@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Telemedicine framework using case-based reasoning with evidences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Telemedicine framework with structured knowledge to support medical professionals.Enrichment of the case-based reasoning process with evidences and expert opinions.Knowledge engineering using reasoning of ontology modeling and semantic similarity.Flexible collaborative model to provide a participative and extensible environment.Application in oncology to improve the reliability and safety of medical services.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Telemedicine,Case-based reasoning,Evidence sources,Medical taxonomy,Oncology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Telemedicine is the medical practice of information exchanged from one location to another through electronic communications to improve the delivery of health care services. This research article describes a telemedicine framework with knowledge engineering using taxonomic reasoning of ontology modeling and semantic similarity. In addition to being a precious support in the procedure of medical decision-making, this framework can be used to strengthen significant collaborations and traceability that are important for the development of official deployment of telemedicine applications. Adequate mechanisms for information management with traceability of the reasoning process are also essential in the fields of epidemiology and public health. In this paper we enrich the case-based reasoning process by taking into account former evidence-based knowledge. We use the regular four steps approach and implement an additional (iii) step: (i) establish diagnosis, (ii) retrieve treatment, (iii) apply evidence, (iv) adaptation, (v) retain. Each step is performed using tools from knowledge engineering and information processing (natural language processing, ontology, indexation, algorithm, etc.). The case representation is done by the taxonomy component of a medical ontology model. The proposed approach is illustrated with an example from the oncology domain. Medical ontology allows a good and efficient modeling of the patient and his treatment. We are pointing up the role of evidences and specialist's opinions in effectiveness and safety of care.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Telemedicine is a remote medical practice using telecommunication and information technologies. It is an efficient tool for collaboration between physicians but it also offers many others benefits (e.g. cost savings, improved care, improved access and real-time responses). Like any medical practice, telemedicine aimed at establishing a diagnosis, providing a preventive or post-therapeutic medical monitoring, performing medical acts, prescribing drugs and services.The large amount of health knowledge available to the medical personnel is hardly embraced. Medical information is doubling every 5 years [1] and 81% of the physicians spend less than 5h per month reading medical journals. Only 20% of the knowledge used by clinicians relies on evidence-based resources. In the United States of America (USA), there are an estimated 1.5 million prescriptions and medication errors amounting for an extra cost of close to 50%. The analysis of structured medical data could help retrieve former similar cases and help in choosing the best diagnosis and treatment strategy, as well as ease the extraction of epidemiological information [2].Telemedicine is a new medical approach contributing to the improvement of health care access and provision (e.g. penitentiary institutions, nursing homes, mountainous regions or less-favored areas). It can provide additional healthcare opportunities particularly in the fields of aviation, space and maritime transport; where proper remote diagnosis and treatment can avoid costly medical evacuation services (MEDEVAC).Telemedicine is scarcely written in law, but national governments and healthcare authorities influence the organization of health care services at a distance, like in France where we will test our research method. The French Law has defined five acts of telemedicine in decree n° 2010-1229 (October 19, 2010) [3]:-Teleconsultation: a physician performs a remote consultation to a patient who can be assisted by health professional.Teleexpertise: a physician solicits remotely other physicians to discuss and treat a case.Medical telemonitoring: a caregiver observes and interprets medical signs of patient. This can be done either in the manual or automatic mode.Medical teleassistance: a physician assists remotely another medical professional to perform a medical act.Medical coordination of emergency.Telemedicine benefits from a large bibliography but practical challenges remain: organizing the management of the knowledge wealth, improving security engineering and risk management in the context of a continuous improvement of healthcare services. In this context, information modeling can be traced according to medical patterns through structured data that are linked to practices via telecommunication technologies.Thereafter, we propose to enrich the case-based reasoning (CBR) process with a conceptual information system architecture that seeks to reflect both the conventional medical reasoning and the CBR. This architecture is based on conventional medicine step by step process. The first four stages reflect the medical consultation process:•Establishment of the diagnosis of medical problems.Research of the right treatment.Verification of effectiveness of the treatment.Adjustment of the treatment if required.The fifth stage is the continuous updating of the knowledge base to ensure its permanent consistency and sustainability. The more cases in knowledge base we have the more efficient is the case-based reasoning method. We are illustrating the approach that we are proposing with the study of an oncology case.The remainder of this paper is organized in four sections. Section 2 provides the theoretical background and motivating issues about telemedicine and case-based reasoning. In the first part of Section 3, we describe the proposed architecture with its detailed steps for purposes of development in the suggested methodology. In the second part of Section 3, it is provided a real case study from the oncology domain. Section 4 presents a discussion of the achieved and expected results. Section 5 gives the conclusion with outline descriptions of provided contribution in the research work presented in this paper.In this section after showing the interest of using case-based reasoning (CBR) in telemedicine we will mention a few recent works addressing CBR and telemedicine. And at the end we will also show the innovative aspects of the proposed research approach.The case-based reasoning copies the human behavior. It resolves problems seeking similar cases and adapting them. CBR is a reasoning paradigm that instead of relying on general rules or models chooses the specific knowledge contained into already solved instances of problems [2]. It is formalized as four-step process:•Retrieve: find similar cases.Reuse: adapt and use similar case to resolve a new problem.Revise: adjust the new solution.Retain: store the resulting experience.The quality of case-based reasoning method depends primarily on a good representation of cases in the retrieve step (it means to understand current case in relation to old cases in knowledge base) and the richness of knowledge base. In other words, the development of the case-based reasoning process is driven by the following activities [4]:-Adapting old solutions to meet new demands.Using old cases to explain new situations.Using old cases to critique new solutions.Reasoning from precedents to interpret a new situation.The rationale for using the case-based reasoning process is to support the formalization of reasoning procedures for collaborative medical acts in telemedicine.In fact, this paradigm is similar to the physician's reasoning regarding the assessment of news cases in comparison with reported cases and eventually adaptation of retrieved solutions (if this is necessary).Furthermore, CBR has methodological variations and systemic approaches allowing the use of appropriate technologies, with a consistency of system application guidance and flexibility of services.In terms of implementation practices we can describe four main types of case-based reasoning [5]:•Case-based reasoning using nearest neighbor: this is the most widely used technology in CBR. The similarity between target case and each case in the knowledge base is determined in order to rank them.Case-based reasoning using induction: this method partitions cases in clusters. Cases in each cluster are similar, and as it is assumed (usually correctly) that cases with similar descriptions of problems (where possible its key components) will refer to similar problems and hence similar solutions.Case-based reasoning using fuzzy logic: fuzzy logic deals with approximate reasoning with variables possibly having a truth value that ranges in degree between 0 and 1. Furthermore, the attributes of cases can be represented by linguistic variables associated with specific functions.Case-based reasoning using database technology: database technology can be used to implement case-based reasoning. The problem is that the databases use only structured information and usually employ a number of exact matches to answer queries.Many works have already addressed telemedicine. These works differ in terms of telemedicine acts covered and methods used to practice telemedicine.Authors in [6] suggest a different method (conceptual graphs and argumentative logic) and focus on tele-expertise act. They propose a framework for the decision making process to ensure traceability in teleexpertise. They visualize reasoning by CoGui [7] software that includes functions to edit constraints and rules for the assistance in the reasoning process. In telemonitoring act, the purpose of Meenu Singh et al.’s works in [8] is to use a tool (handheld tele-electrocardiogram) to identify heart condition in a rural underserved population. The objective of this study was clinical validation of this electrocardiogram as a screening tool for evaluation of cardiac diseases in the rural population. Some activities of teleconsultation are already done in the region of Midi-Pyrénées in France as part of a health project led by GCS (health care cooperation consortium) [9] Télésanté Midi-Pyrénées. A health information system is available for physicians in order to deliver remote healthcare services. In teleassistance, Giorgio [10] proposes a medical device for health monitoring and teleassistance applications. This system allows real-time rescue of patients having heart failure and high risk of life.Some works are related directly to the application of CBR in medical domain. Montani et al. [2] propose a case-based decision tool. Their aim is to help doctors in diabetes therapy revision through an intelligent retrieval of data related to past cases similar to the target one. In our approach we propose case-based reasoning architecture.The non-exhaustive reading of works related to the medical applications of case-based reasoning [2,4,8] shows that they mainly use the basic CBR process with four steps. In our reasoning approach, due to the sensitivity about the complex issues of the medical field, we add another step in the CBR process in order to increase the reliability of the medical reasoning processes.In what follows, we will present in detail our architecture enriching the CBR process and then an illustrative application of the proposed approach in oncology.In this section we will first list and explain the constitutive elements of our architecture. Then we will study the relation between the elements and how to combine them to build an efficient reasoning system able to provide effective support in telemedicine.Fig. 1shows the proposed architecture that is intended to be easily expandable. The stage of structuring and conceptualization is not presently fully automated but it is made in collaboration with experts of the medical field (particularly in oncology and geriatrics). The complete automation of this architecture will be the object of future studies [11].The proposed architecture (Fig. 1) combines ontologies and rules in reasoning tool that formalizes knowledge modeling for the description of collaborative practices and information retrieval.An ontological model is obtained from patients, diseases, and treatment data by the structuring tool. Then a reasoning tool (taking into account the specified constraints and rules) can check the consistence of ontology and make inferences. The result will be a knowledge base which will be in communication with the retrieval tool aiming to find similar cases.We have in Fig. 2the CBR framework (with five steps) based on the proposed architecture. Each step would be performed using suitable tools for natural language processing, data representation, ontology modeling, indexation and information retrieval.During research of treatment (first stage of reasoning), we will apply successively two techniques often used separately: case-based reasoning using induction then case-based reasoning using nearest neighbor. The purpose is to make case retrieval faster but also efficient. In fact a partition of the cases base in different clusters allows to reduce the research space and to make similarity calculations on a small group on which the reasoning procedures will have to focus for the determination of the more suitable cases.•OntologyIn the context of computer science, ontology is used for information organization and knowledge representation. Defined originally in 1993 by Thomas Gruber [12] as an explicit specification of a conceptualization, ontology is designed for knowledge sharing. Ontology contains a hierarchical description of concepts and relationships that can formally exist for an entity or a community of entities. The development of ontologies is essential to formalize a common vocabulary for distributed collaboration in a particular domain. Four categories of ontology can be distinguished depending on subject of the conceptualization [13].-Application ontologies: statements of the meaning of terms to model knowledge needed for a specific application.Domain ontologies: conceptualization of a particular domain (e.g. medicine, automobile industry, oenology).Generic ontologies: upper conceptualization applicable across a varied range of domain sets.Representation ontologies: explanation of the conceptualizations that underpin knowledge representation formalisms.Natural language processing (NLP)NLP operates as a practical tool within the human–computer interaction framework and encompasses language understanding or language generation to cover tasks such as information retrieval, information extraction and speech processing. Natural processing language may increase the feasibility and effectiveness of more applications in the medical domain by making it easier to structure information from different sources [11]. In fact it can increase the effectiveness of communication means (e.g. proper use of the medical devices) to make them more user-friendly for collaborative teams. NLP will also facilitate the conversion of medical information from computer databases into understandable human language.Before the description of the 5 stages, we will focus on a most important notion in case-based reasoning: the “case”. It is generally defined as a set of features representing a problem, its solution, and indications about how the solution is generated. Case will be considered like a vector of concepts characterizing a situation with an ontology modeling.In Table 1, for each step of our architecture, we describe the associated tasks and tools used for the implementation of the CBR process.Taxonomy is a classification of concepts, with the principles underlying such an arrangement. Taxonomy is often seen as the minimal structure of ontology in computer science.As described earlier the domain ontology contains a hierarchical description of concepts, which corresponds to a taxonomic structuration of classes with respect to their specialization relation.In [14] Tulu et al. proposed a taxonomy structuring telemedicine domain. They identified five dimensions (Fig. 3): (1) application purpose, (2) application area, (3) environmental setting, (4) communication infrastructure, and (5) delivery option. Application purpose and application area represent the medical part and the last three dimensions are tools and places to do telemedicine.Table 2provides some examples of medical taxonomy content that is applicable in each dimension.Taking into account the taxonomy presented above, we built domain ontology of medical field with the open-source ontology editor called Protégé®[15]. Fig. 4shows a segment of our ontology with treatment's assertions.The most important concepts are patient and treatment. The case representation describes the treatment and the patient is the main component of this description.Patient conceptThis concept summarizes all considered attributes in the characterization of a patient condition. It is the information required for the recognition of symptoms, the establishment of the diagnosis with the means available to the health professionals.Fig. 5shows how are organized the additional concepts required to characterize the component “patient”.Treatment conceptIn the tree structure of treatment concept, we find all features of medical system (Fig. 6):•The patient: a person who is a recipient of health care and associated treatments.The disease: an abnormal condition that affects a patient with certain symptoms and signs.The physician: a medical professional who provides the diagnosis and treatment of diseases.Environment: hospital, patient home, etc.Means and options: devices and applications;Prescriptions: a medical instructions of care (e.g. by drugs) or complementary investigations transcribed by a physician.Evidences: scientific proofs that serve to support clinical decision-making.Palliative care: therapies that relieve symptoms of diseases without curative intent.Alternative medicine: naturopathic and traditional medicine practices (e.g. homeopathy, African and Chinese medicine).Chemotherapy: treatment of cancer with chemical substances (chemotherapeutic agents).Table 3shows features defining a case. For each attribute we have the possible values and their type.In Table 4we summarize each step with the main attributes.At this level, the aim is to identify the patient's disease or health problem and clinical condition. The establishment of a diagnosis corresponds to the first stage of our case-based reasoning. The study of medical signs and symptoms (for example comparison with symptoms in International Classification of Diseases (ICD) gives a set of diseases). An investigation of key patient parameters (namely: age, medical history (lifestyle and family)), clinical trials and books provides us with the initial means for achieving a relevant diagnosis and treatment of the considered disease. The taxonomic component of domain ontology and the data representation are the modeling elements used for the formal representation of medical cases (Fig. 3). The concepts used for this stage are presented in Fig. 7.In the process for establishing the diagnosis of a disease, we will first compare symptoms between the current case and previous medical cases recorded in the knowledge base. This comparison will be done with a diagnosis algorithm (Fig. 8) or a local similarity function of tools like Protégé®. If this is enough to confirm a disease we can start the search for a treatment or else we use other sources like International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, usually called by the short-form name International Classification of Diseases (ICD).After the establishment of a diagnosis, a set of possible treatments can be identified and their prioritizations based on the patient's needs. The choice of treatment depends on the comparison of current patient factors (e.g. age and medical condition) with the entire candidate treatments corresponding to the diagnosis established. In order to do this, we will calculate similarities with the following equation:s=∑i=1nf(Ti,Si)×αis: similarity between the current case of the patient involved and the recorded medical cases of past patients; T: attribute of target case; S: attribute of source case; i: current attribute; n: number of attribute; α: the weighting of attributes in order to rank them according to their importance and priority scales of the medical context. For example, the lifestyle of a patient can be considered most importance that his age, for falls prevention in the elderly.This stage provides a pre-treatment assessment, a set of treatments that we will weight in stage 3 (solution and evidence).This is a critical step of the execution of the proposed method, in particular regarding its effectiveness. The most credible and reliable type of treatment is that which provides an analysis of the sources of evidence and experts’ opinions [16].Sources of evidence:Each treatment (case) is registered as follows (Fig. 9).Effective treatments and their associated references can be identified using ontology alignment techniques in digital technologies for healthcare [17]. If proposed references allow choosing one treatment then we proceed to the next stage or else we will take account of the experts’ opinions. References can be:•A review article: presenting research results. Article must be reviewed by experts within the same subject area before publication.Guidelines: showing a course of action. Guidelines may be issued and used by governmental or private organization and following them is not mandatory.A clinical trial is a scientific research study on human subjects intending to assess effectiveness and tolerance of a prospective diagnostic or therapeutic intervention.Generally, it is difficult to obtain a fully similar case to previous ones. We are required to make reasonable adaptations to match the current medical environment and the medical needs of the patient concerned. There is a wide variety of medical options to meet the different anatomical and physiological characteristics of patients suffering from the same disease. The treatment approach typically depends on the category and critical nature of the patient's parameters. For example, on a medical prescription the indications and dosage recommendations depend on variables such as the severity and chronicity of the disease or the age and gender of patient. The choice of the best treatment is determined by a considerable similarity among cases in their attributes and the adaptation of the treatment should be based on the patient's condition, the clinical response and the possible or occurring side effects.It marks a significant stage in the information management cycle of case-based reasoning. This is contributing to support the reuse of the recorded cases with their associated reasoning (establishment of diagnosis or search for treatment) for information retrieval, knowledge and information sharing and decision making. The structuration of cases base is determined by the indexing functions and the models of memory organization (simple model, model with dynamic memory or model based on categories) of the case-based reasoning system. This structuration, for example, can use a network of categories and cases to explain organizational patterns according to the characteristics described by a name, a value and a level of importance regarding the membership of a case in a category (Table 5).The effective step of retaining depends on the obtainability of the essential bibliography, procedures, methods and services to achieve the efficient data structuration and the availability of significant information.Telemedicine is predominantly used for managing chronic diseases or critical medical domains, such as cardiology, radiology, ophthalmology or oncology [18].In our case study, and in the context of supporting the development of remote collaboration between health professionals, we use the model of teleexpertise defined by the GCS Télésanté Midi-Pyrénées (Fig. 10). The referring physician needs a certain expertise regarding complex medical problems and he made the request (in a synchronous or asynchronous manner) on the health information system (SIS) of the GCS. The coordinating physician contacts the required physician to obtain an expert medical advice and organizes the collaborative medical session according to the contextual characteristics of the target case. In the medical situation described in this case study; the required physician is an oncologist who interacts with the case-based reasoning system. However, the oncologist needs to take into account the opinions of the requiring physician; the patients and their families. The primary sources of data for use in this study are real anonymized medical records. A list of prospect records of data from observational databases was asked from an expert physician working in a geriatric oncology unit of a university hospital in Toulouse. It was required that the records would include the establishment of the diagnosis and the treatment of the condition. The physician provided a list of 10 names, a physician involved in the study checked the records for comprehensiveness, and then from the 8 remaining anonymized records four were randomly selected. Three cases were integrated in the target knowledge base and the forth one was used as the test case provided for the execution of case-based reasoning with evidences.Even if our study is in oncology, this framework can be applied on any branch of medicine. In Fig. 11we have 3 cases (treatments) in comma-separated value (CSV) files used to import the attributes of the cases. CVS is a shared file format that is commonly supported by scientific applications to represent sets or sequences of records.In fact for the case study, we use Protégé 3.5® to check the consistence of the ontology and MyCBR® plug-in to compute the case based reasoning process.According to the first stage in the case-based reasoning process, the establishment of diagnosis is performed by comparing symptoms characteristic of the patient's disease. This is achieved mainly through an analysis of similarities symptoms of patients in the data structures. The patient history can be used to enable prompt and reliable diagnosis (Fig. 12).Activating only the attribute symptom, we get a percentage of symptoms found in the patient in comparison to the cases in the knowledge base. The disease of the matching case is lymphoma (as diagnosed by the experts) (Fig. 13).The following figure shows our approach to search a treatment. Each field describing the concept treatment has a weight depending on its importance (Fig. 14).We can start retrieval after editing patient information. This gives the result presented in Fig. 15. Particularly, the treatment 1 corresponds with 80% in the considered case.We have an objective clinical trial certifying the effectiveness of treatment 1 and the experts’ opinions can confirm this point (Fig. 16). In short, the application of the adopted approach is illustrated by the two following steps:(1)Step 1: simple matching: Treatment 1=80% and Treatment 2=5%.Step 2: matching with evidences: Treatment 1=82% and Treatment 2=31%.Each stage or feature of medication depends on one or more attributes. For example dose of medicines depends on the age of patient, potential drug interactions or allergies (Fig. 17).The current case is registered according to the type of disease (Figs. 18 and 19).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
