@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation of effective parameters on composite patch debonding under static and cyclic loading using cohesive elements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A high cycle fatigue de-cohesive constitutive law is used for debonding investigation of composite patch–cracked panel interface.Effects of material, width, and thickness of patch, and bonding strength on progressive damage of bonding interface are investigated.A patch material with larger elastic modulus, thickness and adhesive thickness leads to more damages in the adhesive bound-line.By increasing the adhesive strength and patch width, the de-bonding and crack growth rate of the panel are decreased.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bonded repair,Interface element,Cohesive law,Composite patch,Aluminum panel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The major addressed issue in this paper is investigation of impressive parameters on initiation and propagation of debonding in the adhesive layer when it occurs concurrently with the growth of an initial crack in a single-side repaired aluminum panels by composite patches under cyclic loading. Using the softening behavior of thin layer solid like interface elements, debonding is modeled between the composite patch layer adjacent to the aluminum panel as a function of loading condition and stress field. A user element routine and two damage model routines were developed to include the interface element and to simulate the distribution of damage in adhesive layer under static and cyclic loading. Fatigue crack growth in aluminum panel was also modeled using a simple approach developed by the authors. It is shown that, it is possible to decrease the debonding propagation by implementing appropriate composite patch and adhesive dimensional and material properties.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Extending the service life of cracked components with composite patch has generated a lot of controversy in recent years. This technique is more structurally efficient, formable on curved panels with fewer damages and side effects on the structure than others such as metallic patches. Repair of aluminum structures was initiated by Baker in the early 1970s [1]. Different numerical models have been already used for calculating the stress field of single-side repairs and optimizing the patch geometry to reduce the stress intensity factor (SIF). Chung and Young [2] performed fatigue crack growth tests for the repaired thick plates containing an inclined edge crack. They used Al 6061-T6 alloy for the base material and HT145/RS1222 for the single-side composite patch. Hosseini-Toudeshky et al. [3–7] performed 3D finite elements fatigue crack growth analysis of single-side repaired panels to simulate the actual crack-front shape and crack growth life for various panels with dominant mode-I and mixed mode condition cracks. They also examine their observation in the finite element analyses by performing experiments on single-side repaired panels using different composite patches in various fracture mode conditions [3,8–10]. Jones and Chiu [11] also performed experimental and numerical studies on the repair of cracked structural components. They observed that the crack propagates with a curved front shape along the panel thickness.In contrast to all the advantages mentioned, fatigue life prediction of repaired component by composite patch seems to be complicated due to several possible failure modes, such as growth of initial crack in the aluminum panel, patch debonding and new fatigue cracks in the skin (panel) at the patch edges. The focus of this paper is prediction of possible patch debonding due to the fatigue loading concurrent with the possible growth of the initial crack in the repaired panels.Whether debonding of patch could significantly affect the repaired panel life or not, further questions may arise such as how can it be modeled trustworthily, and which parameters affect the propagation of debonding? Papanikos et al. [12] used finite element-based progressive failure model (elastic property degradation) to investigate the geometrical effects on patch debonding initiation and propagation induced by monotonic loading. It was found that, depending on the patch thickness, debonding may initiate either at the upper patch edge (being catastrophic for the repair) or at the crack faces (being not catastrophic). Denney and Mall [13] and Naboulsi et al. [12] used experiments and the three-layer technique to investigate the effects of pre-existing debonding of various sizes and in different locations on the fatigue crack growth and life of repaired structures. Megueni et al. [14] used the finite element method to compute the stress intensity factor for repairing cracks with bonded composite patch taking debonding into account. The previous studies did not consider principal properties and characteristics of adhesive layers. Moreover, the fracture mechanics approaches cannot easily predict the simultaneous debonding initiation and propagation; therefore, in this paper, the cohesive zone modeling concept using interface element is employed for modeling of adhesive layer and progressive debonding under static and cyclic loading. Different models were already presented for interface elements. The recent models have been developed by Zeng and Li [15], a novel multi-scale cohesive zone in which the bulk material is modeled as a local quasi-continuum medium and the cohesive force and displacement relations inside the cohesive zone are governed by a coarse grained depletion potential. Then [16] they applied their model for composite laminates to simulate the failure process. Li and Zeng [17] also developed a new atomistic-based interphase zone model (AIZM), and employed that for simulation of fractures at small scales.In this paper, the developed solid like interface element model by Balzani and Wagner [18] is used, for the analyses of debonding of composite patches from the panels. Besides, a damage model based on the cohesive zone concept for the analyses of fatigue debonding propagation under quasi-static and high cycle fatigue loadings which was developed in [19,20] is added to the constitutive law equation. Finally, the explained procedure is used for the prediction of possible debonding initiation and propagation concurrently with possible fatigue crack growth in the aluminum panel, which is analyzed using the previously developed simple method by the authors [7].Cohesive interface elements are generally formulated in terms of tractions and relative displacements between two surfaces. In this work, we implement a solid-like interface element formulation from [18] (Fig. 1) which tolerates the strain status of material to a damage variable to define material degradation or damage portion in each Gauss integration point. Such formulation is a standard hexahedral isoparametric solid element but carries only the interlaminar stresses. Therefore, the three-dimensional stress and strain tensors are reduced to interlaminar stress and strain vectors accounting for interlaminar components only and defined by(1)u=[usutun],ε=[γsnγtnεn]=[us,n+un,sut,n+un,tun,n],σ=[τsnτtnσn]where s, t and n are the integer subscripts for local coordinate directions as shown in Fig. 1, u is the real displacement vector,εn,γsn,γtnare the strain components corresponding to modes I, II, and III, andσn,τsn,γtnare the stress components corresponding to modes I, II, and III of fracture.The displacement and strain vectors can be approximated as follows:(2)u=∑I=18NIuI,ε=∑I=18BIuIIn this equation,NIis the shape function of the node-I andBIis the shape function derivatives matrix which is defined by(3)BI=Bi,j={NIi=j0i≠jLinearization of principle of virtual work can be written as follows [18]:(4)ΔδΠ(u)=∫VδεTCΔεdV,C=∂σ∂εUsing the finite element approximation, Eq. (4) can be written as(5)δΠe=∑I=18δuIT∫VBITσdV=∑I=18δuITRIe,ΔδΠe=∑I=18∑k=18δuIT∫VBITCBkdVΔuk=∑I=18∑k=18δuITKTIkeΔukwhereKTeis the tangent stiffness matrix andRIeis the residual force vector and V is the volume of element,δεandσare the virtual strain and interlaminar stress vectors for the interface element, respectively.The notion of this work is to obtain initiation and propagation of debonding under both static and cyclic loading. Therefore, the related constitutive law should have appropriate response to all possible loadings including static and cyclic loading. On the other hand, according to the previous researches [20,21], the damage evolution in a degradation process involving high-cycle fatigue should be considered as the sum of the damage growth from quasi-static loads and the one from cyclic loads as follows:(6)d=dstatic+dcyclicFor the static part of the question a bilinear constitutive law is chosen, which is based on the solid-like interface element presented in [18]. In the case of mixed mode loading, it relates the effective stress to the effective strain, as shown inFig. 2 and contains three parts. In the first part, the interface material behaves in a linearly elastic manner. It continues until the effective strain is less than the damage onset. In this part, the dissipated energy is zero and no damage is presented in the element. In the second part, the stress evaluation is defined by a damage variable, which has an amount between 0 and 1. It initiates when the effective strain reaches the damage onset. In this part, the energy dissipation is formulated as follows [19]:(7)EdisGc=AdAe=1−εmεm0(1−d)wheredis the damage variable, Adis the element damage area and Aeis the element area.Edisis the dissipated energy. Also,εmis the effective strain,εm0is the effective strain at delamination onset andGcis the mixed mode critical energy release rate. Note that a non-dimensional parameter defined as the ratio of damaged area with respect to the element area has been used. Therefore, elements size and area does not influence the damage parameter or fatigue life directly. In the final part, the stress becomes zero and the energy dissipation reaches the critical energy release rate. This part is the well known complete decohesion.The required formulations for the interface constitutive law under static loading are summarized inTable 1 whereεmfis the effective strain at complete decohesion, K is the penalty stiffness, I is the identity matrix,h0is the interface element thickness and η is an experimental parameter.The deleterious influence of cyclic loads can be formulated as a function of the number of cycles. Since there is no explicit expression to define this function, the degradation process which is based on the high cycle fatigue model presented by Turon [19] is implemented by incorporating a fatigue damage parameter that evolves during cyclic loading and is accumulated with the obtained static damage parameter (Fig. 3).To calculate the evolution of the damage variable, the following expression is used to relate the evolution of damage variable to the growth rate of damage area in each integration point [19].(8)∂d∂N=∂d∂Ad∂Ad∂Nwhere d is damage variable and Adis the element damage area.In the framework of fracture mechanics, the term∂d/∂Adcan be calculated from Eq. (7) as the following expression [19]:(9)∂d∂Ad=1Ae[εmf(1−d)+dεm0]2εm0εmfBesides,∂Ad/∂Ncan be formulated as [19](10)∂Ad∂N=AeAcz∂A∂NTo calculate the mean damage evaluation rate in Eq. (10), the fatigue crack growth law of fracture mechanics, the Paris law, can be expressed as(11)∂A∂N=c(ΔGGc)mwhere C and m are the material constants.ΔGis the cyclic variation in the energy release rate, which can be computed by the following formulation [20]:(12)ΔG=∫σdεwhich represents the area under constitutive law curve in cyclic loading.Degradation process in cyclic loading seems to be more complicated than static loading. First of all, according to the explanations in the previous section, damage evolution under cyclic loading results from the loading history and it is obtained through an iterative process in both static and fatigue loadings. Moreover, in a degradation process involving high-cyclic fatigue, a cycle-by-cycle analysis becomes computationally intractable and it is time consuming. Therefore, a cycle jump strategy (defining the interval cycles number and considering the damage portion in one-step) is implemented in the finite element model.Finally, the damage variable is updated in each cycle jump containingΔNifatigue cycles by the following expression.(13)di+1=di+∂di∂NΔNiwherediis the damage parameter in the ith step anddi+1is that in the next step.The obtained damage variable from (13) is the cyclic damage portion of constitutive law and should be added to the static part of damage variable in each step.It is worth noting that, the developed model used un-loading/re-loading concept in each cycle jump (interval) for taking into account the damage variation as a result of panel crack growth into the interface layer. For this purpose, when the interface elements are under unloading, the previously calculated damages are saved. In the next step, when a reloading is applied, analyses are repeated according to the new condition in the constitutive model as shown inFig. 4.It is worth noting that the cyclic degradation should be only performed in the region close to the debonding-front in the considered cohesive zone in which interface elements have exceeded their linear-elastic stress and experience damage [20] would be an oversight.In the finite element modeling of progressive debonding analysis of repaired panels, the following three major parts work coincidently in each step as illustrated inFig. 5:(i)modeling, meshing, and applying the boundary conditions;elastic-damage solution, degradation process and damage evolution calculations under static and cyclic loading formulated in the UPF;fatigue crack growth calculation of aluminum panel at each increment.The geometry and typical mesh in the FEM analyses are shown inFig. 6. The cracked panels are made of aluminum 2024-T3; the composite patches are made of Glass/Epoxy, Graphite/Epoxy and Boron/Epoxy. The applied remote stress range is 118MPa. To perform the degradation under cyclic loading (cumulative damage), it is required to restore nodal stress of previous load step at each calculation step. Therefore, it is more convenient to un-change the mesh information in every load step. The existing symmetry conditions are also used to reduce the calculation volume of the debonding and crack growth modeling of repaired panel.For consideration of the cyclic loading damage in interface elements, (Fig. 7), the load is divided to two parts. The first part is static loading in which the applied load gradually increases from zero to the maximum load value. In this part damage variable is defined by the expression performed in the second row of Table 1in each Gauss point of the elements. The second part is cyclic loading in which the load amplitude remains constant and fatigue process starts at fatigue zone as shown in Fig. 7. In this part, the elements damage accumulation or material degradation occurs which will be considered by Eq. (13). The crack closure technique based on the simple method presented by the authors in [7] is also implemented to compute the fatigue crack growth in the aluminum panels.For prediction of possible debonding initiation and propagation concurrently with possible fatigue crack growth of the preexisting crack in the repaired aluminum panel, a special procedure is needed for handling of crack growth in the aluminum panel. For this purpose, one may suggest to consider a real crack-front to predict the crack growth length and life in finite element modeling. But consideration of real crack-front modeling concurrently with the use of cohesive elements in the bonding area makes too much complexity in the finite element analyses. To overcome such difficulty, the simple method performed by the authors [7] can be used. In this simple method, the real crack-front is not considered in the finite element crack growth modeling (crack-front remains perpendicular to the panel surfaces during the crack growth), but the stress intensity factor of a specific point on the thickness is used for life prediction that approximately gives life similar to the real crack-front modeling.In each step of crack growth, the mode-I strain energy release rate is calculated using the following expression [22]:(14)GI=−12abFycrackfront(uyu−uyd)where a and b are the length and width of the element respectively, andFyanduyare the nodal forces and displacements respectively as shown inFig. 8(b). Then the stress intensity factor for a linear elastic fracture condition can be calculated from the following expression:(15)KI=EGIwhere E is the modulus of elasticity. To calculate the fatigue life for a known crack length increment or to find a crack growth increment for a known and limited number of load cycle increments, the well known Paris fatigue crack growth law is used as follows:(16)dadN=c(ΔK)mwherecandmare the empirical material constants,ΔK=Kmax(1−R)is the stress intensity factor range in fatigue loading,Nis the number of cycles,dais the crack growth length and R is the cyclic load ratio. According to the suggestion of the developed simple method [7], the point along the crack-front,Ze, whose stress intensity factor has to be used in Eq. (16) can be obtained from the following equation:(17)Zetp=0.0166(EAlEPatch)+0.3453whereZeis measured from the unpatched surface of the panel as indicated in Fig. 8(a),EAlandEPatchare Young′s modulus of elasticity of panel and patch materials respectively andtpis the thickness of composite patch.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
