@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated personnel-assets-consumables-drug tracking in ambulance services for more effective and efficient medical emergency interventions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Convenient and rapid inventory control of the PACD in the ambulance.Alarm generation for device maintenance and line replacement of outdated drugs.Missing PACD identification and alarm generation in case of asset removals.Automatic patient information transfer and sharing (hospital–ambulance).Prevention of unprovisioned ambulance dispatch due to depleted or missing PACD.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ambulance,Bluetooth low energy,Medical emergency interventions,Health services,Near field communication (NFC),RFID,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Patient delivery time is no longer considered as the only critical factor, in ambulatory services. Presently, five clinical performance indicators are used to decide patient satisfaction. Unfortunately, the emergency ambulance services in rapidly growing metropolitan areas do not meet current satisfaction expectations; because of human errors in the management of the objects onboard the ambulances. But, human involvement in the information management of emergency interventions can be reduced by electronic tracking of personnel, assets, consumables and drugs (PACD) carried in the ambulances. Electronic tracking needs the support of automation software, which should be integrated to the overall hospital information system. Our work presents a complete solution based on a centralized database supported by radio frequency identification (RFID) and bluetooth low energy (BLE) identification and tracking technologies. Each object in an ambulance is identified and tracked by the best suited technology. The automated identification and tracking reduces manual paper documentation and frees the personnel to better focus on medical activities. The presence and amounts of the PACD are automatically monitored, warning about their depletion, non-presence or maintenance dates. The computerized two way hospital–ambulance communication link provides information sharing and instantaneous feedback for better and faster diagnosis decisions. A fully implemented system is presented, with detailed hardware and software descriptions. The benefits and the clinical outcomes of the proposed system are discussed, which lead to improved personnel efficiency and more effective interventions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The convergence of large populations in cities has led to enormous metropolitan areas and high traffic densities. Both developments have hampered the provision of rapid ambulance services. Dissatisfaction of citizens is frequently reported in the news, about late or inadequate ambulance interventions. Accurate figures on unsuccessful ambulance runs are difficult to obtain however; because city authorities often attribute the cause of failure to dense traffic conditions or long travel distances.The ambulance services are provided by dedicated vehicles, medical healthcare-personnel, assets (computers, medical devices and communication equipment), consumables and drugs (Personnel-Assets-Consumables-Drugs: PACD). The ambulances are based and supported logistically either by hospitals or specifically designated ambulance centers. The logistic support includes the supply of all of the PACD on the ambulance, previous personal-medical patient information and the intervention instructions for special cases. Therefore, the ambulance service should be looked upon as a professional, dedicated emergency service supported and managed by capable, large organizations. The city ambulance services directive [1] is a depiction; which lists the filling out of a daily ambulance maintenance form as one of the duties of the doctor on call, at the city ambulance service center [2]. The form contains a list of all assets which should be manually checked and signed, at multiple times a day. However, repeated manual form completion many times during a day is prone to human errors and does not guarantee practical compliance. For example, despite error-free and complete form evidence, some drugs and assets were missing from an ambulance [3]. The practice of manual forms and hence the same type of errors are common, in many countries. Missing assets do not necessarily mean the negligence of the personnel, because theft may be the reason. In July 2011 and August 2014 – in two separate incidents – assets worth up to 30,000 U.S. dollars were stolen from ambulances parked in front of the hospitals [4,5]. Missing PACD items that are not reflected in the maintenance forms violate the general “rule of PACD presence”; i.e. PACDs’ guaranteed presence on the ambulance at the call site. However, if the disappearance of a PACD is detected immediately, a notification can be sent for its replacement. Additionally, if it were possible to observe the circumstances of the item's removal, similar events may be prevented from happening. Fortunately, today's capable RFID tracking technologies are ready to enable healthcare organizations to provide the needed monitoring and notification.Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a technology which is widely used in healthcare [6,7]. Major RFID hospital application areas are asset tracking, safe drug administration and real time object location [8]. RFID is based on a simple principle, in which an electronic sticker (tag) is used to give a unique identification number (ID) to its beholder. The tag contains a microcontroller whose integrated memory holds the unique ID. An antenna is needed to communicate with the outer world, for the identification process to take place [9]. After obtaining the ID, the reader relays it to a server; which searches its database to match the ID to an already recorded item. As in every electronic device, a trade-off exists between the cost and the operating distance of a tag. Due to the trade-off, RFID tags are divided into two categories, as Active and Passive. The more expensive, active tags require a battery source to energize the microcontroller, to be able to support long lifetime and operating distances. The low-cost passive tag is energized electromagnetically by the reader, which in fact is an alternative to the paper barcode. The passive tags are sub-divided into categories, but the most popular are the ultra-high frequency (UHF) and the high frequency (HF) tags. The HF tags are also called near field communication (NFC) cards because of the low operating distance. The categories and features of RFID tags can be found in many books, but a summary is available in our preceding work [9].Various frequencies and communication protocols are used in active tags for additional features, beyond providing an ID. BLE is a new version of the regular bluetooth communication that promotes the technology into a suitable category, for RFID [10]. A popular, commercial BLE-based item used for identification is the iBeacon (a trademark of Apple Inc.) [11]. Although designed for mobile phone applications, iBeacons are gradually becoming more common in healthcare, as well [12]. An iBeacon is a low energy consuming device that periodically broadcasts a unique identification number (ID). Any device with BLE capability that comes within the iBeacon's transmission range can identify the iBeacon and launch a pre-defined application. Thus, devices can detect proximity to specific locations and perform location aware activities.The differing properties combined with the cost considerations make using one single identification technology for diverse applications impractical. For example, accommodating an iBeacon on a small syringe is not practical due to size mismatch. In addition, the price of an iBeacon is much higher than the syringe's. On the other hand, a UHF RFID sticker is cheaper than a syringe and suitable as a sticker on each item. UHF tags also provide bunch reading of all syringes present in an ambulance, within a second. Fig. 1of presentation [13] summarizes the comparison of various communication technologies. The Wi-Fi and Wi-Max technologies are good for computer-to-computer communication, with high data transfer rates and long operating distances. But, Wi technologies are relatively 100 times more expensive than the passive RFID technologies. However, identification and tracking do not require high transfer rates. Transfer rates less than 1MB/s are enough to acquire the ID of a tag, in less than a second. If there are many items to track another consideration; the cost becomes a big factor. Naturally, the usual choice of tracking cheap and small sized items is using cheap UHF tags. For tracking expensive and bulky items, higher cost technologies like BLE are more suitable. Another constraint is forcing the tracked person or item to come very close to its reader. In other words, intentionally reading each tag one by one is necessary. Hence, the popular NFC tags with an operating distance of a few centimeters (Fig. 1) can specifically compel personnel or expensive assets to be present physically, at the site of the reader. The NFC technology also provides higher security than the UHF tags, for acquiring the ID number through the insecure air medium [9]. Therefore, it can be concluded that the variety of the ambulance PACD requires a combination of RFID technologies, for efficient tracking.In this paper, the next section presents the identification and analysis of the problem, as well as the related work. Our proposed solution is called Effective and Efficient Ambulance PACD Tracking System (EEAPTS); which is a software application for tracking PACDs, supported by RFID and BLE technologies. The details of the proposed solution are given in Sections 3 and 4. Section 4 also presents an integration example. Section 5 presents the discussion; Section 6 depicts the limitations and finally, Section 7 presents the conclusion and future work.Straightforward, the problem is the need to stop the lives or health lost in ambulatory services, due to human errors; especially of those humans who normally would have recovered had the correct treatment been available, at the correct time. The provision of the correct treatment at the correct time, at the call site can be simply defined as effective emergency intervention. There are several factors affecting the quality of effective intervention. One of the factors is the accessibility to the most current medical history of the patient at the emergency site. Utilizing mobile technologies provide immediate access to patient medical history from the hospitals, on demand. The transfer of patient vital signs to hospitals in return and sharing the data with other health institutions increase the patient's survival chances. The real time monitoring of patient signs is referred to as mobile health (m-health) [14]. M-health makes an early specialist physician intervention possible [15]. Several cases have demonstrated the success of m-health, like the transmission of echography video during emergency services [16]. Mobile technologies can further improve the efficiency of the emergency services by sharing the patient information among hospitals and institutes. When revealed, it will be obvious that our proposal supports m-health, with complementary RFID.The other issue affecting effective intervention is the inability or the delay in giving the correct treatment, because of PACD unavailability. The reason of PACD unavailability is mainly due to human errors. But, human errors in the ambulance and hospital services can be eliminated, by using ubiquitous systems. Such systems also eliminate the degraded confidence of patients and ambulance crews in the guaranteed presence of critical PACD. Increased confidence helps in improving the satisfaction; but obviously there is a need to set the threshold for satisfactory ambulance services. Hence, the general requirements of transporting a remote patient to a hospital have to be clearly identified, first. In order of importance, the requirements are:a)Minimization of the time that passes between the initiation of an emergency call and the entrance of the patient into the hospital emergency room,The immediate transfer of the patient's measured biological and personal (if possible) data to the hospital, for the preparation of the hospital treatment,The transfer of patient health history (previous operations, complications, allergies, etc.) to the ambulance personnel, before or during the remote intervention,The guaranteed provision of timely maintained, calibrated and tag updated PACD in the ambulance, in correct quality and quantities,The dispatch of the list of PACDs used during the last intervention, to enable the logistic preparations start before the ambulance reaches the hospital,The detection of any non-presence or deficiencies in PACD, before the ambulance leaves the emergency call site.Failing to satisfy one of the above requirements results in an ineffective intervention, during the present or in the next emergency run. In other words, it is not only important to deliver the patient to the hospital fast; but it is also important to intervene efficiently in the present emergency call and make preventive preparations for the following calls, even before the ambulance returns its base.The need to meet the requirements of effective emergency services obligates the use of reliable technologies in tracking of healthcare PACD. Such strategies help to eliminate the old fashioned, error prone, manual, form driven procedures. Currently, past intervention processes and patient records are archived in patient health record (PHR) forms [17]. The non-digital forms are often lost or deformed beyond recognition. Obviously, preserving and retrieving information from unreadable paper forms is a source for errors. In addition, categorizing and retrieving information from an extensive archive of paper files is very time-consuming. The emergency department of Southampton university hospital in U.K. investigated patient transfer forms and emergency department reports, for accuracy of patient information [18]. Among the records investigated, as many as 26 had inconsistent information or missing data. Going one step further, Owen et al. studied the transfer of information between the ambulance and emergency department personnel [19]. The study identified the two main problems; the deficiencies in verbal information transfer and the short transfer time for information handover. In an attempt to remedy the problem, Redfern et al. aimed to improve the formats of the doctor notes and the patient record-forms, filled in by the ambulance crew [20]. Saga university hospital in Japan opted to use information technology and modern communication techniques to improve the information transfer, in the emergency departments [21]. To reach the goal, a tablet based information sharing solution has been developed for the Emergency Medical Services. The system maintains a record of available hospitals for emergency cases, and shares the information with the ambulance personnel. However, the 3G mobile phone communication connection used to transfer a large amount of data is exposed to weak or sometimes unavailable connections, leaving the ambulance personnel with no support. A comprehensive medical emergency system (CMES) is proposed in work [22] consisting of five subsystems: a main central server, online healthcare records, a mobile web application, an ambulance system and global positioning system (GPS) tracking [23]. However, the CMES offers only periodical personnel inspections, but no automated tracking of the ambulance equipment. The equipment data are recorded manually on a form. This process is also vulnerable to human error and time consuming. Other mobile asset tracking solutions in healthcare centers are provided in works [23–25]. Although RFID based systems are used to manage the assets in hospitals in these works, the ambulances are excluded.There are also various commercial solutions for the tracking of ambulance assets. IntelliTrack uses the old-fashioned barcode technology [26]. Unfortunately, the paper barcode has serious disadvantages, such as “wear and tear” and “one-by-one” manual reading. In another solution, SPT IntelliView offers only active RFID based tracking [27]. However, the system does not cover all PACD for two reasons. First of all, the cost of the active tags is much greater than the cost of most drugs and consumables. Secondly, small sized or flexible PACD cannot be tagged by larger, rigid active tags. Yet another commercial product is Collective Data's software solution, which offers no hardware devices for tracking [28].In the U.K., the East Midlands Ambulance Service has tagged around 4000 devices, turning the error prone and burdensome manual checking into an efficient (error free and fast) automated process [29]. The automation has also improved the efficiency of the maintenance of the devices. Since the start of the project, wrongly timed maintenance and replacement of devices into wrong ambulances have been mostly eliminated. Even though the above solutions and examples are available, many problems are still reported. For example, the loss of a suction pump from an ambulance and the transfer of a heart monitor to another ambulance were detected through the RFID tracking of the assets of the Frisbie Memorial Hospital (U.S.A.) [30]. In U.K. hospitals, it is not uncommon to find one thousand mobile medical devices that have a combined value of 3 million sterlings. The total price of the mobile equipment in university hospitals is over 10 million sterlings [31]. As an example of investment in RFID, WellSpan Health's hospital in York upgraded its mobile device tracking capability from one thousand to three thousand [32]. The period of return of investment has been reported as 2 or 3 years, depending on size of the tracking projects [9]. The ambulance PACD is simply an extension of hospital PACD. Therefore, considering the importance given to delivering patients in critical condition to hospitals, investment in ambulance PACD tracking is fully justified. More information on RFID tracking projects can be found in work [8].The implementation of PACD tracking in ambulances is more challenging than in hospitals because of the differences between a hospital and an ambulance. For example:•A hospital's location is fixed, but the ambulance is mobile: the tracking of mobile PACD in a mobile vehicle is more complex,Ambulances can be airborne, maritime or ground vehicles, each of which has special circumstances,Mobile ambulances contain fewer items but from all cost categories (high, medium and low), requiring a combined and closely integrated solution.To meet the above challenges, the ambulances usually have a mounted GPS and a radio link to the hospital. But, more sophisticated facilities that are not found on most ambulance are:•An online asset tracking application working in coordination with the hospital information system (HIS),An automatic data collection set-up that feeds the HIS, which in return provides feed-back of patient and intervention information to the ambulance,An integrated tracking of both the assets and the personnel, enabling the hospital to trace the cause of abnormal events; e.g. the removal of a valuable asset from the ambulance with no accompanying personnel (an apparent theft).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
