@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A flexible zero-inflated model to address data dispersion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Zero-inflated Conway–Maxwell–Poisson models dispersed datasets with excess zeroes.Hypothesis test detects statistically significant dispersion in light of excess zeroes.Data simulations and examples illustrate flexibility in model fit.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Conway–Maxwell–Poisson,Over-dispersion,Under-dispersion,Excess zeroes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Excess zeroes are often thought of as a cause of data over-dispersion (i.e. when the variance exceeds the mean); this claim is not entirely accurate. In actuality, excess zeroes reduce the mean of a dataset, thus inflating the dispersion index (i.e. the variance divided by the mean). While this results in an increased chance for data over-dispersion, the implication is not guaranteed. Thus, one should consider a flexible distribution that not only can account for excess zeroes, but can also address potential over- or under-dispersion. A zero-inflated Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (ZICMP) regression allows for modeling the relationship between explanatory and response variables, while capturing the effects due to excess zeroes and dispersion. This work derives the ZICMP model and illustrates its flexibility, extrapolates the corresponding likelihood ratio test for the presence of significant data dispersion, and highlights various statistical properties and model fit through several examples.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerous datasets contain excess zeroes, thus limiting their ability to be described via a standard distributional model. Accordingly, zero-inflated representations of these distributions have been developed to better describe such a random variable containing excess zeroes. In particular, the zero-inflated Poisson (ZIP) regression (Lambert, 1992; Hall, 2000) is a popular model to describe the relationship between a count response variable and explanatory variables of interest. The ZIP model has been used in a variety of applications, including manufacturing (Lambert, 1992), horticulture (Hall, 2000), zoology (Zipkin et al., 2014), and criminology (Famoye and Singh, 2006). Meanwhile, to address added over-dispersion that may exist in the data (even with accounting for the excess zeroes), the zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB) model is often selected to address the matter, of which the zero-inflated geometric (ZIG) distribution (as discussed in Pandya et al., 2012, for example) is a special case. The ZIG regression is likewise considered as an alternative model in various applications such as those noted above. These and other zero-inflated models are available for use in the Vector Generalized Linear and Additive Models (VGAM) package (Yee, 2014) available for use in R (R Core Team, 2014).Over-dispersion is a common issue of many datasets. Excess zeroes are often thought of as a cause of data over-dispersion, however excess zeroes do not assure the existence of data over-dispersion. In actuality, excess zeroes reduce the mean of a dataset, thus inflating the dispersion index (variance divided by the mean); however, a severely under-dispersed dataset can still be under-dispersed even with the inclusion of excess zeroes in the data. Through broader examples, Sellers and Shmueli (2013) (in fact) illustrate that datasets with perceived forms of dispersion can actually stem from probability mixtures with different dispersion levels, including cases of over- or under-dispersion. One should therefore consider a flexible distribution that cannot only account for excess zeroes, but also address potential over- or under-dispersion in the distribution mixture. The Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (COM–Poisson) distribution of Conway and Maxwell (1962) is a flexible, two-parameter distribution for count data expressing over- or under-dispersion. Thus, a zero-inflated COM–Poisson (ZICMP) regression model would address the excess zeroes and provide flexibility in modeling data dispersion in a dataset.This work derives the ZICMP model and illustrates its flexibility and statistical properties. To first further motivate its use, Section  2 provides more details about the COM–Poisson distribution. Section  3 develops the ZICMP regression model. Section  4 illustrates the flexibility of this model to capture data dispersion associated with various simulated zero-inflated structures. Section  5 further demonstrates its adaptability through real and simulated examples. Finally, Section  6 concludes the manuscript with discussion.The Conway–Maxwell–Poisson (COM–Poisson) distribution of Conway and Maxwell (1962) has the probability mass function(1)P(Y=y)=λy(y!)νZ(λ,ν)y=0,1,2,…,for a random variableY, whereλ=E(Yν)is the usual rate parameter under the Poisson model,ν≥0is a dispersion parameter, andZ(λ,ν)=∑j=0∞λj(j!)νnormalizes the distribution. As the dispersion parameter,ν=1denotes equi-dispersion via the Poisson distribution (i.e.ν=1implies a Poisson(λ) distribution), whileν<1andν>1respectively denote over- and under-dispersion. The COM–Poisson distribution not only captures the Poisson distribution as a special case, but also contains two other classical distributions, namely the geometric distribution with success probabilityp∗=1−λwhenν=0andλ<1, and the Bernoulli distribution with success parameterπ=λ1+λwhenν→∞. Thus, this distribution not only captures three classical distributions, but further serves as a flexible bridge distribution for count distributions displaying over- or under-dispersion.The COM–Poisson distribution has numerous statistical properties, including the ability to be represented as an exponential family (see Shmueli et al., 2005 and Sellers et al., 2011 for details), and moments of the form,(2)E(Yr+1)={λ[E(Y+1)]1−νr=0λ∂∂λE(Yr)+E(Y)E(Yr)r>0.In particular, the expected value and variance are(3)E(Y)=λ∂logZ(λ,ν)∂λ≈λ1/ν−ν−12νand(4)Var(Y)=∂E(Y)∂logλ≈1νλ1/ν,where the approximations are especially good forν≤1orλ>10ν(Shmueli et al., 2005). The associated moment generating function ofYisMY(t)=Z(λet,ν)Z(λ,ν), and its probability generating function isE(tY)=Z(λt,ν)Z(λ,ν).To formulate our ZICMP model, we consider a random sample,Yi,i=1,2,…,n, of the form,Yi∼{0w.p.piCOM–Poisson(λi,νi)w.p.1−pi,hence(5)P(Yi=yi)=[pi+(1−pi)(1Z(λi,νi))]ui[(1−pi)λiyi(yi!)νiZ(λi,νi)]1−ui(6)=[pi(Z(λi,νi)−1)+1Z(λi,νi)]ui[(1−pi)λiyi(yi!)νiZ(λi,νi)]1−ui,whereui=1(0)ifyi=(≠)0. The resulting likelihood function then takes the form,L(λ,ν,p;y)=∏i=1nP(Yi=yi)(7)logL(λ,ν,p;y)=∑i=1n{uilog(pi+1−piZ(λi,νi))+(1−ui)[log(1−pi)+yilog(λi)−νilog(yi!)−logZ(λi,νi)]}(fromEq. (5))(8)=∑i=1n{uilog(piZ(λi,νi)+(1−pi))+(1−ui)[log(1−pi)+yilog(λi)−νilog(yi!)]−logZ(λi,νi)}(fromEq. (6))(9)=∑i=1n{uilog(piZ(λi,νi)+(1−pi))+(1−ui)[log(1−pi)+yilog(λi)−νilog(yi!)]−logZ(λi,νi)},where we model the parametersλ=(λ1,…,λn)T, andp=(p1,…,pn)Tvia the canonical link generalized linear model (log(λ)=Xβ, andlogit(p)=Wζ) and consider a constant dispersion parameter (i.e.,νi≡νfor alli). Alternatively, we can further modelν=(ν1,…,νn)Tvia the loglinear link,log(ν)=Gγ, to ensure non-negativity in the resulting value forν. For such a formulation, we represent the log-likelihood aslogL(β,γ,ζ;y)=∑i=1n{uilog(pi[Z(exp(Xiβ),exp(Giγ))−1]+1)+(1−ui)[−log(1+exp(Ziζ))+yiXiβ−(expGiγ)log(yi!)]−logZ(exp(Xiβ),exp(Giγ))}.For the special case where equi-dispersion holds (i.e.νi=1∀i), ZICMP modeling reduces to ZIP (zero-inflated Poisson) modeling. We see this because, for the special case where equi-dispersion holds,Z(λi,νi=1)=exp(λi)=exp(exp(Xiβ)). Thus, Eq. (7) becomeslogL(β,γ,ζ;y)=∑i=1n{uilog[exp(Wiζ)+exp(−exp(Xiβ))1+exp(Wiζ)]+(1−ui)[−log(1+exp(Wiζ))+yiXiβ−log(yi!)−exp(Xiβ)]}=∑i=1n{uilog[exp(Wiζ)+exp(−exp(Xiβ))]−log(1+exp(Wiζ))+(1−ui)[yiXiβ−log(yi!)−exp(Xiβ)]},which is the log-likelihood function associated with the ZIP model; see Lambert (1992) and Hall (2000). Analogously, for the special case whereνi=0andλi<1∀i, the ZICMP model reduces to ZIG (zero-inflated geometric) modeling.We use the method of maximum likelihood for parameter estimation, i.e. maximizing the log-likelihood (Eq. (9)) with respect toβ,ν, andζ; recall that we use the loglinear relation, log(λ)=Xβ, and the logit model,logit(p)=Wζ, to capture the probability of a zero-count. While the maximum likelihood estimators (MLEs) do not have a closed form, we can nonetheless determine their values with great accuracy via the bounded nonlinear minimization/optimization procedure inR, nlminb. We use nlminb to determine the MLEs because we wish to consider the relevant parameter space that constrains the constantν≥0; alternative unconstrained optimization functions inR(e.g.  nlm and optim) can be used (for example) if we apply a loglinear model toν. nlminb applies a Newton-type algorithm to determine the locale of the minimum of the objective function, therefore we let our objective function equal the negated log-likelihood function. Accordingly, the parameters that minimize the negated log-likelihood function, maximize the log-likelihood; hence, the resulting parameters equal the MLEs. nlminb also requires starting values; for ease, we use the ZIP estimates obtained from the zeroinfl function in the pscl package inRand the initial dispersion parameter set equal to 1 (which is consistent with the special case of the ZIP model). The resulting nlminb output includes the parameter (par) values, which are the MLEs; the objective function, which equals the negative of the log-likelihood value evaluated at the MLEs; and a convergence code and message where we can confirm successful algorithm convergence.As demonstrated by the definition ofλas theνth moment ofY(in Section  2),λandνare correlated; more generally, this is true forλ,ν,p, by definition ofYas a zero-inflated COM–Poisson random variable. Given the definitions ofλandpvia their respective link functions, we see that the corresponding Fisher Information matrix for{βˆ,νˆ,ηˆ}is hence a non-orthogonal, block symmetric matrix of the form provided in Appendix. Its components, however, can be computed via the form provided, and the corresponding standard errors associated with the parameter estimates can be obtained by isolating the diagonal components of the inverted resulting Fisher Information matrix; see Appendix.Does a statistically significant amount of data dispersion exist so that the ZICMP model is considered more appropriate than a ZIP model? We can address this question via a hypothesis test of the form,H0:ν=1versusH1:ν≠1. At this stage, we are not concerned with whether the data are over- or under-dispersed, which explains the consideration of a two-sided test. We can, however, infer knowledge of the dispersion type through the resulting ZICMP dispersion parameter estimate. Because both the zeroinfl and nlminb functions provide information to easily determine the log-likelihood value evaluated at the MLEs, we can establish a likelihood ratio test of the form,Λ=L(βˆ0,νˆ0=1,ζˆ0)L(βˆ,νˆ,ζˆ), where(10)−2logΛ=2logL(βˆ,νˆ,ζˆ)−2logL(βˆ0,νˆ0=1,ζˆ0)∼χ12,andlogL(βˆ,νˆ,ζˆ)andlogL(βˆ0,νˆ0=1,ζˆ0)are the respective log-likelihood values associated with the ZICMP and ZIP MLEs, respectively. The ZIP log-likelihood is obtained via the loglik component in the zeroinfl function, while the ZICMP log-likelihood is the negated value obtained from the objective component in the nlminb function. Thus, we can compute the test statistic from Eq. (10) and its correspondingp-value to determine statistical significance. A score-type test is likewise possible; under either scenario, theν=1null hypothesis considers the special case of the ZIP model. The likelihood ratio test approach is preferred, however, given the supplied likelihood output provided in zeroinfl and nlminb, respectively.Fig. 1illustrates the power associated with the likelihood ratio test ofH0:ν=1versusH1:ν≠1in a small simulation study. We draw random samples of sizen∈{50,100,200}from aZICMP(λ,ν,p)distribution withλ=2.0,p∈{0.01,0.1}. For each of these settings, the empirical power of the test procedure,(11)RejectH0if2logL(λˆ,νˆ,pˆ)−2logL(λˆ0,νˆ0=1,pˆ0)≥χ12(1−α),is computed, whereχ12(1−α)denotes the1−αquantile of theχ12distribution. The test  (11) is repeated on 1000 samples drawn from each distinct(λ,ν,p), and the empirical power at that point is taken to be the proportion of rejections. Fig. 1(a) plots the power function forλ=2.0andp=0.01while Fig. 1(b) provides the power function forλ=2.0andp=0.1. For each case, a significance level ofα=0.1is assumed. As expected, the power of the test improves as the sample sizenincreases. The power also appears to improve for the smaller proportion of systematic zeroes,p. In both settings, the test appears to approximate the correct size.We consider various data simulations where we randomly generate 900 values from a count distribution, and add to it 100 zeroes to reflect simulated zero-inflation. Thus, each data representation contains 1000 values with at least 100 zeroes, reflecting some form of a zero-inflated distribution. The underlying simulated distributions considered here include a Poisson, geometric, Bernoulli, and COM–Poisson distribution reflecting over- or under-dispersion, respectively. Table 1serves to illustrate the ability of the zero-inflated COM–Poisson distribution to accurately model these classical zero-inflated models, while maintaining enough flexibility to further model other datasets demonstrating over- or under-dispersion. We compare the performance of the ZICMP with other common zero-inflated count models, including zero-inflated Poisson (ZIP), zero-inflated geometric (ZIG), and the zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB). For ease of illustration, we wish to estimate the constant form of the underlying parameters for each model (i.e.λˆ∗i=λˆ∗for Poisson,pˆ∗i=pˆ∗for geometric,μˆi=μˆandκˆi=κˆfor negative binomial, andλˆi=λˆandνˆi=νˆfor COM–Poisson, andpˆi=pˆto reflect zero-inflation) in this exercise. By our construction of these simulated data, we expect to obtain a probability estimate,pˆ≈0.10, to reflect the amount of zero-inflation in the simulated data.To compare model fits, we consider the log-likelihood, Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC), and the goodness-of-fit (GOF) statistic,GOF(θ)=∑ℓ=1K[Oℓ−Eℓ(θ)]2/Eℓ(θ),based onKcategories,I1,…,IK, where categoryIℓhas observed countOℓand expected countEℓ(θ)=n∑y=0∞I(y∈Iℓ)g(y∣θ)under a given model with densityg(⋅∣θ).GOF(θ)can be used to test the null hypothesis that the data are a random sample fromg(⋅∣θ). Whenθis left unspecified in the test and estimated by maximizing the likelihood based ong,GOF(θˆ)follows a distribution betweenχK−1−q2andχK−12under the null hypothesis (Sutradhar et al., 2008), whereqis the number of unknown parameters to be estimated. A smallerp-value indicates evidence againstg, and hence a less adequate fit. Table 1 provides thep-values stemming from theχK−1−q2distribution as a conservative measure for inference regarding goodness of fit. We merged the possible counts{0,1,2,…}intoKcategoriesI1,…,IKso that eachEℓ(θˆ)≥3. An exception is in the “ZIB” row and “ZICMP’ column of Table 1, where 0 and 1 contain virtually all mass of the distribution but at leastK=5categories are needed to carry out the GOF test withq=3estimated parameters.For all examples, we see that the zero-inflated COM–Poisson model performs comparably or better than the zero-inflated classical distributions. The added dispersion parameter provides the zero-inflated COM–Poisson model with the added flexibility to better capture data dispersion. In all cases, we are able to best capture the representation from the simulated dataset via the ZICMP model with the maximum likelihood estimates forλandν. In particular, for the special case simulations of the ZIG and the ZIP, we see that the results verify the theoretical points noted in Section  2, namely that theνˆestimates for these data are respectivelyνˆ=0.000andνˆ=0.9702≈1for the ZIG and ZIP data. For the ZIG distribution example, we see that the maximum likelihood estimates obtained via the ZICMP model correspond well with the true values under the simulated ZIG model because we know that the geometric distribution is a special case of the COM–Poisson distribution whereν=0andp∗=1−λ; further, we obtainpˆ=0.1133≈0.10, reasonably capturing the expected amount of zero-inflation that was simulated. Meanwhile, for the simulated zero-inflated Poisson example, we verify that the ZICMP distribution captures the ZIP distribution for parameters,ν=1andλ. In this case, we see thatλˆ=2.9299,νˆ=0.9702produce a mean rate approximately equal toλˆ1/νˆ=3.028254≈3, andpˆ=0.0832≈0.10.The third special case is most intriguing. By developing a ZICMP model, this implies that we are able to capture three special cases of zero-inflated classical distributions, namely the ZIG, ZIP, and a “zero-inflated Bernoulli” distribution. However, the Bernoulli distribution is itself a distribution that models counts of zero or one, thus what is reflected via a “zero-inflated Bernoulli” distribution is simply a Bernoulli random variable with a modified success probability. Recalling how the data are simulated for this example (ZI-Bernoulli(π∗=0.7)), we have simulated 900 values from a Bernoulli distribution withπ∗=0.7and added 100 zeroes, for a total of 1000 data values in this example dataset. By definition of the success probability associated with this Bernoulli model, we expect to have produced a dataset with approximately0.7×900=630ones and1000−630=370zeroes (i.e. a Bernoulli(π=0.63)). In actuality, the simulated dataset produced 618 ones and1000−618=382zeroes, i.e.πˆ=0.618. Meanwhile, maximum likelihood estimation applied via the ZICMP model produced the estimates,λˆ=1.6375,νˆ=33.3248, andpˆ=0.0046. The estimate forνis consistent with what has been proven to occur in practice across various applications of the COM–Poisson model to various statistical methods. While theory states that the Bernoulli distribution is captured in the special case whereν→∞, maximum likelihood estimates in practice produceνˆ≥30(e.g., see examples in Sellers and Shmueli, 2010, Sellers, 2012, and Zhu et al., under review). Meanwhile,pˆ=0.0046implies that approximately 0.46% (i.e. approximately 5 out of 1000 values) of the data contain zeroes. Of the remaining 995 values,λˆ=1.6375andνˆ=33.3248imply that COM–Poisson distribution recognizes these data as a Bernoulli model withπˆ∗=1.63751.6375+1≈0.6209, i.e.0.6209×995≈618ones and1000−618=382zeroes in the full dataset (precisely the number of zeroes and ones simulated under the Bernoulli model). Thus, these parameter estimates do, in fact, approximate well the simulated data in this example. The Bernoulli model was also considered for model comparison in the case of the “zero-inflated Bernoulli” simulation and produced a resulting estimate ofπˆ=0.618(with associated standard error, 0.0154),logL=−665.0347, and AIC=1332.069. Thus, the ZICMP and Bernoulli procedures produced equal success probability estimates and log-likelihood values; the difference in AIC values stems from the difference in the number of associated parameters for the two respective distributions. The standard errors associated with the ZICMP model, however, could not be computed because, asν→∞, the ZICMP information matrix approaches singularity. Singularity of the information matrix implies that it cannot be inverted to provide the standard errors associated with the parameter estimates.Meanwhile, the individual parameters of the “zero-inflated Bernoulli” distribution (i.e.ZIB(π,p)) cannot be identified, resulting in singularity of the Fisher information matrix with respect to these parameters (Rothenberg, 1971). In fact, as noted above, we observe that the ZICMP information matrix approaches singularity as well asν→∞. The notion of a “zero-inflated Bernoulli model”, however, is non-sensical, so this matter is not a concern. Just as the “zero-inflated Bernoulli” model can be reparametrized as a Bernoulli distribution with a modified success probability, zero-inflation becomes unnecessary for the COM–Poisson model as it approaches a Bernoulli distribution.The simulated data examples representing over- or under-dispersion, respectively, produce results as expected. Both ZICMP simulations are best estimated via the ZICMP model, producing parameter estimates that are each close to their respective true values. While the under-dispersed example appears to show lacking goodness of fit measures for all models considered, we are reminded that the reportedp-values in Table 1 are conservative statistics based on theχK−1−q2distribution. Considering the full range of possible degrees of freedom betweenK−1−qandK−1, we find that the correspondingp-values thus range from 0.0104 with 1 degree of freedom (as reported in Table 1) to 0.1605 with 4 degrees of freedom for the ZICMP model; meanwhile, the range inp-values under the other models still results in values less than 0.0001. Hence, we see that the zero-inflated COM–Poisson is the only model choice to offer a reasonable distribution fit for the simulated under-dispersed dataset. Meanwhile, for the simulated over-dispersed example, we see that the zero-inflated negative binomial and zero-inflated COM–Poisson offer comparable measures; this makes sense, given the ability of each of these distributions to address data over-dispersion.We carry out a simulation study to assess the large sample properties of the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE),θˆ=(λˆ,νˆ,pˆ), when drawing a random sample from aZICMP(λ,ν,p)distribution whereλ=2,p=0.1, andn∈{100,200,500,1000}for various values ofνbetween 0.25 and 30. For each combination of parameters(λ,ν,p)and eachn,R=1000samples of sizenare drawn, and the MLE is computed on each sample yieldingθˆ(r)forr=1,…,R. Wald statisticsW(r)=(θˆ(r)−θ)TI(θ)(θˆ(r)−θ)are then obtained forr=1,…,R. Ifθˆfollows the anticipated large sampleN(θ,I−1(θ))distribution, the empirical cumulative distribution function (CDF) ofW(1),…,W(R)should approach the CDF ofχ32asnbecomes large. Fig. 2plots the empirical CDF versusχ32for different values ofν. We see that the rate of convergence varies depending on the values ofν, approaching convergence faster forν≤1than for smaller values ofν≥1. In fact, the behavior of theW(r)is as expected forν≤2, but changes asνbecomes larger. Whenν=5, the convergence rate slows substantially. Asνincreases beyond 5, the rate of convergence to aχ32distribution appears to increase; in fact, the limiting distribution appears to change as well to be stochastically smaller thanχ32. As discussed in Section  4.1,ZICMP(λ,ν,p)approaches a non-identifiable “zero-inflated Bernoulli” distribution with a singular Fisher information matrix. This is likely what is influencing the behavior of our Wald statistic, which is a function of the information matrix.Loeys et al. (2012) investigated the impact of education level and level of anxious attachment on the number of unwanted pursuit behavior perpetrations in the context of couple separation trajectories. This dataset is clearly over-dispersed as the mean number of unwanted pursuit behavior perpetrations is 2.284 while the associated variance equals 23.302. Further, there are 246 of 387 cases where the number of unwanted pursuit behavior perpetrations equals zero, so the dataset clearly contains an excess number of zeroes. Accordingly, in their work, Loeys et al. (2012) consider various count models, namely Poisson, negative binomial, and their corresponding zero-inflated models to conduct model selection. This section expounds on that work to further consider the COM–Poisson (CMP) and zero-inflated COM–Poisson (ZICMP) models in the model comparison. To allow for reasonable model comparison, a constant dispersion parameter,ν, is estimated. One can, however, consider a model to describe the relationship between various explanatory variables andν, as described in Section  3. Parameter estimation results are provided in Table 2.Table 2 identifies those estimated coefficients determined to be statistically significant at the 5% significance level (denoted with an asterisk, *). The difference in models impacts the perceived statistical significance and inference associated with the variables of interest (education and anxiety). While anxiety is always perceived to be a statistically significant variable associating with the number of unwanted pursuit behaviors (UPBs) under a non-zero-inflated model, among zero-inflated models, it is viewed to have a statistically significant association with UPBs only in the case of a ZIP model. Meanwhile, when accounting for zero-inflation, education is inferred to be statistically significantly associated with the number of UPBs under all zero-inflated models (i.e. after accounting for excess zeroes), but only statistically significant in the Poisson model (among non-zero-inflated models). Finally, anxiety is consistently viewed to statistically significantly associate with the probability of no UPBs.In all cases, the zero-inflated models outperform their standard model counterparts. This makes sense, given the zero-inflated model’s ability to account for the excess zeroes. Further, we see that the negative binomial and COM–Poisson models outperform the Poisson model (whether one considers the classical model comparisons or their zero-inflated counterparts). This is not only supported by the decrease in AIC, but can also be seen through the resulting likelihood ratio test comparing ZIP to ZICMP (−2logΛ=350.56andp-value<0.0001); the negative binomial and COM–Poisson models are capturing the data over-dispersion present in this dataset (the ZICMP model estimateνˆ<1), while the Poisson model is restricted to the constraint of perceived data equi-dispersion.Given the data over-dispersion in this example, we initially find that the zero-inflated negative binomial and zero-inflated COM–Poisson models perform the best, with the ZINB model slightly outperforming the ZICMP model, however the difference in performance appears negligible. In particular, we note that the estimated dispersion parameter for the ZICMP isνˆ=0.000, i.e. we see that the maximum likelihood estimate forνimplies that the best fit for this dataset reduces to a zero-inflated geometric model because of the significant data over-dispersion present here. In fact, the ZINB and ZICMP models illustrate a powerful relationship—the ZINB is derived by the sum of ZIG (i.e. ZICMP withν=0) distributions. Accordingly, it makes sense that the two models performed as illustrated because the ZINB model has slightly added flexibility not provided by the ZICMP(ν=0) model, yet the ZICMP model does a good job trying to compensate for that difference in relation.Using the ZICMP results as an investigative tool, however, prompts one to consider a zero-inflated geometric (ZIG) regression from VGAM in order to obtain more precise estimates under this special case and reduce the number of parameters used in the model (thus reducing the AIC). In fact, we see that the ZIG model outperforms the ZINB and ZICMP models with regard to AIC because the three models have nearly identical log-likelihood results while the ZIG model uses one less parameter to obtain this result. Further, the resulting inferences associated with the ZINB, ZICMP, and ZIG models are consistent across these optimal models.Fig. 3provides residual analysis plots for the randomized quantile residuals stemming from the negative binomial (NB), zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB), zero-inflated COM–Poisson (ZICMP), and zero-inflated geometric (ZIG) models; Fig. 3(a)–(d) show the respective fitted versus residual plots, and Fig. 3(e)–(h) contain the corresponding QQ plots for each of the four models. We consider these models because they have the smallest AIC in comparison to the other models initially considered for model comparison. Further, we consider residual analysis based on the randomized quantile residuals in lieu of the raw residuals because raw residuals associated with our data construct (under any of the considered models) would produce fitted versus residual and QQ plots that contain spurious curves, thus obscuring any meaningful inference (Dunn and Smyth, 1996). In both the fitted versus residual plots and the QQ plots shown in Fig. 3, we see that these considered models describe the data in similar fashion. The fitted versus residual plots appear centered around zero, although the ZIG plot appears to show a slight tendency of association that may deserve further investigation. As well, a few observations may be identified as outliers, or the fitted versus residual plot may contain some heteroskedasticity. These issues, however, can be addressed through model consideration associating the dispersion parameter with the explanatory variables (Sellers and Shmueli, 2009). Meanwhile, the QQ plots associated with each of these model display approximate normality.To demonstrate the ZICMP’s ability to address dispersion, meanwhile, we inflate two datasets each comprised of 100 data values (10–5s, 88–6s, and 2–7s) with 10 or 20 zeroes, respectively. Dataset 1 (which contains 10 zeroes) is clearly under-dispersed with a mean equal to 5.382 and variance approximately equal to 3.027, while Dataset 2 (containing 20 zeroes) appears to be either equi- or over-dispersed (mean equals 4.933; variance equals 5.004). Tables 3 and 4contain the resulting parameter estimates, log-likelihood and AIC values obtained from modeling these data via Poisson, negative binomial, COM–Poisson distributions, or their zero-inflated analogs. Tables 3 and 4, in particular, demonstrate the impact of applying a (zero-inflated or non-zero-inflated) Poisson or negative binomial model to an under-dispersed dataset; notice that the Poisson and negative binomial models (whether zero-inflated or not, respectively) produce equivalent estimates and log-likelihood values. The negative binomial model is equipped to only address data over-dispersion in that the parameter space only allows for the variance to be greater than or equal to the mean. When trying to model under-dispersed data (i.e. when the variance is less than the mean), the parameter space is restricted from moving into that space which considers a variance less than the mean therefore, at best, it can only maximize the log-likelihood at those parameter estimates that produce equi-dispersion (namely, the Poisson estimates). In contrast, the ZICMP model is able to account for the excess zeroes as well as the data under-dispersion (νˆ>1); accordingly, it produces the best log-likelihood and AIC measures.Table 4 is interesting because, based solely on the dispersion index, one perceives this dataset to be approximately equi-dispersed (or even slightly over-dispersed). Through exploratory data analysis and statistical modeling, however, we can actually see and account for the mixture of distributions. In fact, when accounting for the excess zeroes, the dataset is severely under-dispersed (νˆ=38.666). This dataset thus serves as another example illustrating that datasets with perceived forms of dispersion can actually stem from probability mixtures with different dispersion levels, as discussed in Sellers and Shmueli (2013).For Datasets 1 and 2, the model comparison between the ZIP and ZICMP models both produce a test statistic value of 281.51 and correspondingp-value <0.0001, demonstrating statistically significant data dispersion exists in the respective datasets. Further,νˆ>1in both cases, recognizing the significant data under-dispersion in each dataset.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
