@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimisation of thermo-fatigue reliability of solder joints in surface mount resistor assembly using Taguchi method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A combinationbination of DOE and FEM is used to optimise thermo-fatigue reliability in resistor solder joint.Optimised design has thin die thickness and demonstrates low accumulation of damage in its solder joints.A developed mathematical model has potential to identify the most susceptible interconnection boundary in multi-material joining.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Solder joint reliability,Resistor assembly,Lead-free solder,Component standoff height,Homologous temperature,Taguchi experimental design,Finite element modelling,Fatigue damage,Accelerated thermal cycling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The effect of geometric and ambient parameters on static structural integrity of solder joints in surface mount resistor assembled on printed circuit board (PCB) is investigated to improve the thermo-fatigue reliability of the joints and components. The optimisation of resistor thickness (RT) and components standoff height (CSH) in a range of operating homologous temperature (TH) is poised to produce optimal assembly which could accumulate least strain energy density (ωacc) in resistor joints and consequently possesses longer cycles to failure (Nf). Taguchi design of experiment (DOE),L9(33), is used to generate nine designs and finite element modelling (FEM) is employed to simulate the responses of the assemblies to reliability influencing factors (RIFs). The Garofalo–Arrhenius constitutive creep relation is utilised to model high-temperature response of the soldered joints while the concept of signal to noise ratio and statistics are used to determine the optimal design. The results show that settings of lowest RT, highest CSH and THof 0.86 produce optimal assembly which demonstrates potential of reducing ωaccand increasing Nfof the best design of DOE by 46.9% and 88.3%, respectively. More results show that the nature of finite element model and difference in magnitude of thermal expansion coefficient (CTE) of two bodies bonded together and which experience the same temperature change determine the degree of damage on the interface with the former being more determining.The authors propose the modelDM/N≡DN/M=K1×K23{1≤DM/N≡DN/M⟨∞1≤K1×K2⟨∞(where: M/N, K1, K2 are isotropic materials, CTE and geometric ratio, respectively) as a quick tool to rank and compare boundary damage in a multi-isotropic-material joining.reliability influencing factorsthickness of resistorcomponent standoff heighthomologous temperaturesolder jointsreliability influencing factorsprinted circuit boardcontract electronics manufacturerflip chip on boardaccelerated temperature cyclechip scale packagestatic structural factorsmelting temperatureexcursion temperaturesfatigue indicator parameterresistor lengthresistor widthshortest distance between padscopper pad widthPCB lengthPCB thicknessYoung's moduli (in x, y and z)Poisson ratios (in xy, xz, yz)highly accelerated temperature cyclecreep strain ratevon Mises effective stressuniversal gas constant.displacement in the vertical directioncubic expansitivitycomponent or Material (A, B)coefficient of linear expansionchange in lengthchange in widthchange in thicknessRIFs (designated as A, B or C)Number of level in the experiment.effect of factor jminimum value of factor jnumber of cycle to failurefactor levelelectronic control unitshigh-pressure-high-temperaturesignal to noise ratioflip chipresistor component model 103surface mount componentswaste from electrical and electronic equipmentoriginal equipment manufacturersfinite element analysisfinite element modellingthickness of intermetallic compoundambient temperaturenumber of measurementvalue of the ith measured responseaccumulated strain energy densitytermination lengthtermination thicknesscopper pad lengthcopper pad thicknessPCB widthprinted wire boardcoefficient of thermal expansions (in x, y and z)shear moduli (in xy,xz,yz)Garofalo creep parameterschange in temperatureactivation energyabsolute temperaturevolume of materialchange in volumedamage on a materiallengthwidththicknessCTE ratio of two materialsmean of S/N ratioball grid arraymaximum value of factor jmean-time-to-failuregeometric ratio of two materials

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Resistors remain the key components of most electronic devices which are increasingly deployed to mission critical electronic systems. Such systems operate in sectors which include automotive, oil well-logging and aerospace. In automobiles, electronics are increasingly deployed in the under-the-hood where they serve as sensors and control devices or Electronic Control Unit (ECU). It is anticipated that increase in electronic content of vehicle in response to increasing demand on improving many automobile systems which include engine performance, transmission, steering, traction and combustion, will lead to more electronics being deployed to high-temperature zones of the automobile. Typical under-bonnet and silencer electronics experience temperature cycling outside the “traditional” temperature range from −55/−65°C to +125°C temperatures depending on drive duration, location and climate. Johnson et al. [1] reported that under-the-hood electronics and specifically on-engine electronics can experience ambient temperature cycling in the range from −40 to +150°C.Electronics used in well-logging experiences identical temperature cycling. Watson and Castro [2] reported that electronic systems and sensors deployed in downhole drilling operations function at temperatures of about 150–175°C and above 200°C in deeper well drilling. Characteristic oil well operates at about 150°C. Parmentier et al. [3] reported that 80% of oil-wells operates below 150°C with 95% of them functioning under 175°C ambient temperature. The search for new oil and gas in very deep reserves coupled with subsequent development and completion of high-pressure-high-temperature (HPHT) wells has necessitated operations in higher-temperature ambient. Consequently, development and production of oil and gas from HPHT wells technically demand that the logging tool electronics be protected from extreme temperature and pressure which would otherwise cause conventional logging tool electronics to fail. Thus, these electronics are protected in sondes and cartridges which increase the device weight and pose a challenge to electronics manufacturing miniaturisation trend.Similar to the automotive engines, aero engines experience high volume of electronics deployment in recent years. Mechanical and hydraulic actuators in aero engine are increasingly being replaced with electronic actuators. Designing and manufacturing electronics which will operate reliably in harsh ambient demands that the design engineer has in-depth understanding of the complex relationship and interactions among electronics materials, structural integrity of electronics assembly and operating ambient temperature to ensure that system properties and functions are preserved over long operating periods.Continued reliable performance of surface mount electronic components is challenged by the miniaturisation trend in electronics manufacturing. Surface mount resistors of smaller size are being manufactured and assembled on substrates using varied component standoff height (CSH). The CSH is the height between the base of the resistor and the top of the substrate printed circuit board (PCB). It is basically the height of the solder joints in electronic assembly. With suitable CSH and right thickness of resistor, a good solder joint integrity could be achieved in a resistor assembly. Such assembly has potential to operate satisfactorily in a high-temperature and harsh ambient. In addition to miniaturisation trend, harsh operating conditions and specifically high-temperature operations has adverse effect on the reliability of solder joints in electronic devices. In earlier investigation [4] the effect of elevated temperature operations on thermo-mechanical reliability of flip chip (FC) assemblies was studied and the impact on the integrity of FC solder joints was reported. Since the integrity of solder joints in electronic assemblies depends hugely on the geometry of the joints, evaluating the integrity of solder joints in resistor R102 will provide information which could be used to improve its thermo-fatigue reliability.There are significant amount of published studies on improvement of integrity of solder joints in surface mount components (SMCs) but most of them have focused on joints made of lead based solder alloys. With lead-free solders rapidly replacing the former, and being deployed to operate in high-temperature and harsh environment, the need to conduct research which will provide vital information on improving the thermo-mechanical reliability of SMC assembled with lead-free solder on a substrate is needed.Current studies on lead-free solder joints and their mechanical properties include Refs. [5,6]. Liu et al. [5] investigated and compared the shear response of solder joints formed with different compositions of lead-free alloys. Their findings demonstrate that addition of Bi–Ni to SAC alloy results in higher shear strength at both the bulk solder and soldered interface in the joints. They found that increasing the Bi content significantly increased the shear strength of the joints. In their study, Yang et al. [6] among other things investigated the effect of aluminium concentration on the mechanical properties of Sn–0.7Cu lead-free solder alloy. Their findings show that increase in aluminium content increases the tensile strength and creep resistance of Sn–0.7Cu alloys. The present study is similar to the other two because it seeks to demonstrate techniques of achieving a higher lead-free solder joint strength with minimum damage during device operations.Fig. 1 shows a model of a R102 resistor assembled on a PCB using lead-free solder to form the joints. Fig. 1(a) and (b) are the 3D models while Fig. 1(c) depicts the front view of one end of the soldered joints showing the five components in the assembly.The increase in adoption and use of lead-free solder alloys in electronics assembly is in response to health concerns which led to the introduction of the European Union's Waste from Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) directive in July 2006. One challenge in continued use of lead-free solder material to form solder joints in electronics is that unlike the lead based, its mechanical properties have not been fully characterised. Some published properties of lead-free solder alloys in many studies have demonstrated marked differences which have made it difficult to compare the reliability of lead-free solder with that of lead based solder that is widely reported. Siviour et al. [7] reported that Sn–Pb solder showed a strong dependence on strain rate and temperature, whereas lead-free solders showed only a weak dependence on these parameters. On the contrary, Stam and Davitt [8] reported that reflowed lead-free solder joints did not show a better integrity than near eutectic lead-based ones even though the former showed better bulk mechanical properties. In addition, they stated that although microstructural differences can be seen between them, similar failure mechanisms were observed in the joints. Consequently, the adoption and use of lead-free solders in electronics manufacturing has led to new device reliability concerns and an urgent need for a better understanding of the thermo-fatigue reliability of interconnects used in safety critical applications before the impending deadline for WEEE compliance. Both the Contract Electronics Manufacturers (CEMs) and Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) are interested in information on how reliability influencing factors (RIFs) could be controlled to improve the life of interconnects in resistors made with the new lead-free materials. The interaction field for the factors considered in this investigation is represented diagrammatically inFig. 2. The representation presents the reliability of interconnection to be central when the effects of geometric and operating ambient parameters are considered. These parameters are called RIFs in this study.Research has been on-going in this area of improving the thermo-fatigue and thermo-mechanical reliability of solder joints in SMCs assembly. Goh [9] investigated numerically the effects of critical design parameters such as die size, joint height, joint diameter, joint pitch, PCB thickness and material properties of underfill on the solder joint reliability of (flip chip on board) FCOB. He concludes that parametric (finite element analysis) FEA technique is a very cost effective tool in evaluating the solder joint reliability of FCOB assemblies and also that a useful set of assembly design guidelines can be generated from the result of his study. Recently, Ma et al. [10] investigated accelerated thermal cycling performance of solder joints in lead-free devices at a series of wide temperature ranges. Their results show that the fatigue life of lead-free packages consistently degrades with increasing accelerated temperature cycle (ATC) range. They concluded that failure mode at high-temperature is a mixture of solder joint crack and pad cratering. It was added that failure at low temperature is mainly driven by only pure solder joints fatigue failures. Ye et al. [11] demonstrated how combination of FEM and Taguchi method can be utilised to produce an optimal design capable of reducing the creep strain energy density of chip scale package (CSP) by 78.4% compared with the original design parameters. In a recent study, Wan et al. [12] reported how a mixed robust method based on three-level and experiment design (the quadric surface) and finite element analysis were used to optimise thermal fatigue reliability of FBGA package. They reported that their optimised model achieved equivalent thermal fatigue strain reduction of 48.77% when compared with the original model.The geometric parameters considered in this investigation are CSH and RTwhile homologous temperature (TH) is the environmental factor. The optimisation of these factors towards improving the quality of electronic assembly is poised to provide useful technical information. Technically, depending on variables which include area of bond pad on PCB and reflow profile peak temperature, the CSH of R102 is likely to vary after assembly.This study is significant because its focus is to study the thermo-fatigue reliability of solder joints in miniaturised resistor assembly and provide information on how CSH could be used to improve the thermo-fatigue life of such joint for application in mission critical systems operating in elevated temperatures. The study is vital considering the fact that at high homologous temperature of operation, the sensitivity of thermo-mechanical properties of solder alloy material to creep deformation increases and impacts the systems long time performance. It is believed that the interactions between geometric factors and the ambient temperature affect the reliability of solder joints. The assembly of a reliable system with improved service life requires better understanding of the complex interactions between assembly's parameters and operating environmental conditions. The aim of this investigation is to predict the optimal combination of the magnitude of RT, CSH, and THwhich will yield high integrity assembly of R102 on PCB. It is hoped that this result will be useful to R&D engineers involved in electronics design, assembly and packaging.The research paradigm and design employed in this investigation are presented in the following three sub-headings. The sub-Section 2.1 presents discussions on design considerations while sub-Section 2.2 details the method utilised in designing the experiments. The discussions in this section end with sub-Section 2.3 where the technique of signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio employed in the analysis of results is outlined.The optimal performance of electronic assemblies depends to a huge extent on the integrity of the interconnections between package and substrate; and also the interaction of the assembly materials with the operating environment. The integrity of interconnection can be improved through optimisation of the static structural factors. Ridout and Bailey [13] have reported that solder joints are often the cause of failure in electronic devices. The integrity of interconnection in turn depends on many static structural factors (SSFs). In earlier studies [4,13], it was identified that CSH and thickness of intermetallic compound (IMCT) in the interconnection are two key RIFs for solder bump joints in FC assembly.In this study, we extend this line of investigation to resistors assembly and identify CSH, RTand THas the key RIFs. In the study [14], techniques and factors which produce different magnitude of CSH in assemblies of identical FC component are presented. These techniques and factors are not different in the case of resistor assembly. The magnitudes of the area of pad on PCB and reflow profile temperature are the factors which cause variation of CSH in any electronic component assembly. In this study, three set of values of RT(438μm, 508μm and 550μm) are selected while 60μm, 80μm and 100μm are chosen for CSH. The assembly is modelled using three values of THof 0.81, 0.86 and 0.91. These magnitudes of RTand CSH are within the range employed by Refs. [15,16]. To extend the findings of this study to other solder and interconnect materials used in electronic assembly, the THof the lead-free solder material is used instead of degrees centigrade temperature. It is generally known that different materials have comparable properties at the same TH. In addition, THis a more generic index in application because it expresses the temperature of a material as a quotient of the operating ambient and melting temperature using the Kelvin scale.The THcan be expressed mathematically as in Eq. (1).(1)TH=TA+273TM+273Where parametersTH,TAandTMare the homologous, ambient and melting temperatures, respectively. The SnAgCu solder alloy used in this study melts at 221 degrees centigrade temperature. Excursion temperatures (ETs) of 125°C, 150°C and 175°C are selected for this investigation. These temperatures are obtainable in commercial, automotive and oil-well logging operations. Tsai et al. [17] have reported that the effect of temperature range is the most significant parameter which influences equivalent total strain range under temperature cyclic loadings. At this set of temperatures (125°C, 150°C and 175°C), SnAgCu solder joints are functioning at THsof approximately 0.81, 0.86 and 0.91, respectively. These temperatures are within the creep region of solder alloy materials; and their physical behaviour becomes very sensitive to strain rate, temperature, strain hardening and softening.Table 1 presents a summary of the RIFs (designated as A, B and C) and their levels (designated as 1, 2 and 3).The importance of experimental design as a tool for engineers and scientists for use in product design and development as well as process development and improvement cannot be overstressed. Numerous researchers including [11,18–20] have successfully employed a number of designs which include the methods of factorial, fractional factorial and Taguchi in their experiments. The author, Montgomery [21], believes that the use of experimental designs early in the product cycle can substantially reduce development lead time and cost while leading to processes and products that perform better in the field and have higher reliability than those developed using other approaches. Thus, experimental design is employed to develop nine designs.A factorial experiment based on Taguchi design is employed in this investigation. The L9(33) orthogonal array is considered to determine which of the RIFs and levels have the highest main effect on damage of resistor solder joints. In addition, the design seeks to determine the existence of interactions among the variables as well as the contribution of the interactions to damage of the joints and other interconnection boundaries. The focus of the array is to identify the best design in the DoE that will be robust to RIFs. The Taguchi design is presented inTable 2.The notion of signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) is an analysis tool which is useful in analysing results of numerical modelling. It is employed in this study to calculate the average effects of the RIFs. This technique couple with statistics is used to determine optimal settings of factors from the DoE design for an optimal design. The S/N can be expressed mathematically as(2)SN=−10log10(∑i=1ryi2r)whereris the number of measurement,yiis the value of theith measured response and∑i=1ryi2ris the mean-squared deviation (MSD). The multiplier 10 is a scale factor which has no effect on the conclusions deduced from the usage of this expression and technique. The response of the assembly to the effect of variation of the RIFs is the degree of damage of the solder joints and other component of the assembly. One parameter used to measure the damage in solder joint is the strain energy density designated asω. The accumulation of change inωper unit volume of the solder in the joints, per cycle of temperature loading, is known as accumulated creep strain energy density. It is designated asωaccand could be measured in J/m3. Consequently, the creep energy dissipation per unit volume accumulated over one thermal cycle, ∆ω, could be expressed mathematically as:(3)Δw=∑i=1nΔwiΔvi∑i=1nΔviWhereΔwiis the creep energy accumulated in a cycle in element i andΔviis the volume of the element. Similarly, theωacccan be computed using the relation(4)wacc=∑c=snΔwWhere c is the cycle, s is the cycle at first stabilisation of the hysteresis loop and on set of steady state secondary creep while n is the last cycle before the onset of tertiary creep.Fig. 3 shows plots ofωaccagainst thermal load time for the nine models representing the nine designs. In general, the figure shows that theωaccof model 1 is the largest while that of model 9 is the lowest. It also shows that theωaccincreases as the loading progresses except for models 2, 3, 5, and 9. These models are probably within their secondary creep region with the temperature test range.It can be seen in the figure that plots M1, M6 and M8 follow the well-known creep model while the rest model seem to only show the primary and secondary creep region. It is pointed that only the secondary steady-state creep region that is used to compute theωacc. The results of this computation are presented in Table 6 and Fig. 7. The crossing of some of the plots with the other is an indication that the factors interact and the parameters can be optimised. To adopt and use Eq. (2) in this investigation and considering that the interest is to minimise the damage in the solder joints, the concept of the smaller the better S/N ratio is implemented where the variableyiis theωacc. Numerical analysis is not known to produce variations in measured data, thus the quantityris assigned a unity value. The Eq. (2) may therefore be reduced to Eq. (5)(5)SN=−10log10ωacc2Finite element modelling (FEM) has been widely employed to study thermo-mechanical reliability of solder joints in SMCs which are subjected to ATCs. With reference to the objectives of this investigation, FEM method is an adequate tool and thus is applied. This section is presented in three sub-headings. These divisions are: model and methodology; materials and their properties; and applied loads and boundary conditions.Nine three-dimensional Finite Element (FE) models representing the design points of the resistor assemblies are created using SolidWorks software. The parameters of the assembly and their values are presented inTable 3 and shown schematically inFig. 4. The figure presents the assembly plan with dimensions in Fig. 4(a). In Fig. 4(b), the front of one end of the solder joint is depicted which shows in details six interface boundaries as well as the CSH and the RT. Fig. 4(c) is the whole assembly showing adequate mesh used in its modelling. The whole assembly is used in the modelling because it gives a better result though it takes longer time to simulate. The FE models were input into V.14.5 ANSYS' FEM software, where their static structural responses to cyclic induced thermal loads are simulated.In setting up the models for simulation, adequate meshes of different sizes are used for the components. This process involves the use of body sizing method that enables the usage of different mesh size for each component of the assembly. The element type selected by the software is SOLID186. In specific terms, the sizes of the elements of the key components: resistor die, solder joint, copper pad, terminator are 3.0×E−4, 7.5×E−5, 1.7×E−4, 1.7×E−4, respectively. These are the smallest elements that can be used for the various components in each of the nine models and achieve complete simulation run. The smallest possible element sizes are selected because the authors are aware of the effect of mesh size on simulation result. As there is no possible smaller mesh size for complete simulation run, the mesh sensitivity check did not arise in this investigation. Basically, the number of total nodes, contact elements, spring elements, solid elements and total elements in the FE model are 48717, 35952, 0, 8248 and 44200, respectively.The key materials used in mounting the resistor die on PCB are: alumina die, silver termination, copper pad, SnAgCu alloy solder, metallization layer and PCB. One essential derivative of the reactions among copper pad, metallization materials and the SnAgCu alloy solder is the intermetallic compound (IMC). However, this compound is not considered in this investigation because the effect is assumed to be relatively the same in the models and thus would not influence the findings. Moreover, the authors have extensively investigated its contribution to static structural integrity of solder joints in FC assembly in Refs. [4,22].Table 4 presents the properties of these materials. All the materials were modelled as linear elastic and isotropic substances except the solder and PCB which are simulated using Garofalo creep models and orthotropic materials, respectively.The Garofalo creep model was employed to simulate the thermo-mechanical response of solder bump to the applied ATCs. A good number of studies which include [11,28,29] have utilised the same model in their research which are related to this study. At field service conditions, the duration of thermal cycle of solder joints is in the order of minutes and days. The THof solder alloys in interconnects is within the creep region. Thus solder joints formed using SnAgCu alloy solder are presumed to deform primarily due to creep under this condition. Generally, constitutive relations based on creep are used to model the behaviour of materials over a relatively long period at low strain. Consequently, many researchers have adopted creep models to capture the rate-dependent plasticity of solder alloys in joints. Unfortunately, this condition of low strain over a long period cannot be simulated precisely in the control laboratory because of its high demand on time and cost. The ATC or highly accelerated temperature cycle (HATC) are used as an alternative. The flow equation of creep strain rate is given asdεcrdt=C1[sinh(C2σ)]C3exp(−QRT)(6)dεcrdt=C1[sinh(C2σ)]C3exp(−C4T)Wheredεcrdt,σ, Q, R and T are the scalar creep strain rate, von Mises effective stress, activation energy, universal gas constant, absolute temperature, respectively. The other symbols represent material dependent parameters. The values of the parameters C1, C2, C3 and C4 are presented inTable 5.The nine models created using the design points are subjected to their various six complete ATCs corresponding to their THin 25 load steps. In the study Amalu and Ekere [30], the sufficiency of at least six complete ATCs in thermal cycling reliability of lead-free solder joints is reported. The plot of temperature profiles as a function of temperature time steps for the three profiles used in this investigation is presented inFig. 5.The temperature loading started from THof 0.597 for the 3 ATCs, ramped up at the rate of 15°C/min to the various ETs corresponding to the maxima THs of 0.81, 0.86 and 0.91. The assembly dwelled for 10min in these ETs to ensure thermal equilibrium resulting in uniform temperature distribution. They were then ramped down to THof 0.476 (corresponding to lower dwell region) at the same rate, where they also rested for 10min. This magnitude of ramp rate is used because Aoki et al. [31] reported that the internationally accepted ramp rate of 10–15°C per minute is required by test standard IEC60749-25 temperature cycling (JESD22-A104-B), established for evaluating the reliability of semiconductor parts and assembly printed wire boards (PWBs). It is stated that this ramp rate is widely used in the United States and Europe and in their follow up study, Aoki et al. [32] reported that they have tested ramp rates from market environment conditions at 15°C/min (IEC standard 60749-25). It can be easily seen in Fig. 5 that the ramp rate (slope) of the ATCs are parallel to one another. A constant ramp rate has been used because different ramp rates produce different mean-time-to-failures. In the same study, Aoki et al. [32] reported that their investigation confirms that the higher the ramp rate, the shorter the failure cycle. The assembly (Fig. 4(c)) was simply supported such that the condition of the structure at the support is(7)atthePCBbase,w=0andu(w)=0.Theu(w), represents the displacement in the w vertical direction. A few assumptions were made to aid the simplification of the structure for analysis. These assumptions are: the assembly was at stress free state at room temperature of 22°C which was also the starting temperature of the thermal cycle loading, the assembly is at homogeneous temperature at load steps, initial stresses which may have accumulated from reflow soldering process in the package are neglected and all contacting surfaces are assumed to be bonded with perfect adhesion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has reported the investigation on thermo-fatigue reliability of a resistor R102 assembled on substrate printed circuit board using SnAgCu solder joints. The investigation aims to study the effect of reliability influencing factors (RIFs) which are resistor die thickness (RT), component standoff height (CSH) and operating ambient homologous temperature (TH) on mechanical integrity and reliability of lead-free solder joints and other components of the assembly. The investigation seeks to characterise the distribution of damage in the assembly whilst quantifying its magnitude. It is the focus of the study to evaluate and determine the effect of geometry of components and the coefficient of thermal expansion of the materials to magnitude of damage of interface in the assembly. In addition, this research optimises the RIFs and compares the optimal design with best design of the DoE in terms of accumulated creep strain energy density (ωacc) and fatigue life.It is found that the RIFs have main effect and also interact with one another to influence the performance of the assembly at the simulated conditions. The ambient operating temperature is found to be the most influential factor in contributing to the damage of the soldered joints while at higher operating temperature, the thickness of the resistor die is indifferent to the other two RIFs. This observation occurs because the fluidity of the joint increases and mitigates the solid state damage of the joint. It can be deduced that for assembly which will operate at high homologous temperature, the fatigue life of the assembly could be increased by using optimal CSH to assemble the chip resistor on PCB. Consequently, optimal design of resistor assembly should specify the operating homologous temperature range.Damage distribution on the components is found to concentrate at the periphery and edge of the components. For the soldered joints, increasing the thickness of these areas may mitigate inherent crack initiation and propagation. For the other components, surface treatment and design changes to eliminate edges are recommended. Although the stress range in termination is the highest followed by copper pad and then the resistor die, the interface between die end and termination was found to be the most critical to failure. The solder sandwich between the termination base and the copper pad has absorbed significantly the stress which would have developed between termination and pad. It is proposed that the use of solder between die ends and terminations will serve as stress diffuser and mitigate the high stress developed at the interface between the two components.The relationDM/N≡DN/M=K1×K23{1≤DM/N≡DN/M⟨∞1≤K1×K2⟨∞developed for quick determination of the most critical interface boundary is dependent on ratios of CTE and thickness of components with the geometric ratio being more determining. This relation could be helpful in determining the contribution of assembly geometry as a stress riser in multi-material interconnection in an assembly.The results of this study have demonstrated that the magnitude of accumulated creep strain energy density ωaccdepends on the setting of the RIFs. It also shows that the optimal design has the potential to reduce ωaccof the joint of best design from DOE by 46.9% while improving its fatigue life by 88.2%.