@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A FE based machining simulation methodology accounting for cast iron microstructure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A FE based machining simulation methodology accounting for cast iron microstructure.Assessment of cast iron machinability at orthogonal cutting.A parametric study is carried out based on micrographs of cast iron with varying nodularity.FE-simulated and experimental cutting forces and chip formations compare fairly well.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Machining simulation,Cast iron,Microstructure,CGI,Nodularity,Johnson-Cook model,Chip formation,Fracture modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the present paper the effect of graphite nodularity in the microstructure of cast iron is assessed with respect to its machinability at orthogonal cutting. A micro-structure based model of the cast iron material has been developed based on analyses of micro-graph images. The image analysis combines pearlitic grains with graphite nodules to produce the micro-structures. Continuous deformation behavior of pearlite and graphite phases is described using the Johnson–Cook (JC) viscoplasticty model including temperature dependence. Of particular concern is the modeling of the chip formation, induced by the micro-structure morphology and the mechanical behavior of the work piece material in the vicinity of the insert. This is described by the element deletion methodology along with the Johnson–Cook failure criterion to realize the fracture kinematics. A parametric study is carried out by varying the nodularity of the graphite. To validate the model, the finite element results are compared to machining test results carried out on a Compacted Graphite Iron (CGI) material in a related paper. It turns out that the FE-simulated and experimentally observed cutting force and chip formation compare fairly well.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A key factor for the competitiveness of the manufacturing industry is to be able to rapidly realize new products, and at the same time to develop the manufacturing process as efficiently as possible. It is also crucial to maintain and to further develop manufacturing methodologies with respect to desired high quality product properties in an effective way. This issue pertains, in particular, to the machining, where the proper management of the involved process parameters is of major importance. For example, knowledge of cutting forces, chip morphology, temperatures, surface roughness, residual stresses and surface integrity, etc., is an important prerequisite for reducing machining costs and improving product quality, cf. [1]. The manufacturing industry currently addresses these issues by increasing the implementation of simulation tools for the specific operations included in their processing chain. In fact, models for the prediction of process parameters during metal cutting have been developed for over the past 60years. Early analytical models covered basic mechanics of metal cutting, using simplifying assumptions and mathematical relationships. More reliable and accurate models came with the computer-based simulations together with the finite element method in the early 1970s, cf. [2]. Today the metal cutting processes can be described in a much more realistic manner and the research involves simulations of non-conventional processes such as micro-scale cutting [3]. The developments in the modeling and simulation of metal cutting processes from both historical and current perspectives are described in the review article by Soo and Aspinwall [4].In the present paper we address the issue of modeling the machining of a range of cast irons, including the Compacted Graphite Iron (CGI), as described by the measure of graphite nodularity. From the modeling viewpoint, we note that material models in machining applications are primarily developed for simulations based on the phenomenological approach to the constitutive modeling, thereby adopting a homogenized response of the material without any specific consideration of the meso- or micro-scale. However, to accurately model the typical chip formation in CGI machining and to fully describe the local behavior of the highly heterogeneous material, the heterogeneous micro-structure should be explicitly accounted for in the modeling. In this paper we follow the lines set out in Ref. [1] to capture the heterogeneous material behavior. Thereby, we allow for the incorporation of micro-level models for the individual constituents of CGI, like pearlite, ferrite, and the graphite flakes embedded in the gray mass. In this context we are concerned with the mechanical modeling of the cast iron with respect to relevant mechanisms due to machining operations. This means to consider the mechanical behavior of the micro-structural constituents with respect to high deformation rates, large deformations, fracture, and dependence on high temperatures. Here, we want to emphasize the importance of proper modeling of ductile fracture mechanisms in order to predict accurate results. The traditional way of modeling the cutting process is to primarily consider it as a plastic deformation process, in some cases complemented by a “computational fix” in terms of a criterion necessary for the simulation model to work properly. Even though such a criterion permits the FEM programs to run, it does not represent the physics of what goes on at the tool tip. Recently, it has been emphasized that it is necessary to include additional energy dissipating mechanisms for a proper representation of the whole process, cf. Refs. [5–7]. The same conclusion can be drawn from e.g. the work by Bil et al. [8], where plastic deformation considered as sole energy dissipation mechanism is proven to be insufficient.The proposed model is applied to a set of micro-structures ranging from CGI to nodular iron, whose micro-structures differ mainly by the morphology, or nodularity [9] of the graphite flakes defined by the area fraction in percent of graphite that is considered to be close to nodular in shape. The approach taken is to resolve explicitly the actual material micro-structure by the FE model. The alternative approach, involving computational homogenization, is inappropriate since the cutting depth (pertinent to all relevant orthogonal cutting operations) is in the same order of magnitude as the representative micro-level volume element. The paper consists of three parts: First, a brief review of the typical CGI micro-structure and its typical deformation during machining is described. Then, the adopted modeling approach involving the material behavior based on the Johnson–Cook model [10] and the finite element discretization of the micro-structure are discussed. Finally, a parametric study in terms of the graphite nodularity in cast iron is presented based on FE-simulations of orthogonal machining.As an example of a cast iron let us consider the CGI, which primarily contains a mixture of pearlite, ferrite and graphite phases. The graphite phase appears in a 2D cut as “worm-shaped” or as consisting of vermicular particles. The particles are randomly oriented like in gray iron, however they are shorter and thicker, and they have rounded edges, cf. Fig. 2a. In 3D the individual worms are connected to their nearest neighbors and form the complex coral-like morphology, giving rise to thermal and mechanical properties in between those of gray and ductile iron as shown in Table 1. The characteristic morphology of CGI leads to strong adhesion between the graphite and the “steel” matrix, containing pearlite and ferrite phases. Stronger adhesion together with the rounded edges and irregular bumpy surfaces results in a reduction of the crack initiation and growth providing superior mechanical properties compared to gray cast iron which, traditionally, has been used in a majority of industrial cast components e.g. engine blocks.Unlike more homogeneous and ductile materials (where usually quite long chips are formed), a specific feature of the CGI-machining is the formation of segmented chips due to fracture, where the fracture zone is characterized by decohesion/separation of graphite flakes or nodules from the steel matrix structure. Cracks are developing primarily through the graphite grains due to the fact that the graphite grains act as notches in the much tougher matrix material.In this section we describe the FE-based modeling approach to the orthogonal machining of CGI and nodular (ductile) iron. In this particular machining operation the cutting edge of the tool is straight and normal to both the cutting and feed direction. A key feature is to address the issue of chip formation as induced by the micro-structure of CGI, whereby a multiscale modeling approach is adopted to account for the underlying microstructure, cf. also Ref. [1]. As mentioned earlier, a truly multiscale analysis becomes complicated because the graphite flakes are in the same order of magnitude as the cutting depth dc. This means that the principle of scale separation, cf. e.g. Ref. [11], does not apply to the cutting zone, where steep gradients of the deformation and crack propagation through graphite grains occur. To overcome this problem, the material micro-structure is resolved in an outer layer of thickness drin the vicinity of the cutting zone as depicted in Fig. 1, whereas the remaining material (outside the resolved cutting zone) is homogenized in a standard fashion according to the first order homogenization principle, cf. Ref. [11]. A clear advantage is that the proposed methodology allows for a quite general way of incorporating the micro-structure of cast iron materials, thereby facilitating e.g. the considered parametric study of the detailed graphite nodularity with respect to the machining process parameters.In the following sub-sections, we further describe the involved issues of the approach, like “modeling of the microstructure” based on image analysis as well as material, fracture and thermal modeling for the involved constituents in the steel matrix.To properly capture the mechanical properties of the cast iron we carry out the FE-simulations based on real images of the micro-structure via the software OOF2, cf. Refs. [12,13]. OOF2 facilitates a 2D FE-triangulation representing the different phases as they are observed in the digitalized micro-graphs, as shown in Fig. 2. In the present analysis we shall restrict to the consideration of the steel matrix as a pure pearlitic phase, without the separate modeling of the ferrite phase. Moreover, the mesh is more refined in regions along the graphite/pearlite interfaces to increase the resolution of the analysis in these regions. This is important due to the significant influence of the graphite phase on the cast iron machinability. We also remark that 2D-simulations of heterogeneous micro-structural materials, like cast iron, do not generally capture completely the material response due to the unresolved micro-structural distribution in the third dimension. However, despite this fact the 2D-assumption is used to avoid overly demanding computations, and to enable the proposed resolved micro-structural approach for large scale simulation of e.g. the cutting force.Several constitutive relationships including those of Johnson and Cook (JC), Usui, Zerilli, and Bammann–Chiesa–Johnson have been proposed for the modeling of metallic materials undergoing high strains, strain rates and temperatures, cf. the discussion by [14]. In the present paper we adopt the material model by Johnson and Cook [10], due to its simplicity and robustness to account for the considerable levels of strain, strain rate, temperature and pressure in the work piece material. This model has also been frequently used for chip formation simulations and other transient dynamic simulations, cf. Ref. [4]. Typically, the JC-model assumes that the flow stress is a function of the accumulated plastic strain, plastic strain rate and temperature T. We thus emphasize the relative simplicity of the model corresponding to relatively few material parameters, thereby facilitating simple calibration procedures against experimental data.To establish the constitutive framework pertinent to the Johnson–Cook model, we follow the adopted structure due to [15], where a hypoelastic–viscoplastic formulation is employed for the continuum behavior preserving the structure of “small deformation” constitutive relations. The hypoelastic–viscoplastic framework is chosen due to its computational efficiency compared to the alternative, thermodynamically consistent hyperelastic–viscoplastic formulation. To this end, let us consider the linearized internal virtual workGintas the material time derivative (as denoted by a super-imposed dot) relative to the (fixed) reference configuration B0. This is formulated as(1)Ġint=∫B0(δl:τ̇+τ:(δl·l))dBwhere the actual rate of the Kirchhoff stressτ̇is determined by the co-rotational Jaumann rateτ^of the Kirchhoff stressτ=Jσ(whereσis the Cauchy stress and J is the Jacobian of the deformation) defined asτ^=τ̇−ω·τ+τ·ω, whereωis the spin tensor of the continuum.A constitutive relation is then postulated between the objective co-rotational stress rateτ^and the symmetric part of the spatial velocity gradientlas(2)τ^=Ee:(l−lp−lth)withlp=λ32τdevτvMwherelth=αθ̇1is the thermal part of the spatial velocity gradient,θ̇is the temperature rate, α is the coefficient of thermal expansion, andEe=2GIdev+K1⊗1is the isotropic elastic stiffness modulus tensor, where G is the shear modulus and K is the bulk modulus pertinent to the elastic response. Moreover, in Eq. (2)τdevis the deviatoric part ofτ,τvMis the von Mises effective stress, andλ≥0is the plastic multiplier determined by the Perzyna visco-plasticity format:(3){λ=ε̇0exp[〈Φ〉C(1−θ^m)(A+B(εeqp)n)]⇝λ>0ifλε̇0≥1Φ≤0,λ≥0,λΦ=0⇝λ>0ifλε̇0<1whereεeqp=∫0tλdtis the total equivalent plastic strain, and the overstress function is specified in terms of a quasi-static yield function Φ written as(4)Φ=τvM−(A+B(εeqp)n)(1−θ^m)The model in (3) assumes six material parameters, where the coefficient A is the yield strength, B is the hardening modulus, C is the strain rate sensitivity coefficient (if C is too small too much energy is used for plastic deformation), n is the hardening coefficient and m is the thermal softening coefficient. Furthermore, we note that the parameterε̇0evidently has a strong influence on the rate sensitivity, like a relaxation time parameter. Finally, the temperature dependenceθ^in (3) is accounted for viaθ^={0,θ<θtransθ−θtransθmelt−θtrans,θtrans>θ>θmelt1,θ>θmeltwhereθ^is named the homologous temperature, θmeltis the melting temperature of the material and θtransis the transition temperature defined as the temperature at or below which there is no temperature dependence (usually taken as room temperature).In order to model chip formation, we consider ductile fracture as the main mechanism for the material separation. In fact, highly discontinuous chip formation is often observed in cast iron machining, simply due to the fact that the microscopic material failure shows a large dependence on graphite morphology. This material “damage” mechanism develops primarily due to the graphite morphology, acting as a fracture promotor in the pearlitic phase of the micro-structure.To identify a suitable fracture criterion for high velocity perforation problems, six ductile fracture models were evaluated by Teng and Wiezbicki [16] . Evaluated models are the Wilkins, the Johnson–Cook, the maximum shear stress, the modified Cockroft–Latham, the constant fracture strain, and the Bao–Wierzbicki fracture models. According to the results in [16] only the Johnson–Cook and Bao–Wierzbicki fracture models are capable of predicting the realistic fracture patterns and at the same time the correct residual velocities. For the adopted JC failure model, we introduce the variable D (basically representing the amount of accumulated plastic deformation) which is defined as(5)D=∫0tλεfpdt≤1Whenever D reaches the value 1 at any integration point the corresponding element is removed according to the element removal technique, cf. [17]. According to the Johnson–Cook model [18], the fracture strain is expressed in terms of three multiplicative dependencies (like in the material model). The dependencies are those of stress triaxiality, strain rate and temperature. This is formulated in terms of the equivalent plastic fracture strain εfpwritten as(6)εfp[t]=(d1+d2exp[d3pτvM])(1+d4ln[λε̇0])(1+d5θ^)wherep=−1/3tr[τ]is the pressure accounting for the material ductility on triaxial stress state, as described within the first bracket. The presence of hydrostatic tension significantly decreases the level of critical fracture strain. This is because void nucleation, growth and coalescence (being the major driving force of ductile fracture) are generally promoted by the hydrostatic portion of the stress. In analogy with the constitutive model, expressions in the second and third sets of brackets stand for the effects of strain rate and temperature, respectively.The five parameters of (6), i.e. the initial failure strain d1, the exponential factor d2, the triaxiality factor d3, the strain rate factor d4, and the temperature factor d5, are typically calibrated from tensile tests on smooth and notched specimens combined with either theoretical analysis or finite element simulations for parameter identification. In the present work the fracture parameters were taken from the literature as described in Section 4.3.In the present work, a thermomechanically coupled approach for the simultaneous evaluation of stresses and temperatures is considered governed by the energy equation:(7)ρc[θ]θ̇=rp−h·∇withh=−K·∇θandrp=ητ:lpwhere the scalar rpis the heat input added into the thermal energy balance due the mechanical energy dissipation,lpis the plastic part of the spatial velocity gradient and∇•=∂•/∂xis the spatial gradient. Moreover, η is the inelastic heat fraction, which is chosen to be a constant parameter in our calculations. We also have that ρ is the density of the material andc[θ]is the temperature dependent specific heat. As shown in Eq. (7), the heat transfer occurs due to the heat conduction term, wherehis the heat flux vector, andK=k1is the isotropic thermal conductivity. We conclude that the heating of the material is essentially caused by the delicate balance between generated amount of plastic work and heat transfer due to thermal conduction. As to the possible dependence of the thermal properties of the specimen due to “element removal” of heated elements, it is assumed that the removed element volume is small enough.The objective of the following representative simulations using the proposed FE-based simulation strategy is to evaluate the influence of nodularity on machinability of cast iron materials. The machinability is here represented by resulting contact forces and temperatures. The results obtained are compared to experimental results, cf. OPTIMA [19], where the cutting process has been studied by means of Quick Stop Tests and external longitudinal turning operations on the cast iron materials with three different nodularity values, 5%, 20% and 62%. The simulation of the cutting process is carried out by using the finite element code ABAQUS/Explicit (version 6.7-2), cf. [17]. The explicit time integration method is thereby conveniently exploited due to the inherent impact load character of the problem.In order to realize the parametrization of the nodularity, ten representative 2D micrographs of cast iron materials with nodularities ranging from 0% to 50% are considered. As mentioned earlier, the nodularity is the area fraction (in %) of round or nearly round graphite grains.In Fig. 3two out of ten micro-structures used in the simulations are shown. The actual micro-graphs are provided by Sintercast, which is a supplier of on-line process control technology for high-volume production of e.g. CGI. A two phase heterogeneity is considered comprising the graphite and the pearlite phases. In fact, the cast iron used in industrial applications and also in the experiments [19] contain only small amounts of ferrite (less than 5%), which, therefore, is neglected in the modeling. The meshes and material heterogeneity used in the simulations were created based on the micro-graphs through the software OOF2, as described in Section 3.1.In order to arrive at realistic predictions in FE simulations of metal cutting processes, clearly, we are dependent on the proper high strain rate data of the pearlitic phase, established at different temperatures. For the basic material behavior, the parameters used in the simulations for pearlite and graphite phases are available in literature, cf. Refs. [1,12] and Table 2 for the representative values. However, very little information is generally available in the literature on “dynamic” material properties in terms of experimental data at different strain rates or already extracted JC parameters. To obtain the proper guidance, we resort to the JC-parameters of the high-carbon pearlitic 4142 steel in Ref. [20], which has similar material characteristics as the pearlitic phase of the micro-structure. Possible differences in the amounts of remaining chemical elements are ignored, since observations made of stress–strain curves for ferrite and pearlite specimens with considerable differences in chemical composition show that alloying elements have a negligible influence on the flow stress of both ferrite and pearlite, cf. [1].On the experimental side, we note that techniques focusing high strain rate data at elevated temperatures typically utilize special hydraulic equipments for tensile or compression testing, normally with a limited ability to achieve data for the actual strain rates. For higher strain rates, the Split-Hopkinson pressure bar device may be employed, cf. Ref. [14].Our experience is that the influence of the graphite phase on the macroscopic cast iron behavior is primarily due to the morphology of graphite grains, and that the stress response from the graphite phase can be negligible at machining simulations. The material parameters used in the simulations are listed in Tables 2–4.Micro-structures with ten different graphite nodularities, as described in Section 4.2, are used in the orthogonal machining simulation study. As an example, a discretized micro-structure with nodularity of 50% is shown in Fig. 4.The FE-model, including the tool, for the actual machining simulations is achieved by mirroring the micro-structures, where the FE discretization (obtained via OOF2) of the representative micro-structures is used to produce a prolonged work piece, cf. Section 4.2. Thereby, the resulting FE-model of the work piece has a periodic structure as shown in Fig. 5. The created work pieces are 2.0mm long and 0.7mm high. In the present examples the material micro-structure of the work-piece is resolved. The left boundary of the work piece is constrained in the horizontal direction, while the bottom of the work piece is constrained in both horizontal and vertical directions. Spurious dynamic effects due to reflecting waves in the considered cutting zone, as induced by the current loading and boundary conditions, are considered negligible. This argument is strengthened by the fact that no such effects are visible in the contour plots of the stress state, cf. e.g. Fig. 7. As to the thermal part of the problem, we consider the cutting process to be fast enough to assume that heat has no time to vanish in the vertical as well as in the horizontal directions of the specimen. Hence, we consider the case of complete insulation along the external boundaries in Fig. 5. Approximately 70,000 three-node plane strain CST-elements, i.e. Abaqus CPE3T element with linear variation of both the displacement and the temperature, with the typical size of 7μm are used for each work piece. The size of smallest elements used to describe graphite grains boundaries is approximately 3μm. The mean value of the time increments used in all analyses is approximately 5×10−10s.The tool has −6° rake angle, 3.5° clearance angle, and 30μm edge radius and it is assumed to be perfectly rigid with a straight face. The depth of the cut is approximately 0.42mm. The described settings are chosen in order to reproduce experimental settings in [19] as much as possible. Two different cutting speeds, 150m/min and 350m/min, are used in the simulations to evaluate the cutting forces and temperature variations. We remark that the 2D restriction means that we are unable to reproduce the differences in graphite distribution along the direction perpendicular to the x–y plane in Fig. 5.Furthermore, a constant Coulomb friction between the tool and the work piece is assumed, where the friction coefficient is set to 0.05. The low friction coefficient is chosen to compensate for graphites well known lubricating effect during machining of cast iron. According to Filice et al. [21] the main mechanical results, like cutting forces, are not significantly sensitive to the adopted friction model used in simulation. In this case, the discontinuous contact between the chips and the insert results in an indirect influence of the friction on the temperature field. In the present paper, the heat generation due to friction and its possible influence on the local temperatures of the micro-structure is thereby not included in the FE-model.In Fig. 6a typical distribution of the effective plastic strain during machining is shown. For illustration purposes, the graphite grains are removed (white areas) to illustrate the connection between development of plastic strain and morphology. It appears that the shape of the graphite grains changes during the machining process, where nodules become elongated in the direction of chip flow. Effective plastic strain develops first through the shortest distances between graphite grains, which means that cast iron deforms easier along the grain boundaries. Cracks tend to develop along preferred patterns through graphite grains if the crack promoting “notches” (defined by the graphite morphology) are not too blunt. In reality, this squeezing out of graphite on the surface influences the frictional conditions during the machining of cast iron, as discussed by e.g. Marwanga [22].We also include the von Mises stress distribution in the phases, as shown in Fig. 7. Significantly higher magnitudes of the effective stress are obtained in the pearlite as compared to the graphite phases. This is due to the significantly higher yield stress and higher stiffness in the pearlite as compared to the graphite. The stress–strain behavior of the pearlite material based on properties presented in Tables 2 and 3 during simple shear deformation is presented in Fig. 8for different deformation rates. Note that fairly high shear straining is required to mobilize the stress response in the highest deformed areas of Fig. 7.Typical results obtained for the cutting force versus time are shown in Fig. 9for the higher cutting speed, where the vibrating/fluctuating behavior of the contact force is notable. Every “hill” in the diagram represents the formation of one chip. For the subsequent discussion we consider the averaged value of the norm of the resultant cutting force during the formation of one and two chips as shown in the figure. We observed that in all simulations the vertical component of the cutting force generally has low values, whereby the norm and horizontal component of the force vector are almost similar. In each simulation at least two, sometimes three chips are formed.As mentioned earlier the work pieces used in the simulations are very short which complicates the assessment of the averaged value of the cutting force. Hence, the averaged cutting force differs due to the variation in graphite morphology. Fig. 10shows the results from machining simulations with the cutting speed 150m/min based on microstructures with the different nodularities in the form of mean values of the resultant contact force during formation of one and two chips. It appears that for low nodularities the variation of the graphite morphology induces a more significant variation in the averaged force as compared to the case with high nodularities. This means that the case of 10% nodularity resulted in a situation with a long “valley”, in turn yielding a relatively low averaged force value, cf. 9. In the case of 15% nodularity three chips were created with relatively short “valleys”, leading to a significantly higher averaged force.The results are compared to the corresponding machining experiments on cast iron materials with three different nodularities conducted in Ref. [19]. Comparison between the cutting force mean values obtained by focusing the formation of one or two chips is carried out in order to confirm the trend of increasing values of cutting force with increasing nodularity observed in the experiments. We note that the results indicate an increasing cutting force with the graphite nodularity from the simulations, despite the differences in cutting force levels. This is in agreement with the experimental results in [19].Furthermore, the experimental results show a significant difference in cutting force levels when the machining speed is decreased from 350m/min to 150m/min. This difference was not obtained in the simulations, as presented in Fig. 11, where only minor cutting force differences for the two cutting speeds were observed for each model used in the simulations. However, the higher slope of increasing cutting force versus nodularity in case of the cutting speed 350m/min as compared to 150m/min shows a good agreement with the experimental results.The cutting forces appear to be higher in the simulations as compared to the experiments. One possible factor that may be the cause of this discrepancy is that the material model representing the pearlite phase has a higher strength than the pearlite phase in the experiments. It is also important to keep in mind that the strength of cast iron material is dependent on how fine/coarse the cementite and ferrite lamellas in the pearlite phase are distributed which depends on the casting process. Another explanation involves the fact that the 2D simulations are not able to entirely reproduce the more complicated experimental three dimensional setup.The coupled thermomechanical analysis of stress and heat flow is performed for all the simulations. The highest temperatures are observed above the insert edge and in the contact area between insert and work piece material for the highest cutting speed, as shown Fig. 13. Values for each micro-structure with the corresponding nodularity, presented below in Fig. 12, are the mean time values of the maximum temperature obtained in each machining simulation in the time interval where the temperature is above 1000°C. Measurements of temperature were also conducted in the experiments via an IR camera, cf. Ref. [19]. A complication in the experiments was that the exact situation in the cutting zone could not be completely revealed due to the fact that during the experiments the chips covered the area with the highest temperatures. However, simulations of the maximum temperatures were made based on experimental data and IR camera measurements resulting in estimated maximum temperatures in the middle of cutting zone of approximately 950°C, cf. Grenmyr [19]. As can be seen in Fig. 12, higher maximum temperature values are obtained in the current simulations using a more refined simulation model. Also, despite the big amplitudes in the temperature variations obtained for different nodularities, a clear difference between maximum temperature levels for different cutting speeds is observed. The trend of increasing maximum temperature with increasing nodularity observed in the IR camera experiments is not as clear in the simulations, cf. Fig. 12.In order to validate the simulated typical chip formation and chip shape, the results shown in Fig. 14may be qualitatively compared to the “quick stop” experiments in Fig. 15, as reported by [19] . We note that the similarity between simulated and experimentally observed shear angle and chip shape is remarkable for the considered nodularities.A methodology for the simulation of the machinability of cast iron including its micro-structure, in particular, focusing the graphite morphology, has been proposed in the present paper. The significant heterogeneous micro-structure is accounted for by a micro-level approach assisted by micro-graph analysis of the of the cast iron material. The material micro-scale is thereby resolved on a grain scale in the vicinity of the machining zone. A finite element model is established based on the micro-graphs and the relevant phenomenological modeling of the pearlitic phase has been made within the framework of the Johnson–Cook elasto-viscoplastic and failure models. The modeling is restricted to two-dimensions, thus neglecting geometrical 3D effects. Both the material behavior prior to ductile fracture and the actual fracture behavior have been dealt with in a simplified, pragmatic fashion in order to arrive at a robust and computationally efficient methodology. In particular, we emphasize the importance of the relevant material data/experimental testing methodology associated with the assumed material model.A quite extensive parametric study has been carried out involving micro-graphs of cast iron material, with the graphite nodularity ranging from 0% to 50% nodularity. The results obtained from the simulations yield a fairly good agreement with the experimental program of orthogonal machining. In particular, the predictive capability of the model regarding the nodularity induced increase of the cutting forces is remarkable. We were not able to completely predict the experimentally observed increase of cutting forces magnitude when the lower cutting speed (150m/min) was used. A possible cause for this increase in cutting force at lower cutting speeds is that the temperatures in the cutting zone are (in general) lower due to lower strain rates meaning less energy dissipation. Consequently, lower temperatures means less thermal softening and thereby stronger material resistance. These lower temperature values were confirmed also in the simulations. Thereby, the true effect of elevated temperatures on the continuum response as well as on the critical fracture strain has not been fully captured by the present model. The associated temperature field yields lower temperature magnitudes as compared to the higher cutting speed. Hence, in order to properly address this issue, the associated thermally induced mechanical material behavior evidently needs further studies. An alternative explanation to the mismatch with experimental observations is the inadequate choice of the material parameter controlling the rate dependence of the failure model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
