@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An automated confirmatory system for analysis of mammograms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents an integrated system for the automatic analysis of mammograms to assist radiologists in confirming their diagnosis in mammography screening.The proposed system consists of four off-line stages:Image pre-processing and segmentationFeature extractionSelection of fundamental features using Rough Set theoryTraining of an Artificial Neural Network.Once the system is trained and tuned, is ready for its on-line use. Here the system is successfully tested on two independent databases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-aided diagnosis,Mammogram,Breast-cancer,Texture-feature,Rough-set theory,Artificial Neural Networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an integrated system for the automatic analysis of mammograms to assist radiologists in confirming their diagnosis in mammography screening. The proposed automated confirmatory system (ACS) can process a digitalized mammogram online, and generates a high quality filtered segmentation of an image for biological interpretation and a texture-feature based diagnosis. We use a serial of image pre-processing and segmentation techniques, including 2D median filtering, seeded region growing (SRG) algorithm, image contrast enhancement, to remove noise, delete radiopaque artifacts and eliminate the projection of the pectoral muscle from a digitalized mammogram. We also develop an entire-image texture-feature based classification method, by combining a Rough-set approach to extract five fundamental texture features from images, and then an Artificial Neural Network technique to classify a mammogram as: normal; indicating the presence of a benign lump; or representing a malignant tumor. Here, 222 random images from the Mammographic Image Analysis Society (MIAS) database are used for the offline ACS training. Once the system is tuned and trained, it is ready for the automated use for the analysis and diagnosis of new mammograms. To test the trained system, a separate set of 100 random images from the MIAS and another set of 100 random images from the independent BancoWeb database are selected. The proposed ACS is shown to be successful in confirming diagnosis of mammograms from the two independent databases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Screening mammography is an effective tool for early detection of breast cancer [1]. However, the accuracy of diagnosis depends on both the quality of the mammographic images and the ability of the radiologist to interpret those images [2]. Currently, some radiologists misdiagnose mammograms as mentioned by some recent media reports. For example, in 2013, radiologists’ errors in a Toronto hospital contributed to delays in diagnosing and treating eleven patients, the death of two of them, and the subsequent reassessment of 3537 CT scans and mammograms [3]. It is estimated that radiologists fail to detect 10–30% of cancer cases [4,5].With the wide availability of digital images, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) has emerged as a tool to assist radiologists in rapidly detecting, locating, and characterizing suspicious breast lesions, estimating their probability of malignancy, and quantifying their cancer risk [2,6–8]. Such a CAD software can be used by radiologists as a “second opinion” or a confirmatory tool of diagnostic decision. However, the development of CAD in mammography is still in an early stage, and most of the suggested approaches of CAD systems follow the two-step scheme of pixel-level detection and region-level classification. For example, Kegelmeyer et al. [9] used the standard deviation of a local edge orientation histogram to detect spiculated masses on mammograms in pixel-level, i.e., the lump of tissue with surface spikes or points indicating a high likelihood of malignant tumor. Kopans [10] characterized a spiculated mass by lines radiating from the margins of a mass. Kobatake et al. [11] modeled suspicious objects as rounded convex regions by measuring the average convergence of the gradient over the region, which is a region-level classification. Liu et al. [12] developed a multi-resolution algorithm for the detection of spiculated masses using the discrete wavelet transform, which also is pixel-level detection. Similar works were reported by Zouras et al. [13], Petrick et al. [14], Te Brake et al. [15], Tourassi et al. [16], and Madabhushi et al. [17]. CAD software, based on these methods and others, is used in about 75% of screening mammography in USA, but it is of very little help in detecting breast cancer in practice [18]. This is mainly because classifying suspicious regions and selecting image features on the mammogram are extremely difficult and complex, due to the similarity of the image attributes of a malignant tumor and those of clusters of micro-calcification, and the superposition of normal tissue over tumors [1]. Moreover, pixel level image features are difficult to be biologically interpreted by radiologists [19].Pattern recognition has also been introduced to deal with the complex classification and feature selection problems associated with CAD. The most commonly utilized algorithms are Artificial Neural Networks, Bayesian classifier, genetic algorithms, decision trees, and fuzzy-set theory [20–23]. For example, Li et al. [21] used a fuzzy binary decision tree to classify suspicious regions. The Rough set theory has been successfully applied to region-level classification of medical images [24–27]. The Rough set approach normally deals with uncertainty and vagueness in data mining by analyzing the facts that are hidden in data, and finds a minimal knowledge representation without additional information. For example, Hassanien and Slezak [27] applied directly the Rough-set approach for attribute reduction and rule generation on the classification of breast cancer images, where “attribute” refers to cluster-based image properties in the regions of interest (ROI). However, this ROI classification may not capture completely the information of an entire image [19,28]. That is, a Rough set approach is applied directly to some particular regions of the images to obtain some relevant features.In this paper, we propose a hybrid approach that combines image processing techniques, pattern-recognition methods, and computational intelligence techniques, which produce a high quality filtered segmentation of image for biological interpretation and a texture-feature based diagnosis. Our approach relies on the extraction of texture features from mammograms that best describe their characteristics. Next, some fundamental features are selected using Rough-set theory. Afterwards, the fundamental features are used to train an Artificial Neural Network that is able to classify these mammograms. That is, in the proposed approach, feature extraction is based on the entire-image, instead of attribute extraction based on particular image clusters of ROI as in [27]. Subsequently, a Rough set approach is used to select some fundamental features. In a final stage these fundamental features are used to train an Artificial Neural Network. The proposed approach leads to an integrated system consisting of three components that are tuned off line, as shown in Fig. 1.In the first component, a digitalized mammogram, chosen from an available image database is subjected to automated pre-processing and segmentation, to remove noise, delete radiopaque artifacts, and eliminate the projection of the pectoral muscle. The filtered-segmented image is then used for the extraction of 16 texture distinguishing features. In the second component, a Rough-set approach is applied to reduce the number of distinguishing features to the minimal knowledge representation of hidden data to only five fundamental features: energy, inverse difference moment, difference entropy, directionality, and contrast. In the third component, the five fundamental features are used to train an Artificial Neural Network against independently diagnosed images, classifying mammograms as either being normal, indicating the presence of a benign lump, or representing a malignant tumor. Once the system is tuned and trained as above; it is ready for automated use in the analysis and diagnosis of new mammograms online. The proposed automated confirmatory system has been tested on two independent databases.In Section 2, we present the automated pre-processing and segmentation methods; describe the image feature extraction and selection process; and give an introduction to the Rough-set theory and demonstrate how the application of the Rough-set method reduces the number of redundant features. Additionally, we also present in Section 2, the Artificial Neural Networks’ training necessary for performing an efficient mammogram diagnosis. In Section 3, we present the results of experiments and related discussion. Section 4 provides conclusions on the proposed methodology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An ACS has been devised for detecting breast cancer in mammograms. Its output provides a diagnosis that can serve to radiologists as a “second opinion”. The system is suitable for rapid processing of a large number of mammograms. The system relies on five fundamental textural features, which are determined using a Rough Set theory approach for feature reduction. The fundamental characteristics of a mammogram are: energy, inverse difference moment, difference entropy, directionality, and contrast. These fundamental features are then used off-line to train an Artificial Neural Network to classify mammograms as: normal, benign, or malignant tumor. Even without automation, the system provides clear filtered-segmented and contrast-enhanced images; in addition to five distinct numerical features, that should aid radiologists in arriving at more reliable diagnosis. The proposed automated confirmatory system is tested using images from two databases completely independent of the one used in its development, and is shown to produce diagnosis results that correspond quite well with those noted by radiologists.