@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Use of corn height measured with an acoustic sensor improves yield estimation with ground based active optical sensors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An acoustic height sensor could be used with the INSEY value to improve corn in-season N management.The height sensor was especially useful at earlier and later growth stages depending on the site.Normalizing height aided the relationships with active optical sensor INSEY when combining sites.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Corn height,Corn yield,Acoustic height sensor,Active-optical sensor,NDVI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Corn height measured manually has shown promising results in improving the relationship between active-optical (AO) sensor readings and crop yield. Manual measurement of corn height is not practical in US commercial corn production, so an alternative automatic method must be found in order to capture the benefit of including canopy height into in-season yield estimates and from there into in-season nitrogen (N) fertilizer applications. One existing alternative to measure canopy height is an acoustic height sensor. A commercial acoustic height sensor was utilized in these experiments at two corn growth stages (V6 and V12) along with AO sensors. Eight corn N rate sites in North Dakota, USA, were used to compare the acoustic height sensor as a practical alternative to manual height measurements as an additional parameter to increase the relationship between AO sensor readings and corn yield. Six N treatments, 0, 45, 90, 134, 179, and 224kgha−1, were applied before planting in a randomized complete block experimental design with four replications. Height measurement using the acoustic sensor provided an improved yield relationship compared to manual height at all locations. The level of improvement of the relationship between AO readings multiplied by acoustic sensor readings and yield was greater at V6 growth stage compared to the V12 growth stage. At V12, corn height measured manually and with the acoustic sensor multiplied by AO readings provided similar improvement to the relationship with yield compared to relating AO readings alone with yield at most locations. The acoustic height sensor may be useful in increasing the usefulness of AO sensor corn yield prediction algorithms for use in on-the-go in-season N application to corn particularly if the sensor height is normalized within site before combining multiple locations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Use of precision agricultural techniques by farmers and ag-industry farm input providers has increased steadily over the past twenty-five years Precision agricultural methods for soil sampling have the ability to improve delineation of nutrient management patterns as a basis for site-specific nutrient application (Sadler et al., 2000). Crop yield is affected by pest infestation, rainfall, soil properties, climate variations, crop stress and landscape topography (Raun et al., 2005), which vary spatially and temporally and complicate site-specific nutrient management due to small-scale variability. On-the-go active-optical (AO) sensor technology has been used to detect small-scale variability of crop N status within a field, sometimes at as small a scale as 1m2, enabling more efficient N fertilizer application to corn, wheat, cotton and sorghum (Gitelson and Merzlyak, 1997; Raun et al., 2001 and 2002; Kitchen, 2006; Holland and Schepers, 2010; Franzen et al., 2014).Algorithms developed for the use with AO sensors in relating crop yield with sensor readings contain considerable error despite their value in improving small-scale site-specific N management. The measurement of crop growth in another manner at the time of AO sensor reading may provide an improved yield prediction algorithm. Measuring corn height corn might help detect yield differences due to water stress, evapotranspiration rate, and other crop stresses (Sammis et al., 1988) at a scale similar to that of AO sensors. Under optimum N availability conditions, corn plants grow to their full potential and reach a maximum height; however, if there is a stress due to suboptimal water supply or fertilizer deficiency, plant height will be reduced along with yield (Venuprasad et al., 2008; Li et al., 2013). Crop height as a single factor could be used to measure the vegetative growth and potential yield of corn. Corn plant height is a highly sensitive growth parameter and is influenced by soil water content (Hussain et al., 1999), texture (Kladivko et al., 1986), fertilizer rate (Kapusta et al., 1996), and cultivation methods (Kladivko et al., 1986; Sharma and Franzen, 2014). Machado et al. (2002) found that corn height could explain 60% of yield variability.Red NDVI (normalized differential vegetative index, [red−near infrared]/[red+near infrared]) reflectance is based on two-dimensional measurement of the plant canopy, and is most successfully utilized during early growth stages when leaves do not shade the inter-plant spaces completely. At later growth stages red NDVI readings fall into a narrow range from 0.85 to 0.95 and discrimination between weaker plants and healthier plants becomes impossible as leaves cover the soil surface regardless of plant health. This problem is called ‘saturation’ (Wilhelm et al., 2000; Haboudane et al., 2004; Sharma and Franzen, 2014). A weak relationship between red NDVI sensor readings and yield was found by Sharma and Franzen (2014) at the V12 stage of corn due to red NDVI saturation. Franzen et al. (2003), found improvement in estimation of sugar beet top leaf N concentration and dry matter content in Minnesota using the GreenSeeker® AO red NDVI readings at sugar beet harvest when optical sensor readings were multiplied by a manually obtained plant canopy height, which helped to overcome red NDVI saturation.Manually measured corn height combined with AO sensors has improved the relationship between AO sensor readings and corn yield. Several studies have used corn height in addition to GreenSeeker® sensor readings to estimate yield (Sharma and Franzen, 2014; Freeman et al., 2007; Martin et al., 2012). In all of these studies, significant relationships were found between yield and AO sensor readings multiplied by corn height. Corn height alone has been used to estimate corn yield (Yin et al., 2011a,b; Machado et al., 2002; Katsvairo et al., 2003). Sharma and Franzen (2014) found that corn height can improve corn yield estimates and could be used along with AO sensor readings to improve the algorithms developed to direct in-season N rate application. Although including corn height may have the ability to improve AO sensor algorithms, manual measurement of plant height is highly labor intensive and impractical on a commercial scale.Several nondestructive methods have been used to measure plant height, including image processing (Changgui and Wenyi, 2007), 3-D perspective view to measure tree height (Zhang and Huang, 2009), 3-D view with a 3 point correction (Han, 2011) and light detection and ranging (LIDAR) (Zhang and Grift, 2012). Using plant image for height measurement has been successfully tested by several researchers (Morden et al., 1997; Van Henten and Bontsema, 1995; Tarbell and Reid, 1991; Tarbell et al., 1991). Plant height could also be measured using high resolution ultra-sound distance sensing of the crop canopy (Shrestha et al., 2002; Katsvairo et al., 2003) and stereo vision (Shrestha and Steward, 2001). Use of stereo vision is most applicable for small scale work in laboratories and greenhouses (Matsuura et al., 2001; Kanuma et al., 1998; Lines et al., 2001). In some studies, remote sensing techniques such as synthetic aperture radar (SAR) (Ulander et al., 1995; Dammert and Askne, 1998; Shimada et al., 2001) and airborne LIDAR (Nilsson, 1996; Magnussen et al., 1999; Persson et al., 2002; Kwak et al., 2007; Yamamoto et al., 2011) was used to measure the plant height. All of these techniques and instruments have been used effectively in the greenhouse or laboratory, but their practical application to use in the field is questionable.In order to measure plant height at low cost in real-time and to incorporate plant height into AO sensor algorithms for use in in-season N management, the SenixView™ model TSPC-30S1-232 (Senix Corporation, Hinesburg, Vermont, USA) automated ultrasonic acoustic sensor was used at two different corn stages (V6 and V12). This study was conducted to compare the use of corn height measured with the acoustic sensor with corn height measured manually to determine if sensor height measurements combined with AO sensor readings are similarly related to corn yield as previous studies indicate using manually measured corn height combined with AO sensor.Eight experimental sites were established on farm fields in 2013 in eastern and western North Dakota, USA. At each location, eight soil sample cores were taken before planting and N application using a 2.5-cm diameter hand probe. Soil cores were obtained to a depth of 0–15cm for analysis of nitrate-nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P), potassium (K), zinc (Zn), organic matter, and pH. A 0–60cm soil core depth was taken for residual soil nitrate-N analysis (Table 1). For preplant soil test analysis, soil samples were air-dried after they collected from the research site, ground to pass through a 2mm screen, and thoroughly mixed. Nitrate-N was analyzed using cadmium reduction described by Gelderman and Beegle (1998). Plant available phosphorus was analyzed using the Olsen method (Olsen et al., 1954b), and plant available potassium by the 1-N ammonium acetate method (Thomas, 1982). The DTPA extraction (Lindsay and Norvell, 1978) together with atomic absorption spectroscopy detection was used for Zn analysis. Organic matter content was determined using the loss following ignition method (Schulte and Hopkins, 1996). Soil pH was analyzed using a 1:1 soil:deionized H2O solution method (Watson and Brown, 1998). The eight experimental sites were planted by the cooperators using their choice of corn hybrid. The experimental site locations, soil series within location, planting date and sensor reading dates can be found in Tables 2 and 3. The experimental design at each experimental site was a randomized complete block, with six N treatments: control (no added N), 45, 90, 135, 189 and 224kgN ha−1 applied as ammonium nitrate, with four replications. Each experimental unit (the area of each treatment within a replication) was 6.1m long and 3.05m wide. A 1.5m wide lane was produced by cutting out standing corn at the soil surface at about V6 to separate replications and allow in-season field work without damaging corn within the experimental units. Some experimental sites had different row spacing (50–75cm) because farmers had different planters; therefore, there were 4–6 rows present within each experimental unit depending on the experimental site.No supplemental N was applied to the experimental site by the farmers. At experimental sites where fertilizer P, K or other nutrients were not applied by the grower because the fertilizer blend used on the field also contained N, supplemental P, K and Zn, if recommended by the soil test, was applied by the researchers in a broadcast application before planting. Phosphate was applied as mono ammonium phosphate (110gkg−1 N, 520gkg−1 P2O5 equivalent) and K as potassium chloride (60gkg−1 K2O equivalent) according to North Dakota State University recommendations (Franzen, 2010). If the soil analysis indicated that a site was deficient in Zn, zinc sulfate (360gkg−1 percent Zn granules) at a rate of 11kgha−1 Zn was applied as a broadcast at the time of N treatment application. If any experimental site was found to be S deficient, gypsum was applied at 22kgha−1 S (112kgha−1 200gkg−1 S gypsum). At sites where S deficiency occurred after corn emergence, a similar rate of gypsum was applied as granules over the top of the corn in a broadcast application.The two AO sensors used in these experiments emit modular light pulses from diodes to generate particular wavebands which are absorbed by plant tissues. In the GreenSeeker™ (GS) (Trimble Navigation Limited, Sunnyvale, California, USA) bursts of light are emitted from diodes such that red (R) (660nm) and near infrared (NIR) (710nm) pulses alternately for 1ms at 40,000Hz, with each burst composed of about 40 pulses. The illuminated area in our study was positioned perpendicular to the direction of travel. According to Trimble, the GS field of view is constant for heights between 60 and 120cm above the canopy. The operators of the GS consistently operated the sensors at 60–70cm above the corn canopy. Outputs from the sensor are normalized differential vegetative indexes (NDVI), defined as [(NIR−visual wavelength)/(NIR+visual wavelength)].The source of light for the Holland Scientific Crop Circle™ (CC) sensor (ACS-470, Holland Scientific, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA) is a modulated polychromatic light emitting diode (LED) array which can emit and measure light spectrums from 430nm to 850nm bands. For these experiments, we used two filters in the visible range (red 650nm, red edge 730nm) and one filter in the NIR (760nm). The sensor was calibrated using software provided by Holland Scientific. Measurements can be collected at a rate of 2–20 readings per second. Values for CC measurements were the mean of measurements obtained within 6.1m length of row is the average of about 4000 measurements when moving at 5kmh−1. Outputs of the sensor are reflectance values that allow calculation of the vegetation indices red NDVI and red edge NDVI. The formulas for red NDVI and red edge NDVI follow:Red NDVI=NIR-RedNIR+Redand Red Edge NDVI=NIR-Red EdgeNIR+Red EdgeThe NDVI readings from the GS and CC were obtained when the corn was about V6 and V12 (about 10days to 2weeks after V6) stages. Readings were taken 60–70cm over the top of one interior corn row in each experimental unit and the row was noted so that the row being sensed was the row to be harvested after corn reached maturity. The NDVI was calculated within the CC instrument with built-in software, whereas the GS reflectance values were stored in a text file by the sensor software and NDVI values were calculated post-process using Microsoft Excel 2013.For each experimental unit, the GS and CC readings consisted of 30–50 individual NDVI or reflectance measurements. Means for each treatment area were calculated by using in-house programs for GS and CC raw data developed for Excel (Fargo and Franzen, 2012). The relationship between sensor readings and yield was normalized using the value of ‘in-season estimate of yield’ (INSEY) (Raun et al., 2001). The INSEY was calculated by dividing the sensor reading by the growing degree days from the date of planting to sensing.Manual corn height measurement was conducted on the same day and on the same rows as those subjected to GS and CC sensor and automatic height sensor measurements. The manual height was conducted by selecting three representative plants within the interior row to be sensed with the AO sensors in each experimental unit. A tape measure was used to determine the heights of three corn plants from the soil surface to about 5cm above the corn whorl base (Fig. 1). The three measurements were averaged to provide the manual corn height within each experimental unit.For automated height measurement, the SenixView acoustic height sensor model TSPC-30S1-232 (Senix Corporation, Hinesburg, Vermont, USA) was used. The SenixView sensor measures the distance of an object from to the sensor itself. The sensor is commercialized for research and development in industrial automation distance measurement. Typically, it is used for measuring liquid levels, motion controls, people detection, proximity sensing and dimensioning (SenixView™ data sheet http://www.senix.com/senixview.htm) therefore it has very high sensitivity towards any change in distance. The height sensor was calibrated with the software provided with the sensor.The sensor was mounted on a two-wheel bicycle fabricated for this purpose with the front wheel smaller than the rear wheel to maintain a uniform height and balance between the rows (Fig. 2). Depending on the crop height, the height of the sensor from the ground was adjusted and measured from the soil surface by adjusting the telescoping pole on which the sensor was mounted before measurements. The values from the sensor were subtracted from the value of the height of sensor from the soil surface. After collecting the data, negative, zero, and any values less than 5cm were deleted from the file recorded on the computer during post-processing. A Dell Mini (Dell Latitude 10ST2e, Dell, Inc., Round Rock, Texas, USA), placed on the bicycle in front of the operator, was connected to the sensor to collect the height data. The software, SenixView Version 3, was installed on the Dell Mini.Logging rate was set at one sample per second. The SenixView sensor records 20 echos per second, so each recorded measurement was the mean of 20 individual measurements. Typically, the number of recorded measurements taken in each experimental unit was 7–12, depending on the speed of the sensor operator. Speed varied with smoothness of the soil surface and moisture conditions within the site. Each echo measurement should be considered as an integration of heights from the crop canopy (Fig. 1). The canopy is not horizontal, so acoustic energy from the sensor strikes corn leaves at different angles. Whereas the manual height measurement once defined is similar for each plant regardless of leaf architecture. However, the acoustic sensor measurements are susceptible to different readings due to upright leaves, leaves that arch back to ground, and leaf movement with wind. The acoustic sensor measurements are therefore a trade-off between a firmly defined manual measurement, but is entirely impractical commercially, and a practical automatic measuring tool whose values inherently contain greater error.The growth stages V6 and V12 were chosen because these represent two important times for possible in-season N application to corn. At V6, the corn plant has not yet determined maximum yield, so yield is not yet limited by shortage of N. An early in-season N application is usually made between V5 and V8. Using the INSEY normalization factor, an algorithm for in-season application to corn using the V6 data is valid for plus or minus two leaves; therefore, a V6 dataset helps to build an algorithm for V4 to V8 sensing, while an algorithm based on V12 data helps build an algorithm for V10 to V14 sensing, which then leads directly into tasseling and pollination. Therefore, V6 and V12 were chosen to operate AO sensors and height measurements in anticipation of future in-season algorithm development. The sensor height data from Durbin and Richardton at V6 was not collected due to wet soil conditions, where mud and crop residue built up on the tires and prevented practical use of the bicycle.The interior row (6.1m in length less the outside ear at the beginning and end of each length) that was earlier sensed at V6 and V12 in each experimental unit was hand harvested after corn physiological maturity. An Almaco® (Almaco, Nevada, Iowa, USA) corn sheller was used that allowed complete shelling of wet and dry corn. Grain moisture at shelling was determined on a grain subsample using a Dickey-John® GAC-500 grain moisture and test weight instrument (Dickey-John, Auburn, Illinois, USA).Regression analyses were conducted on sensor readings and yield in SAS for Windows 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA) using PROC REG with yield as dependent variable, and INSEY or INSEY multiplied by corn canopy manual height (INSEYMH) or INSEY multiplied by corn canopy sensor derived height (INSEYSH) (Sharma and Franzen, 2013) determined at V6 and V12 as the independent variable to evaluate the relationship between yield and corn canopy height. Linear regression equations were found to be the best descriptor of the regression relationships. The coefficient of determination (r2) value was used to evaluate the linear regression relationships. Analysis of variance of yield and corn height was conducted in SAS using PROC GLM to compare differences between N treatments, with the LSD being used to separate treatment differences. A p-value of 5% probability (0.05) was used to statistically differentiate the treatments into those that were statistically different and those that were not. The means were further differentiated into values with a 1% probability (0.01) and 0.1 percent probability (0.001).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Use of the SenixView acoustic sensor in these experiments automatically recorded corn height differences observed in the field (Fig. 3) and has the potential to improve yield prediction in corn. The sensor measured corn height provided improvement in the coefficient of determination of the linear regression of yield with INSEY in many comparisons. The use of manually measured corn height as an input to improve corn yield prediction when using AO sensors is impractical for commercial corn production, therefore use of a sensor to improve the relationship between yield and AO sensor reading is important. The normalization of sensor height within each site resulted in values that could be used to combine multiple sites into a yield prediction algorithm that includes the AO sensor reading, corn height measured with the height sensor, and yield data. Although the current database of corn height with corn yield is not sufficient to construct a usable algorithm for commercial use, it indicates that with a larger sensor height database such an algorithm might be possible that transcends differences in genetic corn hybrid height characteristics.