@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A robust spot weld model for structural vibration analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A finite element spot weld which is not sensitive to the element size is proposed.The new model imposes a surface-to-surface link, coincident meshes are not required.The new model reduces the sensitivity to the element size.The new model improves convergence with mesh size.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element analysis,Spot weld,Sensitivity,Structural dynamics,Robustness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A finite element spot weld is proposed. The model is only weakly sensitive to element size, in contrast to some existing models, for which predictions of the static and dynamic responses can be strongly sensitive to the size of the elements in the substructures to which the spot weld is connected, to such an extent that numerical results may not converge. The proposed model comprises a number of multipoint constraint connections to the attached substructures, so that they may have incompatible meshes. It involves stiffness elements distributed around the perimeter of the spot weld. The case of two plates connected by three spot welds is considered. Numerical results are presented and compared with those of CWELD models and with experimental measurements. The results from the proposed spot weld model show good accuracy, low sensitivity to the element dimensions and good convergence properties.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The spot weld is one of the most important structural joints in the automotive industry; a vehicle body typically contains thousands of spot-welds. The finite element (FE) method can be used to analyze spot welded structures and several models have been proposed in the literature. However, there are still issues in the application of these models.The detailed representation of the spot weld using solid elements has often been used as a benchmark in static analysis [1–3]. In this way, a smooth and reliable stress field is predicted. However the model may poorly estimate the interaction forces between the spot weld and the structure. Therefore, when they are used in dynamic analyses, these elements can result in differences between experimental results, for example when using brick element representations of different dimensions which produce non-physical sensitivities in the dynamic characteristics such as the natural frequencies [4–5]. Furthermore, such a model of a single spot weld involves many degrees of freedom (DOFs), so that to model each of the spot welds in detail in a large structure leads to a major increase in model size.On the other hand, in simplified approaches the spot weld is modeled using an elastic component that is attached to the substructure DOFs in general in one of two ways: (1) by directly connecting the joint nodes to nodes in the substructures (node-to-node connection) and (2) using interpolation elements or multipoint constraints (MPCs) to connect the joint nodes to the substructures. Here, the parameters of the connecting element represent the stiffness characteristics of the joint and therefore their influence on the rest of the structure.The node-to-node connection requires coincident meshes; if the location of the joint changes, then the mesh of both surfaces needs to be modified. Moreover, the stiffness is generally underestimated [5–6] leading to inaccurate results. In contrast, when interpolation elements or MPCs are used to connect the elastic component to the substructures (solid, beam or springs) [7–8], the connection can be placed at any location using the existing surface meshes. This latter feature offers a great advantage, since it is then possible to assemble components with different mesh characteristics or to assemble components with complex geometries, for which it is very difficult to have coincident nodes.Unfortunately, when these elements are used, it has been shown that they have a high sensitivity to the element size [9–10]. Moreover, Palmonella et al. [9] identified the element area as a parameter that can be updated in order to reduce the error in the prediction of dynamic properties in a FE model when compared to experimental measurements. It has also been found that for dynamic predictions, some of the lowest natural frequencies do not converge even if the element size is much smaller than the wavelength [6,11].In this paper the cause of the large sensitivity to element size is discussed and an alternative spot weld model is proposed. The sensitivity, which often leads to poor convergence or, indeed, failure to converge at all, is a result of singularities (particularly associated with the rotational DOFs) that occur when point loading is applied, as opposed to loading distributed over an area. Point loading implies infinite stresses at that point and possibly infinite response, even in continuous models of the system. The FE model proposed overcomes this issue by modeling the spot weld as an array of springs. It provides a good physical representation of the spot weld and the forces at the connections are distributed over an area, imposing a surface to surface link between the connected substructures. The model is robust to changes in the mesh size and coincident meshes are not required.In the following section the sensitivity of spot weld models to element size is discussed and demonstrated by application to an example of two simply supported plates with a single connection. In Section 3 a spot weld model robust to element size is proposed. In Section 4 the application of the new spot weld model is demonstrated in a model of two simply supported plates with three point connections. The numerical results from the proposed spot weld model can then be compared to the numerical evaluation of a coupled analytical benchmark model of two simply supported plates connected by point springs formulated using an assumed modes and mobility approach. In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed element, mesh sensitivity and convergence are evaluated. The resulting natural frequencies are compared to experimental measurements. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 5.In this section the dependence of the diagonal terms in the stiffness matrix of a Heterosis plate element on element size is discussed. When the out-of-plane behavior is studied, it is seen that the terms associated with the rotational DOFs are highly sensitive to the element size.When two plates are connected using a conventional spot weld model, constant stiffness values are added to the diagonal terms of the DOFs, both translational and rotational, involved in the connection. The magnitudes of the stiffnesses associated with rotational plate DOFs depend on the element size, while the added rotational stiffness due to the spot weld does not, resulting in natural frequencies and/or dynamic or static solutions that are sensitive to element size. This is a problem that results from the stress singularities that arise from truly point loading, as opposed to loading that is distributed over a finite area. Point loading implies infinite stresses at the point of application of the load and infinite stress gradients. Note that these singularities may be weak in the sense that the response – displacements and rotations – need not be infinite. For example, consider an infinite thin Kirchhoff plate excited by a time harmonic point force. The shear stress at a distanceεfrom the excitation point is proportional toε−1, while the response is bounded, the input mobility (velocity per unit force) being1/8Dσ([12], p. 255), where D and σ are the bending stiffness and mass per unit area respectively. For moment excitation, on the other hand, the rotational input mobility (rotational velocity per unit moment) isω(1−iΓ)/16D, where Γ depends on the nature of the moment. For two point forces separated by a distance 2a, witha→0, thenΓ=4ln(γka/2)/π,γ=1.781…and thus involves a logarithmic singularity ([12], p. 275). The same issues arise in discrete, FE models of systems, which furthermore suffer from the difficulty in approximating the stress field around the excitation point using (typically) polynomial approximations.To illustrate the sensitivity to element size, consider the Heterosis plate element [13]. This is a plate element derived from the Mindlin–Reissner plate theory, used to describe the behavior of thick plates. However, as reduced order integration is used to evaluate the shear stiffness matrix, this element does not suffer from shear locking, possesses correct rank and can be applied to both thick and thin plates.This element has 9 nodes: 4 corner, 4 mid-side and one central node (seeFig. 1). The central node has two rotational DOFs and each other node has 5 DOFs which describe in-plane and out-of-plane motion. Drilling DOFs (i.e. rotation about plate normal axis) are not included. There are 42 DOFs in total.The displacement field within the element is interpolated using serendipity basis functions, whilst the rotations in the x and y directions are interpolated using Lagrange basis functions. The out-of-plane co-ordinates(w,θx,θy)of a point within the element are given by(1)w(x,y)=∑i=18Ni(x,y)wi;θx(x,y)=∑i=19Pi(x,y)θx,i;θy(x,y)=∑i=19Pi(x,y)θy,iwhere the subscript i indicates the node number andPiandNiare Lagrange and serendipity basis functions. These basis functions are described in terms of the normalized co-ordinates(2)ξ=2x−sxsxandη=2y−sysywheresxandsyare the lengths of the sides of the element in the x and y directions respectively. Eq. (1) can be written in matrix form as(3){w(x,y)θx(x,y)θy(x,y)}=[NT000PT000PT]dewhere N and P are vectors of the basis functions and the nodal DOF vector is given by(4)de=[w˜Tθ˜xTθ˜yT]Twherew˜,θ˜xandθ˜yare vectors of nodal DOFswi,θx,iandθy,i.For out-of-plane vibration, the stiffness matrix of a plane isotropic element based on the Mindlin–Reissner plate theory comprises bending and shear contributions [14], i.e.(5)K=Kb+Kswhere the bending contribution to the element stiffness matrix is(6)Kb=t312∫A(BbTDbBb)dAand the contribution from the shear stiffness is given by(7)Ks=t∫A(BsTDsBs)dAHereAis the area of the element,BbandBsare the strain–displacement matrices given by(8)Bb=[00∂PT∂x0−∂PT∂y00−∂PT∂x∂PT∂y],Bs=[∂NT∂x0PT∂NT∂y−PT0]and the matrices of material constants are(9)Db=E(1−v2)[1v0v1000(1−v)2],Ds=[κG00κG]where E is the Young׳s modulus,vis Poisson׳s ratio, G is the shear modulus andκis the transverse shear correction factor. The transverse shear correction factor is an empirical constant applied to improve the accuracy of the predicted wave velocity. Generally this constant is taken to be 5/6 [2].Since the basis functions in Eq. (8) are defined in terms of ξ and η, the appropriate derivatives are then given by(10)[∂NT∂x∂NT∂y]=J−1[∂NT∂ξ∂NT∂η];[∂PT∂x∂PT∂y]=J−1[∂PT∂ξ∂PT∂η]where J is the Jacobian transformation matrix(11)J=[∂x∂ξ∂y∂ξ∂x∂η∂y∂η]Rather than evaluating the integrals in Eqs. (6) and (7) in physical coordinates, it is more convenient to evaluate the integral over the non-dimensional domain(ξ,η), resulting in(12)Kb=t312∫−11∫−11(BbTDbBb)|J|dξdη(13)Ks=t∫−11∫−11(BsTDsBs)|J|dξdηWhen the integrals in Eqs. (12) and (13) are evaluated it is found that the values for the rotational DOFs in the leading diagonals ofKbandKsare(14)Kb(θx,θx)=Kb(θy,θy)=CbEt3(1−v/3)1−v2and(15)Ks(θx,θx)=Ks(θy,θy)=CsEtsxsy(1+v)whereCbandCsare constants that depend on the node number, mesh characteristics, the shape functions and the integration scheme used in the particular element formulation. For example for the first corner node in the Heterosis element,(16)Cb≈0.0389andCs≈0.00514Following Eqs. (14), (15) and (5), the stiffnesses associated with the rotational DOFs are(17)K(θx,θx)=K(θy,θy)=Cb(Et3(1−v2))(1−v3)+CsEtsxsy(1+v)The relative contributions to these rotational stiffnesses from the bending and shear contributions are(18)Ks(θx,θx)Kb(θx,θx)=CsCb(3−v3(1−v))(sxsyt2)Thus the contribution to the total stiffness from the shear term is large compared to that of the bending contribution except whensx,sy⪡t, i.e. the lengths of the sides of the element are much smaller than the thickness. Hence the relative contributions from shear and bending to the rotational stiffness terms in the leading diagonal of the element stiffness matrix depend on the element dimensions.In contrast, the contributions to the elements in the stiffness matrix associated with translational degrees of freedom are independent ofsx,sy, the bending contribution is equal to zero, and the shear contribution is given by(19)K(w,w)=Cs,wEt(1+v)As can be seen in Eq. (17), the relative importance of the rotational stiffnesses in the plate element matrix depend on the element dimensions. On the other hand, the rotational stiffnesses in existing spot weld models (e.g. CWELD and ACM2) are constant and independent of the element size [7,8,15]. Therefore, when the stiffness matrices are assembled, the relative magnitude of the rotational stiffness of the spot weld added to the substructure stiffness depends on the element size, resulting in solutions which are sensitive to the element size over and above effects associated with discretization. This effect is illustrated in the following example.A system of two, simply supported parallel rectangular plates with a single elastic connection as shown inFig. 2 is used. The material and geometric properties are given inTable 1. The plates are modeled using a mesh of identical rectangular Heterosis elements. Different element sizes ranging from 0.006 to 0.12m are chosen in order to calculate the static deformation at point (0.38, 0.32) in plate 2 to a force applied at coordinate (0.38, 0.32) in plate 1.The connection is modeled using a spring attached to the structure using a multi-point constraint (MPC). This type of connection is extensively used in the automotive industry. It was applied by Ouisse et al. [15] and it is similar to the spot weld model proposed by Fang et al. [7] and implemented in NASTRAN as the CWELD model.Two cases are analyzed when either a single translational or rotational spring is used. In the first case the translational and rotational spring stiffnesses areKw=16,000N/m,Kθx=0Nm/radandKθy=0Nm/rad; the second case corresponds toKw=0N/m,Kθx=1600Nm/radandKθy=0Nm/rad. An analytical solution of this system was estimated using a flexibility approach [5]. In essence, a solution in terms of the vibration modes of the simply supported plates is assembled, and the response at zero frequency gives the static solution. The numerical results when using square elements and different element sizes are compared to this analytical solution and are presented inFig. 3 in terms of % error. It can be seen that in the case in which only a rotational spring connects the plates (case 2) the static solution depends on the element size and does not converge as the element size decreases. On the other hand, when only a translational spring is used (case 1), the solution is not sensitive to the element dimensions; furthermore the error when compared to the analytical result is very small.One way to remove or reduce the sensitivity of the model to element size is to develop a connection model that does not add stiffness to the rotational DOFs, but instead adds an equivalent rotational stiffness to the system using an array of translational springs. Such a connection model is described in the following section and subsequently applied to spot weld modeling.In this model, the spot weld is assumed to be circular with radius r. In order to add rotational stiffness to the connection, the proposed spot weld model applies N translational vertical springs(N≥3)located at the perimeter of the spot weld at angles of2πj/Nwherej=1,2,…,N(seeFig. 4). The equivalent translational stiffness of the connection in the out of plane DOFs is(20)Kw,eq=NKwwhereKwis the translational stiffness of each individual spring. The equivalent rotational stiffness is given by(21)Kθx,eq=∑j=1NKwr2cos2(2πjN)Now,(22)Kθx,eq=∑j=1Ncos2(2πjN)=∑j=1N12(1+cos(4πjN))Noting that forN≥3,∑j=1Ncos(4πj/N)=0, it follows that(23)Kθx,eq=Kθy,eq=12Kwr2N=12Kw,eqr2Eq. (23) shows thatKθx,eqandKθy,eqare independent of N and are also independent of the angle between the global and element co-ordinate systems. Thus if the total translational stiffness is divided into a number of uniformly distributed springs(N≥3)and r is sufficiently small, the equivalent rotational stiffnesses are independent of the number of springs used in the array. Note that the total static stiffnesses are the same, irrespective of how many springs are used, the only difference being their locations. Since the radius r is small, then the use of N=3 springs is recommended to minimize the number of DOFs associated with the spot weld and hence improve computational efficiency.The main advantage of this model compared to the simple MPC model in Section 2.1 is related to the fact that the new model provides a surface-to-surface link between components. In doing so the physics of the connection is modeled in a better way and the area of the spot weld is consistent with the spot weld dimensions. Finally the rotational stiffness is proportional to the spot weld radius, as can be seen in Eq. (23), and not to the element length.For in-plane vibration, spring connections in the appropriate direction are added to the center of the weld. This has been proven effective in practice [5,9]. The local DOFs of the individual springs are attached to the structures using MPCs in the same way as the simple model in Section 2. The springs associated with one spot weld can be attached to more than one element in each of the substructures it connects. Thus not only can the spot weld be located anywhere in the model but it can also join structures with different mesh characteristics as illustrated in Fig. 4.The experimental set-up comprised an assembly of two overlapped identical steel plates with free-free boundary conditions and with three spot welds along the overlapped area. This set-up was used previously by Lardeur et al. [6,16]. The spot weld diameter is 7mm and the plate thicknesses are 1.96mm. According to Lardeur [6,16], this value was chosen because it is thin enough to satisfy thin plate theory conditions and thick enough to reduce effects due to geometrical imperfections. The geometry is shown inFig. 5.The assembly was hung by rubber bands to replicate free boundary conditions. The first plate was excited using an electrodynamic shaker (LDS V201) attached at coordinates(xi,yi)=(84mm,36mm). The input force was measured using a force gauge (PCB type 208C01) screwed to a threaded stud which was glued to the plate using epoxy glue. A 25mm long stinger was used to connect the force gauge and the shaker in order to reduce the effects of moments transmitted from the shaker.The response was measured using two PCB accelerometers attached to the second plate at coordinates(x1,y1)=(314mm,84mm)and(x2,y2)=(236mm,185mm). A stepped sine signal was input to the shaker with a fine frequency resolution around resonances. The signals from the transducers were acquired by a Data Physics DP240 analyzer and the signals were postprocessed using MATLAB. The test was repeated three times for each of two different samples. In each case, the plates were dismounted from the experimental set-up and then mounted again.The natural frequenciesfnare estimated from the measured FRFs using the single DOF circle fitting method [17]. In the frequency range of interest twelve modes were observed: 6 rigid body modes and 6 elastic modes. Only the elastic modes are considered in this study. The measured natural frequencies are given inTable 2. Also shown are the coefficient of variationσ, defined as the standard deviation normalized with respect to the mean.These results show that the experimental variability of the measured natural frequencies for each of the two assemblies is small, in all cases less than 0.1%, while the differences between the means for the two assemblies is greater than the experimental variability but still small. Therefore the average will be used as a reference for the numerical model.The plates in Fig. 5 were modeled using Heterosis elements [13]. The material properties were estimated experimentally from beams cut out from the original assemblies, the beam dimensions, mass and first natural frequency measured experimentally are given inTable 3. Using these, Young׳s modulus, density, area and second moment of area were estimated. Estimated properties are shown inTable 4. In the FE models different element sizes ranging from 0.002 to 0.03m were used.The elastic connection was modeled using two models: a simple MPC model as described by Ouisse and Cogan [15] and similar to the CWELD model [3] and the model described in Section 3. For the simple model, the stiffnesses used in all three connections areKw,eq=1×1012N/mandKθx=Kθy=1×104Nm/rad. These values provide an effectively rigid connection, i.e. the effects of increasing the stiffnesses are negligible. When the proposed model is applied, the configuration described in Section 3 is used, i.e. three translational springs are arranged in a circular array withr=0.0035mand each having a stiffness ofKw=0.333×1012N/m. The effects of including a different number of springs (i.e. N>3) in the model were also investigated and were seen to produce negligible differences. These and further results are reported in [18].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a new spot weld model was proposed. This model imposes a surface-to-surface connection between two structures using simple spring elements and MPCs, therefore coincident meshes are not required. The application of the new spot-weld model was validated experimentally on a model of two simply supported plates with three spot weld connections. The performance was compared to a simple MPC connection.It was seen that when plate elements are based on Mindlin–Reissner plate theory, the stiffnesses in the rotational DOFs depend on the element size. In addition, when the rotational stiffnesses of the connection are added to the system the static and dynamic response and natural frequencies are sensitive to the element size. This was demonstrated on an assembly of two simply supported plates with a single connection.The new model does not add stiffness to the rotational DOFs, but instead is composed of an array of translational springs that add an equivalent rotational stiffness to the system. The results show that the new spot weld model reduces the sensitivity to the element size substantially and improves convergence with different mesh sizes. The original and proposed models were compared with experimental results, illustrating the improved performance of the new model.The first author thanks CONACyT, Mexico (205696) for sponsoring his Ph.D. studies.