@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comparison of a finite element only scheme and a BEM/FEM method to compute the elastic–viscoelastic response in composite media

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compare a FEM scheme with a BEM/FEM one for elastic–viscoelastic composites.Mathematical and numerical complexity and solution quality are considered.A novel mathematical and numerical treatment material homogenization is proposed.A recursive device is added to the solution structure to eliminate past history calculations.A robust, stable, more general, easier, convergent and accurate scheme is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite elements,Boundary elements,Mathematical homogenization,Viscoelasticity,Composites,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work is concerned with numerical computational procedures required to determine the mechanical response (displacements, strains and stresses) in composites built up of sectors with both elastic and viscoelastic components, in isothermal conditions. We compare a proposed scheme: a Finite Element Method Only procedure (FEM-only), with a published scheme based on an integrated Boundary Element Method/Finite Element Method (BEM/FEM) scheme. In the former, all the constituents (elastic and viscoelastic) are given a finite element discretization; whereas in the latter, the constituents are given differentiated discretizations. A novel two tier homogenization is presented: a material mathematical treatment homogenization of the viscoelastic and elastic material properties is developed and implemented resulting in a significantly efficient computational procedure; and a Dirichlet homogeneous series representation (same number of terms and same relaxation times) for all materials considered is used as well. The proposed solution structure is not viscoelastic model specific and hence significantly more general. Both model data type and/or experimentally determined data are handled with ease either separately or simultaneously. The comparison is done on the basis of applying the stated FEM-only strategy to three benchmark type problems presented in the published reference. We show that the FEM-only scheme results match rather well the actual solutions of the three problems, requiring significantly lower mathematical formulating effort and concomitantly a lower programming work. Additionally, it is shown that the FEM-only procedure is general, robust, accurate and stable, requiring relatively small computational times when implemented in personal computers. Two novel benchmark type problems are proposed for which both the analytic solution and the numerical solution are included, in order to illustrate both the generality and the accuracy of the FEM-only proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The solution structure of any mechanics problem dealing with solid materials requires, fundamentally, the simultaneous consideration of equilibrium equations, strain–displacement relationships and the constitutive equations representing the mechanical behavior of the materials being used. Generally speaking, the viscoelastic component exhibiting both an instantaneous elastic response as well as a time response, where the viscous part of the behavior plays an important role, characterized by the influence of the history of mechanical events applied to the member.Some of the typical traditional viscoelastic solutions use the analytical Laplace transform [1,2], to solve the problem in the transformed space and then, whenever possible, recover the actual solution using the corresponding inversion to the actual formulation time space. However, only the simplest of problems can be dealt with success in this fashion, pointing to the need of numerical schemes to resolve the associated analytical difficulties. In this line of work, for some applications approximate transform methods (with some form of numerical intervention) have been proposed at various stages of development in the field of viscoelasticity such as in [3,4] in the early stages, and more recently as in [5–8].For even more complex problems, using either creep based constitutive equations or relaxation based constitutive equations, full scale numerical schemes have been used successfully in the form of Finite Element (FE) based methods [9,10], implicit time discretization schemes [11], Boundary Element (BEM) based methods [6,12–15], some of them with the limitation of being restricted to specific viscoelastic models. FE/BEM coupled procedures have been proposed and used as well [15,16]. In [16] a mixed procedure is developed and implemented to solve boundary value problems in two dimensions in the context of isothermal viscoelastic material behavior for composite domains. Given the time dependence of the problems being considered, the numerical schemes that have been proposed generally follow forward time marching procedures.The aim of the present work is to compare a published BEM/FEM strategy [16] with a proposed FEM-only scheme to numerically solve problems dealing with composites made up of both elastic and viscoelastic components, in terms of their performance to produce valid numerical solutions. More specifically, we compare the results of a strategy that uses a combination of: Finite Elements to represent the elastic component, and the Boundary Element Method to represent the viscoelastic component; with results corresponding to a strategy that uses finite elements to represent the mechanical behavior of both type material components. The FEM-only procedure is applied to solve three problems: a tension bar, a sandwich plate and a reinforced tunnel, comparing the results with the corresponding ones obtained using the FE/BEM. It is shown that the FEM-only procedure solves accurately the first and second listed problems. However, for the third listed problem our results differ significantly from the published ones. Using established time limiting expressions in conjunction with formulas for thick walled elastic cylinders, we show that the FEM-only results presented herein are, in fact, the accurate ones. To resolve in a definite manner the accuracy issue we propose two novel benchmark type problems and provide both the analytic solution and the FEM-only numerical solution for each.The FEM-only strategy, framed in the principle of virtual work, leads to a forward marching integration scheme in time. Unlike in Ref. [16], the proposed scheme works with both fundamental material behavior representations (discrete viscoelastic model defined properties) and/or experimentally determined properties as well. And also unlike the reference, it can handle, for a given problem, multiple viscoelastic component composites each with its own viscoelastic model.Ref. [16] reports some difficulties associated with various numerical procedures when computing the instantaneous response of viscoelastic materials. As shown herein no such difficulty was encountered with the proposed scheme.Although we depart somewhat from the notation used in [16] the equations to be satisfied can be shown to be equivalent. For completeness, we begin by presenting the mathematically fundamental set of equations for isothermal elastic and isothermal viscoelastic boundary value problems after [1], using standard indicial notation, as follows:Employing the customary indicial notation, i and j assume the values of either 1 or 2 for the plane problems treated in this comparison, the linearized form of the strain displacements equations is used and thus strains εijare related to displacements uiaccording to:(1)2εij(t)=ui,j(t)+uj,i(t)As is usual, coma indicates differentiation with respect to the variable associated with the given index. t represents time.The form in Eq. (1), used as well in the reference published paper [16], implies that the deformation kinematics are limited to both small deformations and small rotations only, in the composite domain.In the absence of body forces and volumetric moments, equilibrium by a symmetric stress tensor σijis satisfied if the stress components are such that and comply with:(2)σij,j(t)=0If needed, body forces and volumetric moments could readily be included in the proposed scheme.The relationship between stresses and strains for isothermal, isotropic elastic members is given by(3)σije=CijlmεlmewhereCijlmrepresents the well known form of the linear elastic material tensor.In a manner that will be explained in the implementation section, the alternative FEM-only proposed strategy considers the elastic components behaving viscoelastically with a fictitious dependence on time, or alternatively, viewed as a viscoelastic material that does not vary in time (infinite relaxation time). In this fashion, with either view, both elastic components and viscoelastic components are handled as viscoelastic components. The former not truly varying with time and the latter varying with time according to the chosen specific material model or material data.In composites exhibiting both multi-elastic components and multi-viscoelastic components each elastic component is given the same representation as indicated above and treated in the manner indicated in the previous paragraph.The deviatoric and volumetric form of the constitutive equations for linear isothermal isotropic viscoelasticity are given, from Ref. [1], respectively by(4)Sij(t)=∫−∞tG1(t−τ)dεij(τ)dτdτ,i≠j(5)σkk(t)=∫−∞tG2(t−τ)dεkk(τ)dτdτ,nosummationwhere G1(t) and G2(t) are independent relaxation functions and τ represents integration time.As usual, the deviatoric components of stress and strain are given by(6)sij=σij−13δijσkk,sii=0(7)eij=εij−13δijεkk,εii=0respectively, where δijis the Kronecker delta.We remark that expressions (4)–(7) above are given the same form in the FEM-only procedure for all possible different viscoelastic material (all models) components as will be shown.We also remark that for the comparison being presented in this work the only viscoelastic model used is the Boltzmann solid (a particular form of the generalized Kelvin solid model) [1], (Fig. 1), given that it is the only such model used in [16]. In its one dimensional (1-D) version, is made up of two distinctive components: a 1-D spring unit in series with a 1-D viscoelastic unit, wherein a spring and a dashpot are arranged in parallel. The elastic component providing the instantaneous response, and a viscoelastic solid type component providing the delayed viscous type of response with a residual long term elastic behavior once viscous effects die down, that is, the final (long time) response of the model exhibits the behavior of two linear elastic springs in series. In Fig. 1, the same notation as used in [16] is employed here: Eerepresents the elastic modulus of the elastic component, Everepresents the elastic component of the viscoelastic module and η stands for the dashpot viscous magnitude.The particular form in which the Boltzmann model is used in the alternative proposed strategy will be presented later. Emphasizing that the proposed FEM-only alternative numerical strategy, as will become apparent, is not restricted to this particular model and it can accommodate more complex solid viscoelastic models (or pseudosolids, that is, viscoelastic liquids with large relaxation times) without difficulties in a rather efficient numerical scheme.From the model in Fig. 1, as a requirement of equilibrium, for the more general three-dimensional space, the elastic component and the viscoelastic component are subjected to the same stress level, that is,(8)σij(t)=σije(t)=σijve(t)where superscripts e and ve refers to elastic behavior and viscoelastic behavior respectively.The given stress components in Eq. (8) are total stress, elastic stress and viscoelastic stress respectively. The latter two identified with the elastic part of the model and the viscoelastic part of the model respectively.In multidimensional space settings, the kinematics of the arrangement in Fig. 1 requires that the total strain be given at all times by the sum of the elastic part plus the viscoelastic part as follows:(9)εij(t)=εije+εijve(t)We remark that expression (9) exhibits the same limitations as the ones pointed out for Eq. (1).We depart somewhat from the treatment in [16] in that we do not separate the elastic element from the viscous element in the viscoelastic component of the Boltzmann model. Not representing a significant limitation.In a composite exhibiting both multi-elastic components and multi-viscoelastic components each of the many possible viscoelastic components is given the same representation in the proposed scheme.Assuming an initial stress-free state, the initial conditions for the standard three mechanical field variables are as follows:(10)ui(t)=εij(t)=σij(t)=0,−∞<t<0On the portion of the boundary,Bσwhere tractionsSi(t)are prescribed, and the portion of the boundaryBuwhere displacementsΔi(t), are prescribed, the boundary conditions to be satisfied are respectively:(11)σij(t)nj=Si(t)onBσ(12)ui(t)=Δi(t)onBuwhere njas usual, represents the unit outward normal vector to the boundary of the body.The FEM-only formulation used herein is based on framing the corresponding solution development in the principle of virtual work, that is, it represents a weak form of the equations of mechanics and their solution in a standard fashion. Using such a formulation results in a forward incremental time marching procedure that satisfies equilibrium at each computational step (local time) and for the entire time span considered (global time). And as a result, it produces a rather attractive numerical procedure from a fundamental mechanics viewpoint. For completeness, Appendix A exhibiting the salient features of an isothermal viscoelastic FEM-only solution structure for the class of problems being considered is included. We remark that the FEM-only formulation is notably simpler and easier to implement than the BEM/FE procedure.For reasons described in Section 2.6 below, when both the relaxation functions of the viscoelastic components and the elastic moduli of the elastic components are numerically approximated in terms of series of negative exponentials (Dirichlet series), using a least squares procedure, a preliminary required step in the specific form of the coded FEM-only procedure used herein, substantial computational savings can be achieved. Since in this case a recursive procedure is obtained that eliminates the need to perform either the increasingly lengthy calculations to include the mechanical history at each time step typical of viscoelastic computations, and the concomitant typical large storage requirements of the results corresponding to each step for the entire past computational history as well. This device is attributed to Zak [17], and details of using such series representation of the material data are given in [18] wherein it is indicated that for a problem requiring n incremental computational steps, an approximate reduction of total computational time by a factor of (n+1)(n)/2 can be achieved in this fashion. The specific discrete least squares procedure used herein to obtain the Dirichlet series representation based on either model data or experimental relaxation data is presented in Ref. [19].Let us remark that the proposed incremental solution form in Appendix A implies that at each time step the solution corresponds to that of an elastic composite problem. As a result, in order to be able to handle large rotation mechanical motion kinematics a form such as described in [20], for example, could be applied to our composite viscoelastic problem solution scheme as well.We find important to underline that in the case of linear-elastic only calculations the load is applied only once in a single step computation. However, in a time incremental scheme such as the one used herein, required by the time variable integration for time dependent materials, the external load needs to be applied at each computational step since it is continuously active during the mechanics of the time deformation process. Given that the total displacements (strains and stresses indirectly as well) are computed in a cumulative way by adding the increments of these quantities at each time step, if the load is present at each calculating step, each displacement increment and as a result each strain increment would include, incorrectly, a new instant elastic response, when in reality all that is needed is a calculation at each step that only includes the response of the structure to the changes induced by the variation in the system stiffness due to the changes in the viscoelastic component(s). The correction to achieve precisely the described scenario shows up, in a natural mathematical way, in the development of the computing solution structure in the second term on the right hand side of Expression (A.18) in Appendix A. However, this expression is applicable to domains with viscoelastic materials only unless some special device is implemented as explained in the next section.In order to incorporate in the calculations two different material behaviors, a single computational procedure was developed considering all elastic components of a structure to be fictitiously made of a viscoelastic material with a constant relaxation modulus (the modulus of elasticity of the material). In this fashion in a coherent way, mathematically, mechanically and computationally both elastic and viscoelastic materials exhibit the same mathematical form of viscoelastic materials, but retaining at the same time their true physical nature. Consequently, the correction referred to in Section 2.6 applies also to the elastic constituents of a given structure in a natural simple form without requiring any additional devices.Due to the importance of the subject a variety of homogenization schemes extensively used in Mechanics to deal with composites have been developed [21–31] utilized for both micro- and macroconstituents. However, we underline that the chosen venue does not represent an effective or a material property homogenization, such as the Non-Uniform Transformation Field Analysis (NTFA) [21] applied in viscoelastic analyses as in [22], or as a stress and energy averages considerations as in [23], nor a homogenization based on construction of linear operators [24], and neither constitutes any of the homogenization methods proposed in [25]. Rather it is a novel type homogenization in that two conceptually different material behaviors are given the same seamless mathematical and numerical representation, hence, no additional complicating special devices (in the solution structure and coding) such as sub-region schemes as used, for instance in [16], are needed with the proposed scheme.Consequently, the computationally efficient device, mentioned in Section 2.6, using series of negative exponentials can be applied to the elastic parts of the structure as well. That is, the utilized computing structure does not differentiate between the treatments given to either of the two classes of material behavior that need to be considered. In this fashion, all the routines of the coded calculating structure are valid regardless of the type of material to be modeled (elastic or viscoelastic) as long as the bookkeeping is done properly during the computations. It will be shown that this approach can be used successfully to solve a sandwich panel deflection problem and a reinforced tunnel problem, precisely the two problems in Ref. [16] that exhibit both types of materials. Additionally, it is shown that the described scheme produces significantly accurate results in two new benchmark type problems proposed and described in Section 4.4.The solution structure is homogeneous in an additional sense as well, since it is based on giving all the component materials the same Dirichlet series form, that is, same number of terms and the same relaxation times but different coefficients for all the material components (elastic and viscoelastic) of a given composite problem. Regardless of the different viscoelastic models (or experimentally determined data) corresponding to each viscoelastic constituent (each with its own model relaxation times) in a given problem. This device greatly simplifies the solution structure and simplifies the resulting computational code. As a result, also in this sense the proposed solution is seamless.The described homogenization devices represent a small computational time price to be paid, and results in a more general procedure in that it is fully specific model independent as long as the viscoelastic model consists of a chain in series of modules of the so called standard linear solids, of which the Boltzmann model is one of the simplest forms. Hence, the proposed scheme can handle composites with multiple elastic components and multiple viscoelastic components with diverse material data in either of the following general forms:(a)Analytical data.Experimentally determined data.Any combinations of the above available data for any number of materials.We point out that the algorithm and computer routines used to approximate via Dirichlet series viscoelastic relaxation functions also perform rather well at approximating a constant relaxation modulus (modulus of elasticity) as will be shown in the results sections of this work.We remark that the calculations leading to the results shown herein require just a few seconds for the problems with finer meshes and larger number of time increments (TI), in a 32bit Intel® processor personal computer, owing to the already described efficient computational procedure that uses an updating recursive structure in the required specific vectorial and tensorial calculations concomitantly with the variable time step choice and especially the described two tier proposed homogenizationThe details of the FE/BEM numerical procedure are given in [16]. However, we make the following remarks:1.Therein, FE’s are used to discretize the elastic component of a given boundary value problem and BE’s are used to discretize the viscoelastic component of the given problem, and both components contributions are integrated to model the entire physical system. In contrast, the proposed FEM-only procedure as presented herein is used to handle both the elastic component(s) and the viscoelastic component(s) in an integrated seamless fashion due to the already described homogenizations schemes.In [16] the solution structure inherently corresponds to a specific single viscoelastic model, the Boltzmann model. Other models, obtained for example by a simple insertion of a spring in series with the dashpot in the viscoelastic module of Fig. 1 producing a Kelvin generalized solid model, would require reworking the entire solution (mathematics, algorithms, coding). However, the FEM-only solution structure does not change when different viscoelastic models need to be dealt with. In fact, in the proposed scheme all that is required from the viscoelastic materials properties point of view is relaxation functions obtained either analytically or experimentally to be used in expression (A.18) in Appendix A. This aspect of the proposed scheme results in a significantly advantageous solution structure since the mechanical behavior of all materials (constitutive equations) of a given problem show up in the data file rather than in the computational code.We underline that one of the significantly salient features of the described FEM-only proposed device is that it is applicable for problems with any number of different materials in the composite domain as long as they are restricted to either elastic or viscoelastic material behavior. Not just one elastic material and one viscoelastic material as in [16], hence, its resulting generality.In [16] additional conditions in the form of equations of equilibrium and kinematic compatibility at the elastic–viscoelastic interfaces are needed. We underline that the FEM-only proposed procedure does not require imposing such additional restrictions in the solution structure due in part to the described implemented material homogenization treatment. In this sense, the FEM-only scheme is also seamless.In the FEM-only scheme the calculation of stresses in the viscous component cannot be obtained separately from the calculation of stresses in the elastic component in the viscoelastic module part of the Boltzmann model as it can be done in [16]. We find this aspect of the calculations of minor importance since although in a discrete mathematical model type description, as opposed to a convolution integral description type as per expressions (4) and (5), this separation is simple, as is known, physically one cannot separate one component contribution from the other component contribution in a given material since they are inherently inseparably connected. In this sense, the present approach is far less restrictive as pointed out in references such as [1].The comparison of the two strategies being considered is obtained by comparing the results and corresponding accuracy for three different boundary value problems as already described. Computational times are not compared since they are not reported in [16]. In all three problems the material model utilized for the viscoelastic component corresponds to the Boltzmann viscoelastic solid. Without loss of generality, throughout all the calculations in this work the constant strain triangle (CST) was used in the coded solution for both the elastic components and the viscoelastic components, except, as explained therein, in Problem 1.The first problem whose solution comparison we seek is that of a sandwich panel subjected to a uniform lateral load (Fig. 2). This kind of structural component has received significant attention over the years [31]. The core is made up of low density urethane and the reinforcing outer plates are made of steel. The problem is treated as a plane stress problem. The experimental results for this problem, available in Ref. [32] are also included in the comparison presented herein.Since in [16] two degrees of freedom per end bar elements were used for the reinforcing steel, we adopt the same modeling procedure here.The relevant data for this problem is as follows: Urethane core thickness, hu=80mm; reinforcing steel plate’s thickness, hs=0.51mm, panel length, L=4000mm; panel width b=1100mm. The load for the analysis includes the structure’s uniformly distributed own weight of 0.1397N/mm, and, additionally, an externally applied uniform lateral load of 0.7799N/mm for a total load of 0.9196N/mm. The physical data for this problem is as follows: steel plates with a Young’s modulus of 2.1×105N/mm2, Poisson ratio of 0.3, and for the viscoelastic components in the model in Fig. 1: Ee=9.856N/mm2, Eve=20.888N/mm2, η=4.6083 days, Poisson’s ratio=0.4.Both the general analytic relaxation function and the analytic compliance function for the description of the mechanical behavior for the Boltzmann model (Fig. 1) from an ordinary differential equation (ODE) are obtained, as it was done in Appendix B. Using the data from the above paragraph the particular forms corresponding to this problem are obtained. Accordingly, a set of tensile relaxation function values at selected times for this problem can readily be obtained. With these values, using the procedure outlined in [19] somewhat modified as described in Appendix B, the Dirichlet exponential series approximations for the relaxation functions corresponding to steel and urethane can be obtained and are shown together with the analytic values inFig. 3.The discrete least squares norm (DLSN) for the approximation of the viscoelastic relaxation data for this problem is 0.00734 for a maximum relaxation modulus value (at time zero) of 9.81N/mm2, and for the constant relaxation modulus for the elastic part the DLSN is 281.1 for a steel elasticity modulus of 2.10E+05N/mm2. The low values of the DLSN are reflected in the rather good approximations shown in Fig. 3.The FE mesh for this case was constructed by dividing the panel urethane domain into a rectangular grid and then each rectangle is subdivided into two CST’s. The steel reinforcement was added as bar elements with two DOF per end, superimposed on the uppermost elements and on the lowermost elements just as it was done in the Ref. [16] (Fig. 4).Fig. 5 shows the present results compared with both BEM/FEM and the results corresponding to the experimental procedure using uniform time steps. It is to be noted the appreciable variability in the experimental values attributed in Ref. [32] to daily cycles of temperature variation during the experiment. The so-called simple model approximation in this figure is taken from the stated reference.Using the stated so-called simple model approximation (a smooth approximation to the experimental values) in [32] as a reference vs. present results, the maximum recorded difference is 0.76% and takes place at the 7th time step. On the average the difference over the time range considered is 0.2%.Table 1 presents a numerical convergence study for the FEM-only scheme as applied to the sandwich panel structure both in terms of spatial discretization convergence as well as time discretization convergence based on TI’s per decade. Although in Fig. 5 uniform time stepping was used for comparison purposes, to obtain the study presented in Table 1 a more computationally efficient variable time stepping was used, as described in the next problem (Section 4.2).These results show both good spatial convergence and good time convergence for the FEM-only scheme as compared with the references. Computational runs 5 and 7 employed less than 5s and 2s respectively in a personal 32bit INTEL® based computer, respectively.We point out the relative accuracy of the results of the present approach in view of the relatively large ratio (4 orders of magnitude) of the elastic bars modulus of elasticity vs. the core relaxation function values, a point of interest made in [30].The second benchmark type problem considered is that of a uniform rectangular plate of viscoelastic material without elastic constituents. Given that this is a plane stress problem with uniform solution for all the mechanical fields only two CST elements are needed as shown inFig. 6 to cover the entire domain, wherein boundary conditions, geometry and discretization are shown as well:The geometric data is as follows: h=100mm, L=800mm. Uniform end loading, p=5N/mm2.The physical data22The corresponding author in Ref. [16] acknowledged to present authors, via e-mail, that in the published paper some of the data and some of the graphs given in the figures therein corresponding to this problem are incorrect. In order to have a coherent comparison, our work reflects the corrected items as needed in the comparisons presented.for the model in Fig. 1 for this problem is: Ee=22.576kN/mm2, Eve=11.0kN/mm2, η=45.4545 days, ϑ=0.0.Using the already described Dirichlet series approximation together with the given physical data in this case produces a DLSN of 283.0 for a maximum relaxation modulus value (at time zero) of 2.2576E+4kN/mm2.Fig. 7 shows the comparison for the end displacement of the bar subjected to the indicated loading.The maximum difference recorded between both analytical and Ref. [16] vs. present calculations was 2.41% for the entire range in Fig. 7 (180 total time steps) using a step size of 2.5 days. When the time step is reduced to 1 day the infinite vector error norm with respect to the analytic solution becomes 0.0091.Fig. 8 shows bar elongation results accuracy as a function of uniform time step size variations.For this problem, for the entire time range of calculations, the stresses remain constant at a value of 5.0MPa as required by equilibrium.We note that due to the exponential nature of the class of problems treated herein, usage of a more efficient time stepping procedure may be very convenient. In fact, using an exponentially growing variable time step for the present problem and using only nine computational steps to cover the 450 days range, the maximum error becomes 3.4%. In contrast, using nine uniform time steps (50 days steps) the error becomes 17.0% using the present approach and approximately 14.4% error in Ref. [16]. In this regard, it is proposed that the negative inverse of the relaxation functions slopes for a given problem viscoelastic material be used as a valid basis to establish the variable time step for viscoelastic forward marching computing procedures.As it was done in the reference a complete unloading at time 200 days was applied and its effects examined using the present approach.Fig. 9 shows the comparative results of this study. The analytic results were determined using the ODE solution in Appendix B.As expected, the positive jump at t=0 days and negative one at t=200 days are approximately equal: 0.177mm vs. 0.18mm, 1.6% difference; since they correspond to the instantaneous response of the elastic module in the Boltzmann model.Given that this particular problem exhibits one material only and does not pertain to a composite, for this and other reasons two proposed novel benchmark composite problems, and concomitant analytic solutions, are presented in Section 4.4 together with the corresponding FEM-only solutions.Each of the reported calculations for this problem employed less than 1s in a 32bit INTEL® based PC.As well known, tunnels constitute a rather important structural element [7,8], together with its relatively related problem: various forms of cylinders both unreinforced and reinforced [29].The third benchmark type problem treated is that of a circular section tunnel, subjected to inner pressure, embedded in a specific soil type: soft rock (Fig. 10). The problem is treated as a 2-dimensional plane strain problem. Both reinforced and non-reinforced tunnel calculations were presented in [16] and are compared with in this section. The reinforcement is considered elastic and the soil is considered viscoelastic with a Boltzmann model type law.The following data applies to this problem: soil model elastic component, Ese=1.034GPa, soil model elastic part of the viscoelastic component Esve=4.5GPa, soil viscous component ηs=7.14285 days, soil Poisson modulus ϑs=0.15, elastic reinforcing ring elastic modulus Ere=20.68GPa, reinforcing ring thickness of 0.3m.Due to the axial symmetry of this problem the computational FE domain was chosen to be a thin wedge of the entire tunnel cross section,Fig. 11 shows the overall mesh and a close up at the inner tunnel sector mesh respectively. By simply changing the material specification of the first two layers of the domain the same mesh can be used for both unreinforced and reinforced tunnel calculations.The tunnel is subjected to an inner pressure of 70.3kPa, tunnel inner radius a is 2.54m, and outer tunnel radius is considered sufficiently large, b→∞. In order to simulate this condition for present calculations, the outer tunnel surface radius was increased until a compressive radial stress value of less than 0.015% of the applied pressure value was reached therein, and was at that distance radially restrained. This condition was obtained for an outer radius of 400m, and the resulting calculated outer boundary compressive stress was 7.38Pa.Using the described Dirichlet series approximation together with the given physical data for the soft rock produces in this case a DLSN of 8.659E+06 for a maximum relaxation modulus value at time zero of 1.034GPa. For the constant relaxation modulus of the elastic part the DLSN is 2.766E+06 for a reinforcement modulus of elasticity of 20.68GPa.We remark that given the plane strain nature of this problem its domain can be considered as a long thick walled cylinder with an infinite outer radius for which an analytic solution is available for time limiting cases as presented and used in Appendix C.The instantaneous radial displacement and long term radial displacement at the tunnel inner radius so calculated are compared inTable 2.As expected, the ratio of the last column two values (0.814) is the inverse of the ratio of the elastic modulus of the elastic part of the Boltzmann model (instant response) over the value of the compounded elastic modulus of the two Boltzmann model elastic moduli in series (long term response). This ratio value is a property of any structure using this specific material model data values and thus a way to partially verify the accuracy of calculations. A ratio that is not satisfied by the reference’s results is included in Table 2.The estimated entire time response for this case is shown inFig. 12. The upper curve shows the calculation of the radial displacement of the inner radius of the tunnel under the applied pressure without the reinforcement.Ref. [16] reports results values that are very different from ours by two orders of magnitude in excess, and as a result, could not be visibly plotted in the same graph of Fig. 12, making a graphical comparison of results somewhat difficult.For this problem the authors in [16] present the results for approximately 170 calculations with a time increment of half a day. As already indicated, for computational cost reasons, variable time steps were used for this problem. The results shown in Fig. 12 correspond to 44 variable time calculations. In addition, we note that using just one-tenth of those time steps but keeping them variable, approximately 5 calculations (the last time step was 37.5 days), remarkably similar results to the ones shown in Fig. 12 are obtained.Given that there are important discrepancies between Ref. [16] results and present results for this problem as indicated in Table 2, based on fundamental results from the theory of viscoelasticity verification for both the instantaneous and long term radial displacements in Table 2 and in Fig. 12 for the unreinforced case is presented in Appendix C.When the reinforcing ring is added to the tunnel (Fig. 10), the results for the radial displacement of the tunnel inner surface is substantially reduced, approximately 3.5 times. The lower curve in Fig. 12 shows the response of the reinforced tunnel to the stated internally applied pressure.Given the described solution approach to these problems (same number of total degrees of freedom), both non-reinforced tunnel and reinforced tunnel numerical calculations took the same amount of time, less than 2s on a personal 32bit INTEL® based computer.Ref. [16] reports results values that are very different from ours by two orders of magnitude in excess, and as a result, could not be visibly plotted in the same graph of Fig. 12, making a graphical comparison of results somewhat difficult. Corresponding limiting values are shown inTable 3.In order to resolve some of the mentioned accuracy issues and, in a more general sense, to better assess the composite modeling performance and generality in the solution of viscoelastic composites as opposed to a single material member as per Problem 2, the composite three material components, 12 element bar, ofFig. 13 exhibiting two distinct viscoelastic material sectors and an intermediate elastic sector, is analyzed in terms of the FEM-only scheme under two different type loadings that results in either bar relaxation or bar compliance. Given that in this case solutions for relaxation and compliance tests to obtain bar relaxation function Gbar(t), and bar compliance function Jbar(t) can be determined analytically, this arrangement provides a reliable reference to test solutions obtained by numerical methods, in general, and by the proposed FEM-only method.Using the definitions in Fig. 1 the specific Boltzmann material model data used for these problems is shown inTable 4.The elastic modulus for material 2 is 2.1E+05.The geometry is specified as follows: h=1.0mm. L=1.0mm.In terms of boundary conditions, the bar is restrained at the left end as indicated in Fig. 13 and either displacement or load is applied at the right end according toTable 5. The resulting expressions for relaxation or compliance to be numerically estimated are given therein as well.h(t) stands for the Heaviside unit step function. This arrangement has been designed so that in the first case, the FEM-only calculated bar longitudinal strain corresponds to a numerical approximation of the composite bar compliance modulus Jbar(t), and, so that in the second case the FEM-only calculated stress corresponds to a numerical approximation of the composite bar relaxation function Gbar(t).The schematic model for our problem from Figs. 1 and 13 becomesFig. 14.For this specific composite with the specifically selected geometric arrangement, the bar compliance function Jbar(t) is given by(13)Jbar(t)=J1(t)+J2(t)+J3(t)wherein the right hand side J’s stand for compliance moduli for the three chosen materials. J1(t) and J3(t) stand for viscoelastic (VE) compliance functions for materials 1 and 3 respectively, J2(t) is a constant, in this case the inverse of the elastic material chosen elastic modulus of elasticity.As a result of the specific selected geometric arrangement, the analytic bar relaxation function Gbar(t) is given by(14)Gbar(t)=G1(t)⁎G2(t)⁎G3(t)G1(t)⁎G2(t)+G2(t)⁎G3(t)+G1(t)⁎G3(t)wherein the right hand side G’s stand for relaxation moduli for the three chosen materials. As before, subindices 1–3 stand for materials. In this particular case G2(t) is just the elastic modulus of material 2.In expressions (13) and (14) the VE material compliance functions and relaxation functions are given, as per expressions (B.2) and (B.4), Appendix B reproduced below, respectively in a generic form as(15)J(t)=a+b(1−e−dt)and(16)G(t)=1ge−(fd/g)t+1f(1−e−(fd/g)t)The values for the indicated constants appearing in expressions (15) and (16) applicable to the two distinct VE materials (1 and 3) for the present composite are given inTable 6.Using the FEM-only proposed procedure, the results of these analyses are given inFigs. 15 and 16.The average errors of the FEM-only procedure (over the entire time range at computational times) with respect to the analytic values are: 2.78% for Gbar(t), and 1.92% for Jbar(t).The numerical solution to the problems in this section required less than 2s in a 32bit INTEL® based PC.The significance of all the error approximations associated with the five problems calculations presented herein can be placed in prospective when compared with errors≤5.0%, the threshold for elastic only FE calculations to be considered of ‘normal accuracy’ according to Ref. [33].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An alternative significantly simpler (both in solution structure and in coding) numerical scheme to a FE/BEM published procedure is presented to handle composite problems with both elastic and viscoelastic subdomains, using the same three problems discussed in the reference for a comparison of the efficacy of both methods.In the proposed computational structure, a novel treatment is given to the presence of two different types of materials by introducing a mathematical material modeling homogenization scheme as opposed to an effective equivalency type of homogenization. This approach results in a seamless treatment of the two types of materials considered, significantly simplifying solution structure, coding and computations.By homogenizing the representation of all material behavior (model type, experimental type, elastic, viscoelastic) with the same form Dirichlet series provides an additional significant simplifying aspect to the solution structure and a corresponding simplifying aspect to the computational code.In the reference FEM/BEM scheme different viscoelastic models require reworking the solution structure entirely from start since the specifics of the viscoelastic models are embedded in the computer code, whereas in contrast in the FEM-only scheme different viscoelastic models show up only in the data file and hence, in this sense, it is a significantly more general than the former scheme.The alternative procedure exhibits: very good accuracy, robustness and stability in the solution of the three benchmark type problems used for the comparison in terms of accepted accuracy scales for the type of problems treated herein.Unloading (an essential mechanical test or response when present) as indicated in the numerical tests of problem 2 is accurately captured by the proposed alternative scheme.Two novel benchmark type composite problems (two distinct viscoelastic components and an elastic one) for which the analytic solutions are given are posed and solved for the type of problems treated herein using the FEM-only procedure, confirming the generality and accuracy of the proposed scheme.The computational time cost exhibited by the proposed scheme, for the three problems examined, in a standard 32-bit INTEL® based PC ranged from under a second to just a few seconds.The proposed alternative procedure is even more general than presented herein in the sense that no reason can be anticipated precluding its use in composites made up of not just one elastic subdomain and a single viscoelastic subdomain, but rather it should be applicable to composites with both multiple different elastic materials subdomains together with multiple different viscoelastic materials subdomains.Given the material representation described in terms of discrete least squares Dirichlet series it is also general in another important viscoelastic sense, namely: both discrete model type material description and/or experimentally determined material type behavior can be handled with ease with the same computational structure. For the four cases considered, the Dirichlet series fit of both the elastic data and the relaxation data indicates rather good accuracy (low DLSN) over the time span considered in each case, leading to the accurate results shown in this work.Finally, no difficulties can be foreseen in incorporating temperature effects in the proposed mathematical and numerical homogenization structure, a problem of practical interest [34,35], especially so for viscoelastic materials belonging to the so called thermorheologically simple (TRS) material class [1].6.1 Consejo de Investigación, Universidad de Oriente, Venezuela. 6.2 La Fundación para el Desarrollo de la Ciencia y la Tecnologí;a (FUNDACITE), estado Anzoátegui, Puerto La Cruz, Venezuela. 6.3 Pedro Báiz, Department of Aeronautics, Imperial College London, participated in both initial considerations about the subject of this work and also kindly provided a helpful first reading of the manuscript.Finite element formulation of the solution.As indicated, for completeness, the material in this appendix is included. Remarking that all the expressions presented herein are applicable to all the materials considered as a result of the homogenization procedure described in Section 2.7.The computational strategy is framed in the principle of virtual work in the following time dependent version:(A.1)∫B¯σij(xk,t)δεij(xk,t)dv=∫B¯fi(xk)δui(xk,t)dv+∫∂B¯T¯i(xk,t)δu¯i(xk,t)dswhereB¯,∂B¯, xk, δ, υ, fi,T¯i,δu¯iand s represent: the union of all subdomains in the composite, the union of all the subdomains external boundaries, kthspace coordinate, first variation, volume, body force, surface traction and surface displacement, respectively.Given that the eventual computations are incremental in nature, Expression (A.1) is recast in terms of the increments of displacements and strains at stage n as follows:(A.2)∫B¯σij(n)δΔεij(n)dv=∫B¯fi(n)δΔui(n)dv+∫∂B¯T¯i(n)δΔu¯idsΔ represents the increment operator. In expression (A.2) space and time dependence are omitted for clarity and typical increments defined according to(A.3)ui(n)=ui(n-1)+Δui(n)In the usual tensorial notation, the statement for the general isothermal viscoelastic constitutive equations at t(n) is given by(A.4)σij(n)=Gijkl[t(n)]εkl(0)+∫0+t(n)Gijkl[t(n)−t′]∂∂t′[εkl(t′)]dt′Approximating the integral by a finite sum (xkdependence still retained but not shown)(A.5)σij(n)=Gijkl[t(n)]εkl(0)+∑m=1m=nGijkl(m)[t(n)−t(m−1)]Δ[εkl(t(m))]Switching to vectorial-matrix notation (typical form:δΔεij(n)→yieldsδΔε̲nT) for compactness and clarity, substituting (A.5) in (A.2), and solving for the last term in the right hand side, expression (A.6) below is obtained:(A.6)∫∂B¯(δΔu̲n)T(T¯n)ds=∫B¯(δΔε̲n)T{([G̲(tn)](ε̲0)+∑m=1n[G̲(tn−t(m−1)′)](Δε̲m)}dv−∫B¯(δΔu̲n)T(f̲n)dvExpression (A.6) establishes the necessary relationship between applied tractions, body forces and the virtual arbitrary (but permissible) displacements for the entire domain.In order to develop a displacement finite element based formulation, a finite element time dependent approximating displacement field is assumed in the standard form:(A.7)u̲(xk,t)=M̲(xk)g̲(t)The functions in matrixM̲carry the space dependence, in our case those corresponding to the constant strain triangle (CST), and the functions in vectorg̲carry the time dependent nodal displacement magnitude.Omitting space dependence, (A.7) in incremental form becomes:(A.8)Δu̲n=M̲Δg̲nIn terms of displacements nodal value incrementsΔvat time tn(A.8) becomes(A.9)Δv̲n=A̲Δg̲nfrom (A.9) we get(A.10)Δg̲n=A̲−1Δv̲nApplying appropriate space differentiation onΔu̲nandM̲in (A.8), and employing (A.10) the element incremental strain vector in terms of the element incremental nodal displacements is obtained in the form:(A.11)Δε̲n=B̲A̲−1Δv̲nSubstituting (A.10) in (A.8), taking the first variation of the resulting expression as well as the first variation of (A.11) and transposing appropriately, the following expressions are obtained:(A.12)δΔu̲nT=δΔv̲nTA̲T−1M̲T(A.13)δΔε̲nT=δΔv̲nTA̲−1TB̲TSubstituting these expressions in (A.6) and recalling that the variationsδΔv̲nTare arbitrary (A.14) below is obtained:(A.14)∫∂B¯A̲−1TM̲TT¯̲nds=∫B¯A̲−1TB̲T{G̲(tn)B̲A̲−1v̲0+∑m=1nG̲(tn−t(m−1))}(B̲A̲−1Δv̲m)dv−∫B¯A̲−1TM̲Tf̲ndvrepresents the finite element formulation for a boundary problem in terms of the incremental displacementsΔv̲nto be computed at each tntime step, all else being known, and in so doing retaining the entire past mechanical history. Once the incremental values of the displacements are known, incremental strains and incremental stresses are readily calculated, also at each time step, using expression (A.10) and the constitutive equation respectively.If the data representing the relaxation function admit an approximate representation in terms of series of negative exponentials (Dirichlet series) in the following form below:(A.15)G(tn)=G̲0+∑β=1MG̲βexp(−tnτβ)wherein the G’s are constants, each associated with a relaxation timeτβ,(τ0→∞), then an efficient computational scheme can be obtained that eliminates the need to store the entire history of past computational steps and to use them to compute the response at each current time step [17], implied in the second term of the first integral on the right hand side of Eq. (A.14), the(tn−t(m−1))dependence. By defining under such conditions the following expression:(A.16)Z̲n′(β)≡∑m=1nΔv̲mexp(−tn−tm−1τβ)it can be shown that a recursive expression is obtained in the form:(A.17)Z̲n′(β)={Δv̲m+Z̲n−1(β)}exp(−tn−tn−1τβ)the solution structure from (A.13) then becomes(A.18)∑β=0MG̲βexp(−tn−tn−1τβ)Δv̲n=T¯̲n−G̲0v̲n−1−∑β=1MG̲β{v̲0exp(−tnτβ)+Z̲n(β)exp(−tn−tn−1τβ)}Note that no time summation terms appear in (A.18), remarking that, in spite of this fact, this scheme still fully retains the influence of the entire past history on all mechanical field variables.(A.18) represents a set of linear algebraic equations with n unknowns to be solved at each time step. In our case a banded solver is used. As long as valid relaxation functions are available (obtained either from an ODE form of a model representation or a relaxation function experimentally determined in the form of a table of numbers) (A.18) can readily be solved at each time step for any given isothermal composite boundary value problem exhibiting multiple elastic subdomains and multiple viscoelastic subdomains.Analytic solution for the Boltzmann model and discrete least squares determined Dirichlet series.The Boltzmann model has two displacement components: an elastic component and a viscoelastic component. The ODE that describes the viscoelastic module of the Boltzmann model mechanics in terms of the dimensionless displacement δve(t) is(B.1)dδvedt+δveη=PAEveηwhere P is the resultant of the end load and A is the bar cross sectional area. The solution to the complete Boltzmann model including the elastic contribution to the total 1-D model displacement is given as(B.2)Δ(t)=(δe+δve)L=(PLA)[1Ee+1Eve(1−e−t/η)]wherein the bracketed expression is recognized as the compliance function J(t). Recalling the relationship between the compliance function and the relaxation function in the Laplacian transformed space given by(B.3)J¯(s)=[s2G¯(s)]−1the relaxation function G(t) can readily be obtained to be(B.4)G(t)=Ee[e−(1/αη)t+α(1−e−(1/αη)t)]where(B.5)α=Eve(Ee+Eve)It is this function, G(t), given in either analytical form as per Eq. (B.4) or as a series of points in experimentally determined relaxation functions, that is approximated by a finite number of series terms discrete least squares procedure for each of the three treated problems to generate the series of negative exponentials (Dirichlet) in the form indicated in expression (A.15).In the published procedure [19], the relaxation times are selected a priori, one per decade, in order to linearize an otherwise highly nonlinear least squares problem. For improved accuracy we modified the stated procedure from [19] and changed it so that two relaxation times per decade are used. As shown in the main text the procedure just described works rather well in terms of producing accurate relaxation functions in series form once relaxation data is available.As a representative example of the three cases considered herein, the terms in expression (A.15) for the urethane and steel in problem 1 are as exhibited inTable B1 as follows:The approximating curves in the graph in Fig. 3 in Section 4.1 are obtained using these series term values. We emphasize that as part of the homogenization scheme proposed in Section 2.7 the relaxation time for both materials considered are pre set at the same value as indicated.Accuracy verification for Problem 3.As stated in the main text of this work, in Problem 3 notable discrepancies between reference results and present results were detected. From the fundamental theory of viscoelasticity, and since in the time limiting states: instantaneous response (t=0), and at long term response (t=∞) the material behaves elastically, and also as a result of the fading memory principle, two basic elastic calculations are performed to determine the correct tunnel inner radius displacement under the stated load conditions. This is done considering that the tunnel without reinforcement can be modeled as a thick walled cylinder (in plane strain) with an infinite external radius, limit as b→∞ in Fig. 10, for which the analytical solution for the inner radius radial displacement can be readily determined from Lamé׳s known solution in the form u(r)=a2Pi(1+ϑ)/(rE). Recalling that Pi=70.3kPa, E is computed using the relaxation function expression in Appendix B for E(0) and E(∞) and inner radius a=2.54m, the corresponding numerical values are shown inTable C1.Confirming our FEM-only estimates exhibited in Table 2, main text.