@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Contextual anomaly detection in crowded surveillance scenes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel context aware anomaly detection process applied to human behaviour.We evaluate our method upon 2 different datasets.We utilise a novel social connections metric and a scene model as contextual information.The use of scene contextual information improves the detection of subtle anomalies.The use of social contextual information improves the detection of abnormal behaviour.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behaviour analysis,Visual surveillance,Security,Context,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work addresses the problem of detecting human behavioural anomalies in crowded surveillance environments. We focus in particular on the problem of detecting subtle anomalies in a behaviourally heterogeneous surveillance scene. To reach this goal we implement a novel unsupervised context-aware process. We propose and evaluate a method of utilising social context and scene context to improve behaviour analysis. We find that in a crowded scene the application of Mutual Information based social context permits the ability to prevent self-justifying groups and propagate anomalies in a social network, granting a greater anomaly detection capability. Scene context uniformly improves the detection of anomalies in both datasets. The strength of our contextual features is demonstrated by the detection of subtly abnormal behaviours, which otherwise remain indistinguishable from normal behaviour.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As a society we have the need to monitor public and private space in order to prevent criminal behaviour and identify security threats. The scale at which surveillance is undertaken and the density of information in video results in a huge amount of data – the analysis of which using human resources is often prohibitively expensive. The solution is to automate human surveillance (Makris and Ellis, 2005). Due to advances in pedestrian detection and robust tracking long term human centred tracks are becoming more prevalent (Kalal and Matas, 2009; Felzenszwalb et al., 2010). It is becoming plausible to autonomously profile the behaviour of a single, or multiple, humans over time. An abnormal event in automated surveillance is one which has a low statistical representation in the training data (Loy, 2010). Our approach is motivated by this definition with an emphasis upon contextual information as a method of creating separation between otherwise only subtly distinct behaviours. A good behaviour representation should encode the dataset in such a way that homogeneous clusters of behaviour can be segmented from the heterogeneous mass of data. Equally a poor behaviour representation is incapable of measuring the distinction between desired subgroups of data. Subtle behaviours provide a greater challenge because the information required to segment them from the greater set is not directly measurable. Subtle behaviours can be handled in the following two ways; firstly by measuring more relevant information which better segments the data into homogeneous subsets, or secondly by implementing a better suited model which is capable of fitting the nuances of the data domain. In this research we tackle the former point; inspired by work in Scene Modelling (Makris and Ellis, 2005) and Social Signal Processing (Cristani and Raghavendra, 2012) we demonstrate the extraction and use of high level surveillance information which provides a contextual basis to identify subtly abnormal behaviour. Simple surveillance scenes may not contain much contextual information, in fact at its simplest a surveillance scene can be said to have only one contextual state. In such cases a simple trajectory matching algorithm may be appropriate to detect outlier behaviour. However, a dynamic or crowded surveillance scene may be heterogeneous, and thus behaviour in one context may not be representative of behaviour in a different context. In any non-trivial surveillance scene contextual information such as scene region, social context, periodic events, and entry or exit points impact the dynamics of behaviour (Lan and Wang, 2010). We can use this contextual information to provide further means of segmenting abnormal behaviours from the mass of data, and perhaps provide the means to segment subtle behaviours from the mass of data. For a more general discussion on contextual anomaly detection see (Chandola, 2009; Song et al., 2007).With this work we demonstrate the significance of inferring social links between people in a surveillance application. We provide further validation of the growing trend in automatic scene understanding, additionally providing a novel approach. Furthermore we demonstrate a novel social context based anomaly detection procedure. We evaluate our systems capability to detect subtle behavioural anomalies within a complex and crowded human surveillance scene. Our main contributions are a novel method of acquiring scene structure information in surveillance, the development of a novel mutual information social group metric, and the demonstration that social and scene contextual information is effective in combination at anomaly detection.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
