@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SU-8 etching in inductively coupled oxygen plasma

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SU-8 is etched using inductively coupled plasma (ICP) RIE in O2 with SF6 added.Anisotropic etching at etch rates around 750nmmin−1 is achieved.Etched SU-8 surface roughness is caused by surface antimony acting as a local mask.Sb surface concentration and roughness are reduced significantly by adding SF6.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dry etching,ICP-RIE,SU-8,Antimony,Roughness,SF6,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Structuring or removal of the epoxy based, photo sensitive polymer SU-8 by inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) was investigated as a function of plasma chemistry, bias power, temperature, and pressure. In a pure oxygen plasma, surface accumulation of antimony from the photo-initiator introduced severe roughness and reduced etch rate significantly. Addition of SF6 to the plasma chemistry reduced the antimony surface concentration with lower roughness and higher etch rate as an outcome. Furthermore the etch anisotropy could be tuned by controlling the bias power. Etch rates up to 800nmmin−1 could be achieved with low roughness and high anisotropy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
SU-8 is an epoxy based, photo sensitive polymer developed by IBM in the late 1980s [1]. SU-8 negative photo resist is derived from EPONTMresin [2], where the monomer consists in average of eight epoxy groups and eight aromatic benzene groups as indicated by the name. The viscous polymer contains between 5% and 10% photo-initiator enabling cross linking by standard I-line lithography. The photo-initiator used for the SU-8 resin is based on triarylsulfonium–hexafluoroantimonium, adding fluorine, sulfur, and antimony to the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen from the monomers as elements in the SU-8 resin.SU-8 in microtechnology was developed for use in LIGA1Lithographie, Galvanoformung, Abformung.1[3] where the polymer is used to define a structured mold. Furthermore, SU-8 was interesting as etch mask, due to the patterning by standard photolithography. The chemical resistance of SU-8, however, complicates the removal of the resist in both applications, with plasma removal as one of the only reliable option. Therefore, the most thoroughly discussed subject in SU-8 etching is complete removal of SU-8 after its use as masking material.More recently, SU-8 has been used as a device layer rather than a sacrificial layer. Fabrication of devices in SU-8 can in general be accomplished by photo-lithography, for a large number of applications. Lab on a chip (LOC) systems with microfluidic channels made in SU-8 [4,5], have advantages such as biological compatibility and easy fabrication. Devices for optical applications such as polymer waveguides [6] and optical transducers [7] have been shown. Furthermore, the mechanical properties of SU-8 make it an obvious choice for cantilever sensors [8].Plasma treatment of all of these devices can be used for several purposes. Probably the most relevant cases of plasma treatment of SU-8, in addition to removal, is functionalization or activation of a surface. This can for example be used to tune the hydrophobicity of a surface or change the surface termination to alter the bonding capabilities [9]. For some applications further patterning of the SU-8 after the initial photo-lithography in the form of etching might be interesting. For instance an isotropic etch can be used to increase the aspect ratio or decrease the line width of lithographically defined structures.In the scarce literature on SU-8 etching available, most authors agree on the need for fluorine in the plasma chemistry. However, there has not been offered a satisfying explanation for this observation.Dentinger et al. [10] presented a study on different methods for SU-8 removal, including removal using solvents, chemical removal in different plasma etching configurations, and other more exotic methods. For our study the chemical removal in any type of plasma setting is interesting. Both, results from reactive ion etching (RIE) as well as downstream chemical etching (DCE) can increase the understanding of the different mechanism involved in the process. Etch rates of 1–4μmmin−1 were obtained in RIE using a mixture of CF4/O2 in approximately equal proportions [10].In DCE, Dentinger et al. observed that only 2–4% of CF4 was needed to obtain etch rates as high as 10μmmin−1. However, to obtain such high rates the temperature was elevated to 275°C. Such high temperatures will introduce thermal stress in the polymer, increasing the risk of cracking and peeling. It will also cause compatibility problems with some materials in practical applications. Furthermore, surface contamination with antimony was observed after complete SU-8 removal. Dentinger et al. ascribed the surface antimony contamination to residues left from the photo initiator.The influence of fluorine on etching of cured SU-8 is also discussed by Hong et al. [11] and Mischke et al. [12]. Mischke et al. used CF4 just as Dentinger et al. did, while Hong et al. added SF6 as fluorine source to the plasma. Hong et al. limit the discussion to etch rate and anisotropy without discussing chemical composition. However Mischke et al. [12] used Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) on etched SU-8 surfaces to identify antimony and fluorine in addition to the expected carbon and oxygen. Mischke et al. conclude that fluorine is introduced by the etch chemistry, neglecting the fact that the photo initiator in SU-8 is triarylsulfonium hexafluorantimonium which includes SbF6+ ions.De Volder et al. [13] used plasma etching to produce nanowires in SU-8. Their process is basically an oxygen plasma etch where they also see an accumulation of antimony at the surface; the antimony is believed to act as local masking agent and starting point of the nanowires. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the surface shows up to 19%atom antimony surface concentration in their experiments. Similar to Mischke et al. no external source for antimony was present, and the antimony must hence originate from the SU-8 photo-initiator. For removal of SU-8 this will result in rough surfaces and low etch rates and should be avoided.The presence of antimony in plasma treated surfaces is a problem for biological applications since antimony is toxic. This does not only apply to samples structured by plasma etching, but also surfaces cleaned or primed in an oxygen plasma will have increased concentrations of antimony in the surface after a shallow etch. Small amounts of antimony may not be critical since the toxicity is weaker than e.g. that of arsenic [14,15]. However, since etching generates thin hairlike structures it can be assumed that the antimony present in the surface is on nanometer scale, for which Bregoli et al. [16] has evaluated the toxicity and found it poisonous. It is important to minimize the antimony concentration to achieve relevant results for biological experiments performed on SU-8 chips.In this work we will discuss structuring of SU-8 in an ICP-RIE oxygen plasma with varying SF6 content. Control of antimony concentration and surface roughness will be discussed, together with measurements of etch anisotropy and rate. We will in more detail discuss the influence of antimony on the surface quality obtained and link it to the etch chemistry.All SU-8 etching experiments were done in a turbo pumped, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) system, Advanced Silicon Etcher (ASE HC250M) from STS, refitted for polymer etching. The system is fitted with two RF power supplies; the main power supply, the Coil Power, controls the intensity of the plasma, while the secondary power supply, the Bias Power, controls the ion energy of the ion flux to the etched substrate. In the experiments reported here, the feed gasses oxygen (O2) and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) were used at flow rates controlled using mass flow controllers. The pressure in the etch chamber is controlled by a throttle valve and measured using a pressure gauge. All sample preparation and characterization except XPS was carried out in a cleanroom environment.Since plasma etching, in general, is a very complicated process involving many parameters, Design of Experiments (DoE) was used to reduce the number of experiments necessary to identify the most important parameter relations in etching of SU-8.The number of experiments conducted was reduced by selecting the four most important parameters for variation, Table 1while the remaining parameters were kept constant. The O2 flow rate (QO2) was keep constant at 99sccm, while the SF6 flow rate (QSF6) was varied between 0 and 20sccm. The pressure in the etch chamber was controlled to keep the gas density stable. Since the pressure has a pronounced effect on etch characteristics, the pressure (p) was varied between 20 and 40mTorr. It should be noted that the system was run in automatic pressure control mode, which continuously adjusts the throttle valve to keep a constant pressure during etch. The coil power (PC) was fixed at 1000W, while the bias power (PB) was varied between 0 and 30W. Finally, the substrate chuck temperature (T) was controlled between 10 and 50°C. This design resulted in a full factorial screening in four parameters, where three center points were used to check for quadratic curvature, where the quadratic term of a parameter is needed to generate a valid model. The total number of experiments in this setup is 19, which were processed for 20min each. The experiments in the design were carried out in random order.After completion of the first set of experiments it was evident that curvature was present in the response. To enable data analysis and generation of a valid model for the system, the curvature was addressed by adding eight face centered points with two additional center points to the design. A face centered point is a center point with one parameter value at min or max. The ten extra experiments were also carried out in random order, and the center points were used to check for variations between the two sets of experiments. The final dataset comprises the 19 initial experiments combined with the 10 additional, giving a total of 29 experiments to characterize.Samples were prepared by spinning 25μm SU-8 2075 resist on 100mm silicon wafers with a 2μm thick thermal silicon dioxide followed by 1h of baking on a hotplate at 50°C [17]. The samples were exposed with 150mJcm−2 at the I-line, through a test mask with line arrays of different widths, and baked for 2h at 50°C on a hotplate, followed by development in PGMEA. Finally, to completely crosslink the polymer, samples were flood exposed with 500mJcm−2 at the I-line and baked for 15h at 90°C in an oven. The sample patterning by photo lithography facilitated characterization of the subsequent etch. Prior to each etch experiment the chamber was conditioned using a 20min chamber clean in an oxygen plasma with a blank silicon wafer loaded. For the cleaning process, the chuck temperature was always set at 20°C. The chamber cleaning process was considered necessary to ensure stable and predictable conditions in each etch process, since the condition of the chamber walls might affect plasma etching processes. When a new substrate was loaded for etching, the temperature was set to the required value and allowed to stabilize before the etch experiment was started.Before and after etching, the samples were characterized with respect to etched depth, structure width, surface morphology, and composition. The height of the structures was measured before and after etching using a Dektak 8 stylus profiler from Veeco. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were used to characterize the structure width and the appearance of the surfaces. The width of the structures found from SEM images and the known line pitch in the line array were used to characterize line width reduction during the etch process. For line width measurements, lines in the center of the arrays were chosen to eliminate influence of RIE loading effects on the line width. The roughness was measured using atomic force microscopy (AFM) after etching.The surface composition of the samples was characterized using XPS. The analysis was carried out in a Thermo K-Alpha XPS instrument with a monochromatic Al–Kα-source and charge compensation. For each sample a binding energy survey from 0 to 1350eV was performed followed by detailed spectra analysis in the O1s, Sb3d, F1s, and C1s binding energy ranges. The atomic concentrations of surface elements were extracted using the software package Advantage provided by Thermo. In the calculations for the O1s and Sb3d peaks, the ratio and separation of antimony peaks Sb3d3/2 and Sb3d5/2 were fixed to 0.577 [18] and 9.34eV [19], respectively. By doing this it was possible to find the surface concentrations of the four main elements in the surface layer: C, O, F, and Sb.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
