@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Novel structural descriptors for automated colon cancer detection and grading

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel colon cancer detection and grading system has been proposed.The system exploits structural variation among various colon tissue types.The system mathematically quantifies the variation in terms of some novel features.The shape of lumen is the most discriminating factor among different tissue types.RBF kernel of SVM shows promising results for classification of colon cancer data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Colon cancer,Colon cancer detection,Colon cancer grading,Colon classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The histopathological examination of tissue specimens is necessary for the diagnosis and grading of colon cancer. However, the process is subjective and leads to significant inter/intra observer variation in diagnosis as it mainly relies on the visual assessment of histopathologists. Therefore, a reliable computer-aided technique, which can automatically classify normal and malignant colon samples, and determine grades of malignant samples, is required. In this paper, we propose a novel colon cancer diagnostic (CCD) system, which initially classifies colon biopsy images into normal and malignant classes, and then automatically determines the grades of colon cancer for malignant images. To this end, various novel structural descriptors, which mathematically model and quantify the variation among the structure of normal colon tissues and malignant tissues of various cancer grades, have been employed. Radial basis function (RBF) kernel of support vector machines (SVM) has been employed as classifier in order to classify/grade colon samples based on these descriptors. The proposed system has been tested on 92 malignant and 82 normal colon biopsy images. The classification performance has been measured in terms of various performance measures, and quite promising performance has been observed. Compared with previous techniques, the proposed system has demonstrated better cancer detection (classification accuracy=95.40%) and grading (classification accuracy=93.47%) capability. Therefore, the proposed CCD system can provide a reliable second opinion to the histopathologists.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Colon cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer related deaths in modern and industrialized world. About half a million people die every year worldwide due to colon cancer [1]. Primary reason of colon cancer is chain smoking, but there are some other reasons of colon cancer such as family history of colon cancer, increasing age, and unbalanced diet such as diets with low consumption of fruits/vegetables and heavy consumption of meat [2].The conventional method of colon cancer diagnosis is microscopic analysis of colon biopsy samples. In such an examination, histopathologists analyze the biopsy samples under microscope, and diagnose the tissue as normal/malignant based on the morphology of tissues. Further, histopathologists assign quantitative cancer grades depending upon the morphology of malignant tissues they observe under microscope. However, the manual process of colon cancer diagnosis has a few limitations. First, it consumes valuable time of the histopathologists as they have to examine many images per day. Second, the process is subjective, and may lead to inter- and intra-observer variability in diagnosis due to workload and experience of histopathologists [3,4]. Therefore, a computer-aided diagnostic system, which could accurately identify normal and malignant samples, and quantify the cancer grade as well, is required.In the past decade, a few computer-aided diagnostic systems have been proposed for automatic detection of normal and malignant colon biopsy images. These techniques exploit the textural changes in normal and malignant colon biopsy images, and have been summarized in a recent survey [5]. The texture analysis of colon biopsy images is characterized by the extraction of discerning features from the images. The extracted features are then used as input to different classifiers for identifying normal and malignant images. For instance, Esgiar et al. calculated texture features of contrast, entropy, angular second moment, dissimilarity, inverse difference moment and correlation from gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) of the input colon biopsy images [6]. They achieved 90.20% classification accuracy by employing linear discriminate analysis (LDA) and K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classifiers. In another work, Esgiar et al. combined features of entropy and correlation with image fractal dimensions [7], and obtained 94.10% classification accuracy with the same set of classifiers i.e. KNN and LDA. Later, Masood et al. employed GLCM based texture features of energy, inertia and local homogeneity, and morphological features of shape, size and orientation in order to classify normal and malignant colon biopsy images. They employed third degree polynomial kernel of support vector machines (SVM) for classification, and achieved an accuracy of 84% and 90%, respectively, by using morphological and texture features [8]. Masood et al. further extended their work, and employed circular local binary patterns in order to classify colon biopsy images [9]. They employed Gaussian kernel of SVM for classification, and obtained classification success rate of 90%.Similarly, a few cancer grading techniques have also been proposed in the past. For example, Altunbay et al. proposed a textural features based technique for classifying colon samples into normal and malignant (low grade and high grade) categories [10]. They constructed a graph on different objects, obtained by using circle fit algorithm [11] on the white, pink and purple clusters of the image. A few structural features such as degree, average clustering coefficient, and diameter are computed from the graphs, and are used to classify given images by using linear SVM.Ozdemir and Demir also presented an automatic colon cancer detection and grading technique [12]. In this work, a few normal colon tissues are manually selected among large sized colon tissue images, and query graph is generated separately on each selected tissue. Later, reference graph is generated on each test colon biopsy image. The query and the reference graphs are generated using the same way as done in [11]. Further, multiple key regions are located in the reference image that are most similar to a normal biological structure by searching each query graph over the entire reference graph of test image. The similarity is measured in terms of graph edit distance. The graph edit distance actually quantifies the dissimilarity in source and the destination graph by calculating the minimum cost of edit operations that should be applied on source to transform it into destination graph. The basic idea behind this approach is that query graphs of normal glands will be similar to the graphs of selected key regions of normal colon biopsy images compared to those of malignant colon biopsy images. Later, graph edit distance, and some other statistical features computed from these key-regions are given as input to SVM classifier for classification of test images into normal, and malignant tissues of low and high grade cancer. They achieved 92.21% classification accuracy on a colon biopsy image based dataset. But, this technique is computationally expensive due to heavy processing involved in matching query graphs and key regions of reference graphs.The techniques mentioned in the previous paragraphs have a few limitations. First, the graph based techniques [10,12] are computationally expensive. Generating graphs for extracting these features is not computationally expensive. Rather, these techniques consume large time in fitting circles in the three clusters of colon biopsy images for determining graph nodes, which is a pre-requisite step of graph generation. Further, feature extraction from graphs is also expensive in some of these techniques such as Ozdemir and Demir [12], wherein comparison of query graphs and key regions of reference graphs is expensive. Second major set of techniques for feature extraction [6–9] are those that exploit the texture variation in normal and malignant images. These texture features are general in nature and do not consider the specific pathological variation between normal and malignant colon tissues. For example, colon cancer causes the lumen tissue in a malignant image to turn from near-elliptic to irregular shape. Such pathological variation in structures of tissues is not encoded in the features proposed in literature for colon cancer classification/grading. Therefore, a computationally tractable computer-aided diagnostic technique is required, which could exploit the background knowledge specifically about pathological structure of normal and malignant colon tissues into the classification process.In this paper, we propose a novel colon cancer diagnosis (CCD) system, which is capable of automatic colon cancer detection, and its classification into various cancer grades. Unlike previously proposed methods, which capture information about the general texture present in colon biopsy images, the proposed method incorporates the background pathological information about the morphology of normal and malignant tissues into the classification and grading process. To this end, some novel structural features, which exploit the shape, convexity, concavity, circularity and area based characteristics of lumen for detection and grading of colon cancer, have been proposed. A data set comprising 192 images has been used for validating the proposed CCD system. Training and testing data has been formulated using Jack-knife 10-fold cross-validation, and radial basis function (RBF) kernel of SVM classifier has been employed for both cancer detection and cancer grading. The proposed features have been proved to yield better results compared to general texture based features in the experimental section.The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the morphology of normal and malignant colon tissues. Section 3 illustrates the proposed technique, and the novel structural descriptors in detail. Section 4 presents performance measures, which have been used for evaluation purposes. Section 5 provides experimental setup, results and the associated discussion. Section 6 concludes this research work.A normal colon tissue has three main constituents, namely epithelial cells, non-epithelial cells, and lumen. The detailed organizational structure of a normal colon tissue is shown in Fig. 1(a), wherein we see that the said constituents possess a regular organizational structure, and are very much aligned. Epithelial cells surround lumen and form glandular structure, whereas non-epithelial cells (stroma) lie outside these structures.Normal colon tissues have well-defined structures such as elliptic shaped epithelial cells and lumen. However, the standard geometry of normal colon tissues is disturbed considerably if the patient is suffering from cancer. In malignant colon tissues, the constituents of tissues mix together, thereby diminishing the boundaries and introducing deformation. Further the deformation introduced by cancer increases as the cancer grade progresses. The grade of colon cancer actually quantifies the differentiability level of malignant cells. There are three grades of colon cancer, namely well-, moderate-, and poor-differentiable. The ‘well differentiable’ is the slowly progressing grade of colon cancer in which malignant cells are nearly similar to the normal ones. In ‘moderately differentiable’ grade of colon cancer, malignant cells are differentiable from normal cells, and cancer progresses at moderate speed. The third grade of colon cancer is ‘poor differentiable’. In this particular grade, malignant cells are totally different from the normal ones, and spread at very high rate. Fig. 1(b)–(d) presents microscopic images of well-, moderate-, and poor-differentiable colon samples, respectively.The proposed system comprises three main phases, namely (1) pre-processing, (2) cancer detection, and (3) cancer grading. Fig. 2portrays the three phases of the proposed system. In the pre-processing phase, a few pre-processing steps are applied on image database in order to make the images suitable for subsequent processing. In the cancer detection phase, a few novel descriptors, which exploit the structural differences between morphology of normal and malignant colon tissues, are extracted from the pre-processed colon biopsy images. These descriptors are then employed for classification of images into normal and malignant categories. The next phase deals with the grading of malignant images. In this phase, the structural changes happening in colon biopsy images due to progressing cancer grade are exploited, and a few descriptors are extracted exploiting these structural changes. These descriptors are then used for the identification of various cancer grades. Thus, the proposed CCD system may be used by histopathologists as a comprehensive tool for detection and grading of colon cancer. Different phases of the proposed system are discussed in detail in the following text.The pre-processing step is generally performed in order to make the images suitable for next phases especially for the feature extraction phase. In this research work, K-Means algorithm is applied as a pre-processing strategy in order to divide colon biopsy images into constituent clusters. Colon biopsy images are usually characterized by pink-colored connecting tissues, purple-colored nucli, and white-colored epithelial cells and lumen. Therefore, K-Means algorithm with K=3 is applied on color intensities of pixels in order to divide image pixels into three clusters. K-Means is a non-parametric statistically iterative method, originally developed by Fukunaga et al. for estimation of gradients of a density function [13], and has extensive use in computer vision for image segmentation [14,15] and visual object tracking [16]. K-Means is based on a simple and straightforward concept. It randomly picks large number of image pixels as representatives of cluster centers. A hypothesized multidimensional ellipsoid is centered on cluster center, and the cluster center is moved to the mean of the data lying inside ellipsoid. Mean is iteratively calculated, and cluster centers are moved accordingly until there is no significant change in mean value. Adjacent and similar regions are merged during iterations, and number of final clusters may be much smaller than the number of clusters in the start. The output of applying K-Means on a colon biopsy image is shown in Fig. 3.The purpose of cancer detection phase is to identify normal and malignant colon biopsy images. In this phase, some novel structural descriptors are extracted from the white cluster of colon biopsy images. The white cluster corresponds to epithelial cells and lumen, which undergo maximal variation in case of malignancy. Thus, extracting structural features from the white cluster captures the underlying difference between the structures of normal and malignant images. The descriptor values are then formulated, and images are classified into normal and malignant categories based on the descriptors. Three novel structural descriptors, namely, lumen inner concavity (LIC), lumen outer convexity (LOC), and lumen circularity (LUC) have been proposed for cancer detection. LIC and LOC have been explained in Section 3.2.1, whereas LUC has been explained in Section 3.2.2.The lumen, shown in Fig. 1(a), is the central part of a colon tissue, and is surrounded by various elliptic shaped epithelial cells. The lumen has near-elliptic shape in normal colon tissue, whereas lumen and epithelial cells merge with each other in well-differentiable cancer grade of colon tissues, by this means generating larger white patches. Therefore, we have proposed two novel structural descriptors, which quantify the deviation of malignant lumen from the underlying elliptic shape in normal tissue. The process of the extraction of these descriptors comprises the following three main steps.1.Lumen extractionLumen is the largest structure in white cluster of colon tissue (see Fig. 1(a)), therefore, it is extracted from the white cluster only. The lumen extraction process for sample normal and malignant colon biopsy images is shown in the first and second row of Fig. 4, respectively. Fig. 4(a1) and (a2) shows original normal and malignant colon biopsy images, respectively. Fig. 4(b1) and (b2) shows white clusters of these images. As shown for the cluster of normal sample in Fig. 4(b1), lumen is connected with epithelial cells, therefore, morphological erosion is performed in order to disjoint them. The erosion is performed with a disk-shaped structuring element, and is formulated in the following equation.(1)C∗=C⊙swhere ⊙ denotes the erosion operator, C represents the white cluster, s is the disk shaped structuring element of radius 2, and C* is the resultant cluster. The result of erosion is shown in Fig. 4(c1) and (c2). In the next step, lumen is extracted by finding the largest connected component in C*.Fig. 4(d1) and (d2) shows all the connected components for the sample images. The largest connected component is segregated from other components of the image. The largest connected components for the samples images have been shown in rectangular boundary in Fig. 4(d1) and (d2). Finally, the lumen is obtained by applying the hole filling process to the extracted largest component. The final lumen is shown in Fig. 4(e1) and (e2) for the sample images.Ellipse fittingIn this step, a least square ellipse is fitted to the contour of the extracted lumen in order to capture the underlying geometry of the extracted lumen. The least square method fits such a candidate ellipse to the extracted contour that minimizes the pixel-wise distance between the contour and the candidate ellipse in the least square sense. The least square ellipse fitting process is graphically represented in Fig. 5for the lumens shown in Fig. 4 (e1) and (e2), respectively.Quantification of lumen shapeThe fitted ellipse will approximate the contour of extracted lumen better for normal colon biopsy images. Whereas, the irregular contour of the malignant lumen will deviate considerably from the fitted ellipse. This can be easily observed from the ellipses fitted to sample malignant and normal images shown in Fig. 5(b1) and (b2), respectively. In this step, such deviation is quantified in terms of the following two novel structural descriptors.•Lumen inner concavity (LIC): LIC measures the number of pixels of the extracted lumen, which are not part of the fitted ellipse. These pixels are shown by the area filled with vertical lines in Fig. 5(c1) and (c2). LIC descriptor is computed as follows:(2)LIC=(U−E)∩L¯¯E¯¯where E, L and U represent the sets of pixels in fitted ellipse, the extracted lumen, and the bounding box around extracted lumen, respectively. The terms(U−E)∩L¯¯andE¯¯represent the cardinality of sets (U−E)∩L and E, respectively. The factor(U−E)∩L¯¯is divided byE¯¯in order to normalize the LIC measure with respect to the size of fitted ellipse.Lumen outer convexity (LOC): LOC measures the number of pixels of the fitted ellipse, which are not part of the extracted lumen. These pixels are shown by the area filled with horizontal lines in Fig. 5(c1) and (c2). LOC descriptor is computed as follows.(3)LOC=(U−L)∩E¯¯E¯¯where E, L and U are the same as used in LIC feature. The terms(U−L)∩E¯¯andE¯¯represents the cardinality of sets (U−L)∩E and E, respectively. The factor(U−L)∩E¯¯is divided byE¯¯in order to normalize the LOC measure with respect to the size of fitted ellipse.The near-elliptic shape of lumen in a normal colon tissue can be considered as a slightly squeezed circle, therefore, the measure of lumen circularity can also be exploited as a valuable structural descriptor for discerning normal and malignant tissues. This measure can exploit the structural variation between normal and malignant lumen from a different perspective compared to the proposed LIC and LOC descriptors. LUC is a measure of the circularity ratio of the extracted lumen, and it can be calculated using the following mathematical expression.(4)LUC=4×Π×ap2where p and a represent the perimeter and area of the extracted lumen, respectively. Fig. 4(a1) and (a2) presents sample normal and malignant colon biopsy images, and Fig. 4(e1) and (e2) shows the corresponding extracted lumens. The extracted lumen of the normal image has LUC of 0.87, which is higher compared to the LUC (0.26) of the malignant image.The purpose of cancer grading phase is to identify well, moderate, and poor grades of malignant colon biopsy images. In this phase, two novel area based structural descriptors are calculated from white cluster of colon biopsy images. The descriptor values are then formulated, and images are classified into different cancer grades based on these feature values. These structural descriptors are described in detail in the following text.The distribution of all the cytological tissue constituents such as epithelial cells, non-epithelial cells, and connecting tissues of a colon biopsy image changes due to malignancy. However, the variation that lumen and epithelial cells experience is significant among all. This variation is also notable among different grades of progressing colon cancer. In the well-differentiable grade, epithelial cells and lumen merge together, in this manner resulting in larger white patches. With the increase in severity of colon cancer, the white patch splits into multiple smaller patches, which are dispersed among other constituents of colon tissue. Therefore, we intend to measure the variation between different colon cancer grades by calculating the area spanned by the largest patch in the white cluster of colon biopsy image.For calculating area based features, largest connected component is extracted from white cluster using the same method as already discussed in Section 3.2.1 for extraction of lumen. This process is graphically illustrated in first, second and third columns of Fig. 6for sample colon biopsy images with well-, moderate-, and poor-differentiable grades, respectively. The first row in the figure shows original colon biopsy images, whereas second row shows white clusters corresponding to these images. Similar to the cancer detection phase, erosion is applied on the clusters in order to disjoint epithelial cells from lumen. The eroded clusters are shown in the third row of Fig. 6. Finally, the largest connected component is obtained by converting eroded cluster into connected components. The fourth row in Fig. 6 shows all the components and the corresponding largest connected component (encircled by boundary) for well, moderate, and poor grade samples.Later, the expansion in lumen and epithelial cells has been quantized in terms of two novel structural descriptors. Let I, W and C represent the sets of pixels in the image, white cluster, and the extracted largest component, respectively, the structural descriptors are defined as under.•Lumen percentage with cluster (LPWC): LPWC is the percentage area occupied by the largest white connected component in the white cluster. By area, we mean number of occupied pixels.(5)LPWC=C¯¯W¯¯×100whereC¯¯andW¯¯represent the cardinality of set C and W, respectively.Lumen percentage with image (LPWI): LPWI is the percentage area occupied by the largest white connected component in the whole image. By area, we mean number of occupied pixels.(6)LPWI=C¯¯I¯¯×100whereC¯¯andI¯¯represent the cardinality of set C and I, respectively.The classification capability of the various features proposed in this work has been quantitatively evaluated using various performance measures such as accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, Mathew's correlation coefficient (MCC), F-score, and receiver operating characteristics curve (ROC). Normal and malignant images correspond to negative and positive samples, respectively. Therefore, true positive (TP) and true negative (TN), respectively, are the number of correctly classified malignant and normal images. Similarly, false positive (FP) and false negative (FN), respectively, represent the number of incorrectly classified normal and malignant images.Accuracy: The classification accuracy is a measure of usefulness of a technique [17]. It depends upon the number of correctly classified samples, and is calculated using the following equation.Accuracy=TP+TNN×100where N is the total number of colon biopsy images.Sensitivity: Sensitivity is a measure of the ability of a technique to correctly identify positive samples [17]. It can be calculated using the following equation.Sensitivity=TPTP+FNThe value of sensitivity ranges between 0 and 1, where 0 and 1mean worst and best recognition of positive samples, respectively.Specificity: Specificity is a measure of the ability of a technique to correctly identify negative samples [17]. It can be calculated using the following equation.Specificity=TNTN+FPThe value of specificity ranges between 0 and 1, where 0 and 1mean worst and best recognition of negative samples, respectively.Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC): MCC is a measure of the efficacy of binary class classifications [18]. It can be calculated using the following mathematical expression.MCC=TP×TN−FP×FN((TP+FN)(TP+FP)(TN+FN)(TN+FP))The valid range of MCC is between −1 and +1, where +1, −1 and 0, respectively, correspond to best, worst, and random prediction.F-Score: F-score is a weighted average of precision and recall [17]. It is a measure of the correctness of classification algorithm. F-score can be calculated using the following mathematical expressions.Precision=TPTP+FP,Recall=TPTP+FN,F-score=2×Precision×RecallPrecision+RecallThe valid values of F-score range between 0 and 1, where 0 and 1, respectively, mean worst and best classification.ROC: An ROC curve is a standard way for graphical representation of the classification performance of a system [17]. It has been used in various research studies in the past for analyzing the performance of classifiers [19,20]. It characterizes the system over its entire operating range, and is created by plotting true positive rate (TPR) against false positive rate (FPR). In practical applications, the ROC curve provides a degree of freedom to select the operating point which best accomplishes the requirements of the application.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
