@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical study of the effects of refractory lining geometries on the swelling induced by oxidation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Paper proposes an analysis of behavior of SiC-based refractory linings which are subjected to a chemical environment.The model takes into account the transport of oxygen in the gas through the porosity.The model takes into account the chemical expansion induced by oxidation.Three designs of the lining are studied.The obtained results allow the highlighting of the design effect in relation with material properties.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
SiC-based refractories,Ceramics,Thermo-chemo-mechanical model,SiC oxidation,Chemical strain,Waste-to-energy plant (WTE),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Finite element (FE) computations have been performed to analyze the thermo-chemo-mechanical behavior of SiC-based refractory parts in linings used in waste-to-energy plants. These parts are in contact on one side with smoke and ashes at high temperature, and on the other side with the pressurized vapor pipe. Three multi-layered lining designs have been studied: two with tiles and one with a concrete panel. A coupled model taking into account the transport of dioxygen in the gas through the porosity, the reaction of dioxygen in contact with silicon carbide particles and the formation of solid components gradually clogging the pores, has been implemented in the finite element code ABAQUS®. These phenomena affect the mass diffusion rate of dioxygen through the refractory layer and induce a macroscopic swelling of the material. The analysis of the numerical results allows for a better understanding of the influence of the lining design and the nature of the ceramics on the lifespan of such refractory parts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimizing the design of multi-layered linings used in furnaces, stoves, kilns, ovens, in plants dealing with the manufacturing of metal, cement, ceramic, glass products, chemical and petroleum products or plants generating energy from waste or biomass is a great challenge. These linings must withstand to high process temperature, abrasive wear by hot liquid and solid particles, and aggressive chemical environment (hot gases, acid or basic gases, liquids and solids in movement). Their optimization is required for sustainable development of the manufacturing process and also for enhancing the safety, extending the lifespan of the industrial tools and reducing the costs.Today, numerical computations are already performed on such structures. But even the thermomechanical models accounting for damage and creep, do not permit to predict well the stress and strain states in-service – except the first heating of the structure – as they are not able to simulate the complex microstructure change of the refractory ceramics (usually called refractories) and their consequences. Thus, one main difficulty to overcome is to develop mechanical behavior that are strongly dependant on the environment conditions (i.e. oxydation, corrosion, etc.).The first goal of the paper is to demonstrate that the development of numerical tools capable to describe the diffusion of mass, the heat transfer, the oxidation mechanisms and the mechanical behavior will permit a better understanding of the degradation process of the material in the linings.Silicon carbide (SiC)-based refractories are well known for their high resistance to corrosion, thermal shock and abrasion at high temperature [1,2]. Because of their good thermal conductivity they are often used in municipal waste incinerators to ensure a good heat recovery by the metallic waterwall tubes they have to protect against aggressive gas. In such plants, the flame temperature reaches up to 1200°C in the combustion chamber at the bottom level, while the waterwall temperature is approximately equal to 250°C. Around 17m higher at the top of the chamber, due to cooling the temperature of smoke and ashes is close to 500°C.As the incineration of domestic and industrial waste is a continuous process, extending the lifetime of the protective refractory layer in the combustion chamber of the waste-to-energy (WTE) plant facilities is one option to limit the maintenance operations. Currently the lifetime of the lining is several years with one or two maintenance operations per year.Observations made on worn parts of the refractory layer of the lining revealed different types of degradation of the material and parts of the refractory layer (e.g. tiles). These degradations reduce the efficiency of the protection again hot smoke and ashes with the consequence that the waterwall tubes can be corroded. As shown by Prigent [3], at the microstructural scale of the refractory several corrosion mechanisms take place over time. For example, post-mortem analysis on worn SiC-based tiles [4] has shown that molten salts react with SiC aggregates and matrix phases and form para-wollastonite around SiC grains and porosity near the zone close to the hot face of refractory tiles. Other phases such as cristobalite and microline are also formed down to the core of refractories. At the macroscopic scale cracks and rupture are common degradation that can be observed in the refractory layer of the lining. They result from excessive stresses induced by the progressive swelling of the material during the use. These degradations depend both on the material and the design of the lining. Fig. 1illustrates the deformation of SiC-based tiles in the refractory lining parts that has occurred in-service.The environmental conditions in the combustion chamber are not well known. Indeed, the nature of the chemical components of smoke and ashes depends on the waste burnt and the incinerator process. Moreover, the temperature field is strongly influenced by the incinerator management, the refractory lining design and the depth of the layer of ashes deposited on the hot face. Consequently different mechanisms of corrosion may be involved in the chemical degradation of the SiC-based refractory: chemical reactions between phases present in the initial composition of the material, chemical reactions between phases of the material and phases coming from the smoke and ashes. These reactions occur when phases in contact are not in chemical equilibrium. They strongly depend on the level of temperature and the transport conditions of the initial and produced species. The local mass change resulting from the disappearance of initial compounds and the deposition of new compounds explains the change in porosity and the macroscopic deformation. Porosity change and macroscopic deformation depends on the swelling and mechanical constraints at the local scale (i.e. the microstructure) and at the macroscopic scale (anchors design, thermal expansion, joint thickness, etc.).These remarks show that thermomechanical phenomena and corrosion cannot be analyzed independently to fulfill the degradation observed. One way to study such degradation mechanisms consists in doing a multi-physical coupling analysis as already proposed in previous studies [5,6]. Such an analysis helps in selecting all phenomena involved, evaluating their importance and their interactions to finally select the main phenomena to model from a conceptual point of view.In this paper, a multi-physics numerical model is developed in order to study the effect of lining design on the macroscopic deformation of the refractory layer induced by its corrosion (limited herein to oxidation). Currently, the level of knowledge and the data available do not allow the development of a highly complex model which takes into account all the mechanisms mentioned by Prigent [3]. Hereafter, attention is exclusively focused on the oxidation of SiC-based refractory. This choice is justified by the fact that this phenomenon is the first step in the degradation process of such linings and often participates substantially in the degradation of SiC-based refractory concrete structures [7].The proposed thermo-chemo-mechanical model is built in the classical framework of irreversible thermodynamics of open continuous reactive media [8]. It takes into account a reactive diffusion of dioxygen present in the gas flowing through the porosity of the refractory layer. The formation of solid silica (SiO2) deposits gradually clogs the porosity. It leads to a reduction of the gas diffusion and to the development of a chemical strain that adds to the classical mechanical and thermal strains. The constitutive equations describing the complex material behavior have already been validated by comparison with experimental results on a reference case [9].The model is shortly summarized in the first section and identified for two refractory materials. The implementation of this model in the finite element (FE) software ABAQUS ® [10] and the numerical method applied for solving the coupled partial differential equations are briefly detailed in the next section. The following section is dedicated to the analyses of the results of the simulations of the long-term behavior of the protective refractory layer (a one-year in-service without maintenance) in order to check the ability of such models to provide an assistance for the refractory lining design.To reach this second goal of the paper, three lining designs representative of those already used in WTE have been studied. In two linings (denoted A and B, respectively) the refractory layer consists of an assembly of tiles (denoted Atand Bt, respectively). These tiles are manufactured in refractory plants; first cast by pressing the mix in a mold and sintered at high temperature. Tile Atis attached on the waterwall tubes with its handle, while tile Btis tied on the top handle with a mortar. In the third lining design (denoted C) the refractory layer is made of an assembly of concrete panels (denoted Cp). The panels are cast on-site and the first heating of the incinerator is managed to obtain the final properties of the material at high temperature. They are fixed to the metallic waterwall tubes by means of anchors.For this three lining designs, computations have been carried out considering two SiC-based refractories supplied by Calderys a subsidiary of Imerys World Minerals under the brand namesSF60andCV85. The aim is to compare the response of these six different configurations in order to better understand and distinguish the effects of geometry and material behavior on the long-term behavior of the lining.The parameters for the multi-physical model described below have been identified for two types of SiC-based refractory which contain approximately 60wt% of SiC for theSF60and 85wt% of SiC for theCV85. Both materials have good resistance to corrosion and high temperatures.The refractories are heterogeneous multi-phase concretes (also named castables) containing SiC grains with size ranging from several tenth micrometers to several millimeters. The grains are bonded with calcium-aluminate cement and form strong bonds in service at high temperature before the oxidation. The matrix phase is arbitrarily defined as the phase containing both fired cement and SiC aggregates with size below200μm. The mass content of the matrix is 51.7% in refractorySF60and 53.6% in refractoryCV85. The macroscopic porosity in both refractories is approximatively 16–17%. Mainly located in the matrix, it is open making easier the diffusion of oxygen through the bulk of the refractory layer.It is not possible to model all the details of the complex material behavior of the heterogeneous microstructure in the numerical simulations of the refractory lining. Thus to build the macroscopic model describing an average behavior it is necessary to define a representative volume element (RVE). This RVE must be large enough to give a meaning to the definition of the average behavior and properties corresponding to those of an equivalent homogeneous material [11]. Consequently, one has to keep in mind that the model will not be able to describe accurately the evolution of the state at each point of the microstructure inside the RVE.To build the thermo-chemo-mechanical model, the material has been defined as an open porous medium exchanging mass (i.e. gas), momentum and energy with the surrounding RVE. It accommodates a chemical reaction, hereafter the passive oxidation of SiC. Both the kinetics of the chemical reaction and the mass exchange have been considered slow enough to satisfy the thermodynamic assumptions. Only the main assumptions and equations of the model are summarized below. The complete multi-physics model has been presented in Ref. [9] where the material parameters have been identified for only one material.Assuming local thermal equilibrium, hence same temperature in each species contained in the RVE, the heat equation for the whole medium reads:(1)ρ∂cpT∂t=−div(qth)−ṁoxidΔHoxidwhereT=T(M,t)is the temperature field at the current position M and time t, cpthe average specific heat capacity of species of the RVE,qththe average vector of heat flux density,ΔHoxidthe specific enthalpy of oxidation andṁoxidthe mass rate change of oxides in the RVE. Fourier׳s law can be applied at the macroscopic scale, so that:(2)qth=−λgrad(T)where λ is the average coefficient of thermal conductivity which can be assumed isotropic and only depending on the temperature and grad denotes the gradient operator.Because of the high heat flux present in-service in the lining, the chemical heat source linked to the enthalpy of reaction is negligible, as well as the heat transported by the flowing gas through the RVE. Consequently, the temperature field, T, in the lining can be computed by solving the classical heat equation:(3)ρ∂cpT∂t=div(λgrad(T))Note that for the engineering application studied here, the material parameters depend mostly on the temperature and in a secondary way on the microstructural change like porosity and phase change.In the open continuous and reactive medium, the mass balance for each species is defined by [12](4)ρẋj=−divJj+∑i=1rυjiMjξi̇where xjis the mass ratio of species j,Jjis the mass flux vector of species j, υjiis the stoichiometric coefficient of species number j in the ith chemical reaction and Mjis the molar mass of jth species. Furthermore,(·)denotes the time derivative. ξiis the extent of the reaction i.Only the passive oxidation of SiC is modelled. This means that the crystallization of the formed silica layer detailed in [13], which is expected to occur after a long reaction time at high temperature and may modify the oxidation kinetics, has not been taken into account. Therefore the oxidation extent rate,ξ̇, is given by the classical parabolic evolution law:(5)ξ̇=12kpξ(ρxO2MO2)2(1−Qkeq)2where kpis the kinetic factor of the reaction,MO2the dioxygen molar mass andxO2the dioxygen molar mass ratio contained in the RVE. keqand Q are the equilibrium constant and the mass action law product of the reaction, respectively. The kinetics factor kpfollows Arrhenius law:(6)kp=kp0e(−(E/RTr))where kp0 is a pre-exponential constant and E is the activation energy of the passive oxidation.The mass flux of O2, CO or CO2 resulting from diffusion of these species through the gas in the porosity, leads to(7)Jj=−Djgrad(ρxj)where Djis the diffusion coefficient of species j in the air.Due to lack of experimental data, to account for progressive clogging up of the porosity by the compounds of reactions, it is assumed that the diffusivity changes linearly with the porosity, ϕ, which decreases from the initial porosity, ϕ0:(8)Dj=Daϕϕ0where Dais the diffusion coefficient of gas A in the stationary or stagnant atmosphere of gas B estimated by the Chapman–Enskog theory [14,15]:(9)Da=0.0018583T3(1MA+1MB)1PσAB2ΩABwhere B is assumed to be air (MB=28.97g/mol) and A the dioxygen gas (MA=32g/mol). P is the pressure (atm). The symbolsσABandΩABare Leonard Jones potentials for the collision diameter (i.e. 3.525Å) and collision integral (dimensionless), respectively. Values for the collision diameter and the characteristic interaction energy can be found in tables in Ref. [14].One can notice that during the oxidation a part of SiC disappears leading to an increase in porosity, whereas the deposit of formed silica SiO2 gradually clogs the pores. Consequently the porosity ϕ is defined as(10)ϕ=ϕ0−(MSiO2ρSiO2−MSiCρSiC)ξwhere the molar mass MSiC andMSiO2are equal to 40g/mol and 60g/mol, respectively. The mass density of both phases is given byρSiC=3220kg/m3andρSiO2=2100kg/m3.For the engineering application studied, the oxidation extent and the porosity characterize the change in the microstructure of the RVE. Below these fields variables are denotedVm=(ξ,ϕ).The momentum balance expressed in index notation and Cartesian coordinates system reads(11)∂σij∂xj+fi=0where σijdenotes the (ij)th component of the macroscopic Cauchy stress tensorσand fithe ith component of the volume force vectorf.Both refractories exhibit an elastic quasi-brittle behavior. Assuming small perturbations and no inelastic deformation, the macroscopic total strain tensor,ε– average over the RVE – is the sum of three terms: an elastic strain tensor,εe, a thermal strain tensor,εth, and a chemical strain tensor,εch, due to oxidation of SiC:(12)εij=εije+εijth+εijchThe mechanical behavior of the material is assumed isotropic and linear elastic. Thus, the macroscopic elastic strain tensor,εe, is related to the stress tensorσthrough the state law:(13)εije=SijklσklwhereSis the fourth rank compliance tensor.For this engineering application, the compliance tensor depends mostly on the temperature and secondary on the phases change characterized by the couple of field variablesVM=(ξ,ϕ).The macroscopic thermal strainεthlinearly depends on the isotropic coefficient thermal expansion, α, and the temperature, T:(14)εijth=αδij(T−Tref)where δijis the Kronecker symbol and Trefthe reference temperature. The coefficient of thermal expansion, α, can be a function of temperature and the microstructure variable Vm.The macroscopic chemical strainεchis assumed linearly depending on the oxidation extent:(15)εijch=β〈ξ−ξcr〉δijwhere β is the coefficient of chemical expansion,〈〉denotes the positive part of the content in the bracket and ξcris the critical oxidation extent before which no chemical strain appears at the RVE scale. The apparent delay may describe (i) the oxidation extent which is necessary to fill partially the porosity before the particles are pushed by the new swelling compounds and/or (ii) the shrinkage induced by the last stage of sintering of the matrix binder, which is not taken into account in the present work.Hereafter, the identification of the parameters of the model for the SiC-based castablesSF60andCV85is detailed. The parameters of the oxidation kinetics have been identified thanks to thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) performed by Bahloul at 1000°C and 1200°C for 50h [16]. Assuming very fast flow of gas inside the powders the effect of gas diffusion can be neglected and the kinetics of oxidation in the small powder sample is representative of the local kinetics in the bulk refractory. By integrating the mass balance (Eq. (4)) over the volumeV≈V0having an initial mass m0, the mass change is given by(16)Δmm0=1m0∫V0(MSiO2νSiO2+MSiCνSiC)ξdVwhereνSiO2andνSiCare the stoichiometric coefficient of SiO2 and SiC.From the experimental curves, the constant rate kpdefined in Eq. (6) has been identified first for each temperature and then the activation energy E and the pre-exponential factor k0. The data are reported in Table 1for both refractories. The results from experiments and model show a good agreement (Fig. 2). However one has to keep in mind that the kinetics of SiC oxidation is substantially dependent on the size of the SiC aggregates. This point is deeply analyzed by Gallet-Doncieux et al. [17].The identification of parameter β (Eq. (15)) requires to correlate the oxidation extent to the strain measured during dilatometry tests subjected to the same temperature history as the TGA tests. Assuming homogeneous oxidation in the dense samples, after the same duration, the oxidation extent should be the same as that of TGA powders. As the size of the dilatometry samples is small (9×9×15mm3), and there exists a high open porosity so that the diffusion of gas is very fast this assumption is reasonable.Isothermal dilatometry tests have been done by Bahloul at 1000°C and 1200°C [16]. Other results are presented in Ref. [17].The chemical expansion due to SiC oxidation versus time is plotted in Fig. 3. Fig. 4shows the correlation between the chemical strain, εch, and the oxidation extent, ξ. The apparent non-linearity observed at the beginning of the curve corresponds to an additional mechanisms of deformation induced by the last stage of sintering of the matrix binder. After a time delay which depends on testing temperature a linear relationship takes progressively place between εchand ξ which is less sensitive to the temperature. The slope of the linear part of the curve corresponds to β. The identified values are reported in Table 1.It is obvious that the proposed identification favors the identification of the asymptotic slope. In fact, after the heat treatment of tiles in the manufacturing process, the sintering of the material is finished so that this non-linearity is not observed. In that caseξcr=0. This is not the case for the panel, as a part of the sintering is carried out during the first heating of the lining. To make easier the comparison between the different lining designs, the associated strain (shrinkage) due to sintering has not been taken into account.The two castablesCV85andSF60do not have the same behavior in relation to the oxidation of SiC: oxidation of theCV85is a faster than that of theSF60. But in return the coefficient of the chemical strain, β, ofCV85is lower in comparison to that ofSF60. These observations illustrate that different strategies can be adopted to design suitable refractories with low macroscopic swelling in service by favoring either a low chemical expansion or a slow oxidation kinetics (e.g. by controlling the permeability). When the chemical expansion cannot been avoided a good alternative consists in designing a material by slowing down the kinetics.As indicated previously, for the concerned engineering application, some couplings between the different phenomena discussed previously and consequently the couplings between the different equations describing these physics are weak.The thermal problem is uncoupled so that the temperature field can be computed independently under the assumption that the material parameters (ρ,cp,λ) do not depend on the microstructure change, Vm, but only on the temperature, T. This assumption is justified by the fact that it is not possible to perform accurate tests to measure the evolution of these parameters as a function of Vmbecause homogeneous oxidation in the sample to test cannot be obtained. Moreover in practice the variations of ρ, cpand λ with Vmare limited and do not affect substantially the temperature profile in the refractory layer.The field equations describing the transport of species involving the field variable, xi, and those describing the oxidation of SiC involving the field variable, ξ, are strongly coupled by the mass balance and must be solved together. To achieve this computation step, the temperature field is a prescribed input. The porosity is updated at each increment of the computation step of the mass balance equation.The momentum balance is uncoupled, so the mechanical problem is solved separately. The temperature and the extent of oxidation field variables are prescribed conditions for the mechanical computation and the strain and stress field variables are determined.The numerical computations of the multi-layered linings have been performed with the finite element code ABAQUS®[10] in three successive steps using solvers with an implicit integration scheme:•first step: solving the set of equations describing the heat transfer,second step: solving the set of equations describing the mass transfer and the local oxidation kinetics,third step: solving the set of equations describing the mechanical behavior.The implementation of the constitutive equations has required to add some specific features of the proposed model to complete those already available in the material model library of ABAQUS ®. The reactive transport (Eq. (4)), including the oxidation extent rate (Eq. (5)), has been implemented in the finite element software ABAQUS ® thanks to the UMATHT subroutine which allows us to modify the energy balance. The oxidation extent has been introduced as a degree of freedom and the energy balance has been modified to compute the reactive mass transport. The chemical strain (Eq. (15)) has been implemented in ABAQUS ® via the UEXPAN subroutine which allows us to define special thermal strain and/or special additional strain thanks to user defined field options. To take into account the temperature and the oxidation extent as field input data in the mechanical simulation, the result from reactive mass transport computations has been transferred to another user defined field variable using a dedicated homemade routine.The protective refractory layer is made of tiles or panels. The thickness of the refractory part is small (≈60mm) allowing an easy heat recovery by the metallic waterwall system. The refractory coating is in contact with hot smoke and ashes on the hot face and with the waterwall tubes on the cold face in which the water vapor temperature has been set to 250°C. The temperature in the combustion chamber is equal to 1200°C at the bottom level in the combustion flame. The temperature of smoke and ashes has been set to 1050°C in the FE model.Three geometries of lining have been studied: two tile-based refractory layers and a panel-based refractory lining already partially described in Section 1. The design of the linings is shown in Figs. 5–7. Tiles Atare placed on their handles whereas tiles Btare tied only on the top handles with a mortar. The panels Cpare fixed on the waterwall system with anchors, regularly distributed. Taking advantage of the symmetries of the problem only the half part of one tile has been meshed. For the concrete panel, the smallest representative cell containing an anchor allowing to reproduce the periodic structure of one panel has been meshed.For the thermal computations, convective heat flux is applied between the refractory layer and the smoke and ashes with a constant heat transfer coefficient, hcf, as well as between the pipes and the water steam with a constant heat transfer coefficient, hhf. In lining designs A and B, a thermal resistance of contact is introduced between the pipes and the tiles. It is estimated by the ratio of the thickness of the air layer, ea, present between the refractory layer and the pipes and the thermal conductivity of air λa. The convective heat transfer coefficients were identified by temperature measurements made in an industrial WTE incinerator on a lining design A. Several tiles have been equipped with thermocouples and the temperatures measured at different depths have been recorded over a long period [18]. The temperature variations in the refractory part remained low because the temperature fluctuations of smoke and ashes were rapid in comparison to the characteristic thermal time of the refractories. After a transition stage corresponding to the heating of the incinerator, a quasi-stationary temperature has been recorded in the tiles during the use. Change in the temperature profiles was slow. Only the temperature in the first millimeters near the hot face of the refractory layer was affected by local temperature fluctuations.The average of the experimental temperature over a long period is plotted, see dots in Fig. 8. Temperature profiles, resulting from steady-state thermal computations with material parameters defined in Table 1 and with identified convective heat transfer coefficientshhf=300Wm−2K−1andhcf=1000Wm−2K−1, are also reported. Results of the computations are plotted for several values of ea. A good agreement has been obtained with a 0.1mm thick air film for the tile At.For the reactive transport simulation, the initial partial pressure of dioxygen gas in the bulk of the lining is uniform and equal to that of dioxygen contained in air (P=0.21atm). Partial pressures of dioxygen gas are applied at the hot face and the cold face of the tile or panel. At the hot face, the partial pressure of dioxygen, Phf, was assumed equal to that measured in smoke:Phf=0.08atm. At the cold face, the partial pressure of dioxygen, Pcf, changes with time because of the corrosion of the metallic pipe. After a few months, field observations have shown that the waterwall pipes are fully corroded on the side in contact with the refractories. So it was reasonable to fix the dioxygen partial pressure to a value close to zero, which maximized the dioxygen gas flow and thus favored slightly the oxidation process. This has allowed the estimate of upper bound values of ξ andεch.For the mechanical computations, the waterwall pipe is blocked in the three directions. A Coulomb contact is applied between the tile and the pipe for lining designs A and B with a friction coefficient of 0.2. The pipes are tied with the panel for lining design C. For lining design B, the anchor and the tile are pasted with mortar. Finally gravity force is applied to the linings. Only the temperature dependence of the elastic compliance tensor was taken into account as no experimental data are available for the influence of phase change and porosity variation. In practice, this effect is secondary and does only slightly affect the estimates of stress and strain tensors.The material properties used for the numerical simulations have been identified previously and some data have been collected from the literature. The values are reported in Table 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
