@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Guide-Weight method for topology optimization of continuum structures including body forces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce an Optimality Criteria method, i.e. the Guide-Weight algorithm to solve topology optimization problems subjected to body forces.The effectiveness of Guide-Weight method is validated by some numerical tests.The computational efficiency to this kind of problems is improved obviously by this algorithm.There is more superiority for RAMP to solve the aforementioned problems.Some suggestions about how to choose appropriate parameters for SIMP and RAMP are given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Topology optimization,Body forces,The Guide-Weight method,Solid Isotropic Material with Penalization (SIMP) model,Rational Approximation of Material Properties (RAMP) model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces the Guide-Weight method (GW) into the topology optimization of continuum structures subjected to body force loads. Given the design-dependent characteristic of body-forces, three main difficulties are encountered when dealing with topology optimization problems under this load condition, namely, the non-monotonous behavior of the compliance, inactive volume constraint of the optimum, and parasitic effect in low-density regions. Numerous researchers have attempted to solve this problem with mathematical programming or heuristic methods, but all these methods share the significant weakness of low computational efficiency. Accordingly, we propose to solve this problem with an Optimality Criteria method, i.e. the GW method. First, all theoretical derivations of topology optimization with the GW method are carried out, and the iteration procedure with GW is presented. Then, some typical examples of withstanding body forces are tested, and the topologies got in this paper are compared with corresponding results obtained by former researchers. The iteration speed is found to improve significantly when utilizing the GW method to deal with this kind of problems. Finally, considering all the above examples are optimized with SIMP model, we try to combine RAMP model with the GW method. The distinction between the models of SIMP and RAMP when using GW to solve topology optimization problems under body forces are investigated, which indicates that although both these two interpolation models are able to yield very similar optimal results if suitable parameters are chosen, there is more superiority for RAMP model to get clearer topologies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The topology optimization of continuum structures involves finding the best structural layout for given design objectives and constrains in a predetermined design domain. Since the pioneering work by Bendsoe and Kikuchi [1], the topology optimization of continuum structures has been extensively explored and already became a frontier of the field of structural optimization [2,3]. To establish an optimization model of continuum structures, many topology methods have been proposed, including Homogenization Method (HM) [1], Solid Isotropic Material and Penalization (SIMP) [4] and Rational Approximation of Material Properties (RAMP) [5], Evolutionary Structural Optimization (ESO) [6,7], Level Set method [8], and Independent-Continuous Mapping (ICM) [9]. Moreover, to solve large-scale optimization problems, many efficient methods have been developed. These methods are mainly categorized into three, namely, the Optimality Criteria method (OC) [10,11], the Mathematical Programming method (MP) [12,13] and the heuristic methods [14,15]. With the significant developments in the topology optimization theory, numerous practical engineering problems have been successfully addressed by this conceptual design tool.However, almost all of the aforementioned works have concentrated on optimization problems under fixed external loads. Another important kind of load condition, i.e. body force loads, which are design-dependent and include self-weight, inertial forces, and centrifugal forces, is ignored. While there are enormous important mechanical structures in which the body forces have a major significance in the design, for instance, the self-weight of large civil engineering structures, the centrifugal force of rotating machines, such as human centrifuges, energy generator rotors and turbine etc.Until 2005, Bruneel and Duysinx [16] primarily investigated topology optimization problems including self-weight. They pointed out that there are three particular difficulties in solving this problem, namely, non-monotonous behavior of the compliance, inactive volume constraint of the optimal topology, and parasitic effect for low density regions when using the SIMP method. Subsequently, they proposed a modified discontinuous SIMP model and a new solution method combining the Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA) with the Gradient Based MMA (GBMMA) to deal with these difficulties. However, the results of their solutions are not very ideal in terms of the solution efficiency and figure legibility. Following the study of Bruyneel and Duysinx [16], numerous researchers have focused on this area. Yang et al. [17] investigated both the ESO and Bi-directional ESO (BESO) methods in solving topology optimization problems with self-weight in the same year, yet their topology results considerably differ from those of Bruyneel and Duysinx [16], and the solution efficiency is considerably low. Ansola et al. [18] proposed a modified sensitivity computation strategy for the ESO method to deal with this problem in 2006. They obtained favorable results, but their method obviously lacks theoretical basis. In 2009, Zhang et al. [19] proposed to solve this problem with the RAMP model, and they testified its feasibility with some numerical examples. Gao et al. [20] proposed and validated an improved RAMP model with a variable parameter in solving structural topology optimization under inertial loads. Last but not least, in 2011, Huang and Xie [21] developed a new BESO method utilizing the RAMP model to optimize structures with self-weight and demonstrated its capability to generate convergent optimal solutions with numbers of examples. Although many works have been conducted, the efficiency of solving such kinds of topology optimization problems has not been improved remarkably. One main reason is that all these works mentioned above solve this problem either by utilizing the MP methods or the heuristic methods, which all share the same shortcoming of low computational efficiency.To the authors' knowledge there are not published results utilizing the OC methods to deal with topology optimization problems under body forces, however, the non-monotonous character of this kind of question may be more easily to be solve with the OC method. Considering both the limitation of MP methods/heuristic methods and the unique advantage of OC methods, this paper introduces an OC method, namely, the Guide-Weight method (GW) into continuum structures optimization under body forces. The so-called Guide-Weight method was first proposed by Chen [22,23] in the 1980s for the optimization of large-scale antenna structures. As we all know, the main load of a large-scale antenna is its self-weight; however, the previously proposed optimization algorithm, i.e. the Virtual Work Approach Method, totally overlooked the design-dependent characteristic of self-weight and considered it as a fixed load, which resulted in that its optimization topology was not the most optimal result. The GW method of Chen overcomes the limitation of the Virtual Work Approach, and achieved better results in both the convergent rate and the final value of objective function. Because of its advantages of clear physical meaning, high efficiency and strong generality, in 2011, Li and Liu [24] and Liu et al. [25] introduced the GW algorithm into topology optimization and obtained very good effects.In this paper, we improve the GW method further and apply it into the topology optimization problems of continuum structures subjected to body forces. The superiority of the GW method in solving optimization problems with body forces is fully exploited. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the basic theory of the GW algorithm is presented by a typical topology optimization problem subjected to a fixed force. Then, the filtering scheme and optimization procedure utilized in this article are discussed. The features of the GW method in solving topology optimization problems are subsequently validated by a numerical example. In Section 3, we introduce the GW method into topology optimization problems under self-weight, and testify its efficiency and effectiveness by two numerical examples of withstanding single body force. In Section 4, optimization problems under multiple loads containing both a fixed force and a body force are solved by the GW method, and then two classical examples are presented respectively. In Section 5, we attempt to combine RAMP model with the GW solution method to solve the same question. We first analyze the distinction between SIMP and RAMP in solving body force problems. Then, we compare the results obtained from RAMP with those from SIMP. Lastly, we give some suggestions about how to choose p and q value correctly. Section 6 presents the conclusion of this work.If we establish the topology optimization mathematic model with SIMP method, the typical topology optimization problem of continuum structures aimed at minimized mean compliance, and subjected to a mass constraint can be usually expressed as follows:(1){Find:ρ=[ρ1,ρ2,…,ρn]T∈RNMin:C(ρ)Subjectto:M(ρ)≤fM00<ρmin≤ρi≤1i=1,2,…,Nwhere ρiis the relative density of the ith element, ρmin is the minimum value of the design variables (set to 0.01 throughout this paper), N is the quantity of the elements, C(ρ) is the mean compliance, and M and M0 are the expected weight and initial weight of the design domain, respectively.To derive the solution formula of Eq. (1), the Lagrange function needs be constructed first:(2)L(ρ)=C(ρ)+λ(M(ρ)−fM0)where λ is the Lagrange multiplier.Based on the Kuhn–Tucker condition, in the optimal solution ρ⁎, the following formulas must be satisfied:(3){∂L∂ρi=∂C∂ρi+λ∂(M−fM0)∂ρi=∂C∂ρi+λ∂M∂ρi{≤0,ifρi=1=0,ifρmin≤ρi≤1≥0,ifρi=ρminλ≥0λ(M−fM0)=0and{λ=0,ifM<fM0λ>0,ifM=fM0M−fM0≤0ρmin≤ρi≤1i=1,2,…,NFrom(∂L/∂ρi)=(∂C/∂ρi)+λ(∂M/∂ρi)=0, the following can be obtained:(4)−λ(∂M/∂ρi)(∂C/∂ρi)=−λρi(∂M/∂ρi)ρi(∂C/∂ρi)=1The above equation is the core formula of the GW algorithm. Given that C(ρ) denotes the performance of the structure and M(ρ) denotes the material usage, we can define the following four important expressions according to the GW method:(5)Hi=∂M∂ρi(6)Wi=ρiHi(7)Gi=−ρi∂C∂ρi(8)G=∑i=1NGiwhere Hiis the proportional weight of ρi, Wiis the generalized weight of ρi, Giis the guide weight of ρi, and G is the total guide weight.Substituting Eqs. (5) and (7) into Eq. (4) yields(9)ρi=GiλHii=1,2,…,NThe above equation represents the optimization criterion of the GW method. In practical application, to ensure that the iteration is convergent, a step factor α is employed and the bounds of ρ are considered. Consequently, we can obtain the ultimate iteration formula of the GW algorithm as follows:(10)ρi(k+1)={1,ifρi≥1α(GiλHi)(k)+(1−α)ρi(k),ifρmin<ρi<1ρmin,ifρi≤ρmini=1,2,…,NIn addition, we need to derive the explicit expression of the Lagrange multiplier λ. From Eq. (9), one can get(11)λ=GiρiHi=GiWii=1,2,…,NNamely,(12)λ=GiWi=∑i=1NGi∑i=1NWi=G∑i=1NWii=1,2,…,NFurthermore, the key point in executing the iteration formula of Eq. (10) is to express M and C explicitly on the design variables ρ. On one hand, the weight M can be expressed as(13)M=∑i=1Nρiρ0viwhere ρ0 is the real density of the structure material and viis the volume of the ith element.From Eq. (13) one can easily obtain(14)∂M∂ρ=ρ0viOn the other hand, according to fundamental knowledge of the Finite Element Method (FEM), we know that the compliance can be expressed as(15)C=FTU=UTKU=∑i=1NuiTkiuiwhere F is the load vector; U is the displacement vector; K is the total stiffness matrix; uiis the displacement vector of the ith element; and kiis the stiffness matrix of the ith element.Simultaneously, based on SIMP method, there is(16)ki=p(ρi)=ρipkiowhere kiois the initial stiffness matrix of the ith element and p is the penalty factor of the SIMP method.Substituting Eq. (16) into Eq. (15) yields(17)C=∑i=1NρipuiTkiouiCalculating the partial derivatives of two sides of Eq. (15) yields(18)∂C∂ρi=FT∂U∂ρi+(∂F∂ρi)TUFrom F=KU one obtains(19)∂U∂ρi=K−1(∂F∂ρi−∂K∂ρiU)Substituting Eq. (19) into Eq. (18) yields(20)∂C∂ρi=2∂F∂ρiUT−UT∂K∂ρiUIf the topology optimization objective is under fixed external forces, we can ignore the variation of load vector F with ρi, and obtain(21)∂C∂ρi=−∑i=1NuiT∂ki∂ρiui=−pρip−1uiTkiouiIf we substitute Eqs. (14) and (21) into Eqs. (5)–(8) and (12), and then substitute these five values into Eq. (10), the iterative formula can be eventually rewritten as(22)ρi(k+1)={1,ifρi≥1α(ρipuiTkioui∑i=1NρipuiTkioui⋅fM0ρ0vi)(k)+(1−α)ρi(k),ifρmin<ρi<1ρmin,ifρi≤ρmini=1,2,…,NThe optimization procedure based on the GW method is depicted in a flow chart shown asFig. 1, which can be outlined as follows:Step 1: Discretize the design domain using appropriate element mesh, and define the material properties, loads condition, boundary condition and so on.Step 2: Define the GW method parameters, such as volume fraction vf, penalty factor p, step factor α.Step 3: Carry out finite element analysis (FEA) by FEA software such as ANSYS and calculate the elemental sensitivity.Step 4: Filter the element sensitivity.First, define the node sensitivitysjnwhich does not carry any physical meaning on its own, as the average sensitivity value of elements connected to the jth node. Then, we average the sensitivity values of nodes included in an element and give this average value as the new element sensitivity. The modified sensitivity value of the ith element can be written as(23)s^ie=∑j=1MsijnMwhere M is the total number of nodes included in the ith element, andsijnis the sensitivity value of the jth node included in the ith element.Step 5: Calculate the design variables of all elements with the iteration formulas of Eq. (22).Step 6: Construct a new design domain based on the calculative results of step 5.Step 7: Repeat 3–6 until both the volume constraint is reached and the following convergence criterion is satisfied:In order to validate the considerable superiority of the GW method, a sample calculation is performed and the result is illustrated inFig. 2. In the example, the load condition is a fixed external force. The reference length L is 4m and the width W is 2m. The mechanical properties of the structure material to be distributed in the domain are Young's modulus E=2.1×105Mpa and Poisson's ratio v=0.3. The constraint volume fraction is set to be 0.3, and the penalty factor p in Eq. (16) is equal to 3.Then, this optimization problem is solved by iteration Eq. (22), and corresponding results are shown inFigs. 3 and4, respectively. Fig. 3 shows that the optimal topology calculated by the GW method is considerably reasonable in terms of the transferring force, and the topology figure is indeed legible. Fig. 4 indicates that the convergence process of the GW method is stable and its iteration speed is considerably high. From the above figures and analyses, we can easily come to the conclusion that the GW method is outstandingly appropriated to solve topology optimization problems for its excellent merits of both efficient and effective.In topology optimization problems subjected to body forces, the first term of Eq. (20)∂F/∂ρidoes not disappear anymore. Consequently, the derivatives of the compliance C can either be positive or negative, i.e. the compliance exhibits a non-monotonous characteristic with the change in design variable ρi. If a two-dimensional structure about to be optimized is meshed with four-node quadrangular elements, then the elemental load vector subjected to its self-weight can be obtained as the following equation (assuming that the gravity is aligned with the global y direction):(25)fi=14ρiρovigf^=14ρiρovig⋅{0,−1,0,−1,0,−1,0,−1}Therefore, the sensitivity of the compliance C in Eq. (20) can be expressed as the following form:(26)∂C∂ρi=12ρovigf^uiT−pρip−1uiTkiouiIf we substitute Eq. (26) into Eqs. (7)–(8) and (12), and then substitute these values into Eq. (10), we will obtain the iterative formula of topology optimization subjected to body forces as follows:(27)ρi(k+1)={1,ifρi≥1α(−(1/2)ρiρovigf^uiT+pρipuiTkioui−(1/2)ρog∑i=1Nρivif^uiT+pC⋅fM0ρovi)(k)+(1−α)ρi(k),ifρmin<ρi<1ρmin,ifρi≤ρmini=1,2,…,NFig. 5 illustrates a rectangle plate (L×2L) supported at its bottom end. The objective of the example is to determine the optimal topology of the plate withstanding its self-weight. The material volume constraint is set to be 0.3. The following material properties are assumed: Young's modules E=2.1×105Mpa, Poisson's ratio v=0.3, and density ρo=7.85×103kg/m3. The geometry size is L=10m. Due to its symmetry, only half of the design domain is discretized with 50×50 four-node plane elements. After completion of the optimized process, the symmetric half region is mirrored up to clarify the whole structure. The parameters for the GW method in this case are the penalty factor p=3 and step factor α=0.5.Optimization is carried out based on Eq. (27), the previously derived iteration formula. During the process, the total volume of the structure gradually decreases, and then remains constant when the predetermined volume fraction and convergence criterion are achieved.Fig. 6 presents the ultimate topology which is an arch structure spanning its two end supports. The topology figure is identical to those obtained by Bruyneel and Duysinx [16], Ansola et al. [18], and Huang and Xie [21]. Thus, the GW method is effective in solving topology optimization problems with self-weight.Fig. 7 shows the convergent histories of the compliance and volume fraction. These two key indices are found to decrease stably and then converge to a constant value when the volume constraint is reached within only 20 steps. This iteration speed is obviously higher than those obtained by previous researchers, i.e. 54 iterations by Bruyneel and Duysinx [16] with the GBMMA1-GBMMA2 algorithm, 50 iterations by Gao et al. [20] with an improved RAMP model and the MDQA (Method of Diagonal Quadratic Approximations) algorithm, as well as variable 79 iterations by Huang and Xie [21] with the soft-kill BESO. These comparisons demonstrate that the GW method is certainly efficient in calculating such kind of topology optimization problems.As Huang stated in [21], the hard-kill BESO's main advantage is its high computational efficiency, and they have tried to validate this view by optimizing a three-dimensional structure (Fig. 8) within 82 iterations. To compare the convergent speed of the GW with the hard-kill BESO directly, we also optimize the same geometry model with identical load conditions and constrains in this article.The dimensions and support conditions are illustrated in Fig. 8. The following assumptions are made: Young's modulus E=2.1×105Mpa, Poisson's ratio v=0.1, and material density ρo=7.85×103kg/m3. The amount of available material is restricted to 30% of the design domain. Other parameters used in the GW method are p=3 and α=0.5. Given the symmetry characteristic, we only analyze a quarter of the design domain with symmetrical constraints, and mesh it with 20×20×25 eight-node elements.Considering that this case is a three-dimensional problem, some details need be slightly altered based on the two-dimensional example, i.e.f^in Eq. (25) should be represented by the following vector:(28)f^={0,0,−1,0,0,−1,⋯0,0,−1}1×24Then, we can modify the iteration formula Eq. (27) by substituting this newf^to it. Subsequently, we obtain the resulting optimal topology (Fig. 9) as well as the corresponding iteration process of the objective and constraint functions (Fig. 10). The ultimate topology obtained by the GW method differs from that obtained by Huang and Xie [21], which warrants further study; however, the iteration speed of GW is considerably higher than that of the hard-kill BESO.Examples 2 and 3 show that the GW method is very suitable for solving topology optimization problems subjected to self-weight, especially because of its high computational efficiency.For topology optimization problems with multiple loads containing both fixed force and body force, some modification should be carried out based on Eq. (27). First, the mathematical expression of the optimization problem can be written as(29){Find:ρ=[ρ1,ρ2,…,ρn]T∈RNMin:CSum(ρ)=∑j=1LwjCj(ρ)Subjectto:M(ρ)≤fM00<ρmin≤ρi≤1i=1,2,…,Nwhere Cjand wjare respectively the mean compliance and corresponding weight factor of the jth load condition; L is the number of loads; and other symbols have the same meanings as in Eq. (1).In this part, the classic MBB beam subjected to both a concentrated force and its self-weight is to be optimized. The structure and its support condition are shown inFig. 11. This example involves two kinds of loads: one is the fixed external force F and the other is its self-weight. By letting w1=w2=0.5, CSum can be expressed by(30)CSum(ρ)=0.5CF(ρ)+0.5Cg(ρ)Consequently, the sensitivity of the compliance is modified as follows:(31)∂CSum(ρ)∂ρi=0.5⋅∂CF(ρ)∂ρi+0.5⋅∂Cg(ρ)∂ρiBy substituting Eqs. (21) and (26) into Eq. (31), we can obtain the sensitivity of the compliance under multiple loads consisting of F and self-weight as follows:(32)∂CSum(ρ)∂ρi=−12pρi1p−1ui1Tkioui1+14ρovi2gf^ui2T−12pρi2p−1ui2Tkioui2If we substitute Eq. (32) into Eqs. (7)–(8) and (12), and then substitute these values into Eq. (10), we can obtain the iterative formula of topology optimization problems subjected to multiple loads as follows:(33)ρi(k+1)={1,ifρi≥1α(−(1/4)ρi2ρovi2gf^ui2T+(1/2)∑j=12pcij−(1/4)ρog∑i=1Nρi2vi2f^ui2T+∑j=12pCj⋅fM0ρovi)(k)+(1−α)ρi(k),ifρmin<ρi<1ρmin,ifρi≤ρmini=1,2,…,NDue to its symmetry condition, only half of the design domain is discretized with 50×100 quadrangular finite elements. The mechanical properties of the base structure to be distributed in the domain is characterized by Young's modulus E=2.1×105Mpa, Poisson's ratio v=0.3, and density ρo=7.85×103kg/m3. A penalization factor p=3 is chosen in the SIMP model. The volume fraction vf is set to be 0.4.When self-weight is not taken into account, the amplitude of F has no influence on the ultimate optimal topology, as illustrated inFig. 12(a). Conversely, when only self-weight is considered the optimal topology is similar to the arch shown in Fig. 12(f). If the applied force F and self-weight are simultaneously considered in this example, we can see from Fig. 12(b–e) that the resulting topology depends on the ratio of F to the self-weight (100% means that F is equal to 100% of the total structural weight at the situation). Furthermore, when the ratio decreases, the two support bars connected to the load point gradually become slender and disappear. The same topologies and conclusions have also been obtained by Bruyneel and Duysinx [16] as well as Huang and Xie [21].All iteration information of Fig. 12 are listed inTable 1, where we compare the iteration speed of three different solution methods. It is not hard to conclude that the GW method performs excellently in every situation of example 4, especially in terms of iteration speed.Fig. 13 presents a detailed convergent history of 100% ratio, from which we can see that the iteration process is stable, which is really beneficial to industrial applications from a practical point of view.Centrifugal force is another typical body forces that commonly exists in many rotating engineering structures, such as human centrifuges, rotating platforms etc. In this numerical test, we will investigate a simple structure that withstands both tangential and centrifugal forces.Fig. 14 illustrates a disk-like design domain, whose inner and outer radii are 0.5m and 2m, respectively. The following material properties are assumed: Young's modulus E=2.1×105Mpa, Poisson's ratio v=0.3, and density ρo=7.85×103kg/m3. The volume constraint is taken as 0.4 of the initial volume. The penalty factor p of the SIMP model is set to be 3.As aforementioned, the body force in this case is the centrifugal force caused by ω. The load direction vectors of elements vary with their positions, and the ith element's load direction vector can be expressed as following form(34)fi=14ρiρovigf^=14ρiρoviω2ri⋅{cosθi,sinθi,cosθi,sinθi,cosθi,sinθi,cosθi,sinθi}where riis the radius of the ith element's mass point, whose direction vector is defined asr→i; ω is the angular velocity of the disk; and θiis the angle betweenri→and the x axis.Consequently, the iteration formula needs to be modified by substituting the aforementioned fi, with which we have optimized the example 5. When the centrifugal force is not taken into account, the amplitude of F has no effect on the ultimate topology, which characteristic is similar to example 4. The topology in this situation is presented inFig. 15(a).Then, if both tangential and centrifugal forces are considered (i.e. F is set to be 800N and ω is set to be 5rad/s), we obtain the optimal topology as illustrated in Fig. 15(b). A clear distinction between these two load conditions is observed, and the optimal structure in the second situation has directional deflection along with ω, which makes sense from an engineering perspective.All the examples mentioned above are established with the SIMP model and solved by the GW method. Several researchers [19–21] have studied the RAMP model in solving topology optimization problems with body forces, and they pointed out that there are great advantages for RAMP model to solve this type of problems. In this section, we clarify the distinction between SIMP and RAMP when utilizing GW to perform optimization. We then provide some effective suggestions on how to choose the appropriate p or q value.Based on the RAMP model, Eq. (16) should be modified as(35)ki=q(ρi)=ρi1+q(1−ρi)kioCurves reflecting the penalty effect of the SIMP model are shown inFig. 16(a); the corresponding curves for the RAMP model are shown inFig. 17(a). By comparing Fig. 16(a) with Fig. 17(a), we can see that the two methods' penalty effect would be similar if we choose suitable p and q. However, Fig. 16(b) depicts that the ratio of the density interpolation function ρito the Young's modulus interpolation function p(ρi) becomes unbounded in the low-density regions, whereas the ratio ρi/q(ρi) of RAMP is limited as in Fig. 17(b). This finding indicates that the element weight may be relatively far larger than its Young's modulus in some regions for the SIMP model. Accordingly, it is almost impossible to achieve a very nice 0/1 design by SIMP, which can be demonstrated by Figs. 6 and 12 at some extent, in which some faint regions exist. In fact, the contradiction of obtaining a clear topology and a small ρi/p(ρi) value is inevitable for the SIMP model. By contrast, RAMP seems more appropriate to be utilized in this field, and more and more researchers tend to choose this interpolation scheme to solve this kind of problems.To compare the optimal topologies between SIMP and RAMP, we are going to investigate the numerical example 2 again by changing different model parameters. First, if we change the p value of the SIMP model, we will get the following topologies shown asFig. 18. It is not hard to see that no matter which p value is chosen in this case, there exist more or less some faint regions in the ultimate topologies, and the faint regions' area become greater with the increase of p value. Such phenomenon reflects the unbound character of SIMP in the low-density regions which would results in unclear optimal topology.Considering the potential advantages of RAMP as we mentioned in Section 5.1, we optimize example 2 with RAMP and then investigate the relationship between q value and optimal topology.In the RAMP model, the sensitivity of compliance can be written as(36)∂C∂ρi=12ρovigf^uiT−1+q[1+q(1−ρi)]2uiTkiouiAccordingly, the eventual iteration formula is given by(37)ρi(k+1)={1,ifρi≥1α(−(1/2)ρiρovigf^uiT+(ρi/1+q(1−ρi))uiTkioui−(1/2)ρog∑i=1Nρivif^uiT+(ρi/1+q(1−ρi))C⋅fM0ρovi)(k)+(1−α)ρi(k),ifρmin<ρi<1ρmin,ifρi≤ρmini=1,2,…,NBy choosing six different q values, we obtain corresponding optimal topologies illustrated inFig. 19. From these figures, we can see that the same phenomenon as SIMP exists with the change of q, i.e. with the increasing of q, more and more obscure regions appear. However, when q is equal to 5 and 10, the topologies are so clear that without hardly any faint regions and they are far nicer than corresponding topologies of SIMP model. This phenomenon validates the unique superiority of RAMP model, just like the theoretical analysis demonstrates, to solve this kind of problems.Table 2 presents the optimization information of different p values when volume constraint is set to 0.3 in the RAMP model, from which we can come to the conclusion that with the increase of p the stiffness of optimized structure decreases, and the volume constraints tend more and more close to reach the expected volume fraction.A similar phenomenon occurs in RAMP model is the possible inactive volume constraint of the optimal topology. Just like Bruyneel and Duysinx pointed out in [16], the real volume fraction of material in optimal topology is almost always lower than the expected value, and the divergence between them increases with the raise of vf. This point can be validated byFig. 20, wherein when the expected vf is set to values from 0.1 to 1, yet the real volume fraction is even never exceeds 0.4.By comparing RAMP with SIMP in this section, we can conclude that RAMP is indeed superior over SIMP in dealing with topology optimization problems withstanding body forces, especially at the respect of the topology legibility. The main reason for this advantage of RAMP is that its ρi/q(ρi) value is bounded which is beneficial for producing clearer topology. In addition, to obtain ideal optimal topology, p is suggested to be set to 2–4, and q to 5–10.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an Optimality Criteria method for topology optimization of continuum structures under fixed force, i.e. the Guide-Weight method is introduced to solve the topology problems withstanding body forces. The theoretical derivations and practical exemplifications of the Guide-Weight method for the topology optimization of continuum structures subjected to body forces are addressed. Examples under single self-weight condition and under multiple loads (including self-weight or centrifugal forces) are successfully optimized. The results demonstrate that the GW method is not only effective but also efficient in solving this type of problems. The main reason for the high computational superiority of the GW method is that this algorithm attributes to a kind of OC method known for its high efficiency. This paper is the first one that proposes to solve this kind of topology problems with the OC method, which provides a new idea for researchers to study in this field in the future. Lastly, by comparing RAMP with SIMP in this paper, we can see that although both these two models are able to yield very similar optimal results only if suitable parameters are chosen, there is more superiority for the RAMP model to solve this kind of questions. Based on these two main conclusions mentioned above, the next research plan is to try to introduce some other OC methods into this field and utilize the RAMP model to solve such problems.