@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Determining stress–strain relationship for necking in polymers based on macro deformation behavior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Testing and FEM were used to establish the constitutive equation for necking in polymers.Creep is included in the constitutive equation in order to regenerate the necking behavior.Constitutive equation is established for HDPE in two specimen geometries at two cross-head speeds.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FEM,Necking,HDPE,Creep,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An approach, based on mechanical testing and finite element modeling, is presented to establish the stress–strain relationship for polymers when necking evolves under tension. The paper gives details of criteria used for evaluating the stress–strain relationship during the necking process, and depicts how the total strain range is divided into several sections for the ease of the iterative calculation process. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is used as a sample polymer to illustrate the approach. The results show that this approach can consider non-linear and creep deformation during the neck evolvement, and the stress–strain relationship established can be applied to a finite element model to regenerate force–elongation curve and cross-section reduction measured from the mechanical testing.Polymers such as high-density polyethylene (HDPE) are susceptible to spontaneous strain localization (commonly known as necking) and strain hardening that arises from structural rejuvenation induced by large deformation. In view that the ability to predict necking in polymers is essential for assurance of their reliable performance, especially when considering applications such as pipelines and pressure vessels, understanding such deformation behavior is of utmost importance. As a result, much of the research work on polymers has been dedicated to study of the necking behavior and the damage evolution process during the neck development. However, challenges are encountered due to the time-dependent deformation process (such as creep) that plays a critical role for many polymers in long-term service. As a result, most of the characterization methods to evaluate reliability of the long-term performance of polymers require tests on full-sized products. Since those tests are time-consuming to carry out and involve significant uncertainty in its prediction accuracy, some researchers have considered a different approach that is to evaluate the performance through numerical simulation, for which the first step is to establish the stress–strain relationship for the deformation process.During the last few decades many approaches have been proposed to establish the stress–strain relationship for polymer deformation. Some of those approaches, often known as slip-link or tube models [1], are an extension from classical rubber elasticity, to consider chain entanglements in the molecular network for the mechanical response during the deformation. One of those approaches, commonly known as Edward–Vilgis theory [2], separates number of permanent joints from number of topological constraints in the expression of free energy as a function of stretch ratio. Based on this model, formation of cross links in radiated polyethylene was investigated and found to increase the effective chain entanglements during the deformation [3].Other approaches consider interactions at the molecular level to relate the molecular interactions with the macroscopic deformation behavior. One of the first models in those approaches took into account rotation and alignment of molecular chain segments for establishing the stress–strain relationship for large deformation in amorphous polymers [4,5]. The model was later extended to three-dimensional deformation [6,7]. More recently, Wu and Buckley [8] developed a model based on molecular interaction to capture most of the features observed in ductile deformation of amorphous polymers. Based on a slightly larger scale, Drozdov and Christiansen [9] developed a model for a similar purpose, that is, to mimic plastic and visco-plastic deformation in semi-crystalline polymers.A different approach, generally known as phenomenological models, was developed by considering mainly deformation at the macroscopic scale. Although early work, e.g. ref. [10–23], is limited to elastic–plastic deformation, advancement in this approach has shown the ability to mimic viscoelastic deformation [24–28], rate reversal behavior in creep and relaxation [29], and dynamic response [30].Work presented here is part of the phenomenological modeling approach that uses finite element (FE) technique to mimic deformation during the neck development. Previous publication [31] used a relatively simple set of equations to describe the input stress–strain relationship for the FE model, with values for unknown parameters determined using an iteration process. Using this stress–strain relationship, the FE model was able to mimic the cross section contraction and load–displacement curve very accurately, provided that creep deformation is considered. This approach greatly simplifies the simulation process without the sacrifice of accuracy. However, questions are often raised on whether creep deformation needs to be included in the stress–strain relationship to mimic the deformation behavior in such a short duration of less than 30min in total. To address this issue, some additional studies have been carried out, as presented in this paper, to justify the need to include creep deformation in the FE model in order to reproduce the mechanical test results. This paper will give details of the procedure for establishing the stress–strain relationship, including creep deformation, and discuss the dependence of parameters in the corresponding constitutive equations on the specimen geometry and loading speed used in the mechanical testing.The conventional approach to determining the stress–strain relationship is based on measurements from the mechanical testing. An example is the work by G’Sell et al. [32] in which displacements of selected points on the specimen surface are measured to determine strain for a given stress level. However, during the necking process deformation on a cross section is highly non-uniform. Therefore, strain values measured from the surface do not reflect the strain in the core region. Instead, the approach adopted in our study is to establish the stress–strain relationship through a combination of mechanical testing and FE modeling. Details of the approach are given below.Specimens used for the mechanical testing are prepared from HDPE plates of 10mm thick, provided by NOVA Chemicals, of which molecular weight, molecular weight distribution, and density are given inTable 1. The plates were compression-molded from pellets to ensure isotropy of the mechanical properties. Both standard dog-bone specimens of rectangular cross section (ASTM D 638 type I) and nonstandard cylindrical specimens [33] were machined from those plates, with dimensions shown inFig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. To ensure that necking was always initiated at the middle of the gauge section where an extensometer was placed to monitor the change of the cross-sectional dimensions, a small imperfection was introduced there to reduce width and diameter of the dog-bone and cylindrical specimens, respectively, by less than 2%. Note that despite the presence of such an imperfection, all specimens showed full neck development in the whole gauge section prior to the final fracture.All tests were conducted using a universal testing machine (QUASAR 100). To ensure that the test results were reproducible, crosshead speed of 100mm/min, same as that used previously [31], was used for testing the dog-bone specimens. This crosshead speed was chosen in the previous study to shorten the test duration, in order to minimize the creep strain involved during the test. However, heating induced at this crosshead speed may be significant enough to cause material softening. Therefore, another crosshead speed within the common speed range for plastics testing, 5mm/min, was used for both dog-bone and cylindrical specimens. In view that each test at 5mm/min took less than 30min to complete, it was deemed unnecessary to consider another crosshead speed between 100 and 5mm/min. On the other hand, amount of creep deformation is expected to increase at a crosshead speed below 5mm/min, thus increasing its significance in the deformation process. In view that objective of the current study is to show that even within a short duration, the time-dependent deformation behavior still plays an important role in the mechanical testing, conducting tests below 5mm/min is unnecessary if creep deformation needs to be considered at 5mm/min.It should be noted that stress–strain relationship determined from the dog-bone specimens at 5mm/min is identical to that from the cylindrical specimens at the same crosshead speed. Therefore, whenever possible, results from the former are omitted in order to reduce the amount of data presented here.FE modeling was based on three-dimensional (3-D) dog-bone and two-dimensional (2-D) axisymmetric cylindrical models. The models were developed using ABAQUS Standard (version 6.7-1). The 3-D dog-bone model consisted of 4140 (C3D20R) 20-node quadratic brick elements, of totally 19,583 nodes, and was used to determine the stress–strain relationship at two cross-head speeds, 100 and 5mm/min. The 2-D cylindrical model, on the other hand, had 909 CAX8R axisymmetric 8-node elements, of totally 2918 nodes, and was used to determine the stress–strain relationship at the cross-head speed of 5mm/min.Fig. 2(a) and (b) gives an example of the mesh pattern and typical necking behavior generated in the dog-bone and cylindrical FE models, respectively. Note that due to the geometric symmetry, the dog-bone FE model was for half of the specimen length and quarter of the cross section.Necking in the dog-bone FE model was introduced by tapering width in the gauge section so that the smallest width, with reduction about 0.07%, was located at the middle of the gauge section (i.e. at one end of the FE model). For the cylindrical FE model, on the other hand, the geometry was identical to the true specimen geometry used in the mechanical testing, without any artificial defect to encourage the neck formation.Criteria used to evaluate the stress–strain relationship were based on the following information obtained from the mechanical testing.(a)On the curve of engineering stress versus elongation: (i) peak stress and the corresponding elongation, (ii) curve profile during the initial necking process (i.e., during the load drop phase), and (iii) flow stress level during the neck propagation.On the curve of cross-sectional dimensions versus elongation: variation of the cross-sectional dimensions during the necking process, i.e., width and thickness of dog-bone specimens and diameter of cylindrical specimens.When the FE models could regenerate the above criteria from the mechanical testing, the stress–strain relationship was deemed to be successfully established.Stress–strain relationship for the plastic deformation was based on J2flow theory. For the creep deformation a simple power law function was used to express the creep strain rate in terms of stress and time. Such an expression should be sufficient in view of the short duration involved in the mechanical testing. As shown by Eq. (1) below, the stress–strain relationship was expressed using four equations for the elastic–plastic deformation and one for the creep deformation, with the creep deformation considered only for the strain range between εyand εt. Details of implementing the creep strain are given in Section 3.3.(1)σ(ε)={32(1+υ)Eεforε≤εy[15,19,34](a)d[{a(ε+b)}(c−1)−{a(ε+b)}(−c)]+eforεy≤ε≤εn[35](b)αkεNforεn≤ε≤εt[36](c)kexp(Mεβ)forε≥εt[12,14](d)ε¯̇cr=Aσntmforεn≤ε≤εt[37](e)where σ is effective stress in MPa, ε is the equivalent strain, εyis the critical strain for the transition from linear to non-linear deformation, εnis the strain for the on-set of necking, εtis the transitional strain for the strain-hardening,ε¯̇cris the equivalent creep strain rate, t is the time measured from the onset of necking, E is Young’s modulus, υ is Poisson’s ratio, and the rest of parameters (a, b, c, d, e, α, k, N, M, β, Α, n, and m) are user-defined constants.Note that the above stress–strain relationship was implemented in the FE model using more than 2000 discrete points in a table format. Such a high density of discrete points allows minor adjustment to satisfy continuity in the stress–strain relationship between the adjacent strain ranges. InFig. 3 that presents the stress–strain relationship used in this study, however, number of points has been dramatically reduced to improve the presentation clarity.As mentioned earlier, values for parameters in Eq. (1) were determined through iteration. However, the iteration process used in the current work was applied progressively through each strain range, while the iteration process in refs. [23,28] was applied simultaneously to the entire strain range, i.e. from zero to the final necking strain. Therefore, the approach considered in this study has no more than five parameters for which values need to be determined through iteration.Three typical FE simulation attempts (SA) are presented in this section, to illustrate the process that leads to the establishment of the stress–strain relationship for necking in polymers. Typical relationship between equivalent stress and equivalent strain is depicted in Fig. 3(a) for the FE model of dog-bone specimen, and Fig. 3(b) for the cylindrical specimen.In the first simulation attempts (SA-1), an elastic-plastic stress–strain relationship was searched to mimic firstly the engineering stress–elongation curve (the first criterion in Section 2.2). The input material property for the dog-bone specimen is depicted by the SA-1 curve in Fig. 3(a) which unfortunately resulted in collapse of the FE model at an elongation around 40mm, just slightly after the commencement of the neck propagation, as shown inFig. 4(a). Collapse of the FE model was due to an extremely small cross section in the necked section, as depicted by the change of cross-sectional dimensions in Fig. 4(b), a curve labeled SA-1, compared to the dimensions measured from the mechanical testing (labeled “Experiment”). Excessive reduction of the necked cross section was avoided by increasing the rate of strain hardening in the last stage of the neck forming process, i.e., by increasing M value in Eq. (1)(d). However, this also resulted in an increase of the flow stress level, thus not be able to match the engineering stress–elongation curve obtained from the mechanical testing.A similar trend of increasing M in Eq. (1)(d) to avoid the model collapse also resulted in an increase of the flow stress from the FE model of cylindrical specimen. An example is given inFig. 5 for which the stress–strain relationship used for the FE model is presented by the curve labeled SA-1 in Fig. 3(b). It should be noted that the SA-1 curve in Fig. 3(b) is different from the corresponding one in Fig. 3(a). The former has more significant strain hardening than the latter at the last stage of the neck formation. Although model collapse was avoided by the SA-1 curve in Fig. 3(b), and the engineering stress–elongation curve from the FE model could match that from the mechanical testing, as depicted in Fig. 5(b), such improvement in strain hardening could not mimic the change of the cross-sectional diameter observed from the mechanical testing, as depicted in Fig. 5(b).Many scenarios have been considered in the first attempts by firstly matching the engineering stress–elongation curve, but always resulted in a cross section which was smaller than that obtained from the mechanical testing. Therefore, it was concluded that the change of the cross section as a function of elongation cannot be regenerated by the elastic–plastic FE model with the adjustment of strain hardening at the later stage of the necking process, even though the model could regenerate the engineering stress–elongation curve obtained from the mechanical testing.In view of the problems for matching both cross section reduction and flow stress level in all first simulation attempts, focus in the second simulation attempts was shifted to exploring the possibility of using elastic–plastic deformation, Eqs. (1)(a)–(d), to match the flow stress level determined from the mechanical testing. The final cross-sectional dimensions of the neck, on the other hand, were controlled by introducing a sharp stress increase at a strain level that is equivalent to the strain level measured from a tested specimen with a fully developed neck. The use of sharp stress increase is to stop further reduction of the cross section in the FE model.With the final neck dimensions determined by setting the sharp stress increase at the final strain level for necking, values for parameters in Eqs. (1)(a)–(d) were selected in order for the FE model to regenerate the flow stress level. An example of the stress–strain relationship is shown by the SA-2 curves in Fig. 3(a) and (b) for dog-bone and cylindrical specimens, respectively. Note that the SA-2 curves in Fig. 3 are lower than the corresponding SA-1 curves, except the final portion where the sharp stress increase is. All attempts showed that even though the flow stress level from the mechanical testing could be regenerated by the FE model using the SA-2 curves in Fig. 3, displacement for the on-set of neck propagation turned out to be much smaller than that measured from the mechanical testing, as shown inFigs. 6 and 7 for dog-bone and cylindrical specimens, respectively. In each figure, for a given engineering stress or cross-sectional dimensions during the initial neck forming process, elongation from the FE model is much smaller than that from the mechanical testing. Further investigation indicated that this approach could not generate a stress–strain relationship to enable the FE model to generate both engineering stress and cross-sectional dimensions that match those from the mechanical testing during the load-drop phase. Had the stress–strain relationship allowed the SA-2 curves in Figs. 6(a) and 7(a) move closer to the corresponding curves from the mechanical testing, labeled as “Experiment,” the SA-2 curves in Figs. 6(b) and 7(b) would have moved further away from the curves obtained from the mechanical testing.Consistent results from many attempts, as described above, led to the conclusion that the FE model with the elastic-plastic deformation, i.e. Eqs. (1)(a)–(d), could not generate an engineering stress–elongation curve that had both the load-drop phase and the flow stress level match with those from the mechanical testing; while the rate of cross-sectional reduction also matched with that measured from the mechanical testing.In view that based on elastic–plastic deformation, the above FE models could not regenerate results from the mechanical testing, specifically, variation of engineering stress and cross section reduction as functions of elongation, approach adopted in the third simulation attempts was to introduce additional elongation, starting from the peak load, to match results from the mechanical testing. The approach is illustrated schematically inFig. 8. Since HDPE has a glass transition temperature of more than 50K below the room temperature [38], creep is expected to occur at room temperature under tensile loading, especially when subjected to a high level of stress. The FE models, however, only considered the creep deformation during the initial neck forming stage, i.e. during the load-drop phase in the strain range for Eqs. (1)(b) and (c). This was considered to be reasonable because at the initial loading stage, for Eq. (1)(a), time involved was so short that creep deformation could be ignored, and at the later stage of the neck development, for Eq. (1)(d), polymer molecules should have been stretched to be more or less aligned in the loading direction [39], thus allowing very little creep to occur. Although a significant amount of creep might still occur during the neck propagation stage, i.e., in sections away from the fully developed neck, such creep deformation does not affect the flow stress level or cross-sectional dimensions of the neck that were used to verify the stress–strain relationship.It should be noted that due to the deformation-induced chain reorientation, the necking process should have significantly increased the creep resistance of HDPE, especially at the later stage of neck development before the final neck dimensions were reached. However, the increase in creep resistance during the necking process was not considered in this study. Instead, parameters A, n and m in Eq. (1)(e) were assumed to have constant values. This assumption, however, could not generate sufficiently fast strain hardening rate to reflect the deformation behavior observed in the mechanical testing. Instead, four sets of parameters were found to be the minimum requirement for Eq. (1)(d) to capture the fast increase of strain hardening at this stage of the necking process.As mentioned in Section 2 (Mechanical Testing and Simulation), values for parameter in Eq. (1) were determined using a piecewise curve fitting technique. That is, the curve fitting was first applied progressively to each of the strain range for Eq. (1) (a)–(d). Since number of the unknown parameters in each strain range is no more than 5, the task of determining values for those parameters is quite manageable, in spite of the large number of unknown parameters. Note that for the strain range from εyto εt, i.e., for Eqs. (1)(b) and (c), values for the unknown parameters were first determined without the consideration of creep. Then, those values were adjusted to take into account the creep involvement, Eq. (1)(e), through iteration to meet the criteria set in Section 2.2.The final stress–strain relationship determined in the third simulation attempts (SA-3) is presented in Fig. 3(a) and (b), for dog-bone and cylindrical specimens, respectively.Tables 2 and 3 present the corresponding parameter values and the strain ranges, respectively, andFig. 9 the comparison between FE models and mechanical testing for the engineering stress and cross-sectional dimensions as functions of elongation. Fig. 9 suggests that all criteria specified in Section 2.2 are satisfactorily met.As shown in Table 2, one set of values for parameters in Eq. (1)(d) could not generate sufficient strain hardening to mimic the behavior observed from the mechanical testing. Instead, four sets of k and M values were used for Eq. (1)(d), with β being fixed at 1.8 (following that used in ref. [23]), in order to capture the fast strain hardening rate at this stage. Note that no creep needed to be considered at this stage.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An approach is presented to use macro deformation behavior of polymers to establish the stress–strain relationship. The approach has been successfully applied to HDPE specimens of two different geometries at cross-head speeds of 5 and 100mm/min. Stress–strain relationship determined using this approach allows the use of FE simulation to mimic closely the mechanical behavior of polymers during the necking process. The results also suggest that creep deformation needs to be considered in order to regenerate the mechanical behavior observed from the mechanical testing.As the creep deformation is expressed separately from the elastic–plastic counterpart in Eq. (1), the creep-related strain can be excluded from the total strain in order to evaluate the effect of elastic–plastic strain rate on polymer deformation. This part of study is being conducted when this manuscript is prepared. In addition, variation of the stress–strain relationship for a wide range of crosshead speeds is being investigated to evaluate effects of strain rate for elastic–plastic deformation and for creep deformation on the mechanical behavior of HDPE.