@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
FDTD-based Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation model applied to specific neurodegenerative disorders

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Magnetic propagation in Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) for neurodegenerative diseases is modelled by FDTD.A computing tool for the current underdeveloped TMS dosimetry in its emerging clinical application to AD and PD is presented.A realistic high-resolution three-dimensional human head mesh is used.Two realistic magnetic source models are employed: a circular and a figure-8 coil.Results show the electrical field distribution when magnetic stimulation is supplied to those brain areas of specific interest for each particular disease.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FDTD,Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation,Circular coil,Figure-8 coil,Alzheimer disease,Parkinson disease,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Non-invasive treatment of neurodegenerative diseases is particularly challenging in Western countries, where the population age is increasing. In this work, magnetic propagation in human head is modelled by Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) method, taking into account specific characteristics of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) in neurodegenerative diseases. It uses a realistic high-resolution three-dimensional human head mesh. The numerical method is applied to the analysis of magnetic radiation distribution in the brain using two realistic magnetic source models: a circular coil and a figure-8 coil commonly employed in TMS. The complete model was applied to the study of magnetic stimulation in Alzheimer and Parkinson Diseases (AD, PD). The results show the electrical field distribution when magnetic stimulation is supplied to those brain areas of specific interest for each particular disease. Thereby the current approach entails a high potential for the establishment of the current underdeveloped TMS dosimetry in its emerging application to AD and PD.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The study of neurodegenerative processes and the development of techniques for their treatment are nowadays an area of great relevance. This is due to their enormous impact, not only from a medical point of view, but also due to their intrinsic social and economic aspects. The increasing trend of global ageing has intensified the need to find effective solutions to diseases strongly related to ageing, such as Alzheimer (AD) or Parkinson (PD) diseases [1]. Emerging therapeutics for these disorders include those that employ energy sources of different nature (electrical, magnetical, optical) to stimulate specific functional brain regions that have been altered during the neurodegeneration process [2]. Among them, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) is one of the most explored due to its capacity for the neuromodulation of specific neural networks with therapeutic purposes and the subsequent promising results obtained in several clinical trials with AD and PD patients [3,4]. In the last years a growing number of studies have showed promising effects of TMS over an increasing number of pathologies. The clinical trials database by the U.S. National Institute of Health (NIH) shows a significant number of studies (both finished and currently recruiting participants) related to TMS, which is a clear indicator of the potential offered by this non-invasive treatment technique. These studies include neurodegenerative diseases which have nowadays no cure. However, despite its high potential for its future clinical implantation, some controversies related to the proper TMS dosimetry remain unsolved due to the lack of reproducibility in certain clinical trials, the complexity of neuronal activity, the great amount of factors that can affect the response to the magnetic stimulation and the lack of multi-centre trials with a larger number of patients [5]. The development of predictive models constitutes a valuable tool to establish the adequate dosimetric parameters to get a certain therapeutic benefit or to design and analyze scientific studies based on TMS experiments with both diagnostic and research purposes [6]. This requires an accurate computation of the induced electrical field within the brain as well as the dielectric properties of the brain tissues [7]. Early studies in this area were mostly based on spherical models [8], whereas the most recent ones employ a high-resolution model of human head and numerical methods such as the finite element method (FEM) [9,10]. These last ones have allowed a precise calculus of the field induced by common TMS coils in the human head. However the previous studies, such as one of the same authors [11], have not been focused on the electrical field induced by coils precisely positioned over functional brain regions that have been identified as pinpoint targets to treat the main symptoms associated with neurodegenerative diseases. Up to now coil positioning to deal with a specific disorder was taken into account only for depression using an impedance method [12].We present a Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD)-based TMS model, which is applied to specific dysfunctions associated with AD and PD in order to predict the electromagnetic propagation in a realistic model of adult human head. A specific FDTD method is used for modelling low-frequency magnetic propagation in a brain undergoing TMS with single and double stimulation coils positioned over functional areas of interest for both types of disorder. The results enable to observe the main characteristics of each type of stimulation. The analysis performed in this work constitutes the first approach towards the development of comprehensive predictive models that could enable to determine the magnetic radiation distribution in the brain, in order to appropriately control radiation parameters for enhancing and optimizing the stimulation process.Section 2 describes the theoretical foundation underlying the FDTD-based TMS model, which includes a brief review of the well-known FDTD method, as well as the implementation and positioning of two types of coils commonly used in the ongoing clinical trials involving neurodegenerative diseases. In Section 3 the model previously described is particularized for magnetic propagation during TMS in AD and PD. Results in Section 4 show the electric field induced in the brain regions of interest for both diseases using a single and a double coil with variable orientation. Finally, the main conclusions are presented in Section 5.This section describes the theoretical foundation underlying the FDTD-based TMS model which includes a brief review of the FDTD method as well as the implementation and positioning of two types of coils commonly used in the ongoing clinical trials involving neurodegenerative diseases.The FDTD method is a widely used approach for numerically solving electromagnetic propagation through different types of media. FDTD method exhibits very high accuracy and versatility, which makes it an essential tool for electromagnetic studies in many applications. In particular, it has been demonstrated that FDTD is a robust and efficient computational method for the calculation of magnetic propagation in biological tissues [13,14]. One example of its wide application is in [14], where FDTD was used to investigate the cerebral fields induced in a head model undergoing a different brain stimulation technique, electrical stimulation (Transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACs)). tAC directly applies current by stimulating electrodes, on the contrary of magnetic stimulation, which is applied by means of the magnetic coils employed in TMS to induce the desired cortical currents. Although at neuron level TMS excites the neurons with the same mechanism as electrical stimulation, the former is non-invasive. Previous works show that FDTD is a robust and efficient computational method for the calculation of magnetic propagation in biological tissues. However, as it is explained later in Section 3, devoted to the model application, its use for the study of magnetic propagation in human head for brain stimulation at low frequencies greatly increases the computational load. In this case, the computation problem can be solved by a frequency scaling method. In this section we present a concise description of the FDTD method, introducing the essential concepts and including all the fundamental equations involved in the process except the source model, which will be discussed in the next two subsections.FDTD method constitutes a direct implementation of Maxwell's equations in the time domain. This approach for solving Maxwell's equations may present limitations in terms of accuracy. Although these limitations can be overcome by means of adequately choosing the grid parameters and the temporal step [15]. In the present work, the spatial grid was chosen so as to cope with stability conditions, taking into account the geometry of the problem and the wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation. Therefore firstly a spatial discretization is performed using a rectangular mesh of (Nx, Ny, Nz) cubes with a constant cell size characterized by the edge length Δijk. Numerical stability conditions impose a minimum number of 20 cells per wavelength. As a consequence, the approach is valid under the stability conditions point of view. The basic element of the spatial mesh is given by the Yee lattice, in which the electromagnetic field vectors involved in the FDTD method have been depicted.Along with spatial discretization by a rectangular mesh, time is also discretized with a temporal step Δt. Stability conditions impose a maximum time step defined by Eq. (1), where cmax is the highest electromagnetic wave propagation speed in the medium.(1)Δt≤1cmax3/Δijk2From Maxwell's equations, and adapting partial derivatives to the spatial and temporal discretization described above, the equations for calculating the electric and magnetic fields for each position and time instant are obtained [13]. In particular, the magnetic field components Hx, Hyand Hz(defined in the face centre of each cube, whose cell identifier is denoted by the subscript) are obtained for the intervals between two consecutive time instants (denoted by the superscript) by the Eqs. (2)–(4), where the coefficientsH1xandH2xare respectively given by Eqs. (5) and (6).(2)Hxi,j,kn+1/2=H1xi,j,kHxi,j,kn−1/2+H2xi,j,kEyi,j,k+1n−Eyi,j,kn+Ezi,j,kn−Ezi,j+1,kn(3)Hyi,j,kn+1/2=H1yi,j,kHyi,j,kn−1/2+H2yi,j,kEzi+1,j,kn−Ezi,j,kn+Exi,j,kn−Exi,j,k+1n(4)Hzi,j,kn+1/2=H1zi,j,kHzi,j,kn−1/2+H2zi,j,kExi,j+1,kn−Exi,j,kn+Eyi,j,kn−Eyi+1,j,kn(5)H1xi,j,k=1−ρi,j,kxΔt(2μi,j,kx)−11+ρi,j,kxΔt(2μi,j,kx)−1(6)H2xi,j,k=Δt(Δijkμi,j,kx)−11+ρi,j,kxΔt(2μi,j,kx)−1The remaining coefficients (H1y,H2y,H1zandH2z) are analogously defined. Magnetic permeability μ and magnetic losses ρ are defined in the cube nodes. If the medium is inhomogeneous, it is necessary to obtain the effective properties in order to ensure the continuity of the tangent field components. Therefore, the effective magnetic permeability and magnetic losses for the calculation of the field components along the x direction are calculated by Eqs. (7) and (8) respectively.(7)μi,j,kx=μi,j,k+μi,j+1,k+μi,j,k+1+μi,j+1,k+14(8)ρi,j,kx=ρi,j,k+ρi,j+1,k+ρi,j,k+1+ρi,j+1,k+14The equations for the remaining directions, and those for the electric field, can be obtained in the same way [13].Finally, it is necessary to fix the Absorbing Boundary Conditions (ABCs) in order to avoid reflections and calculation errors in the edges of the spatial mesh. There are several methods widely used for this purpose [15]. In this work, we have used Mur's ABCs improved by the superabsorption method [16]. The first order Mur's ABCs are given for the electric field. Specifically, in the particular case of the ABCs for the z component of the electric field in the xy plane, the conditions imposed by the first-order Mur's ABCs are those expressed in Eq. (9) which are implemented in the FDTD method as in Eq. (10).(9)∂Ez∂t−c0∂Ez∂x=0,z=zmin∂Ez∂t+c0∂Ez∂x=0,z=zmax(10)Ez1,j,kn+1=Ez2,j,kn+c0Δt−Δijkc0Δt+Δijk(Ez2,j,kn+1−Ez1,j,kn),j=1:Ny+1,k=1:NzEzNx+1,j,kn+1=EzNx,j,kn+c0Δt−Δijkc0Δt+Δijk(EzNx,j,kn+1−EzNx+1,j,kn),j=1:Ny+1,k=1:NzThe equations above can be straightforwardly extended to the remaining components of the electric field with minor changes of the subscripts. Regarding the superabsorption conditions, they constitute an improvement of Mur's ABCs in terms of robustness and accuracy. The essential aim of superabsorption conditions is to compensate inconsistencies that are present in the boundary magnetic fields components due to residual errors in the electric field components calculated by Mur's ABCs. If we consider the y component of the magnetic field, the first step in the superabsorption method is to calculate Hyin the boundaries using the basic equations of the FDTD method, which yieldsHy1,j,kn+1/2(1)andHyNx,j,kn+1/2(1). After that, Mur's ABCs are applied to Hy, which givesHy1,j,kn+1/2(2)andHyNx,j,kn+1/2(2). Subsequently, the final value of Hyin the boundaries is given by Eq. (11).(11)Hy1,j,kn+1/2=Hy1,j,kn+1/2(1)+(c0Δt/Δijk)Hy1,j,kn+1/2(2)1+(c0Δt/Δijk),j=1:Ny+1,k=1:NzHyNx,j,kn+1/2=HyNx,j,kn+1/21+(c0Δt/Δijk)HyNx,j,kn+1/221+(c0Δt/Δijk),j=1:Ny+1,k=1:NzThis section describes the modelling of two magnetic sources (i.e. circular-shaped and figure-8 coils) commonly used in TMS that were used in the previous FDTD method.In this Section, we summarize a method for modelling a circular coil as an ensemble of simple dipoles. It has been shown that the electromagnetic field induced by a circular coil can be modelled by the superposition of the fields produced by several dipoles located at specific positions [17]. In particular, the approach firstly requires dividing the coil area into subregions, and subsequently locating a dipole in the centre of each of them. In that way, the normal component of the magnetic field (denoted as B(r, β) in two dimensional polar coordinates, where r is the radius and β the angle) is approximated by the weighted sum in Eq. (12).(12)∫0rb∫02πB(r,β)r⋅dr⋅dβ=∑k=1NpkB(rk,βk)In Eq. (12)N is the number of dipoles, pkis the weight associated with each of them and B(rk, βk) is the magnetic field for each dipole located at the corresponding polar coordinates. The determination of the weight and the position associated with each dipole is carried out by numerical solving of systems of nonlinear equations [18]. Here we consider the modelling of a circular coil by 12 magnetic dipoles, as shown in Fig. 1a). This model has a satisfactory degree of accuracy for coils to within approximately 60–80mm, depending on several spatial parameters [8]. In this case, the parameters employed are listed in Table 1.Each magnetic dipole can be modelled using a small-sized coil without magnetic core comprising a coil with a cross section A and N turns whose magnetic moment is expressed in Eq. (13), where i(t) is the current pulse that excites the coil.(13)Mz(t)=ANi(t)Here we use Gaussian pulses as described by the Eq. (14).(14)is(t)=I0t−t0τexp−t−t022τ2The parameter τ determines the centre frequency of the pulse, given by fc=0.16/τ, and the 3dB bandwidth, that is BW=1.15fc. FDTD simulations were carried out at 1MHz, using the dielectric parameters for the brain layers at the desired frequency and applying a posterior scaling method to the results [13].The initial position of the dipoles that model the coil is in the plane yz located in the right side of the head. Afterwards they are rotated in the space by the method described below.The position of each dipole in the yz plane specified in the reference system x0y0z0 can be expressed by means of Eqs. (15)–(17). Where rkand βkare the radius and the angle for the k-dipole respectively, whose values were reported in Table 1.(15)xk0=sb(16)yk0=rkcos(βk)(17)zk0=rksin(βk)The implementation of each magnetic dipole in the FDTD method is performed by the double-closed current loop model [19]. According to this method, the total current density for each of the two loops that model the magnetic moment of the dipole can be expressed as in Eq. (18).(18)Js(t)=AN2Δijk4i(t)In this case, the current density should be weighted by the weight associated to each dipole according to the values in Table 1 and the expression (19). So the moment of the magnetic dipole can be approximated by the weighted sum shown in Eq. (20) in an analogous way to the magnetic field.(19)Js(t)k=pkJs(t)(20)Js(t)=∑k=1NpkJs(t)This section addresses the model of a figure-8 coil from the extension of the circular coil model previously described. In this case a figure-8 coil can be modelled by means of 24 dipoles (12 for each of the two circular coils that comprise it) as it is depicted in Fig. 1b). Taking into account the structure of the figure-8 coil, two new parameters should be considered: the margin between the coils (m), which fixes the spacing between them, and the orientation of the coil axis (ψ).As in the case of the circular coil, the position of the dipoles is initially specified in the yz plane of the head reference system. In this case, the position of the 12 dipoles that model the first circular coil shape is given by Eqs. (21)–(23).(21)xk0=sb(22)yk0=rkcos(βk)+rb+12mcos(ψ)(23)zk0=rksin(βk)+rb+12msin(ψ)The position of the remaining 12 dipoles for the second circular coil can be determined by the Eqs. (24)–(26).(24)xk0=sb(25)yk0=rkcos(βk)−rb+12mcos(ψ)(26)zk0=rksin(βk)−rb+12msin(ψ)Finally, the current density is set to opposite sign for the two circular coils as it is expressed in Eq. (27).(27)Js(t)k=1,…,12=−Js(t)k=13,…,24The rest of parameters involved are the same that those used in the modelling of a simple coil, therefore the weight and the position of each individual dipole is obtained once again from the values listed in Table 1.This section describes the method used to place the coil at any point in the space and therefore to apply the magnetic radiation in the required position and at the desired distance of the head. For this purpose it is necessary to set the reference system. First the head reference system x0y0z0 whose origin matches the centre of the brain mesh is defined as it is shown in Fig. 2.According to this scheme, the central position of the source can be uniquely defined in spherical coordinates in this reference system by means of three parameters: the polar angle θb, the azimuthal angle φband the radius sb. The Talairach coordinates {xT, yT, zT} of the source are directly related to the spherical coordinates by means of Eqs. (28)–(30).(28)xT=sbsin(θb)cos(φb)(29)yT=sbsin(θb)sin(φb)(30)zT=sbcos(θb)The three coordinates define the position vectors→k0expressed in Eq. (31).(31)s→k0=xk0yk0zk0Once we know each dipole position, it is necessary to rotate the position vectors to place them at the final position specified by the polar angle θband the azimuthal angle φb. Such three-dimensional rotation can be carried out by means of two consecutive rotations. First, a rotation over the axis y0 is described by the matrix in Eq. (32), where the rotation angle αyis directly related to the polar angle according to Eq. (33).(32)Ry=cos(αy)0sin(αy)010−sin(αy)0cos(αy)(33)αy=−π2−θbThe second rotation is implemented over the axis z0 as it is described by Eq. (34) where the rotation angle αzis exactly the same as the defined azimuthal angle (αz=φb).(34)Rz=cos(αz)−sin(αz)0sin(αz)cos(αz)0001The concatenation of these two rotation operations over the initial position vectors→k0in the yz plane results in the position vector for each dipole in the source spatial position as expressed in Eq. (35).(35)s→′k=RzRys→kOFinally, it is necessary to pass from the head reference system to the global coordinate system xyz. The position of the reference system origin x0y0z0 is known as it is determined by the vectors→c. In the specific three-dimensional mesh of adult human head employed, the vectors→cis in Eq. (36).(36)s→c=90.77110.3786.94The positions→kof each dipole in the global reference system is given by Eq. (37).(37)s→k=s→′k+s→cThe method described provides the positions of the dipoles that model a source located at any desired point in space. The orientation of these dipoles is orthogonal to the coil plane and characterized by the unit vectorn→defined in Eq. (38), wheren→0is given by Eq. (39).(38)n→=n→0n→0(39)n→0=−xTyTzTThis section is devoted to the application of the model previously described to specific cases of Alzheimer and Parkinson disease subjected to TMS. Thus the selection of the parameters employed was obtained from the analysis of TMS clinical trials that have released beneficial effects over some dysfunctions associated with both neurodegenerative diseases. The parameters employed for the model of TMS in AD were obtained from [20], due to the fact that the authors observed an improvement in language dysfunction (auditory sentence comprehension) when they applied the magnetic stimulation over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in AD patients. Following their clinical setup, the magnetic stimulation in our model is applied over the Broadman area 8/9 with a Magstim double 70mm coil. We have also modelled a single coil in order to assess possible differences between both types of magnetic source.Regarding the modelling of TMS in PD, the parameters selection was carried out taking into account the clinical trial in [21], where the magnetic stimulation over the supplementary motor area (SMA) provided a relief of motor symptoms in PD patients. Therefore the magnetic stimulation in our model is applied over the Broadman area 6 with a double 70mm coil and a single 70mm coil. Furthermore in the case of the single coil, two different coil orientations (ψ=0° and ψ=90°) were tested.The FDTD method directly solves Maxwell's equations in the time domain. As a consequence, it is valid for arbitrary electromagnetic radiation. However, its application for the study of magnetic propagation in human head for brain stimulation at low frequency imposes some difficulties. The fact that the frequencies commonly used in TMS are very low (roughly between 0.1Hz and 10kHz, although the range is commonly restricted to 0.1–100Hz) makes it computationally unfeasible to perform a direct implementation of the FDTD method. In such situations, the problem can be solved by a frequency scaling method [13]. This method takes advantage of the quasi-static nature of the modelled situation. In particular, it is valid when the modelled volume is at least 10 times lower than the wavelength, and |σ+iωɛ|≫ωɛ0. Both conditions are verified for the case of brain tissue. According to such approach, the FDTD can be performed at a frequency f′ higher than the frequency of interest f, and subsequently perform the following scaling operation:(40)E(f)=ff′E′(f′).The dielectric properties included in the FDTD method are specified at frequency f. As well as that, modelling of low-frequency magnetic propagation in the human body converges in far less than a complete cycle, due to the small size of the modelled volume when compared to the wavelength. Taking into account this aspect can significantly reduce the computing time. It has been demonstrated that such approximation gives correct results for ratios of up to 1:200,000. In this work 100Hz stimulation was used due to the fact that it requires less computational load than lower frequencies providing similar results. These approximations are taken into account in our FDTD code. The method uses a three-dimensional realistic head mesh publicly available (namely Colin27 adult brain atlas FEM mesh Version 2) [22]. The total simulation volume is 212mm×240mm×208mm. Dielectric properties of the brain layers (skull, cerebrospinal fluid, grey matter and white matter) for the frequency considered in the FDTD simulations (100Hz) have been taken from the available literature [23], and are listed in Table 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, the FDTD method has been applied to a three-dimensional realistic adult head mesh for modelling the magnetic propagation in a human brain undergoing TMS. TMS was applied to functional brain areas associated with the language dysfunction in AD and with the motor symptoms in PD. The results show that the developed tool is able to predict the radiation distribution in the brain with high resolution for different magnetic source configurations. As a consequence the model outlined provides a valuable tool for the future identification of an accurate TMS dosimetry that facilitates an adequate therapy planning, taking into account the numerous factors that may affect the final treatment response.There is no conflict of interest.