@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Error propagation in the characterization of atheromatic plaque types based on imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A methodology for propagating imaging and segmentation errors is proposed.The error propagated to plaque characterization methods is estimated.The methodology is applied to IVUS, OCT and MRI imaging data.A more realistic validation is performed using the proposed methodology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Error propagation,Image formation,Atherosclerotic plaque,Intravascular imaging,Magnetic resonance imaging,Optical coherence tomography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Imaging systems transmit and acquire signals and are subject to errors including: error sources, signal variations or possible calibration errors. These errors are included in all imaging systems for atherosclerosis and are propagated to methodologies implemented for the segmentation and characterization of atherosclerotic plaque. In this paper, we present a study for the propagation of imaging errors and image segmentation errors in plaque characterization methods applied to 2D vascular images. More specifically, the maximum error that can be propagated to the plaque characterization results is estimated, assuming worst-case scenarios. The proposed error propagation methodology is validated using methods applied to real datasets, obtained from intravascular imaging (IVUS) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) for coronary arteries, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for carotid arteries. The plaque characterization methods have recently been presented in the literature and are able to detect the vessel borders, and characterize the atherosclerotic plaque types. Although, these methods have been extensively validated using as gold standard expert annotations, by applying the proposed error propagation methodology a more realistic validation is performed taking into account the effect of the border detection algorithms error and the image formation error into the final results. The Pearson's coefficient of the detected plaques has changed significantly when the method was applied to IVUS and OCT, while there was not any variation when the method was applied to MRI data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Diagnostic imaging plays an important role in medicine today. Delineation of vessels solves practical applications such as diagnosis of coronary artery disease and assessment of the degree of stenosis in carotid artery pathology [1]. Advantages in imaging technology led to a wide variety of imaging modalities for depicting the silhouette and the interior of blood vessels. These modalities can be either invasive [2,3], i.e. itravascular imaging (IVUS), optical coherence tomography (OCT), near-infrared spectroscopic imaging (NIRS), etc., or non-invasive [4,5], i.e. X-ray angiography (XRA), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), etc., each one having its advantages and disadvantages [6].Imaging systems perform measurements and all measurements have uncertainties due to the equipment imperfection, human imprecision, instrumental calibration, etc. These uncertainties [7] describe how accurately a mathematical model can represent the true physics, and are determined after system tests and by taking into account the measurement procedure to estimate its reliability. To estimate the error of a system (group of instruments), the accuracy of a specified output approximated by a given numerical method is measured. Imaging systems [8] transmit and acquire signals using a detector in order to construct the image. However, all imaging systems are subject to error sources and the detected signals that construct the image include the variations of the detector or possible calibration errors [9]. Those artifacts can affect image quality [10,11], even though some of them are corrected by medical equipment software, resulting sometimes in false image representation. These artifacts, along with the image quality can affect automated or semi-automated computer-aided image processing methods. Spatial resolution [12] is a major determinant of image quality and describes the level of detail that can be distinguished on an image. Spatial resolution relates to how small an object can be in order to be detected by a particular imaging system. Imaging resolution of a digital image can be described in many different ways, including spatial resolution. Therefore, spatial resolution of an imaging system affects its resolution and the ability to resolve vessel microstructures; consequently, producing an error in the final image. Image formation errors include the limitations produced both by the pixel resolution (spatial resolution) of the image acquisition system and by any other possible systematic errors. Spatial resolution, usually is reported in line pairs per centimeter (lp/cm) and provides an adequate metric of the uncertainty implied by imaging system's formation errors.The latest advances in computer technology and the need for automation of the diagnosis of vascular or carotid artery disease have made possible the development of automated methods for processing vessel images derived from various imaging modalities. These methods can be mainly grouped to methods segmenting the vessels [13–15] and methods characterizing the atherosclerotic plaque [16–20] of the segmented vessels, regardless of the imaging modalities used. Segmentation methods vary depending on the imaging modality or method being automated or semi-automated. Vessel segmentation methods are the key components of the automated plaque characterization methods; the results of a segmentation method are used as input in order for the plaque characterization method to be applied. However, all the plaque characterization methods have a serious drawback: plaque characterization and segmentation steps are validated independently. This leads to overestimated results as the segmentation error computed in the validation step and the acquired system image formation errors are not propagated into the final result.In this work, a methodology to study the error propagation for both segmentation step and image formation is presented. The proposed error propagation methodology is validated using three different plaque characterization methods [16,17,20]. The first method [17] processes IVUS images and segments the artery using a semi-automated border detection method [13], based on the use of deformable models [21]. The pixels of the segmented area are then classified to dense calcium (DC), necrotic core (NC), fibrous tissue (FT), fibro-fatty tissue (FFT) and normal tissue-media (M), using a classification algorithm. The second method [20] uses active contours to detect the luminal borders in MRI images. It implements a knowledge-based algorithm to characterize the lipid core (LC) within the segmented area. Finally, the third method [16] segments and characterizes the artery automatically by classifying the plaque in four different plaque types: calcified plaque (Ca), lipid plaque (LP), fibrous tissue (FT) and mixed plaque (MP).Although, the methods [16,17,20] have been validated thoroughly, the segmentation step error and the image formation error to the final plaque characterization results have not been taken into account. Currently, the proposed methodology is applied to present a more thorough and realistic validation. Specifically, for the IVUS method the influence of segmentation error and the image formation error to the detection of DC, NC, FT, FFT, M and the entire plaque area are validated. For the MRI approach, the influence of both segmentation error and the image formation error to the detection of LC are validated. Similarly to IVUS, for OCT the influence of both segmentation and image formation error to the detection of Ca, LP, FT, and MP are validated.Although the plaque characterization results are affected by the propagated errors, still the results of the three methods [16,17,20] are accurate enough (Pearson's coefficient>0.86 in all plaque types) to be used for research or clinical applications.The vessel plaque characterization methods are based on information derived from plaque segmentation methods, which detect lumen and media adventitia borders of a vessel. A block diagram showing the steps those methods and the error propagation from one step to another is presented in Fig. 1.The image formation error is calculated for the different modalities and plaque types based on simulation experiments. For the estimation of the maximum image formation error (MIFR) the shape Siof each plaque based on expert annotation, was used. A typical plaque shape based on expert annotation is shown schematically in Fig. 2a. For each Si, with area Apthe following simulation approach was used:1.Two grids: one with low resolution equal to the spatial resolution of the examined imaging modality and one with higher resolution (10×spatialresolution, Appendix) (Fig. 2a and b) were constructed,The following procedure was repeated100 times:the shape Siwas randomly11Based on a uniform distribution u(0.2×spatialresolution) for both horizontal and vertical directions.translated over the center of the grid,the cells of the high-resolution grid which are entirely inside the translated Si(Fig. 2c) were computed. Let Sibe the number of the cells that are both inside the translated Siand the low resolution cell. The low-resolution cell is considered as activated (Cact) if B/10>thr (thr=0.01, Appendix) (Fig. 2d),the area of activated cells were computed as: AC=∑Cact×Careawere Careathe area of the low resolution cell, while the MIFR for the specific Siand repetition was computed as:(1)MIFR(%)=100×(AC−Ap)Ap.The mean and std of the MIFR(%) corresponding to each shape Si, were calculated and presented in Table 1.The error which is propagated to the plaque characterization method is composed of the segmentation error of the method as well as the image formation error. The segmentation error is estimated for each modality by comparing the area of the ground truth and the method's detected area.The error on the segmentation method is estimated in terms of percentage to the surface of each case. The mean error (E) is estimated as:(2)E=Eb±Es,where Ebis the bias and Esis the standard deviation.Based on the bias and the standard deviation, an upper (overestimation) and a lower limit (underestimation) can be computed. Those two limits statistically cover 68.27% of all [22] cases and are employed for error propagation in geometry reconstruction. Therefore, for an area A, the overestimated area, Ao, is calculated as:(3)Ao=A+(Eb+Es)×A,and the underestimated area Auas:(4)Au=A+(Eb−Es)×A.To incorporate the image formation error, two cases were considered, when the segmentation error is already taken into account, Aoand Aufor overestimated and underestimated areas, respectively. In those cases, the image formation error estimated using Eq. (1), was incorporated.For Ao, an additional overestimation is considered due to the formation error, which is given by:(5)A′o=Ao+MIFR×Ao.Similarly for Auan additional underestimation is considered due to the formation error, which is given by:(6)A′u=Au−MIFR×Au.Plaque segmentation methods provide for each image frame two border lines: the lumen and the outer border. The region of interest (ROI) of the plaque detection methods is defined as the area between these two borders and is used as input to the plaque characterization methods. In order to estimate the error propagated in each plaque type, the ROI areas were modulated, until the desired area to be achieved (Eq. (5) or Eq. (6)), and were characterized.The propagation of image segmentation errors in the plaque characterization algorithm is a random process, without any specific constraints, therefore to modulate the ROI area (AROI) in each frame, we have implemented the following procedure:1.select either the lumen or the outer border of the ROI,divide the lumen (or the outer border) to four quadrants and choose one of the four,increase the lumen quadrant (or decrease the outer quadrant) when the goal is to underestimate the ROI (AROI=A′o) and decrease the lumen quadrant (or increase the outer quadrant) when the goal is overestimate the ROI (AROI=A′u),ifAROI<A′o(orAROI<A′u)return to step 1.A schematic presentation of above described procedure is shown in Fig. 3. The rationale, for using four quadrants was based on the assumption that an increment/decrement in the whole region of the lumen or outer border produces erroneous results (positive predictive value=1 or the sensitivity of the method=1); the area calculated by the method minus the common area between the two measurements and the golden standard area minus the common area between the two measurements is always zero. To overcome this limitation, the center of gravity of each lumen/outer border is detected, four quadrants are drawn and the lumen border can be increased or decreased uniformly (dividing the lumen to eight parts was also tested, and no significant change in the results was reported).To validate the proposed error propagation method, IVUS, MRI and OCT images were used. All participants provided informed consent, while the study was approved by the Institution's Ethical Committee. To characterize the atherosclerotic plaque in IVUS images a plaque characterization method [17] which detects four tissue types: DC, NC, FT, FFT and normal tissue (M), was used. For MRI images a method [20] which detect LC, is used. Similarly for OCT images, a method [16] that detects four tissue types: Ca, LP, FT and MP was used.The IVUS data were provided from the Department of Cardiology, Medical School of the University of Ioannina, using an electronic probe (Eagle eye Gold, Volcano Therapeutics, Inc.) of the following characteristics: synthetic aperture 3.5F and frequency 20MHz. IVUS images (size 648×648 pixels) and their corresponding virtual histology (VH-IVUS) [23] frames from 10 patients were acquired. From these dataset 35 IVUS frames were used as containing all four plaque types, and characterized [17] in order to study the error propagation. The color-coded VH-IVUS frames were used as gold standard.The MRI data were acquired from 24 patients and were provided from Dept. of Radiology, school of clinical medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. The image parameters were: proton-density weighted (PDW): repetition time: 1379.31ms and the effective echo time: 7.672ms. Longitudinal relaxation time weighted (T1W): repetition time: 1428.57ms and the effective echo time: 7.672ms. Transverse relaxation time weighted (T2W): repetition time: 1379.31ms and the effective echo time: 99.736ms. The field of view was 100mm for all sequences and the section thickness 3mm. 35 T1W images were randomly selected and characterized. Two expert observers detected the regions of interests and identified the LC in these 35 MRI frames (any disagreement was resolved by consensus) and the inter-observer variability for the two expert observers in the 35 LC regions was −045±1.56mm2. Those data were used as the golden standard for the validation of the proposed error propagation methodology.The OCT data were acquired from 22 patients, who underwent OCT investigation for clinical purposes using a C7XR Fourier Domain system (Lightlab Imaging, Westford, MA, USA) equipment. 35 OCT frames were randomly selected and characterized [16]. The data were provided by the San Giovanni Hospital, Rome, Italy. Annotations of two experts were used as gold standard for validating the proposed error propagation method. Any disagreements in experts’ annotations were resolved by consensus and the inter-observer variability for the two expert observers in the 35 tissue regions was −0.02±0.16mm2, −0.08±0.19mm2, −0.02±0.10mm2 and −0.06±0.26mm2, for Ca, LP, FT and MT, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a propagation methodology for calculating the error resulting from the application of sequential image processing methods toward plaque characterization in arterial segments is presented. Three application examples have been presented for plaque characterization in IVUS, MRI and OCT imaging modalities. All the methods presented in the literature, having sequential steps for characterizing the plaque do not take into consideration the error propagated from one step to another or the error resulting from the image formation. Although, presented in this work that the maximum resulted propagated error is higher than the initial one, the expected propagated error lies, in acceptable limits, not affecting clinical decision. Thus, the proposed methodology could be used as an extra validation step in plaque characterization methods followed by vessel segmentation.