@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Acoustic finite element model updating using acoustic frequency response function

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Updating an acoustic finite element model using acoustic frequency response function.Both real and complex frequency dependent admittance coefficients are considered.Effects of various numbers of measurement points are demonstrated.The proposed method is capable for noise case.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Acoustic finite element model updating,Admittance identification,Response function method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new approach for updating an acoustic finite element model using complex acoustic frequency response function is proposed in this paper, which is an iterative parametric updating method based on the response function method proposed by Lin and Ewins in structural dynamics. The updating parameters are the boundary admittance coefficients. Both the real and complex frequency dependent admittance coefficients are considered in this paper. Two examples of 2D models are conducted to validate the effectiveness of the approach. Effects of initial guess, the number of measurement points and background noise level are investigated in detail. It is found that the proposed method is robust and has the capability for identifying admittance with a limited number of measurement points.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, in order to decrease the environmental noise pollution or design the lightweight of structures, interior acoustic analysis of the structures such as aircraft, automobiles, marine vehicles and transportation vehicles has been received increased attention. Finite element (FE) modeling has been widely used for the interior acoustic simulation [1,2], especially in the low frequency range [3–5].An accurate acoustic FE model of a vehicle cavity is very important for the simulation of interior noise. However, due to lack of knowledge of the boundary admittance (i.e. absorber property of the various surfaces) of the acoustic cavity, the acoustic FE model may have inaccuracies. The acoustic boundary admittance represents the stiffness, the mass and the damping behavior of the acoustic model, which is the complex value. In Ref [6], either local or global admittance condition was demonstrated. The admittance coefficients usually evaluates by experimental measurements. The most classical way to achieve the coefficients is to use a laboratory set-up of a Kundt’s tube or impedance tube. And the admittance coefficients are assumed real in general, which is incorrect. Taking absorbing boundary as an example, if the admittance is assumed real, then it does not completely simulate the interaction of an absorbing material with the acoustic waves (phase shift occurs for waves propagating in porous media). To construct an accurate acoustic FE model, frequency dependent complex admittance coefficients are needed, and identification of the admittance coefficients by the numerical methods can be a potential strategy.Literature review on recent studies mainly reveals two types of numerical approaches for admittance identification. One type is based on the methods of inverse acoustics [7–10]. In Ref. [8], a BEM-based (boundary element method) NAH (near-field acoustic holograph) method was used to reconstruct sound source and boundary admittance for a two-dimensional interior problem. The admittance was obtained by taking the ratio of surface velocity and surface pressure. Park et al. [9] developed an inverse estimation method for identifying the acoustic impedance of a porous woven hose. A sensitivity equation was established by the measured transmission coefficient and the analytical transmission coefficient which was obtained from four-pole parameters [11]. The least-square algorithm was employed to get the perturbation value of impedance iteratively. Anderssohn et al. [10] presented a method for reconstructing the sound pressure field by using the modal basis of the Dirichlet problem and Tikhonov regularization with FE (finite element) discretization, the boundary admittance was identified later. This algorithm appeared to work well only for the hardly realistic case of Dirichlet boundary condition.The other type is based on the idea of acoustic FE model updating which is just the extension of structural model updating. Updating of structural dynamic FE models [12–16] has been already received considerable attention, while updating of acoustic FE models still has not been much addressed till now. A parametric updating technique based on the constitutive relation error (CRE) method was first developed by Ladevèze in structural dynamics [17], and Ref. [18] introduced the idea to acoustics. In Ref. [19–21], this method was further extended and investigated in detail. The main idea of the CRE method is to separate data into reliable and less reliable ones. A multidimensional unconstrained non-linear minimization algorithm of the Nelder–Mead type was employed. Hepberger et al. [22] also regarded the admittance identification as an unconstrained optimization problem, where the cost function contained a regularization term as well as a least-squares term for the difference of the measurements and analytical sound pressure computed by solving Helmholtz equation with FE discretization. The quasi-Newton method with the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) updated of the Hessian matrix and a Wolfe–Powell line search globalization was employed to solve the optimization problem. Later, a discretization based on proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) was utilized for the solution of the Helmholtz equation [23]. It was proved that the computational efficiency became 338 times than the former. Anderssohn and Marburg [24] formed a non-linear optimization system for acoustic boundary admittance identification, the theory of modal analysis in interior acoustics (just similar as the theory of modal analysis in structural dynamics [25,26]) was employed for the solution of the analytical sound pressure in order to avoid direct inversion of the system matrix. This optimization procedure contained two steps. In the first step, the genetic algorithm (GA) was used to seek the initial values of admittance. Then, a gradient-based method of second order, Newton’s method was applied for the final admittance values. It was shown that this algorithm was much better suited to reconstruct the sound field with arbitrary boundary conditions compared with the algorithm presented in Ref. [10]. Another updating method based on a constrained optimization was proposed by Dhandole [27]. The constrained optimization problem was solved using sequential quadratic programming algorithm, and the updating parameters were the admittance coefficients of the absorbing surfaces and the calibration errors of measurements. It can be seen from the above articles that little published work has been found for boundary admittance identification using a limited number of measurement points without involving sophisticated optimization techniques.Referring to structural dynamics, one knows the response function method (RFM) for structural model updating, which is one of the most frequently used frequency response function (FRF) based updating techniques. This method is first developed by Lin and Ewins [28,29], and it is to use measured FRF data to update the mass and stiffness matrices of an analytical model. However, the used FRFs of the updating formulation are known as complex FRFs, which have both real and imaginary parts, since all of the structural systems have damping. The use of complex FRFs to update mass and stiffness matrices of the RFM is not theoretically correct, and this would lead an inaccurate updated model. Fortunately, in acoustics, the mass and stiffness matrices are mainly associated with the acoustic space, which are generally accurate. The damping matrix is the function of the admittance coefficients, which is required to be updated. Then, helpful with the idea of the RFM, the use of complex FRFs to update damping is theoretically feasible. In this paper, a novel updating approach for the acoustic FE model based on the response function method (RFM) in structural dynamics is proposed. The updating parameters are the admittance coefficients. Both the real admittance and the complex frequency dependent admittance are considered. The key of the proposed approach is to construct the sensitivity equation using acoustic FRF, emphasizing that this new approach requires no sophisticated optimization algorithms. The overall procedure is very effective and accurate for admittance identification with a limited number of measurement points.This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 first introduces the acoustic FE model discretization. Then the proposed method is presented. Following these, Section 3 extends the proposed method to handle with the case of incomplete data. In Section 4, two numerical examples are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Effects of different initial guesses, various numbers of measurement points and measurement noise are also considerable. Finally, several conclusions and remarks are drawn based on the current study.In this section, a method for acoustic FE model updating using acoustic FRF is proposed, which is the extension version of the RFM in structural FE model updating.In linear acoustics, the wave equation encompasses the conservation of mass, the balance of momentum, the constitutive equation. One assumes a harmonic time dependence ofe−iωt, the wave equation is transformed into the Helmholtz equation for the sound pressurepin domain Ω(1)Δp+k2p=0where k is the wave number which is the quotient of circular frequency ω and speed of sound c.There are three types of boundary conditions known for the Helmholtz equation. These are Dirichlet, Neumann, and mixed Robin boundary conditions on parts∂1Ω,∂2Ω,∂3Ωof the boundary, respectively. The corresponding equations are given in the following equation:(2){p|∂1Ω=p¯vn|∂2Ω=jωρ∂p∂n|∂2Ω=v¯nvn|∂3Ω=Apwherep¯is the imposed pressure on boundary∂1Ω,v¯nis the prescribed velocity exciting the acoustic medium, and A is the boundary admittance.Consider a cavity of volume V, a surface S covered with sound absorbing material. In FE formulation of the problem, the governing equation of motion of multi-degrees of freedom (DOF) acoustic field can be written in the matrix form as(3)(K+jωD−ω2M)p=0whereK=∑ne∫Ve(∇N)T∇NdVe,M=∑ne∫Ve1c2NTNdVe,D=∑∫Seρ0AeNTNdSe,are defined as the acoustic stiffness, mass, and damping matrices with the element shape functionsNusing FE discretization, in whichρ0is the density of the medium of the cavity,Ais the admittance of sound absorbing surface andpis the vector of nodal sound pressure. The subscripteafterV,SandArepresents corresponding quantity for an element. Assuming the acoustic pressure fluctuation insideVto be harmonic with frequencyωrad/s, then Eq. (3) transforms into another form as(4)(K+jωD−ω2M)p=qin whichq=jωρ0(Σne∫VeNTQdVe), whereQis the volume velocity per unit volume,qrepresents the acoustic excitation inside the acoustic domain. Indeed, the governing equations in acoustics (Eqs. (3) and (4)) are very similar to those of structural dynamics; the sound pressure is analogous to the displacement.In structural dynamics, one defines the dynamic stiffness matrix (DSM) asZ(ω), which can be written as(5)Z(ω)=K+jωD−ω2MThen the frequency response function (FRF) can be obtained as(6)H(ω)=(Z(ω))−1Similarly, the FRF and DSM are employed for acoustics in this paper. Now, the following identities relating the DSM and FRF matrix can be written for the analytical model and experiment model respectively as(7)ZAHA=I(8)ZXHX=IThe subscriptsAandXrepresent the information of the analytical and experimental models, respectively. The symbol ‘(ω)’ respecting their dependence on frequency has been omitted for the sake of brevity.ExpressingZXin Eq. (8) asZA+ΔZAand subtracting Eq. (7) from Eq. (8), we can get(9)ΔZAHX=ZA(HA−HX)(10)HAΔZAHX=HA−HX=ΔHWith respect to rth column of measured FRF matrix, Eq. (10) can be written as(11)HAΔZAHX,r=HA,r−HX,rThis is the basic relationship of the proposed method for admittance identification. In acoustics,HX,ris not obtained by direct measurement, with the sound sourceqexciting at DOF-r,HX,rcan be obtained as(12)HX,r=pX,r/qrIf the actual admittanceAis real, then, linearizingΔZAwith respect to admittance coefficientsAigives(13)ΔZA=∑i=1nu(∂ZA∂AiΔAi)=∑i=1nu(∂(KA+jωDA−ω2MA)∂AiΔAi)in whichnuis the number of the admittance coefficientsAi.Since the mass and stiffness matrices are not the functions of the admittance coefficientsAi, Eq. (13) becomes(14)ΔZA=jω∑i=1nu(∂DA∂AiΔAi)=jω∑i=1nu(∑(∫Seiρ0NTNdSei)ΔAi)The derivative matrix∂DA/∂Aiis defined as(15)Ti=∑(∫Seiρ0NTNdSei)Therefore, Eq. (14) can be transformed into another formulation as(16)ΔZA=jω∑i=1nu(TiΔAi)Substituting Eq. (14) into Eq. (11), we can obtain the updating equation as(17)HAjω∑i=1nu(TiΔAi)HX,r=HA,r−HX,rEq. (17) written down at ‘nf’ frequency points chosen from the frequency range of interest can be combined and expressed in the following matrix form:(18)S(ω)(n×nf)×nuΔAnu×1=ΔHr(ω)(n×nf)×1in whichSis the sensitivity matrix,ΔAis the variation vector of the admittance coefficients, and the subscript ‘n’ is the DOF of the FE model. Eq. (18) is called the sensitivity equation, which is implemented iteratively until the convergence is obtained. The convergence criterion is based on the ratios between the admittance variations and the updated admittances. A value of 0.001 is used for the present study.If the actual admittanceAis complex frequency dependent value of the form:A=CR+jωCI, whereCRandCIare constant values, representing the real and imaginary parts of the absorbing admittance, respectively, then linearizingΔZAwith respect to admittance coefficientsCR,CIgives(19)ΔZA=jω∑i=1nu(∂DA∂AiΔAi)=jω∑i=1nu(TiΔCiR)−ω2∑i=1nu(TiΔCiI)Substituting Eq. (19) into Eq. (11), we can obtain the updating equation as(20)HA(jω∑i=1nu(TiΔCiR)−ω2∑i=1nu(TiΔCiI))HX,r=HA,r−HX,rSimilar to the above paragraph, Eq. (20) written down at ‘nf’ frequency points chosen from the frequency range of interest can be combined and expressed in the following matrix form:(21)[S(ω)(n×nf)×nuRS(ω)(n×nf)×nuI]{ΔCnu×1RΔCnu×1I}=ΔHr(ω)(n×nf)×1whereSRSIare the sensitivity matrix of the real and imaginary part respectively, andΔCR,ΔCIare the variation vectors of the real and imaginary parts of the admittance coefficients, respectively.Based on the above formulations, the algorithm of the proposed method of acoustic FE model updating can be summarized as follows:1.Construct an initial analytical value of the admittance coefficients for the acoustic FE model.Decide measurement points and measured sound pressure, then using Eq. (12) gets the experimental acoustic FRFHX,r.Choose updating parameters, i.e. boundary admittance coefficients.Set up the sensitivity Eq. (18) or (21).Find the variation of the updating parameters (ΔA,ΔC) by least square algorithm, and then compute the updated admittance just by adding operation for the new analytical acoustic FE model.Check for convergence. If convergence criterion is not satisfied then go on iterating by going back to step (5) else stop with the latest updated admittance coefficients representing the final boundary admittance values.In practice, it is not realistic to measure acoustic FRFs (H(ω)) of all the DOFs specified in an FE model due to a time consuming work. The case of incomplete data is more realistic than the case of complete data which assumes that the measurements are available at all the DOFs of the acoustic FE model.Thus, the basic updating formulation Eq. (11) can be modified in terms of measured and unmeasured coordinates as(22)[HAmmHAmuHAumHAuu][ΔZAmmΔZAmuΔZAumΔZAuu]{HXm,rHXu,r}={HAm,rHAu,r}−{HXm,rHXu,r}where the subscriptsmandurepresent the information of the measured and unmeasured DOFs, respectively.The first part of Eq. (22) which corresponds to measures DOFs is given below. The remaining part related to unmeasured DOFs is dropped:(23)HAmmΔZAmmHXm,r+HAmuΔZAumHXm,r+HAmmΔZAmuHXu,r+HAmuΔZAuuHXu,r=HAm,r−HXm,rwhereΔZAmm,ΔZAmu,ΔZAumandΔZAuuare the sub-matrices of the change of initial DSMΔZA. It is noted thatHXu,rcorresponds to DOFs that are unmeasured is replaced by their FE model counterpartsHAu,r, which is an approximation mean.Assuming that the sound admittance coefficients are complex frequency dependent, substituting Eq. (19) into Eq. (23), can be written as(24)(jω∑i=1nuHAmmTimmHXm,rΔCiR−ω2∑i=1nuHAmmTimmHXm,rΔCiI)+(jω∑i=1nuHAmuTiumHXm,rΔCiR−ω2∑i=1nuHAmuTiumHXm,rΔCiI)+(jω∑i=1nuHAmmTimuHAu,rΔCiR−ω2∑i=1nuHAmmTimuHAu,rΔCiI)+(jω∑i=1nuHAmuTiuuHAu,rΔCiR−ω2∑i=1nuHAmuTiuuHAu,rΔCiI)=HAm,r−HXm,r(25)(SmmR+SumR+SmuR+SuuR)ΔCR+(SmmI+SumI+SmuI+SuuI)ΔCI=ΔHm,rwhereSmmR,SumR,SmuR,SuuR,SmmI,SumI,SmuIandSuuIare the sensitivity matrices,ΔHm,ris the residual vector of complex FRFs at measured DOFs corresponding torth column. Eq. (25) written down at ‘nf’ frequency points chosen from the frequency range of interest can be combined and expressed as the sensitivity equation(26)[S(ω)(m×nf)×nuRS(ω)(m×nf)×nuI]{ΔCnu×1RΔCnu×1I}=ΔHm,r(ω)(m×nf)×1It is noted that all the sensitivity matricesSmmR,SumR,SmuR,SuuR,SmmI,SumI,SmuIandSuuIare actually represented with(m×nf)row andnucolumn. Eq. (26) is implemented iteratively by the following the updating process listed in Section 2.2.In this section, two numerical examples are considered to evaluate the performance of the proposed method. The first example deals with a 2D rectangular cavity. The other one is expressed as a more practical example which is to identify the admittances of the absorbing surface in a 2D car cabin cavity. A 3D car cabin cavity model is not adopted due to its large computation efforts. In both the examples, the medium in the cavity is air, whose density is 1.21kg/m3 and the speed of sound is 340m/s.Numerical studies on a 2D rectangular cavity are conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed method. The size of cavity structure is 1.5×0.6m (length and width). Three surfaces, named A1–A3, are covered with the absorbing material, as shown inFig. 1. The rectangular cavity is modeled into 30×12 meshes using a 4-nodded quadrilateral acoustic element with a total of 403 nodes. A unit point sound source is placed at Node 169 (0.5m and 0.5m).Assume that the admittance coefficient over surface A2 is real, and the others are complex frequency dependent admittance coefficients (A=CR+jωCI). Then, the number of the updated admittance coefficients is five. The experimental admittance coefficients are listed inTable 1. The frequency range from 0 to 600Hz is treated as the frequency range in which sound pressure is assumed to have been measured. Two hundred equally spaced frequency points from 0 to 600Hz are used for validation. Two test cases are presented to investigate the effectiveness of the proposed method. They are the updating cases of complete data and incomplete data. The first case is assumed that the sound pressures at all the DOFs are available. The other case is concerning for the incomplete measured data. For both the cases, the simulated experimental data is obtained by using different admittance coefficients compared with the analytical FE model. The updating algorithms have been implemented in MATLAB environment.This case addresses the updating process using complete measured data. Updating is carried out by the following algorithm presented in Section 2. In order to investigate the effect of the initial guess on the solution at the convergence, three groups of different initial guesses for admittance coefficients listed inTable 2 are used. Though the initial values of all the three groups are far away from the experimental values, the updating algorithm for all the different initial guesses result in convergence after 2 iterative computations. The updated admittance coefficients are exactly correct compared with the experimental values, which are also listed in Table 2.It is noted that the correctly updated values and the fast convergence speed are obtained for even very large discrepancies between experimental and analytical models due to the correctly updating theory for the case of complete data without any approximation according to Eqs. (18) and (21).This case deals with the more practical situation of the updating process using incomplete measured data. The algorithm presented in Section 3 is employed. To study the effect of the number of measurement points on updating, five configurations of measurements in the cavity are concerned. They encompass sound pressure measurements at 8, 8, 6, 4, and 2 positions. As seen fromTable 3, groups 4 and 5 both have eight measurement points, but the positions are different selections, which can be seen fromFigs. 2 and 3. Note that the measured positions for groups 1–4 are near the absorbing surfaces, and all the measured positions for these five groups are in the cavity, not belonging to the boundaries. According to the updating theory proposed in Section 3, we know there has been an approximation for the case of incomplete data, and this may lead the updating sensitivity matrix into ill-conditioned state. So a better estimation of the FE analytical model is employed here to evaluate the effect of various measurement points for updating, which is presented inTable 4.Fig. 4 shows an overlay of the real part for analytical and experimental FRF at Node 304 (1m and 0.55m) before updating, andFig. 5 shows an overlay of the imaginary part for analytical and experimental FRF. Obvious discrepancies of the FRF between the analytical and experimental models are found due to the different admittance coefficients. The updated results are also listed in Table 3. As seen from it, all the first four groups are updated to the correct values even with three measurement points, which indicates that the updating method does not need many measurement points to obtain well updated results. Furthermore, compared with the above completeness case, these cases have more iterative steps due to their incomplete measurements.Figs. 6 and 7 illustrate the real and imaginary parts of analytical and experimental FRF, respectively. They are fitting well due to the exact admittance coefficients after updating.Pay attention to group 5, unlucky, the updating algorithm for this group is not convergent. This is because the positions of measurement points for group 5 are farther away from the absorbing boundaries compared with these of group 4. The sensitivity matrix computed by the acoustic FRFs is not sensitive to the updating admittance coefficients, this could lead the updating algorithm to be divergent. It indicates that the measurement points should be near the absorbing boundaries for the case of incomplete data, which would make the updating algorithm faster and more accurate. However, optimal positions for a minimal number of measurement points have not been determined, and it will be studied in the future.To investigate the effect of various analytical FE models (various initial guesses) on the updated solution, four groups of different initial guesses are considered as shown inTable 5, and four measurement points are used. As it can been seen, from group 1 to group 4, the discrepancies between the experimental and analytical FE models are larger, and the updating algorithm needs more iterations except for the group 4 which is not convergent to the correct updated results due to its large discrepancies. It indicates that a closer initial guesses are easier for the proposed method iterating to the correct values in the presence of incomplete data. A reasonable initial estimation of the admittance might be determined by using Kundt’s tube.In practical measurement, the measured sound pressure is often contaminated by some amount of background noise. To investigate the effect of the noise on the performance of the proposed updating method, simulated random noise is added to the measured complex sound pressure. The noise is obtained by multiplying the real and imaginary parts of each measurement by(1+n×N), whereNis a random number chosen from a normal distribution with mean zero and variance one, andnis the noise level. Four measurement points are used here, and the initial admittance coefficients in Table 4 are adopted for this analytical FE model. An average noise level of 2% and then 5% (i.e.n=2%andn=5%) is added to the sound pressure for updating, respectively.For the subcase of 2%, after 11 iterative computations, the updated results are obtained. As seen fromTable 6, all the updated coefficients, except one of them, are identified within±5%error. The maximum error is −15.7% of the imaginary coefficient for the first absorbing material.Figs. 8 and 9 show the real and imaginary parts of the acoustic FRF at Node 304 for the experimental and analytical models after updating, respectively. It can be observed that the modified sound pressure has a good agreement with the experimental sound pressure. For the subcase of 5% noise, after 13 iterative computations, the updating algorithm is convergent. As seen from Table 6, all the updated admittance coefficients, except one of them, are identified within 20% error. The maximum error is 29.2%. As expected, increase in the levels of noise results in a larger error in the updated coefficients. Even though the error in the updated coefficients increases with the level of noise, however, the identified sound pressure, either the real part or imaginary part, is still seen to agree well with the experimental values (without noise plotted), which are plotted inFigs. 10 and 11. This section indicates that the proposed method is also effective to update cavities with frequency dependent admittance coefficients in the presence of measurement noise.In this section, a study of a 2D car cavity that is geometrically more complex than the cavity taken in the previous section is considered. A 3D car cabin cavity model is not adopted due to its large computation efforts. The simplified geometry of it (length, 2.7m; height, 1.0m) was found in Ref. [24]. The FE mesh and boundary conditions are shown inFig. 12. The FE mesh consists of 152 eight-nodded quadrilateral acoustic elements with a total of 533 nodes. The sound field is excited by a unit point sound source which is placed at Node 432 (0.9123m, −0.4905m).As shown, four boundaries are covered with absorbing material, all of them use the complex frequency dependent admittance (A=CR+jωCI). So, eight parameters are required to be updated, four real parts and four imaginary parts. Eight measurement points near the boundaries are used for the updating process, as shown inFig. 13. Obviously, this belongs to the case of incomplete data. The updating algorithm presented in Section 3 is employed. For this situation, a better estimation for the analytical FE model is needed, as for the previous example. A quite random pattern of admittance discrepancies is used for this example, which is shown inTable 7. The admittance coefficients of the experimental and analytical FE models for the four absorbing surfaces are also presented in Table 7. As seen from it, all the discrepancies are not very large, the largest discrepancy is −60% which is produced by the imaginary part of the admittance of surface 3 and the average discrepancy for all admittance coefficients is 41.6%. After eight iterative computations, the updating algorithm results in convergence. The updated values are very exact compared with the admittances of the experimental model, which indicates the proposed method has the capability for updating the complex geometrical model. However, the scope of the reasonable initial values for successful updating is not considered, which will be studied in the future.This paper proposes an approach for acoustic FE model updating to identify boundary admittance using acoustic FRF. It is based on the RFM in structural dynamics, which is an iterative parametric updating technique. The updating parameters are the admittance coefficients of the absorbing material. Both the real admittance coefficients and the complex frequency dependent admittance coefficients are considered in this study. The key of this approach is to construct the sensitivity equation. Then, the least square method is employed to solve the sensitivity equation. Compared with the other methods of admittance identification, this method does not need to adopt any sophisticated optimization techniques through the updating process. The case of updating with incomplete data is emphasized, which is a realistic case in practice. Two numerical examples are presented to evaluate the performance of the method. Effects of initial guesses and various numbers of measurement points are also investigated. It is concluded that a better initial values and arranging measurement points near the absorbing boundaries are useful for identifying the boundary admittance more efficient and more accurate. Effect of background noise is also studied. In the case of minor noise, the updated error is still very small. Along with the level of noise increasing, the identified error increases. However, the updated sound pressure FRF is still accurate after updating.In the future, a complex 3D model is required to be studied, maybe with model reduction techniques to reduce the computational time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
