@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A risk management model for familial breast cancer: A new application using Fuzzy Cognitive Map method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of a familial breast cancer risk assessment model using Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) methodology.The proposed methodology concentrates its efforts on personalized/individual decision making including the family history and the demographic risk factors to elicit the hidden risk of developing breast cancer.Hebbian-based learning capabilities of FCM were used to improve the modeling issue and contribute to risk prediction.The accuracy of the system is compared with benchmark machine learning methods showing its superiority.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Familial breast cancer,Risk assessment,Fuzzy Cognitive Maps,Hebbian learning,Medical decision support systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Breast cancer is the most deadly disease affecting women and thus it is natural for women aged 40–49 years (who have a family history of breast cancer or other related cancers) to assess their personal risk for developing familial breast cancer (FBC). Besides, as each individual woman possesses different levels of risk of developing breast cancer depending on their family history, genetic predispositions and personal medical history, individualized care setting mechanism needs to be identified so that appropriate risk assessment, counseling, screening, and prevention options can be determined by the health care professionals. The presented work aims at developing a soft computing based medical decision support system using Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) that assists health care professionals in deciding the individualized care setting mechanisms based on the FBC risk level of the given women. The FCM based FBC risk management system uses NHL to learn causal weights from 40 patient records and achieves a 95% diagnostic accuracy. The results obtained from the proposed model are in concurrence with the comprehensive risk evaluation tool based on Tyrer–Cuzick model for 38/40 patient cases (95%). Besides, the proposed model identifies high risk women by calculating higher accuracy of prediction than the standard Gail and NSAPB models. The testing accuracy of the proposed model using 10-fold cross validation technique outperforms other standard machine learning based inference engines as well as previous FCM-based risk prediction methods for BC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast Cancer (BC) is the second most common malignancy among women with an estimated 1.38 million new cases per year globally [1]. It develops in the breast tissue, primarily in the milk ducts (ductal carcinoma) or glands (lobular carcinoma) which begin with the formation of a small tumor or mass [2]. A mass with a smooth, well defined border is non cancerous (benign). Mass with an irregular border or with spiculations may be cancerous (malignant). Detection and diagnosis of breast cancer in an early stage increases the chances for successful treatment and complete recovery of the patient.Familial breast cancer typically occurs in people with an unusually high number of family members affected by breast, ovarian or a related cancer [3]. Women having a number of first and/or second degree relatives affected with the above mentioned types of cancers either in their maternal or paternal lineage, have a high probability of inheriting the BRCA1/BRCA2 gene mutations. These people have an increased future risk of developing malignant breast tumors; thus they need to be given special attention in terms of the screening procedures, the screening frequency and other follow up procedures, even though their current screening study is absolutely normal and they remain asymptomatic. Hence, there is a strong need for developing a familial breast cancer risk assessment model that takes into account the risk factors related to age, personal medical history of the individual and more importantly her family history of breast cancer related incidences, as well as the demographic factors. This is expected to give a formal FBC risk assessment.National Cancer Institute has developed an interactive risk assessment tool, namely Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (BCRAT) which is based on the GAIL model [4]. The Gail model considers only first degree relatives and also takes no account of the age of onset of breast cancer. It underestimates the risk in the 50% of families with cancer in the paternal lineage [5]. As compared with the Gail model, the Claus model incorporates more extensive information about family history, but it excludes risk factors except family history [6,7]. Similar to the Gail model, the Claus model does not also consider the age and life style related factors for estimating the risk. Challa et al. (2013) have extended the Gail Model by including the puberty age and number of biopsies taken [8] to the Indian population in order to assess the probability of breast cancer. As it refers to the BRCAPRO model, it calculates the probability occurrence of a germ-line mutation of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes [9]. Moreover, the Tyrer and Cuzick model [10] integrates the factors related to family history, hormonal factors, and benign breast disease. These different models give aid to different categories of individuals by estimating the risk of developing a malignant tumor and provide suggestions for the required life style changes which could decrease their risk [10–13].Therefore, the available BC risk assessment tools/models concentrate either on family history, genetic mutations or hormonal factors and after all, these models perform well for populations but poorly for individuals. The models that are designed based on personal history (Gail model and its extensions) do not cover sufficiently the family history. Other models like Claus that focus on family history, perform poorly when personal history is added. Models like BRCAPRO only take into account the genetic mutations. There are only a few models like Tyrer–Cuzick that are comprehensive enough for BC risk prediction.In this article, a soft computing methodology is used to develop a familial BC risk assessment model which concentrates on both family history and personal medical history including also the demographic factors described in literature. FCM belongs to the class of soft computing techniques that is useful to model the dynamics involved in a given complex systems using a set of concepts and the relationship with each other. FCM inherits the main aspects of fuzzy logic and neural networks in a graph-based structure modeling complex decision making problems. Due to their ease to construct and use, their flexibility and adaptation to practically any problem domain, their support on uncertain knowledge, their relatively simple and comprehensible modeling philosophy which is very close to human reasoning and their capabilities to handle efficiently complex issues in different domains, FCM has become popular and found large applicability to many diverse scientific areas from knowledge modeling to prediction and decision making [14–17,55–57].In a recent previous work for medical decision support [18], an integrated risk prediction model using a two-level Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) structure was developed. The proposed model combined the results of the initial screening mammogram of the given woman with her demographic risk factors to predict the post-screening risk of developing BC. More specifically, the Level-1 FCM models the demographic risk profile and through Hebbian learning it helps on predicting the BC risk grade based on demographic risk factors. The risk grades estimated by the proposed model were validated using two standard BC risk assessment models viz. Gail and Tyrer–Cuzick. The Level-2 FCM models the features of the screening mammogram concerning normal, benign and malignant cases. The data driven hebbian learning algorithm (DDNHL) was used to train this model in order to predict the BC risk grade based on these mammographic image features. An overall risk grade was calculated by combining the outcomes of these two FCMs.Even though the proposed L1-FCM model included the demographic risk factors identified by domain experts, it does not completely cover the history of the individual, mainly the family history and personal medical history. The purpose of this study is to develop a BC risk assessment model which concentrates on family history and personal medical history using FCM methodology enhanced by its Hebbian learning capabilities. Moreover it aims to compare it with the standard models which estimate the risk of familial breast cancer among women. Actually, in this research study, we further consider more features related to the family history, such as the family history of first and second degree relatives, male breast cancer and personal medical history of the individual person in deciding their FBC risk level. The proposed model is concentrated on individualized personal decision making and though the efficient capabilities of FCMs can provide effective decisions about the individual BC risk level. No previous research has explored FCM for the stated purpose.The proposed soft-computing based model is flexible to incorporate new knowledge and its inference is based on expert knowledge. Besides, it covers comprehensively the age related factors, complete family history including the number and age of affected 1st and 2nd degree relatives, incidence of male breast cancer, etc., together with the life style and personal medical history details covering breast density, ADH and LCIS.The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 gives a literature review on medical decision support applications of FCMs, Section 3 describes an overview of FCM and Section 4 describes the identification of Risk Factors and the development of Personalized Risk Profile using FCM model for prediction of risk assessment of BC. Section 5 briefly outlines the unsupervised learning using NHL and provides the experimental results for 40 patient cases. Section 6 gives the discussion of results gathering the main advantages and limitations of the proposed approach. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.Previous decision support studies have shown that probabilistic networks, cognitive approaches and fuzzy logic based methodologies may be used for medical decision making [19,20]. Apart from providing decisions regarding mainly diagnosis and treatment suggestions, the probabilistic and cognitive processes are able to cope with inherent uncertainty and a priori knowledge. Their main drawback is that they require enough knowledge acquisition time and huge expert effort. Fuzzy Cognitive Map-based methodologies and algorithms have been proposed in a significant number of medical decision making and classification tasks. They have proved to facilitate doctors’ decision making and act as a proactive and reactive mechanism against health risks [15,21].Some examples of the successful applications of FCMs in medical decision support problems are described. In Ref. [22] FCM trained with Active Hebbian Learning algorithm to grade brain tumors was shown to give a better diagnostic output compared to fuzzy decision trees for low and high grade brain tumors. In another study, FCM has been used to predict the autistic behavior [23,24]. Another FCM tool has been used to diagnose meningitis and based on the severity of the disease, decisions regarding the most appropriate treatment were recommended [25]. In dental implantation the patient's anatomical and other conditions were analyzed and FCM was used as a decision making tool to determine the type of abutment from more than 370 items [26]. In Ref. [27], FCM technique was used to predict infectious diseases and the severity of the infection in the problem of infectious pneumonia. In Ref. [28], with a view to help medical and nursing personnel to assess patient status, to assist in making a diagnosis and to facilitate the selection of a course of antibiotic therapy, FCM was applied as a part of decision support system. In Ref. [29], a FCM was structured for differential diagnosis of alterations in urinary elimination, considering six possible diagnoses: stress urinary incontinence, reflex urinary incontinence, urge urinary incontinence, functional urinary incontinence, total urinary incontinence and urinary retention; and 39 signals associated with them. The model was implemented in Microsoft Visual C++® Edition 2005 and applied in 195 real cases. Its performance was evaluated through the agreement test, comparing its results with the diagnoses determined by three experts (nurses).In the case of classification, unsupervised data-driven non-linear Hebbian (DDNHL) algorithms were used for FCM learning using both experts’ knowledge and historical data. In comparison to other machine learning approaches, DD-NHL algorithm exhibits the following advantages: less computational effort, less time consuming and promising performance even in cases with small number of instances [30].For example, in Ref. [31], a method based on the FCM was introduced for the screening and separation of usual ductal hyperplasia (UDH) from the rest of intraductal lesions (classification). For this purpose, 86 patients in the Shahid Beheshti Hospital of Isfahan were studied. Ten of the most significant characteristics were extracted by three pathologists and used as the main concepts of FCM determining the screening of these lesions. An overall accuracy of 95.35% was obtained on the entire database. The obtained results indicated that the proposed FCM not only enjoys a high level of accuracy, but also is capable of offering an acceptable FNR while reducing the value of FPR to zero.Recently, FCMs enhanced by the Hebbian-based learning capabilities, suggested in Ref. [21], used to construct a Decision-Support Framework for promoting Independent Living and Aging Well. The presented FCM-based decision support mechanism was proposed for depression diagnosis in elderly people and was validated by applying it to numerous plausible artificial healthy and depressive-prone elderly cases. The produced results, which were evaluated by experts (neuropsychologists), demonstrated that the system worked satisfactory in the sense that a high level of accuracy was achieved. Also, a data driven NHL-FCM approach was adopted in order to train the FCM model toward predicting and assessing future health risks, e.g. depression.In the case of breast cancer there is no single factor identified as the reason for it. The cause-effect relationships between the combined effects of the multiple risk factors on the probability of developing breast cancer is not thoroughly studied and understood as yet. Even the opinions of oncologists and radiologists are highly subjective in this aspect. In such cases, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCM) have proved as a transparent and human friendly clinical assisting tool which uses the aggregated opinions of different experts in determining the causal relationships among the factors of interest and their degree of influence on the risk grade thus eliminating subjectivity to a considerable extent [14,18].The main scope of this work is the construction of a knowledge based decision-making tool to estimate the risk level of developing breast cancer for women having family history of breast and ovarian cancers. This also alleviates the cost burden and mental stress of undergoing routine screening tests for low grade risk women. The tool proposed in this research is designed to aid oncologists who are responsible for clinical decision-making regarding the follow up recommendations to women with family history of breast cancer who are currently normal or are having benign findings in the present mammogram study; more specifically, it helps them in making decisions regarding the most appropriate follow up screening modality and its frequency.A Fuzzy Cognitive Map consists of nodes that represent the concepts and edges representing the causal relationship between the concepts. The concepts reflect the key factors, characteristics and qualities of the system and are denoted by Ci, i=1,…N where N is the total number of concepts. Each concept takes an activation value Ai∈[0,1], i=1,…N and signed fuzzy weights Wij of the edges between Ci and Cj where j=1,…N, takes the values in the range [−1,1] [14]. A positive sign indicates a direct relationship between the concepts and a negative sign indicates an inverse relationship. The value of each concept Aiat any particular instance k+1 is calculated by the sum of the previous value Aiin a precedent instance k with the product of the value of Aiof the cause node Ciin the precedent instance k and the value of cause-effect link weight Wij. The mathematical formula is given in Eq. (1).(1)Ai(k+1)=fAi(k)+∑j≠ij=1NAjkWjiAi(k+1)denotes the value of concept Ciat simulation step k+1,Ai(k)denotes the value of concept Cjat simulation step k, Wij(k) ji is the weight of interconnection between concept Cjand concept Ciand f(x) is the sigmoid threshold function which is calculated as(2)f=11+e−λxwhere λ is a positive constant which takes value as 1 or 5 and f(x) lies between 0 and 1.The initial FCM graph constructed with weights assigned to the interconnections of the concepts with the help of experts’ knowledge have to be trained. To increase the effectiveness of FCM, learning algorithms are introduced able to adjust the weights assigned initially and extract the hidden valuable knowledge given by the experts [32]. The Data Driven Non Linear Hebbian (DD-NHL) algorithm proposed in Ref. [33] performed better than the generic NHL method. In Refs. [34,35] FCM learning was based on swarm intelligence algorithm and was able to effectively alleviate the deficiencies caused by the deviation in the experts’ suggestions. As can be stated from the literature, there are many evolutionary based algorithms for FCM learning and only some Hebbian-based. The Hebbian-based learning algorithms are mainly used in medical decision support problems where initial knowledge from experts is available to model construction and a relatively small dataset of historical data is used for classification and prediction.Breast cancer risk estimation is a complex process requiring an understanding of multifarious risk factors to arrive at a decision regarding the effective follow up procedure needed for early detection of a potential malignancy. The family history of a woman described by the number and age of first and/or second degree relatives known to be affected with breast cancer or any other cancer, her genetic predisposition with respect to BRCA1 and BRCA 2 genes, and her own personal history of ovarian cancer or any other benign breast diseases like ADH, LCIS, etc. is believed to have a significant impact on the woman's chances of developing familial breast cancer.The development and design of an appropriate FCM for the description of FBC grading system requires the contribution of expert knowledge. In the research work presented in this manuscript, the information regarding the breast cancer risk factors were gathered from physicians, different official online medical resources [45–49], various risk prediction models [10,11] and medical literatures [8,9,36,40,50] that provide recommendations and guidelines related to breast cancer and its clinical management. The gathered knowledge was then transformed as a well-structured questionnaire and was presented to four oncologists affiliated to the Radiology department of St. Lukes Radiation Oncology Network, Dublin, UK. The questionnaire covers different age related, life style related and primarily the family history related risk factors. On the basis of the aforementioned three experts’ opinion, 18 concepts were finalized as the main influencing familial risk factors of BC. The gathered concepts are given in Fig. 1and their description is given in Table 1.These 18 risk factors are the concepts that form the familial risk profile of the proposed FCM model. The FCM model construction with these 18 concept nodes is discussed in the following section.The FCM model for assessing the FBC risk grade comprises of 18 concepts identified by domain experts as representing the personalized familial risk profile (PFRP). This profile encompasses the risk factors associated with age of the individual, the number and age of first and second degree family relatives and personal medical history. The 19th concept is called the Decision Concept (DC) – in this case-one of the three FBC risk grades (Low, Medium, High) that decides the nature of the follow up screening modality and its frequency. The values of the 18 concepts (C1–18) decide the final Decision Concept (DC) i.e. C19. The DC represents the familial breast cancer risk grade.After defining fuzzy sets for the concept variables, each expert-oncologist was asked to describe the strength of association between the concepts using an “if-then” rule. The three aforementioned oncologists independently described their perception about the strength of influence of one concept to the other using the fuzzy if-then rules with respect to the PFRP features and the same was done with the help of two independent radiologists for image related features taken for study. Each concept has a weighted association on the decision concept (risk grade) and in some cases some of the concepts may have an impact on other concepts The experts described the influence of each pair of concepts in linguistic terms in terms of fuzzy if-then rules. For instance, the personal history of a non invasive benign breast disease Lobular Carcinoma In Situ (LCIS) is treated with chest radiation therapy. Thus ‘LCIS’ concept node impacts the concept node ‘Exposure to chest radiation’ with a certain degree featuring a causal relationship between the concept nodes C15 and C18.Following this, an aggregated fuzzy linguistic weight was inferred for each edge of the FCM by aggregating the fuzzy linguistic associations opined by the experts using SUM function. The method of Center of Gravity will defuzzify the linguistic weight into the numerical value in the range [−1,1] which corresponds to the causal weight of the given edge of the FCM. For example, the degree of influence of the concept C12 (Breast density) on the decision concept C19 was described by the three oncologists in terms of the following fuzzy if-then rules:1st Expert:If C12 is High then C19 is High. This means that there is a positive high influence from C12 to C19.2nd Expert:If C12 is High then C19 is Very high. This means that there is a positive very high influence from C12 to C19.3rd Expert:If C12 is High then C19 is Very Very high. This means that there is a positive very very high influence from C12 to C19.Using the SUM aggregation technique, the above three linguistic weights (high, very high, very high) are aggregated. Then the “centric” defuzzification method is implemented to calculate the numerical value of the weight in the range [–1,1] as illustrated in Fig. 2. The aggregated influence of C12 on output concept C19 is 0.77, which is shown as the center of gravity in Fig. 2. The weight of 0.77 is assigned to the interconnection from C12 to C19. In a similar way, the weights of all interconnections of the FCM model are obtained. The developed FCM is shown in Fig. 3.To fine tune the causal weights derived initially based on the experts’ opinion and in order to get more accurate results from the proposed FCM model, Nonlinear Hebbian Learning (NHL) method [42] was employed to learn the weights. The values of the concepts C1–C18 and the Decision Concept C19 were updated till all the concepts converge at their desired regions. The learning rate was set to 0.001. After reaching the termination state given in Eqs. (3) and (4), the value of concept C19 provides the category of the cancer risk based on the personalized risk profile of the case under study.(3)F1=∑i=1N(DOCi−Ti)2(4)F2=DOCi(k)−DOCi(k−1)<eHere, Tiis the desired target value of the decision concept and e is the tolerance level in the magnitude of the difference in decision concept in two successive iterations.For analyzing the reasoning capabilities of the proposed NHL-FCM tool, the model was tested with 40 patient records in various age groups ranging from 30 to 70 in which 15 records were estimated by the experts as belonging to Grade A where primary care setting is recommended, 15records of Moderate risk category and 10 of Low risk category.Since the proposed method is unsupervised, Tyrer–Cuzick model [10] which is quiet comprehensive in covering the BC related risk factors is taken as a benchmark for evaluating the results of proposed FCM. The NHL-FCM correctly classifies 38 out of the 40 given records correctly. The results are also compared with the standard BC risk assessment models GAIL [4], and NSABP [11]. The results obtained by the proposed model and the other standard models are shown in Table 2. The Tyrer–Cuzick model is considered as the most consistently accurate model for prediction of breast cancer [12]. The results obtained by the proposed FCM model are 95% concurrent with the Tyrer–Cuzick model. The Gail and NSABP models significantly underestimate risk for the patients with family history of second degree relatives. As can be shown from the conducted experiments there is a high degree of concurrence with the FCM model.For comparing the classification accuracy, the same data set was used for classification with other benchmark machine learning models. The WEKA tool box version 3.7 (Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis – Weka) [54] was used to test the other machine learning algorithms as follows: The back propagation Network with 18 input neurons, one hidden layer with 10 neurons and 3 output nodes (corresponding to the 3 output classes) was used as the multilayer perceptron (MLP, [58]). The Support Vector Machine, J48 decision tree learner C4.5 (Release 8) [59], MLP – ANN and the Naïve Bayesian Classifier were also used on for categorizing the risk into 3 classes viz., high, medium and low. The classification accuracy obtained from NHL-FCM and its comparison with other standard classifiers for each class of risk is summarized in Table 3. The proposed FCM technique outperforms the other classification methods in terms of overall Classification accuracy. This happens due to the efficiency of NHL to work with a very small data set for modifying the FCM weights, thus producing desirable decisions for the output concepts.To show further the superiority of the proposed methodology, the proposed model is compared with the previously proposed level L1-FCM model in Ref. [18], which was proposed to assess the BC risk considering the demographical factors with some features of image analysis and only some of the family factors.The following Table 4gathers the results of accuracy of the level L1-FCM model, published in previous paper, with the new one FCM model for familial BC risk assessment proposed in this work. For the same examined cases (forty) the proposed model predicts the individual risk level of BC much better than the previous one (L1-FCM), increasing the overall accuracy to 95% (Fig. 4).Also, a software tool with a GUI has been developed for this research work to show the implementation capacities and its usefulness in medical personnel to make decisions for this type of risk management. In above figure the breast cancer screening questionnaire is illustrated where the healthcare professionals can choose the respective responses for each question. Next pressing “Submit” the tool is able to infer a decision about the category of the FBC risk level.For a specific patient case, the tool is able to provide individualized decision support for breast cancer. The full version of the under development software tool is not fully described in this study, as it is out of the scope of this article.The proposed FCM model presented in the paper tries to mimic the reasoning ability beyond the available data – the extrapolative and augmentative ability of the domain experts for rational decision making in a clinical setting regarding the optimum follow up mechanism for women having strong family cancer history. The categorization of individuals into different care settings assists the physicians/clinical professionals in making a rational decision about the optimum follow up procedure needed.The 95% overall classification accuracy obtained through Hebbian-based FCM using 40 real patient cases and 95% (38/40 patient cases) concurrence of the results obtained from the personalized risk assessment model with the medical guidelines, make the proposed decision making tool a reliable and flexible individualized decision support system for clinical oncologists; it also significantly contributes in enhancing the oncologists’ consensus on the BC risk assessment process. The results provided by the conducted experiments are promising and suggest that our approach will assess the future FBC risk. Of course, further testing with a large number of real-life clinical cases is needed to further confirm this result.Actually, in the proposed model we consider four more familial factors (family history) which are the family history of first and second degree relatives, male breast cancer and personal medical history of the individual person in deciding their FBC risk level. The results have shown that this new model can predict the FBC with better accuracy than the previously proposed L1-FCM (see description in Ref. [18]).Next, the classification performance of each one algorithm was tested using mean absolute error (MAE) index, root mean square error (RMSE) index, classification rate (CR), that is defined as the percentage of the correctly classified patterns over the entire testing set, and True Positive (TP) rate, which is defined as the percentage of all true positive rates of the three categories.The objective function that is being minimized in all cases is the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between the actual and the desired output concepts of the prediction tools. The MAE performance index is defined as follows:MAE=1M∑k=1M∑l=1NDOClkReal−DOClkPredictedwhere M is the number of training sets (N=56),N the number of system output concepts (N=3) and (DOClkReal−DOClkPredicted) is the difference between the lth decision output concept (DOC) and its corresponding real value (target), when the kth set of input concepts appears to the tool's input.The RMSE performance index is defined as follows:RMSE=1MN∑k=1M∑l=1NDOClkReal−DOClkPredicted2where M and N are the number of training sets and the system outputs respectively.The classification analysis was performed and the results depicted in Table 5, show that that the FCM with DDNHL algorithm for training FCMs outperformed when compared with the previously proposed FCM tool and the benchmark machine learning approaches, with smaller training error, except the MLP-ANN. Even though the classification accuracy of the latter is found to be equal to that of the proposed FCM tool, for the case study conducted in the reported work, given the fact ANNs are not able to give any explicit knowledge or the causal relationships of the given system and simply behaves as a black box classification engine. This limitation of ANN make it less suitable for medical decision making systems and in this context the proposed FCM tool gains a clear upper hand over ANNs and other conventional classification engines.In previous study [18], the 40 cases were classified in three different categories of low, moderate and high, by the same experts (as 22 in High risk, 11 in moderate risk and only 7 in Low risk grade). Due to the fact that the number of cases in each category is different than the number determined in this case study, it is not possible to accomplish a straightforward statistical analysis between these two models in order to show the statistical significance.In order to test the performance of the five different approaches, DDNHL-FCM, MLP-ANN, SVM, Naive Bayes and Decision Trees, and show if they are statistically significant or not, a statistical analysis was explored. At first we implemented the two-sample F-test to compare two population variances. This tool provides the result of a test of the null hypothesis that the two compared samples come from distributions with equal variances against the alternative that the variances are not equal in the underlying distributions. The tool calculates the value f of an F-statistic (or F-ratio). A value of f close to 1 provides evidence that the underlying population variances are equal [14].This study is built on the hypothesis that there is a significant difference between the FCM for BC classification and the MLP-ANNs, the SVM, the decision trees (DTs) classification technique and the Naive Bayes. In Table 6, the systems (DDNHL-FCM, MLP-ANNs, SVM, Naive Bayes and Decision Trees) performance summary compared with FCM is illustrated. The applied F-test, or F-ratio hypothesis test, indicates that the f values in only one comparison (DDNHL-FCM/ANNs,) are higher than the critical values. Thus, the hypothesis is rejected, indicating that the differences in prediction are not statistically significant.In the case of FCM/SVM, FCM/Decision Trees and FCM/Naive Bayes, the differences in prediction are statistically significant.Next, we implemented the well-known t-test paired two samples of mean among the five different approaches to show if the results are statistically significant or not. This study is built on the hypothesis that there is a significant difference between the DDNHL algorithm for FCM (DDNHL-FCM) for classification, and the other machine learning approaches. Table 7gathers the results of t-test of all the systems’ performance summary compared with each other.The results of the hypothesis test shown in Table 7 reveal no statistically significance between DDNHL-FCM and ANN as well as between DDNHL-FCM and SVM techniques. In these cases, both methods produced about the same mean and standard deviations, with t-values of 0.37 and 0.21 respectively, which are insignificant at both one-tail (1.68) and two-tail (2.02) respectively. In the case of DDNHL-FCM/Naive Bayes and DDNHL-FCM/Decision trees, the calculated p-value does not exceed 0.05, so the observation is not consistent with the null hypothesis – thus statistically significance was revealed from the obtained statistical analysis. It is observed from the statistical analysis, that the DDNHL-FCM outperforms the Decision Trees and Naive Bayes and its results are statistically significant.The same happens in the case of F-ratio hypothesis test (F-test) where statistically significant results were observed for the cases of DDNHL-FCM/Naive Bayes and DDNHL-FCM/Decision trees.Concluding, the new FBC risk management tool has the following advantages:•It considers all the familial factors that have not been considered from any other previous models for BC risk assessmentIt is able to efficiently predict the risk level compared with other benchmark machine learning factorsIt has been implemented in software providing a user-friendly and flexible interface for individual decision making and supportIt's an easy to use methodology by physicians and other researchers to cope with personalized decisions in health care.It assists health care professionals in deciding the individualized care setting mechanisms based on the FBC risk level of the given womenSome limitations of the proposed methodology are: (a) the limit size of the patient cases used for learning and prediction of familial breast cancer, (b) its heavy dependence on experts’ knowledge and (c) no use of historical data and/or past observations of the given women. As different experts have different subjective opinions on their selection of risk factors and in deciding their degree of impact in triggering the BC risk, considerable efforts are needed to confine subjectivity. While the domain expertise and the reasoning ability of the human specialists are to be preserved, interpretability and transparency are also vital to the design of any clinically useful medical decision support system. Besides, these systems should be accurate and smart enough in capturing even subtle variations occurring in the diagnostic input patterns.Familial BC risk assessment is very important regarding getting proactive about adopting effective risk reduction strategies. As there is no single factor causing breast cancer, the multitude of risk factors that can be attributed to increasing the chances of getting BC and their interrelationship should be well understood. This will enhance the degree of reliability of the risk assessment models.To sum up, our efforts were concentrated on the exploitation (identification) of an individualized care setting mechanism to determine (define) appropriate risk assessment, counseling, screening, and prevention options by the health care professionals. The proposed tool is helpful for end users to accurately estimate their personal chance of developing familial breast cancer.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Personalized risk assessment is important to understand the individual risk level and helps for decision making for further screening follow up. Even though several breast cancer risk assessment tools were proposed so far, no available tool comprehensively covers the familial risk factors together with other demographic features. The proposed soft-computing based model covers comprehensively the age related factors, complete family history including the number and age of affected 1st and 2nd degree relatives, incidence of male breast cancer etc., together with the life style and personal medical history details covering breast density, ADH and LCIS. The classification accuracy of the proposed NHL-FCM tool is high when compared to other standard machine learning based classifiers like SVM, Naive Bayes, Decision Tree etc., as well as with the previous FCM approach for breast cancer risk assessment. The FCM-based model is more simple, transparent, comprehensive yet effective to accurately assess the risk level, especially for the women with strong family history.In conclusion, it is our belief that the proposed decision support approach has the capacity to accurately evaluate the familial BC risk factors and to assess the risk grade, by providing the clinical oncologists with useful information for adjusting the patients’ intervention procedure accordingly. Future work is directed to personalized medical decision support using more features and variables necessary for this task of decision making.