@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
JTSA: An open source framework for time series abstractions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
JTSA provides a collection of algorithms to perform temporal abstraction and preprocessing of time series.JTSA provides a framework for defining and executing data analysis workflows based on time series processing techniques.JTSA provides a GUI for workflow prototyping and testing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Temporal abstractions,Time series analysis,Data analysis workflow,Temporal pattern discovery,Biomedical data mining software tool,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveThe evaluation of the clinical status of a patient is frequently based on the temporal evolution of some parameters, making the detection of temporal patterns a priority in data analysis. Temporal abstraction (TA) is a methodology widely used in medical reasoning for summarizing and abstracting longitudinal data.MethodsResultsJTSA provides: a collection of algorithms to perform temporal abstraction and preprocessing of time series, a framework for defining and executing data analysis workflows based on these algorithms, and a GUI for workflow prototyping and testing.The whole JTSA project relies on a formal model of the data types and of the algorithms included in the library. This model is the basis for the design and implementation of the software application. Taking into account this formalized structure, the user can easily extend the JTSA framework by adding new algorithms.Results are shown in the context of the EU project MOSAIC to extract relevant patterns from data coming related to the long term monitoring of diabetic patients.ConclusionsThe proof that JTSA is a versatile tool to be adapted to different needs is given by its possible uses, both as a standalone tool for data summarization and as a module to be embedded into other architectures to select specific phenotypes based on TAs in a large dataset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Temporal abstraction (TA) is a well known data analysis technique that is frequently applied in clinical domains to analyze complex multivariate clinical histories [1,2], i.e. the series of relevant clinical events occurring to a patient (e.g. hospitalizations, visits, drug intakes, sudden variations of arterial blood pressure and glycemic control). A clinical history is in general made up of a set of temporal sequences related to heterogeneous information. The heterogeneity is not due solely to the variety of clinical variables, but also to the nature of the data (signals, values, reports), to the sampling grid used for data collection and to the temporal granularity of the observations. Since the evaluation of the status of a patient is frequently based on how his/her clinical variables evolve over time, the availability of systems able to automatically detect temporal patterns from data could support physicians in the difficult task of following a large number of patients.Temporal patterns detection can be particularly useful for a variety of medical analyses, such as data exploration and summarization, temporal reasoning, evaluation of the response to specific treatments, anomaly detection, and prediction of clinical outcomes. Temporal patterns can be extracted using different techniques and several methodologies have been proposed in the literature to achieve this goal. Despite the relevance of TA as a methodology for temporal reasoning, only few efforts have been made to create a framework that is general, easy to use and simple to integrate into other applications.In this paper we propose JTSA (Java Time Series Abstractor), a Java-based framework providing a library of algorithms for TAs detection, which can be easily extended and integrated into other applications. The novelty of JTSA relies in the possibility of combining different algorithms to define the analysis workflow suitable for detecting the desired temporal patterns. Such patterns can be conveniently extracted from the data thanks to the availability of the JTSA execution engine. A set of simple analysis blocks represents the starting point for building arbitrarily complex workflows. Single blocks and entire workflows are potentially reusable over different data sets and in different applications or medical contexts. The flexibility of JTSA, deriving from the possibility of tuning the values of a set of parameters and of combining blocks into workflows, makes it suitable for a large variety of applications, ranging from chronic diseases management to ICU monitoring. The framework is provided with a GUI that can be used both for workflows prototyping and parameters tuning, and as a tool for offline data exploration.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the related literature on TAs detection tools, Section 3 formally introduces the JTSA analysis process and components, which are then technically detailed in Section 4. Results on the application of JTSA to the diabetes domain are presented in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
