@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Eulerian analysis of bulk metal forming processes based on spline-based meshfree method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The geometry of workpiece is explicitly represented by NURBS curves.The explicit representation dispenses with the need to solve transport equations.Neat representations of workpiece are possible regardless of background mesh.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spline-based meshfree method,Isogeometric analysis,NURBS,Eulerian analysis,Metal forming analysis,Meshfree methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An effective Eulerian approach employing Non-Uniform Rational B-Spline (NURBS) curves as a boundary representing technique is presented. This approach is based on the Spline-Based Meshfree Method: analysis domain boundaries are represented by NURBS curves and a NURBS patch is employed as a background mesh. By doing so, clear and neat boundary representations are possible. Moreover, the explicit definition of the analysis domain boundary dispenses with the need to solve convective transport equations. In this work, utilizing the above idea, bulk metal forming processes are treated within Eulerian framework based on the flow formulation of rigid-plastic materials. The implementation issues of the proposed method are discussed in detail. The effectiveness of the present approach is shown by comparing with other numerical methods. It is demonstrated that the method yields reliable results even in the case where severe deformation occurs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the finite element analysis of metal forming processes, large deformation occurs accompanying severe mesh distortions. When dealing with such large deformation problems, conventional Lagrangian finite element analyses may have difficulties due to mesh distortion and therefore frequent remeshings are necessary to proceed the analyses. The remeshing increases computational cost and transfers solution parameters in an approximate way which can erode the solution accuracy. Vast amount of research can be found about the remeshing techniques from the 1970s, and these efforts led to the development of reliable commercial programs which are currently employed in metal industry.Besides above-mentioned efforts, some researchers are still finding ways to eliminate the mesh distortion problems. Meshfree methods are proposed in this regard and also applied to the analysis of metal forming problems. For an overview of meshfree methods, please refer to [1–3]. Numerous applications of meshfree methods to metal forming problems can be found: such as reproducing kernel particle methods (RKPM) [4–9], smooth particle hydrodynamics methods (SPH) [10], element free Galerkin methods (EFG) [11,12], and least-squares meshfree methods (LSMFM) [13,14] These methods successfully analyzed metal forming processes dealing with the problems of large deformation effectively.Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) method is another approach to analyze the problems with large deformation. In ALE framework, the finite element mesh does not need to be attached to the material or be fixed in space. The mesh can be moved arbitrarily relative to the material. The method combined the strengths of Lagrangian framework and Eulerian framework and analyzed metal forming problems as well [15–18]. However, controlling the mesh motion complicates the methods and mesh distortion problems still can exist when dealing with severe distortion of complex geometries.Another approach is the method based on Eulerian framework. In Eulerian framework, the mesh is fixed in space and only the material moves. Therefore, this framework is widely employed in fluid mechanics area where the deformation of material is severe. In the analysis of metal forming process, plastic deformation is dominant while elastic deformation is negligible. Therefore, the idealization to rigid-plastic material behavior is acceptable. The analysis based on this assumption is known as flow formulation[19]. In the flow formulation, metal workpieces are treated as an incompressible viscous non-Newtonian fluid. Several researches of the analysis of metal forming processes based on Eulerian framework can be found [20–26]. One of the main issues when implementing Eulerian framework is how to define and update the free surface of the domain. To define the free surfaces, several methods are proposed. One method is the pseudo-concentration method proposed by Thompson [27] and its applications to metal forming processes can be found [21–23]. The pseudo-concentration method assigns a pseudo-concentration variable(ci)to each node. Then, the pseudo-concentrations function is interpolated inside the analysis domain:c=Nici, whereNiis the basis function used in the analysis. The free surface is defined by the surface ofc=0, void regions are defined byc<0and material regions are defined byc>0. During the analysis, pseudo-concentration variables and solution parameters are updated by solving convective transport equations. Another method is the volume of fluid (VOF) method proposed by Hirt and Nichols [28] and its applications to metal forming processes can be found recently [24–26]. The VOF method defines a function f which represents a fractional volume of the fluid (solid) in each element that has a value between zero (empty) and one (fully occupied). When a certain element has a value between zero and one, it means that the element contains a free surface. During the analysis, the function f and solution parameters are updated by solving convective transport equations.The spline-based meshfree method (SBMFM) [29] is a new class of meshfree method based on isogeometric analysis [30]. The method combines the strengths of isogeometric analysis and meshfree methods. In the SBMFM, the non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS) patch is employed as a background mesh and the boundaries of the analysis domain are explicitly defined by NURBS trimming curves on the NURBS patch. One of the distinguishing features of the SBMFM is that domain boundary update is not performed on DOFs, but on the curves. Therefore only the curves are updated based on numerical solutions (displacements or velocities) while background mesh remains. Since the curves and the background mesh are defined with complete independence, the curves can move without any restrictions. The prescribed feature is illustrated inFig. 1. In the previous researches of the SBMFM [29], geometrically nonlinear problems are successfully treated.In this work, the SBMFM will be applied to the rigid-plastic analysis of bulk metal forming processes. The analysis procedure can be roughly summarized as follows: (i) set up an analysis model using NURBS trimming curves and NURBS background mesh, (ii) perform a rigid-plastic analysis and obtain a velocity solution, (iii) update the model (NURBS curves) according to the velocity solution, (iv) march the time steps until the end of process. It is expected that the use of NURBS curves to define free boundaries will bring some benefits compared to other methods. First of all, the boundaries are explicitly represented without any smoothing or approximation processes. Second, the analysis domain boundaries are represented by the curves independently from the background mesh. As a consequence, domain update can be done with Lagrangian sense without solving convective transport equations, sayxit+Δt=xit+vi⋅Δt. The circumvention of convective transport equations can drastically improve the convenience of the proposed method since upwind techniques such as SUPG method [31] are not necessary. Also, complex geometries can be represented regardless of the resolution of background mesh. In pseudo-concentration method or VOF method, the geometric resolution of analysis domain boundaries is determined by background mesh since the geometric data is stored in background mesh (pseudo-concentration method: nodes, VOF method: elements). Therefore, fine background mesh or certain smoothing techniques were necessary to obtain smooth and fine geometries. In the proposed method, the geometries of NURBS trimming curves are defined by control points of the curve, and any information of background mesh is not involved at all.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the preliminary studies of the SBMFM is briefly introduced. In Section 3, the rigid-plastic formulation employed in this work is presented and solution strategy is presented. The implementation issues of this method, such as NURBS trimming curve update from velocity solution and time integration of effective strain are discussed in detail. Numerical examples are presented in Section 4. It is shown that the analysis is successfully performed even in the case with severe distortions. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 5.In this section, the background of the SBMFM is briefly introduced. The SBMFM is exploited from the trimmed surface analysis [32], and the trimmed surface analysis is a method to improve the flexibility of isogeometric analysis.Isogeometric analysis [30,33] is a framework that integrates Computer Aided Design (CAD) and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) through the unification of the basis functions of the both CAD and FEA. Due to the versatility of NURBS, NURBS-based isogeometric analysis is mainly researched recently. NURBS basis function is widely used in CAD systems and has a lot of advantages as the basis function of FEA: a higher order continuity and an exact geometric description. Isogeometric analysis embraces the whole field of computational mechanics such as conventional structural analysis, fluid–structure interactions, optimizations, contacts, dynamics, and so on.NURBS-based isogeometric analysis has been applied to various fields of computational mechanics with substantial benefits over the classical FEA. However, NURBS-based isogeometric analysis experiences severe inflexibilities when dealing with the models with complex geometries. This is due to the tensor-product nature of NURBS objects: the object should be composed of multiple patches of rectangular shape. To model the complex geometries with multiple patches is not straightforward and cumbersome task. Therefore, in CAD systems, trimming techniques are widely employed. The trimming technique represents complex geometries by cutting-off unnecessary regions from rectangular patches. This technique significantly simplifies the modeling processes of NURBS objects. A brief illustration of the trimming technique is presented inFig. 2. Even for the simple geometry, the circular plate with two holes, 6 patches are necessary when the trimming technique is not employed. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the modeling process is simple and straightforward when the trimming technique is employed.Since conventional NURBS-based isogeometric analysis is unable to handle the trimmed information provided from CAD systems, an inefficient multiple-patch modeling process should be performed prior to the analysis. This inefficient process is against the spirit of isogeometric analysis. To get rid of this inefficiency, trimmed surface analysis [32,34] was proposed. In this method, the NURBS surface object with trimming technique is readily analyzed by deploying trimming information exported from CAD systems.In the trimmed surface analysis, trimmed elements are inevitably created since trimming information is directly utilized. Therefore, some special treatment for trimmed elements is necessary for an accurate numerical integration (for untrimmed elements, conventional integration schemes employed in NURBS-based isogeometric analysis can be used). For an accurate integration of trimmed elements, Kim and Youn proposed special mapping relations [32] based on NURBS-enhanced finite element method (NEFEM) [35]. InFig. 3, an example of the analysis domain of trimmed surface analysis is illustrated. The shaded elements are trimmed elements and they are classified into three types according to the number of vertices included in material region (or void region). Then, the classified trimmed elements are decomposed into triangular integration cells as shown inFig. 4. Each element is decomposed into triangular integration cells and curved triangular integration cells. For the triangular integration cells, conventional Gauss quadrature rules for triangular cells can be used; for the curved triangular integration cells, the special mapping relations [32] can be used. Consequently, the NURBS objects with trimming technique directly utilized in isogeometric analysis by the aid of trimmed surface analysis. For more details of trimmed surface analysis, please refer to the Refs. [32,34].Exploiting the idea of trimmed surface analysis, Kim and Youn proposed spline-based meshfree method (SBMFM) [29]. The main motivation of SBMFM is to inherit the advantages of both isogeometric analysis and meshfree methods. The concept of SBMFM is briefly introduced in Fig. 1. The distinguishing features of SBMFM can be summarized as follows:i)Geometries of analysis domain are represented by NURBS trimming curves only: Complex geometries can be easily modeled in this way. Domain boundaries are explicitly defined without any ambiguities in contrast with classical meshfree methods.NURBS basis functions are employed in SBMFM: The good characteristics of NURBS basis function are inherited in SBMFM. Beyond this, no additional parameters or schemes are necessary.Good harmony with CAD systems is guaranteed: The analysis domain of SBMFM can be produced with simple trimming operations in CAD systems. And the communication with CAD systems can be realized with standard file formats (IGES or STEP).The governing equations are given as follows [36]:(1)Equilibriumequation:∂σij∂xj=0(2)Constitutiveequation:ε̇ij=32ε¯̇σ¯σij׳(3)Yieldcriterion:σ¯=32(σij׳σij׳)1/2=σ¯(ε¯)(4)Compatibilitycondition:ε̇ij=12(∂vi∂xj+∂vj∂xi)whereσijis the stress tensor,σij׳the deviatoric stress tensor,ε̇ijthe strain rate tensor andvithe velocity field. The constitutive equation and the yield criterion are derived according toJ2flow rule. The effective strain rateε¯̇is defined as follows:(5)ε¯̇=23(ε̇ijε̇ij)1/2The flow stressσ¯is a function of effective strainε¯, and only work hardening effects are considered in this work.The variational functional associated with rigid-plastic metal forming analysis is defined as follows:(6)π=∫Ωσ¯ε¯̇dΩ−∫ΓnvTfdΓwherefis the surface tractions. The velocity fieldvin Eq. (6) is the admissible velocity field that satisfies the conditions of compatibility and incompressibility. The solution of the rigid-plastic metal forming analysis is obtained by taking variation of the functional Eq. (6).(7)δπ=∫Ωσ¯δε¯̇dΩ−∫ΓnδvTfdΓ=0The incompressibility constraint of the admissible velocity field in Eq. (7) can be replaced by the Lagrange multiplier method or the penalty method. In this work, the penalty method is implemented due to its computational efficiency and convenience. However, it is noteworthy that the implementation of the penalty method produces unstable pressure field and it can cause some problems in nonlinear analysis. If an accurate pressure field is required, pressure correction methods or Lagrange multiplier method will be necessary. For the imposition of incompressibility conditions in SBMFM with the Lagrange multiplier method, please refer to [37]. By using the penalty method, Eqs. (6) and (7) is modified as follows:(8)π=∫Ωσ¯ε¯̇dΩ+∫Ω12Kv(ε̇v)2dΩ−∫ΓnvTfdΓ(9)δπ=∫Ωσ¯δε¯̇dΩ+Kv∫Ωδε̇vTε̇vdΩ−∫ΓnδvTfdΓwhereε̇v=ε̇ii(volumetric strain), andKvis a very large positive constant (penalty parameter).In the analysis of metal forming problems, boundary conditions can be decomposed into three categories: velocity boundary conditions, traction boundary conditions and frictional contact boundary conditions.Velocity boundary conditions are essential boundary conditions. Velocity boundary conditions are defined as(10)v=v¯onΓdwhereΓdis the domain boundary where the prescribed velocityv¯is specified. In SBMFM, spline basis functions do not satisfy Kronecker delta property. Therefore, some special schemes are necessary to impose essential boundary conditions. In this work, we selected the penalty method to impose velocity boundary conditions. The penalty method is widely employed in meshfree methods to impose essential boundary conditions.Traction boundary conditions are natural boundary conditions. Traction boundary conditions are defined as(11)σn=f¯onΓnwhereΓnis the domain boundary where the prescribed tractionf¯is specified. Imposing traction boundary conditions can be done with the integration off¯along the domain boundaryΓn.Frictional contact boundary conditions in metal forming analysis are imposed at the die (tool)–workpiece interface(ΓC). The contact boundary conditions are mixed, they can be decomposed into normal direction and tangential direction of contact interface.For the normal direction at the contact interface(ΓC), non-penetration condition should be imposed. Thus, the non-penetration condition is imposed as velocity (essential) boundary conditions as follows:(12)vn=nTVdwhereVdis the die (or tool) velocity andn, the unit normal vector from workpiece to the die. Since the die is assumed to be rigid in this work, the unit normal vector is given by die geometry onΓC. Consequently,vnis given, and frictional contact boundary condition in normal direction can be imposed in the same manner described with the velocity boundary condition.For the tangential direction at the contact surface, frictional stresses exist due to the friction between die and workpiece. In this work, following friction law is employed [38]:(13)fs=−mkvs|vs|≈−mk{2πtan−1|vs|vo}vs|vs|=−|τ|vs|vs|wherefsis the frictional stress,mthe friction coefficient,kthe shear yield stress(σ¯0/3),vsthe sliding velocity of the material relative to the die and defined asvs=tT(v−Vd). Thev0is a small positive number compared tovs. Note that arctangent function and the constantv0are employed to catch the abrupt sign change of the frictional stress at a neutral point. The arctangent function makes the frictional stress Eq. (13) smooth (i.e., differentiable) and thev0makes arctangent function to saturate immediately. Generally, the value of 10−3–10−4 is acceptable forv0. Consequently, Eq. (13) corresponds to the traction boundary condition in tangential direction onΓc.The functional for rigid-plastic analysis including boundary conditions can be written as(14)π=∫Ωσ¯ε¯̇dΩ+∫Ω12Kv(ε̇v)2dΩ−∫ΓnvTf¯dΓ+∫Γd12Kd(v−v¯)2dΓ+∫Γc12Kd(nT(v−Vd))2dΓ−∫ΓcvTfsdΓwhereKdis a penalty parameter for velocity boundary condition. Taking an arbitrary variation ofv, Eq. (14) becomes(15)δπ=∫Ωσ¯δε¯̇dΩ+Kv∫Ωδε̇vTε̇vdΩ−∫ΓnδvTf¯dΓ+Kd∫ΓdδvT(v−v¯)dΓ+Kd∫Γc(nTδv)T(nT(v−Vd))dΓ+∫ΓcδvT|τ|(v−Vd)|vs|dΓIn the present work, velocity field is approximated as(16)v=RTv˜whereRis the basis functions in matrix form,v˜the corresponding coefficients (velocity values of DOFs). For two-dimensional cases, in matrix form, velocity field can be written as(17)v={v1v2}=[R10R20⋯0R10R2⋯][vx1vy1vx2vy2⋮]whereR1is the basis function corresponding to the specified connectivity and forv1, superscript is the connectivity number and subscript is a direction.The strain-rate can be expressed as(18)ε̇=Bv˜whereBis the strain-rate matrix. In this paper, plane-strain and axisymmetric deformation will be considered. For both cases, Eq. (18) can be written as(19)ε̇={ε̇xxε̇yyε̇zzγ̇xy}=[∂R1∂x0⋯⋯0∂R1∂y⋯⋯00⋯⋯∂R1∂y∂R1∂x⋯⋯][vx1vy1⋮⋮](20)ε̇={ε̇rrε̇zzε̇θθγ̇rz}=[∂R1∂r0⋯⋯0∂R1∂z⋯⋯R1r0⋯⋯∂R1∂z∂R1∂r⋯⋯][vr1vz1⋮⋮]Eq. (19) is for plane-strain deformation and Eq. (20) is for axisymmetric deformation.In the rigid-plastic analysis formulation for computational implementation use, the effective strain-rateε¯̇and the volumetric strain-rateε̇vare used. The effective strain rate in terms of strain-rate matrix can be written in matrix form as(21)(ε¯̇)2=23(ε̇ijε̇ij)=ε̇TDε̇=v˜TBTDBv˜The matrixDis the constitutive matrix. For plane-strain or axisymmetric use,Dmatrix is defined as(22)D=[23000023000023000013]The volumetric strain rate in terms of strain-rate matrix can be written in matrix form as(23)ε̇v=ε̇xx+ε̇yy+ε̇zz=Cv˜whereC=[1110]Bfor plane-strain or axisymmetric deformation cases.Eq. (15) is now discretized and expressed in terms ofvand its variation ofδv. A set of nonlinear equations, called stiffness equations, is obtained.(24)∂π∂v˜=∫Ωσ¯ε¯̇BTDBv˜dΩ+Kv∫ΩCTCv˜dΩ−∫ΓnRf¯dΓ+Kd∫ΓdRRTv˜dΓ−Kd∫ΓdRv¯dΓ+Kd∫Γc(nTRT)TnTRTv˜dΓ−Kd∫Γc(nTRT)TnTVddΓ+∫Γc|τ|I|vs|RRTv˜dΓ−∫Γc|τ|I|vs|RVddΓ=0In rigid-plastic analysis, Eq. (24) is nonlinear since the stiffness equations have a dependency on the velocity field. Therefore, the solution is obtained by iterative methods. Two methods are frequently employed to solve nonlinear problems: Newton–Raphson method and direct iteration method. The convergence of Newton–Raphson method is usually good and fast if an initial guess is close to the converged solution. If the initial guess is far from the converged solution, the method diverges. Another method is the direct iteration method. The method does not require the initial guess nor the 2nd derivatives of the functional. Therefore, the direct iteration method is used when the process is complex and obtaining a good initial guess is difficult.In the present method, not all the DOFs in background mesh (NURBS surface basis functions) are employed: some DOFs are active, and others are inactive (seeFig. 5). Moreover, as the analysis proceeds, some of the active DOFs are inactivated and some of the inactive DOFs are activated. In order to use Newton–Raphson method, reasonable initial guesses for the newly activated DOFs are needed. Furthermore, in this work, extended basis functions are employed for the numerical stability [39] (see Section 3.2.3 for the details of outer basis, inner basis and extended basis function). The influence domain of each extended basis function is different and extended basis function does not satisfy non-negativity property. Therefore, providing the good initial guesses for all the DOFs is not a straightforward task and the convergence of solution cannot be assured when Newton–Raphson method is used. Therefore, in this work, the direct iteration method is selected as our solution method. Fig. 5 shows the mesh configurations of rectangular bar example (analysis details will be described in the next section).The stiffness equations for the direct iteration method is constructed as follows (rearrangement of Eq. (24)):(25)(∫Ωσ¯ε¯̇BTDBdΩ+Kv∫ΩCTCdΩ+Kd∫ΓdRRTdΓ+Kd∫Γc(nTRT)TnTRTdΓ+∫Γc|τ|I|vs|RRTdΓ)v˜=∫ΓnRf¯dΓ+Kd∫ΓdRv¯dΓ+Kd∫Γc(nTRT)TnTVddΓ+∫Γc|τ|I|vs|RVddΓEq. (25) leads toKv˜=Fwhich is familiar finite element equation.The computational procedures of the direct iteration method can be summarized as follows [36,40]:1.Letn=1: Assign a constant average strain rate(ε¯̇0=0.001)and flow stress(σ¯(ε¯)=σ¯(0.0001))for each quadrature point in analysis domain, and assign constant average sliding velocity(vs=1mm/s)to contact boundary. Calculate initial guess of the velocity fieldv0.For the first iteration,Kv=0.75KvandKd=0.75Kd. From the second iteration,Kv=KvandKd=Kd.Compute all the matrices in Eq. (25) and solve the equations to obtain new velocity solution.CalculateΔvn=vn−vn−1, and update the velocity solution byvn=vn−1+αΔvn−1, whereαis the deceleration coefficient.Check the error norm of the velocity solution|Δv|/|v|. If the error norm is smaller than the specified criteria, go to step 6. If not, go to step 3 and repeat until the error norm becomes smaller than the specified criteria.Calculate the strain increment at all the material points and update their accumulated effective strain value. Evolve the geometry of the workpiece and coordinates of the material points (details are available in Section 3.2.2.3) from the velocity solution.Go to step 3 and start the iterations for the new time increment. If the analysis is proceeded up to the specified time, the analysis is ended.For the numerical integration of Eq. (25), we used Gauss quadrature rules. For the domain integrals, we used selective reduced integration method: reduced integrations for the incompressibility term and full integrations for the other terms. In this work, when quadratic basis function is used,1×1Gauss quadrature rule is used for the incompressibility term,2×2Gauss quadrature rule is used for the other domain integral terms, and 5-point Gauss quadrature rule is used for the boundary integral terms. For the triangular integration cells, 1-point Gauss quadrature rule is used for the incompressibility term and 3-point Gauss quadrature rule is used for the other terms. The deceleration coefficientαin step 4 is employed for the stable convergence of the velocity solution. The coefficient has the value between 0 and 1, decided by the value of the velocity error norm|Δv|/|v|. The material point and the evolution of the geometry of workpiece in step 6 will be discussed in the next section.According to the velocity solution obtained from Eq. (25), the geometry of the workpiece should be updated for the next time step. In this work, a NURBS curve fitting algorithm will be used to update the geometry. Among the various NURBS curve fitting algorithms, the chord length method is implemented since the method is generally adequate [41].Let us assume that degree, knots, weights and number of sampling points for the fitting are assigned by user. Since the number of sampling points is the same as that of newly generated control points of a NURBS curve, the sufficient number of the point should be used for the precise fitting. Assume thatQkis a set of equally spaced (in parametric space) sampling points defined by(26)Qk=C(u¯k)=∑i=1nRi,pC(u¯k)PiwhereC(u)is a NURBS curve which defines geometry,Ri,pCthe basis functions of the NURBS curve andPithe control points of the fitted curve. The subscriptpdenotes the degree of basis function, superscript c denotes curve basis function and s the surface basis function.The parameteru¯kis selected from the chord length method as follows:(27)u¯1=0u¯n=1u¯k=u¯k−1+|Qk−Qk−1|d,k=2,…,n−1where the constantdis the total length of the curve defined as(28)d=∑k=2n|Qk−Qk−1|With the definitions ofu¯k, Eq. (26) can be written as a system matrix of linear equation(29)[100⋯00R1,p(u¯2)R2,p(u¯2)R3,p(u¯2)⋯0R1,p(u¯3)R2,p(u¯3)R3,p(u¯3)⋯0⋮⋮Rn−1,p(u¯n−1)Rn−1,p(u¯n−1)000⋯01]{P1P2⋮Pn−1Pn}={Q1Q2⋮Qn−1Qn}The system matrix of linear equations (29) is positive definite and banded. Solving Eq. (29) gives a set of control points for a fitted curve and a set ofu¯kis a knot vector of the curve. Now, if we can obtain the proper sampling pointsQk, the update can be performed using Eq. (29). Conceptually the sampling points can be found as follows:(30)Qkn+Δt=Qkn+vi⋅ΔtwhereQkn+Δtare the sampling points of curve to be fitted, andQknare the points of curve before fitting. Eq. (30) shows the evolution of sampling points with the velocity solution of the current step.The detailed procedures of Eq. (30) can be described as follows:1.Find the parametric coordinates ofCn(uk)from the information of parametric curve as follows:Cn(uk)=(∑Ri,pC(uk)Ps,∑Ri,pC(uk)Pt)=(s,t)Calculate their coordinates in physical space from the information of physical surface (background mesh).(x,y)=(∑Ri,pS(s,t)Px,∑Ri,pS(s,t)Py)∈QknCalculate their velocities at the same point from the velocity solution(vx,vy)=(∑Ri,pS(s0,t0)vx,∑Ri,pS(s0,t0)vy)The updated sampling points are now obtained and curve fitting is performed.Qkn+vi⋅Δt=(x+vx⋅Δt,y+vy⋅Δt)∈Qkn+ΔtUpdate the geometry of the workpiece using the fitting algorithm.The conceptual illustration of the prescribed process is shown inFig. 6. The procedures are implemented in the previous work of the SBMFM [29], and showed a good performance in updating the geometry. It is noteworthy that sufficient number of the sampling points should be used for the precise expression of the updated geometry.The deformed geometry of the workpiece is obtained from the velocity field solution. It can be written as(31)xit+Δt=xit+vitΔtwherexitthe coordinates of the certain point of workpiece at timet, andΔtis the time increment. The update of deformed geometry is controlled by not only the velocity field solution, but also the time increment. The adequate time increment is an important factor for the solution of the rigid-plastic analysis. Many criteria can be considered to determine the time increment size. Such as maximum strain-increment consideration, contact consideration or a maximum time increment defined by user. In this work, consideration of the volume constancy (incompressibility) is a factor to determine the time increment [36] and less than 2% of volume loss is allowed at the end of the process.In rigid-plastic analysis, the entire domain is assumed to deform plastically. However, there can exist rigid zones or unloading. In these cases, effective strain rate becomes very small and the first term in Eq. (25) cannot be determined uniquely. The difficulty can be remedied by adopting limiting value of the strain rate [36]. This can be written as(32)∫Ωσ¯ε¯̇ε¯̇δε¯̇dΩ⇒∫Ωσ¯0ε¯̇0ε¯̇δε¯̇dΩforε¯̇≤ε¯̇0whereε¯̇0is a limiting strain rate value and10−3is used in this work.In the rigid-plastic analysis of metal forming, the material has a history dependent property (work hardening). Therefore, it is necessary to track the material trajectories, and the effective strain (ε¯) should be integrated along this path. In the conventional Lagrangian frameworks, finite element methods or meshfree methods, the trajectory of the material is easily tracked since the nodes or DOFs move with the materials. Therefore, the effective strain can be integrated with no difficulties. However, in Eulerian framework, the mesh is stationary and DOFs are also fixed, only the material moves. Therefore, in the rigid-plastic analyses based on Eulerian framework, convective transport equations are solved for not only geometry update but also effective strain update.In the present method, since there is no need to solve convective transport equations to update geometries, it would be better not to solve convective transport equations for the update of the effective strain as well. To do so, we adopt the material points to store and update the effective strain in the workpiece. By using the material points, not only the update of the effective strain is possible, but also visualization of the flow of the metals in the workpiece becomes possible. The material points are regularly distributed points in the workpiece.The material points are plotted inFig. 7. It can be seen that the material points are regularly distributed in workpiece and on the boundary curves. After the velocity solution is obtained, information of the material points are updated. First, the effective strain values of the material points are updated from the effective strain rates as follows:(33)ε¯n+Δt=ε¯n+ε¯̇n⋅ΔtThe coordinates of the material points are also updated according to the velocity solution as follows:(34)xin+Δt=xin+vin⋅ΔtFrom the information of the material points, we can approximate effective strain at any location in workpiece. We use very simple and straightforward method to approximate the effective strain at a certain location.The four nearest material points are searched as demonstrated inFig. 8, and they are averaged by distance weighted sum as follows:(35)ε¯=∑i=14(DistSum−Disti)3×DistSumε¯iwhere(36)DistSum=∑i=14DistiEq. (35) implies that bigger weights are assigned on closer material points. It should be noted that Eq. (35) produces a reliable approximation result when the effective strain value differences among the four material points are sufficiently small.In this work, the boundary representing NURBS curves can move without any limitations in the background mesh. In some particular cases, extremely small trimmed elements can be produced as illustrated inFig. 9.These small trimmed elements can cause a numerical instability of the system by amplifying the condition number of the global system equations (Eq. (25)). To stabilize the solution process, the extension of basis function [39] is implemented in this work. The extension process can be summarized into following two steps. First, classify inner and outer basis of active DOFs. The outer basis is the DOF which can cause numerical instability due to its small contribution to global system equations and the inner basis is the DOF which has a sufficient contribution. Second, merge outer basis into inner basis with the extension coefficient(ei,j)as follows:(37)uh(x)=∑i∈IRi(x)ui+∑j∈JRj(x)uj=∑i∈I[Ri(x)+∑j∈Jei,jRj(x)]ui=∑i∈IRie(x)uiTheuhdenotes a numerical solution,Rthe basis function anduthe coefficient of each basis function. The subscriptidenotes inner andjdenotes outer terms. For the calculation of the extension coefficient, the procedure introduced in [42] is implemented. In the present work, the extended inner basis function (Rie) is constructed through Eq. (37) at the beginning of numerical integration process. Then, the constricted basis function is employed in the analysis, like conventional finite element analysis.All the ingredients related with the solution process of this work is organized as a flow chart inFig. 10. During the processes, solving convective transport equations are avoided. The boxes filled with blue color are the process when convective transport equations are solved in conventional Eulerian analysis.In this section, the validity of the proposed method will be tested with bulk metal forming processes. The analysis results of this work will be compared to those of finite element method and reproducing kernel particle method (RKPM) [8]. The material used in this work is an Al6060 aluminum alloy at room temperature. The flow stress is defined as(38)σ¯=298.3ε¯0.0857MPaThe friction coefficient between the die and workpiece is considered 0.11 [8]. A constant upper die velocity 1mm/s is imposed until the desired deformation is achieved. The velocity norm to check the convergence,|Δv|/|v|, is set to5.0×10−4[36]. In this work, two penalty parameters are used. For the penalty parameter for Dirichlet boundary condition (Kdin Eq. (25)), we used1.0×108.For the penalty parameter for incompressibility (Kvin Eq. (25)), we used1.5×107.This is based on the previous literatures [43,44] and the value of the flow stress in Eq. (38). Typical time stepΔtwas0.04s.Cylindrical preform is compressed up to 60% reduction in height. The initial dimensions of the cylindrical preform are: initial diameterd0=8mm, and initial heighth0=8mm. The problem definition is illustrated inFig. 11.InFig. 12, the boundary conditions of this problem is illustrated. The quarter model is considered due to the symmetries. The left boundary is fixed in radial direction due to axisymmetry and the bottom one is fixed in height direction due to the symmetric deformation of the workpiece. On the top boundary, frictional contact boundary condition is imposed. In the analysis, quadratic basis functions are used with 21×23 background mesh, about 130–150 inner basis functions are employed and 2914 material points are used.InFig. 13, the mesh configurations and the material points of the problem are plotted. During the analysis, the DOFs involved are changed and flow of metals are visualized by using the material points.Fig. 14 shows the effective strain for the two levels of deformations. The contours of effective strain show good agreements with the Ref. [8]. The minimum and maximum values of contours are slightly different.Tables 1 and 2 compare the radial values of the workpiece with the reference, and shows a good agreement within about 1% difference.The predicted load is calculated at the upper flat die, and plotted versus its displacement inFig. 15. Also, the comparison was made with the Ref. [8]. The calculated load of present work was underestimated. The difference probably due to the different basis functions employed, different numbers of DOFs and the different framework employed (Eulerian framework).Rectangular bar is compressed up to 50% reduction in height. The initial dimensions of the bar are: initial widthw0=5.6mm, initial heighth0=5.6mmand initial lengthl0=20mm. The problem is assumed to be in plane-strain state. The problem definition is illustrated inFig. 16.In this problem, the full-model is considered in the analysis. In the analysis, quadratic basis functions are used with 29×27 background mesh, about 180–220 inner basis functions are employed and 2477 material points are used.InFig. 17, the mesh configurations and the material points of the problem are plotted.Fig. 18 shows the effective strain distributions for the two levels of deformation. The contours of effective strain show a good agreement with the Ref. [8]. As we can see in Fig. 17, the mesh is fixed and only the workpiece moves. Therefore, different discretization is performed on the workpiece in each time step and exact symmetric analysis result cannot be obtained. However, the value of the discrepancy is very small and within acceptable range.The predicted load is calculated at the upper flat die, and plotted versus its displacement inFig. 19. Also, the comparison was made. Unlike other numerical methods, present work shows under predicted result. It seems that the present work has a tendency to underestimate the load.A plane-strain backward extrusion problem is solved with the present approach. Backward extrusion problems involve severe distortions and rotations near the tool. Therefore, meshfree methods [11] or Eulerian frameworks [24] are applied to the problems of this class. The proposed method is expected to be effective in analyzing backward extrusion problems. The same set-up is utilized with the Ref. [8]. The initial dimensions of the workpiece are: initial widthw0=20mm, initial heighth0=10mmand extrusion ratioR=1. The problem is assumed to be in a plane-strain state and the punch moves downwards. The analysis is performed up to 8mm stroke of the punch.InFig. 20, the problem definition of backward extrusion example is illustrated. Due to the symmetry, only the half model is considered in the analysis. The punch is modeled as a rigid tool and the container is also considered rigid. The friction condition is the same with the previous examples. Quadratic basis functions with 36×32 background mesh is employed. During the analysis, about 400–435 inner basis functions are involved and 6250 material points are used.The boundary conditions of backward extrusion problem are little complicated. For the left boundary of the workpiece, symmetry boundary condition is imposed, and for the bottom boundary of the workpiece, the frictional contact boundary condition is imposed. However, for the other contact boundaries (the red dashed lines inFig. 21), the contact boundary conditions are nonlinear since they need continuous monitoring and update of the true contact interface as the analysis proceeds.For the bottom boundary of the punch contacting with the workpiece, contact boundary condition is continuously updated. Since metal flows to the right side, numerical modeling of the punch is continuously updated in each time step. Moreover, the contact boundary conditions are imposed weakly with the penalty methods. If we fully impose the boundary conditions on the bottom of the punch (5mm, actual punch width), the effect of boundary condition exceeds 5mm due to the compact support property of the B-spline basis function. In this work it was reasonable to impose the contact boundary condition slightly less than the actual width of the punch. In this work, the punch width is modeled as 4.65mm and the difference with actual punch width (0.35mm) corresponds to the length of one element in background mesh.For the side boundary of the punch contacting with the workpiece, contact boundary condition is continuously updated since the penetration of the workpiece into the punch is expected. To do so, we virtually set up very thin penetration detection zone along the side of the punch. If the penetration of the workpiece is detected by the detection zone, non-penetration boundary condition is imposed to the detected area.For the right side boundary of the workpiece, a detachment of workpiece from rigid container is expected. Therefore, continuous monitoring on the detachment of the boundary is required. The detachment is activated when a force component normal to the boundary changes sign [8]. To do so, we sprinkle force sampling points, and found the point where the force component changes its sign. In this work, initially 1000 force sampling points are used.The backward extrusion example is successfully analyzed as shown inFigs. 22 and 23. The results show a good agreement with those from the Ref. [8]. The effective strain distributions in Fig. 23 are very reasonable since high effective strains are mainly developed at the corner of the punch. The detachment is occurred during the analysis and seems reasonable considering the flow of metal in workpiece. For the high punch stroke such as 8mm, the bottom of the workpiece also experiences high effective strain. And the extruded part has low effective strains since they experience relatively low resistance during the process.The predicted load is calculated at the punch, and plotted versus its stroke inFig. 24. Comparing to the RKPM and FEM results, the underestimation is observed again. However, the fluctuation of the calculated load was smaller and the load curve was smooth than other methods. In all the numerical examples in this work, underestimation of the predicted load was observed and more investigation will be necessary about this topic.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, the SBMFM was applied to the rigid-plastic analysis of bulk metal forming processes within Eulerian framework. By employing NURBS curves to represent the geometry of workpiece, Eulerian framework was implemented with ease and the free surface of the workpiece was successfully defined and tracked. Moreover, the convective transport equations employed in conventional Eulerian framework was circumvented and neat boundary representation was possible regardless of background mesh configuration. The effectiveness of the proposed method was shown by the numerical examples and good agreements with the other methods were observed. Also, reasonable and logical predictions of the flow of metal were possible.One of the drawback of the proposed method is a blurred boundary condition imposition due to the basis function property and Eulerian framework (DOFs are not aligned to the boundaries). The refinements on the boundary condition imposition methods will be essential to improve the accuracy of the proposed method. The applications of the proposed method is not limited to metal forming analysis. Various applications will be our further research directions.