@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
CEPSim: Modelling and simulation of Complex Event Processing systems in cloud environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
CEPSim, a simulator for cloud-based Complex Event Processing systems, is proposed.CEPSim query model is based on Directed Acyclic Graphs.CEPSim simulation algorithm is based on a novel abstraction called event sets.Custom operator placement and scheduling algorithms can be used in simulations.Experimental results showed that CEPSim is effective for Big Data simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Complex event processing,Cloud computing,Simulation,Stream processing,Big Data,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The emergence of Big Data has had profound impacts on how data are stored and processed. As technologies created to process continuous streams of data with low latency, Complex Event Processing (CEP) and Stream Processing (SP) have often been related to the Big Data velocity dimension and used in this context. Many modern CEP and SP systems leverage cloud environments to provide the low latency and scalability required by Big Data applications, yet validating these systems at the required scale is a research problem per se. Cloud computing simulators have been used as a tool to facilitate reproducible and repeatable experiments in clouds. Nevertheless, existing simulators are mostly based on simple application and simulation models that are not appropriate for CEP or for SP. This article presents CEPSim, a simulator for CEP and SP systems in cloud environments. CEPSim proposes a query model based on Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) and introduces a simulation algorithm based on a novel abstraction called event sets. CEPSim is highly customizable and can be used to analyse the performance and scalability of user-defined queries and to evaluate the effects of various query processing strategies. Experimental results show that CEPSim can simulate existing systems in large Big Data scenarios with accuracy and precision.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The emergence of Big Data has been profoundly changing the way enterprises and organizations store and process data. Clearly, the sheer amount of data created by mobile devices, the Internet of Things (IoT)  [1], and a myriad of other sources cannot be handled by traditional data processing approaches  [2]. Simultaneously, there is also a consensus that obtaining insights and generating knowledge from these Big Data can bring competitive advantage to organizations using them. Therefore, these organizations have been actively pursuing alongside the research community new ways of leveraging Big Data to improve their businesses.According to the most commonly accepted definition, Big Data is characterized by the 4 Vs  [3]: volume, velocity, variety, and veracity. The velocity dimension refers both to how fast data are generated and how fast they need to be processed. As technologies created to process continuous streams of data with low latency, Complex Event Processing (CEP) and Stream Processing (SP) have often been related to the velocity dimension and applied in the Big Data context. From the business perspective, the goal of these technologies is to process fast input streams, obtain real-time insights, and enable prompt reaction to them  [4].The resurgence of interest in CEP and SP systems has been accompanied by the use of cloud environments as their runtime platform. Clouds are leveraged to provide the low latency and scalability needed by modern applications  [5–7]. Other systems explore cloud computing to facilitate offering CEP functionalities in the services model  [8]. In this context, the development of efficient operator placement and scheduling strategies are essential to achieve the required quality of service. However, validating these strategies at the required Big Data scale in a cloud environment is a hard problem and constitutes a research problem per se.First, cloud environments are subject to variations that make it difficult to reproduce the environment and conditions of an experiment  [9]. Moreover, setting up and maintaining large cloud environments are laborious, error-prone, and may be associated with a high financial cost. Finally, there are also many challenges related to generating and storing the volume of data required by Big Data experiments.Simulators have been used in many different fields to overcome the difficulty of executing repeatable and reproducible experiments. Early research into distributed systems  [10] and grid computing  [11] used simulators, as well as the more recent field of cloud computing  [12–14]. Generally, cloud computing simulators make it possible to model cloud environments and to simulate different workloads running on them. Nonetheless, these simulators are mostly based on application models and simulation algorithms that cannot represent properly the dynamics of CEP or SP systems. To overcome these limitations, this paper presents CEPSim, a flexible simulator of cloud-based CEP and SP systems.CEPSim extends CloudSim   [12] using a query model based on Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) and introduces a simulation algorithm based on a novel abstraction called event sets. CEPSim can be used to model different types of clouds, including public, private, hybrid, and multi-cloud environments, and to simulate execution of user-defined queries on them. In addition, it can also be customized with various operator placement and scheduling strategies. These features enable architects and researchers to analyse the scalability and performance of cloud-based CEP and SP systems and to compare easily the effects of different query processing strategies.This article significantly extends the authors’ previous work  [15] by improving the discussion about CEPSim’s goals and assumptions, by introducing the event set concept, by presenting detailed descriptions of all simulation algorithms and a thorough evaluation of CEPSim. New experiments include comparing CEPSim with a real SP system in multiple scenarios, assessment of its performance, and a detailed analysis of the available simulation parameters.The article is structured as follows: Section  2 presents background information and related work. Section  3 discusses the main design principles and assumptions of CEPSim, whereas Sections  4 and 5 detail fundamental concepts and the simulation algorithms. The experimental evaluation is presented in Section  6, and Section  7 is devoted to the final remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This article has presented CEPSim, a simulator for cloud-based Complex Event Processing systems. CEPSim can model different CEP systems by transforming user queries into a Directed Acyclic Graph representation. The modelled queries can be simulated on different environments, including private, public, hybrid, and multi-clouds. In addition, CEPSim also allows customization of operator placement and scheduling strategies, as well as the queue size and data generation functions used during simulation.Experimental results have shown that CEPSim can simulate a large number of queries running on a large number of virtual machines within a reasonable time and with a very small memory footprint. Furthermore, the experiments also demonstrated that CEPSim can model a real CEP system (Apache Storm) with good accuracy and precision. Together, these results validated CEPSim as an effective tool for simulation of cloud-based CEP systems in Big Data scenarios.By using CEPSim, architects and researchers can quickly experiment with different configurations and query processing strategies and analyse the performance and scalability of CEP systems. Hopefully, the availability of a simulator may also encourage research in this field.In future work, it is planned to add reconfiguration features to CEPSim, including dynamically moving vertices to other VMs and deploying new queries during a simulation. Moreover, experiments that simultaneously use multiple clouds will also be included.