@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
XFEM investigation of a crack path in residual stresses resulting from quenching

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Simulation of mechanical effects due to water quenching of a large thick plate made of 40CMD8 steel.Study of the influence of operating parameters on residual stresses with FEM.Application of XFEM to simulate a crack's path observed experimentally, which is initiated by the sawing of the plate.The results demonstrate the relevance of XFEM to study cracking problems through residual stress fields computed with FEM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quenching process,Residual stresses,XFEM,Crack path,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this work is the numerical study of a crack path in a residual stress field resulting from a manufacturing process such as quenching. An XFEM technique is proposed to that end and the example illustrating the quenching of a large thick plate is considered so as to demonstrate the capability of the method proposed. Indeed, during the quenching of steels, metallurgical transformations can occur, leading to high residual stresses at room temperature. From the practical point of view, the thick plate must be sawn after quenching. But it is experimentally observed that, under certain quenching conditions, the crack initiated by the sawing, suddenly propagates through the thickness of the plate and then rotates through an angle of about 90°. The numerical simulation of quenching is detailed and the results obtained under two operating conditions are given. Then the XFEM technique applied to the crack propagation in a residual stress field is presented and the cracking path obtained on the quenched plate is compared to that obtained using the FEM coupled with a remeshing technique. It is shown that the computed crack path justifies experimental observations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The quenching process is often used in industry to improve the material properties of many mechanical steel components. The quenching of steels involves a fast cooling stage from an austenitic state generally obtained in a furnace. Due to the concomitant gradients of thermal strain and to the volume changes associated with the transformation of austenite into bainite or martensite during the cooling, residual stresses and distorsions occur in the component during the process. The residual stress state can be responsible for quench cracks. But the component can also be sawn after quenching and the propagation path of the crack initiated by the sawing strongly depends on the residual stress field, which can lead to surprising cutting profiles.Measuring residual stresses through the thickness of a thick component so as to study the propagation path of a possible crack is utterly impossible. The numerical simulation of the quenching process is therefore the only way to access the residual stress field but the interactions between heat transfer, metallurgical transformations and stress–strain, as summarized in Fig. 1, have to be accurately taken into account. A large number of research studies have been carried out for simulating the temperature field, the metallurgical changes and the stresses and distorsions induced by quenching. One can cite the work of Inoue and Raniecki [1], Denis et al. [2], Bergheau et al. [3] and more recently Kang et al. [4] and Li et al. [5] propose finite element programs to investigate the process parameters, Carlone et al. [6] focus on the prediction of the metallurgical structure, Da Silva et al. [7] study the distorsions of a C-ring and Lingamanaik and Chen [8] include the effects of carburizing. The finite element method is generally used [3] for the numerical simulations.Studies concerning the propagation of a possible defect in the residual stress fields created by a quenching process are much rarer. Autesserre [9,10] proposed to use the finite element method combined with a remeshing technique and a second order fracture criterion to simulate the propagation of a crack in a quenched thick plate. But this type of approach is time consuming and is relatively complicated to implement. Moreover, when the piece is subjected to an initial (residual) stress field, this method raises the problem of the internal variables projection from one mesh to another. The past years have seen the emergence of new techniques to take account of the geometry of a crack and its evolution during propagation. The most popular enriched technique is the eXtended finite element method introduced by Moes et al. [11] for crack growth. It is based on the partition of the unity property of finite elements identified by Melenk and Babuska [12]. This approach is closely related to the GFEM technique proposed by Strouboulis et al. [13,14]. The XFEM method avoids both remeshing and the difficulty of the projection of internal variables such as phase proportions and plastic strains which are at the origin of the residual stress field in our case study. Therefore, the XFEM method is quite easy to use. Recently, Gallina [15] used the XFEM method to predict the formation of cracks during quenching but, to our knowledge, the simulation of a crack path in a component after quenching using XFEM has never been investigated.In this paper we propose to study the mechanical effects of water quenching on a large thick plate made of 40CMD8 steel, the dimensions of which are0.4⁎3⁎5m. This example comes from a real case study which has been studied by Autesserre [9]. After being completely austenitized in a furnace, the plate is quenched in water and then cooled in air up to room temperature before being sawn. Experience has shown that reducing the quenching time in water can lead to adverse effects, the sawing step becoming impossible to realize. It turns out that the saw initiates a crack which propagates almost instantly without following the desired trajectory because it rotates through an angle of about 90°. To understand the origin of this phenomenon by means of numerical modeling, this paper proposes a finite element approach to simulate the quenching step, followed by an XFEM simulation to compute the crack's propagation.Section 2 presents the numerical simulation of the quenching of steel components. All the phenomena and their interactions which need to be taken into account to compute residual stresses are detailed. Section 3 presents the case study and the computed results for different quenching conditions. Section 4 focuses on the modeling of crack propagation in a residual stress field and especially the analysis of the crack initiated by the saw in the case of interrupted quenching conditions. A comparison of the crack paths obtained with FEM coupled with a remeshing technique is presented to show the interest of the numerical approach proposed.Considering the Fourier conduction law, the heat equation writes:(1){ρḢ=div(λgradT)inΩλgradT·n=h(T(p)−T)on∂Ωwhereρis the material volumetric mass, H is the specific enthalpy, T is the temperature,λis the thermal conductivity,T(p)is the temperature of the quench liquid and n is the unit outward normal vector to the boundary∂Ωof the domainΩrepresenting the volume of the work piece. h is a coefficient which represents the heat exchanged between the mechanical component and the quench fluid supposed to be at the temperatureT(p)during the cooling phase [16]. These two parameters can depend on space and time and may be determined or adjusted, for example, from measurements of the drasticity.The weak formulation of the heat equation is classically obtained by multiplying Eq. (1)1 by weighing function T⁎ and integrating over the domainΩ[17]. Integrating by parts and accounting for the boundary condition (1)2, one thus obtains the following weak formulation:(2)∫ΩgradT⁎λgradTdv+∫ΩT⁎ρḢdv=∫∂ΩT⁎h(T(p)−T)dsFollowing the usual procedure, the weak formulation (2) is applied to the finite element approximation of the function T given by(3)T≈∑i=1NNiTiIn this expression, N denotes the number of nodes, Tithe value of the function T at node i and Nithe shape function associated to this node. Following Galerkin's approach, the weighting function T⁎ takes the same form.Applying for instance an implicit Euler algorithm for time discretization of the enthalpy H[18], the finite element method then leads to solve at each time step a system of N equations of the form:(4)∫Ωgrad(Ni)λgrad(T)dv+∫ΩNiρΔHΔtdv−∫∂ΩNih(T(p)−T)ds=0Three types of interaction between thermal and metallurgical phenomena must be considered [19,3]:•metallurgical transformations depend on the thermal history,metallurgical transformations are accompanied by latent heat effects which modify temperature distributions,thermal properties are phase dependent.Different approaches can be used to describe the transformation kinetics in steels [20–22]. These approaches rest upon the modeling of transformations under either isothermal conditions (IT diagrams) or anisothermal conditions. In the latter case, parameters come from CCT diagrams. The model we use in this study lies in the second category. Generally, those models can be expressed, in the case of one transformation, with a differential equation of the following type:(5)ṗ=f(p,T,…)where p is the proportion of the created phase. Leblond and Devaux [21] have suggested the use of a simple first order differential equation of the form:(6)ṗ=p¯(T)−pτ(T)F(Ṫ)p¯(T)denotes the phase proportion obtained after an infinite time at temperature T,τ(T)a time delay depending on temperature T andF(Ṫ)a function representing the dependency of the transformation rate with the temperature rate. These parameters are adjusted for each transformation in order to represent the CCT diagram. One can note that if theF(Ṫ)is chosen proportional toṪ, then the resulting phase proportion only depends on temperature as is the case for martensitic transformation which follows the Koistinen–Marburger law [23]:(7)p(T)=(1−e−b(Ms−T))where Msand b respectively characterize the temperature at the beginning of transformation and the evolution of transformation with temperature. In such a case, one has to choosep¯(T)=1forT≤Msand 0 else andτ=1/b. The effect of stresses on transformation kinetics has been widely examined [24], but, in practice, the lack of material data is a strong limitation to the application of models so that this effect is neglected in this study. Once p is known, the enthalpy H of the mixture may be obtained from the simple “linear mixture rule”:(8)H=(1−p)H1(T)+pH2(T)whereH1(T)denotes the enthalpy of the parent phase 1, the proportion of which is(1−p)andH2(T)that of the product phase 2, the proportion of which is p. Although this expression disregards possible thermodynamic interactions between the phases, it is widely considered to provide an acceptable approximation of the enthalpy of alloys during phase changes. The material volumetric massρand the thermal conductivityλof the mixture may be obtained in the same way. The model has been generalized in order to consider several transformations between several phases [21]. The material thermal properties are then obtained through mixture laws between the thermal properties of all the phases.The mechanical analysis is based on the momentum equation where inertial effects are neglected:(9)divσ=0inΩwhereσis the Cauchy stress tensor. It is performed with a plane strain assumption and the infinitesimal strain theory. Therefore,σis assumed to depend linearly on the elastic strain tensorϵeby means of the fourth rank elastic tensorCas follows:(10)σ=C:ϵeAs the effect of plastic dissipation on heat transfer and the influence of stresses on metallurgical transformations are neglected, the mechanical analysis can be uncoupled from the thermo-metallurgical simulation. In this way, heat transfer and metallurgy are involved in the mechanical analysis through four effects [19]:•the thermal strains,the volume changes due to the transformations (contraction during heating and expansion during cooling),the influence of temperature and of the phases on the behavior law (generally, the yield strength of phases is higher if they have been created with high cooling rates),the transformation induced plasticity.The strain rate tensorϵ̇is thus decomposed into a thermal and metallurgical partϵ̇th, an elastic partϵ̇eand a plastic partϵ̇pthat includes both classical plasticity and transformation induced plasticity:(11)ϵ̇=ϵ̇th+ϵ̇e+ϵ̇pThe volume changes due to transformations are a major cause of the appearance of residual stresses and strains. To include those changes, a simple solution consists in changing the standard thermal strain into the following thermal and metallurgical strain:(12)ϵth=(1−p)ϵ1th(T)+pϵ2th(T)whereϵ1th(T)denotes the thermal strain of the parent phase 1 andϵ2th(T)that of the product phase 2.ϵthreflects both the thermal strains of the phases and the volume change between the latter [25]. The stress–strain relation must be temperature-dependent, representative of the phase mix, and reproduce the transformation induced plasticity phenomenon. The material behavior law during transformation is usually supposed to be elastoplastic. Plastic strain rateϵ̇pis expressed as the sum of three terms, proportional to stress variationσ̇, temperature variationθ̇and phase proportion variationsṗrespectively:(13)ϵ̇p=a(…)σ̇+b(…)θ̇+c(…)ṗThe first two terms represent the conventional plastic strain rate, while the third one represents the transformation-induced plastic strain rate. Transformation plasticity can be associated with two physical phenomena:•Greenwood–Johnson mechanism [26]: the volume difference between the phases can generate microscopic internal stresses which are sufficient to induce plastic strain in the weaker phase (austenite).Magee mechanism (martensitic transformation only) [27]: in the presence of an external stress martensite needles are formed in a preferential direction.To apply the finite element method, the weak formulation for the mechanical problem is obtained by multiplying Eq. (9) with weighing functionU⁎and integrating over the domainΩ. The boundary conditions can be prescribed displacements or stress vectors imposed. Integrating by parts and considering that the surface of the workpiece is free of stresses, one thus gets:(14)∫Ωϵ(U⁎):σ(U)dv=0withϵ(U⁎)=12(gradU⁎+gradtU⁎)Following the usual procedure, the weak formulation (14) is applied to the finite element approximation of the displacementUwhich is similar to the one used for the temperature approximation:(15)U≈∑i=1NNiUiFrom the simulation point of view, the internal heating due to plastic dissipation is always neglected considering the small strain rates generated by a quenching operation [34]. Therefore, the simulation can be achieved through a staggered method which consists in splitting the analysis into two steps. First, the temperature and phase variations are determined as a function of time. Then, the mechanical computation uses the previous results to get displacements, stresses and distortions. Generally, for practical reasons, the mesh implemented for the thermo-metallurgical computation is also the one used for the mechanical analysis.The example proposed consists of quenching of a large size plate described in Fig. 2. A bidimensional simulation is carried out on a quarter section for symmetry reasons. The 2D mesh is plotted in Fig. 3. All the simulations have been performed using the computer codeSysweld®[35].The plate is initially at the uniform temperature of 900°C in a full austenitic state. It is then quenched in a water bath at a temperatureT(p)equal to 20°C. Two quenching conditions are considered. A first case of continuous quenching in which the plate is maintained in the water bath until it reaches a temperature close to 20°C (room temperature). A second case of discontinuous quenching in which the plate is taken away from the water bath after 3000s, the end of cooling occurring more slowly in air at 20°C. The values of the heat transfer coefficient h have been estimated using an inverse method and comparisons between simulations and thermal kinetics were measured with thermocouples. They are given respectively in Tables A1 and A2 for cooling with water and air. The values of the metallurgical processing parameters inSysweld®[35]K(T),K′(T)such thatp¯(T)=11+K′(T)K(T)andτ(T)=1K′(T)+K(T)andF(Ṫ)are given in Tables A3–A6 for the martensitic and bainitic transformations. Two types of metallurgical transformation have been considered during cooling: a bainitic transformation and a martensitic transformation. The conductivities and the volumetric mass are given in Tables A7–A9. The enthalpies are defined by means of the temperature T (°C) as follows:(16)Hferrite(Jkg−1)=0.18T2+460T(17)Haustenite(Jkg−1)=0.08T2+495T+105where Hferritedenotes the enthalpy of both bainite and martensite.The yield stress and the thermal strain are given in Tables A10–A14. The stresses are assumed to be zero everywhere in the austenized plate before quenching. Therefore, the thermal strain of austenite is taken equal to zero at 900°C as shown in Table A14. Young's modulus is assumed to be only temperature (and not phase) dependent and is given in Table A15. Poisson's ratio is taken equal to 0.3. For all the phases, hardening is assumed to be kinematic and is described in Tables A16 and A17. For computation, boundary conditions of symmetry are imposed on the left and lower sides of the quarter section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
