@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Musical-noise-free blind speech extraction integrating microphone array and iterative spectral subtraction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a musical-noise-free speech extraction method using a microphone array.We theoretically clarify the degradation of the noise estimation accuracy.We introduce a channel selection strategy to improve the noise estimation accuracy.From experiments, the proposed method outperforms the conventional methods

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Blind speech extraction,Higher-order statistics,Iterative spectral subtraction,Microphone array,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose a musical-noise-free blind speech extraction method using a microphone array for application to nonstationary noise. In our previous study, it was found that optimized iterative spectral subtraction (SS) results in speech enhancement with almost no musical noise generation, but this method is valid only for stationary noise. The proposed method consists of iterative blind dynamic noise estimation by, e.g., independent component analysis (ICA) or multichannel Wiener filtering, and musical-noise-free speech extraction by modified iterative SS, where multiple iterative SS is applied to each channel while maintaining the multichannel property reused for the dynamic noise estimators. Also, in relation to the proposed method, we discuss the justification of applying ICA to signals nonlinearly distorted by SS. From objective and subjective evaluations simulating a real-world hands-free speech communication system, we reveal that the proposed method outperforms the conventional methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the past few decades, many applications of speech communication systems have been investigated, but it is well known that these systems always suffer from the deterioration of speech quality under adverse noise conditions. Spectral subtraction (SS) is a commonly used noise reduction method that has high noise reduction performance with low computational complexity [1–5]. However, in this method, artificial distortion, referred to as musical noise, arises owing to nonlinear signal processing, leading to a serious deterioration of sound quality. To achieve high-quality noise reduction with low musical noise, an iterative SS method has been proposed [6–8]. Also, some of the authors have reported the very interesting phenomenon that this method with appropriate parameters gives equilibrium behavior in the growth of higher-order statistics with increasing number of iterations [9]. This means that almost no musical noise is generated even with high noise reduction, which is one of the most desirable properties of single-channel nonlinear noise reduction methods. Following this finding, the authors have derived the optimal parameters satisfying the no-musical-noise-generation condition by analysis based on higher-order statistics. We have defined this method as musical-noise-free speech enhancement, where no musical noise is generated even for a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in iterative SS [10].In conventional iterative SS, however, it is assumed that the input noise signal is stationary, meaning that we can estimate the expectation of noise power spectral density from a time-frequency period of a signal that contains only noise. In contrast, under real-world acoustical environments, such as a nonstationary noise field, although it is necessary to dynamically estimate noise, this is very difficult. Therefore, in this paper, firstly, we propose a new iterative signal extraction method using a microphone array that can be applied to nonstationary noise. Our proposed method consists of iterative blind dynamic noise estimation by independent component analysis (ICA) [11,12] and musical-noise-free speech extraction by modified iterative SS.Secondly, in relation to the proposed method, we discuss the justification of applying ICA to signals nonlinearly distorted by SS. We theoretically clarify that the degradation in ICA-based noise estimation obeys an amplitude variation in room transfer functions between the target user and microphones. Next, to reduce speech distortion, we introduce a channel selection strategy into ICA, where we automatically choose less varied inputs to maintain the high accuracy of noise estimation. Furthermore, we introduce a time-variant noise power spectral density (PSD) estimator [13] instead of ICA to improve the noise estimation accuracy. From objective and subjective evaluations, we reveal that the proposed method outperforms the conventional methods.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe related works on SS and the musical noise metric. In Section 3, the new musical-noise-free blind speech extraction method is proposed. In Section 4, an improvement scheme for poor noise estimation is presented. In Section 5, objective and subjective evaluations are described. Following a discussion on the results of the experiments, we present our conclusions in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
