@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive marker-free registration using a multiple point strategy for real-time and robust endoscope electromagnetic navigation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed an adaptive mark-free registration method for aligning electromagnetic trackers and pre-operative images.An endoscope center calibration on the basis of a 2D-printed model was presented.A multiple point strategy was proposed to address an assumption of moving endoscopes along the centerline of the intraluminal organ.The registration error was significantly reduced from 7.58 to 4.71mm under dynamic phantom validation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Marker-free registration,Endoscope 3-D motion tracking,Electromagnetically navigated endoscopy,Bronchoscope navigation,Electromagnetic tracker,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Registration of pre-clinical images to physical space is indispensable for computer-assisted endoscopic interventions in operating rooms. Electromagnetically navigated endoscopic interventions are increasingly performed at current diagnoses and treatments. Such interventions use an electromagnetic tracker with a miniature sensor that is usually attached at an endoscope distal tip to real time track endoscope movements in a pre-clinical image space. Spatial alignment between the electromagnetic tracker (or sensor) and pre-clinical images must be performed to navigate the endoscope to target regions. This paper proposes an adaptive marker-free registration method that uses a multiple point selection strategy. This method seeks to address an assumption that the endoscope is operated along the centerline of an intraluminal organ which is easily violated during interventions. We introduce an adaptive strategy that generates multiple points in terms of sensor measurements and endoscope tip center calibration. From these generated points, we adaptively choose the optimal point, which is the closest to its assigned the centerline of the hollow organ, to perform registration. The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed adaptive strategy significantly reduced the target registration error from 5.32 to 2.59 mm in static phantoms validation, as well as from at least 7.58mm to 4.71mm in dynamic phantom validation compared to current available methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electromagnetic tracking (ET) systems are increasingly used for computer-assisted interventions in medical communities [1]. They can track surgical devices or tools in real time and conveniently locate devices or tools at suspicious regions in the body to assist physicians to perform interventions (e.g., tumor resection or tissue biopsies). In operating rooms, physicians expect an augmented-reality (AR) environment, which can provide a fusion of pre- and intra-operative images to guide operations and directly visualize where surgical tools are located in the body [1–3]. To obtain AR environments, surgical tool three-dimensional (3-D) motion tracking must be performed. It seeks to locate surgical tools in a spatial reference system, e.g., pre-clinical 3-D computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) volume. An ET system with a magnetic field generator and position sensors is popularly used for surgical tool 3-D motion tracking. Therefore, during ET-involved navigation, an unavoidable problem is to spatially register and temporally synchronize the ET and CT coordinate systems.As one of most performed minimally- or non-invasive procedures, endoscopy is widely introduced for medical purposes of diagnosing and treating different diseases, e.g., bronchoscopy for bronchus and lung cancers and colonoscopy for rectum and colon cancers. It usually uses an endoscope with video cameras integrated at its distal tip to directly insert and visually inspect the interior of hollow organs or cavities of the body. Since the endoscope itself provides only two-dimensional (2-D) endoscopic video sequences, it challenges physicians to locate the endoscope's six-degree-freedom (6DoF) position and orientation in the 3-D CT volume space. Video-based navigation techniques, e.g., a commercialized system – Apollo (VIDA Diagnostics, USA), are commonly introduced for the endoscope location [4,5,3,6]. Moreover, electromagnetically navigated endoscopy, which uses an ET system to track endoscope movements, is employed to address such a challenge in operating rooms [7–9], e.g., a commercially available superDimension navigation system (superDimension Inc., USA), in which the diagnostic accuracy has been reported about 59–74% without sensitivity to tumor size [10–13]. During the electromagnetic endoscope navigation, an ET position sensor is usually attached at the endoscope distal tip to measure endoscope movements. To transform these ET sensor measurements to the CT volume, the spatial alignment between the ET system and CT volume must be determined.This paper focuses on solving the spatial alignment of ET and CT; particularly, we propose an adaptive marker-free registration method to compute the spatial transformation of the ET and CT (ET—CT) coordinate systems. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows the motivation or purpose of this work. The adaptive marker-free registration approach is detailed in Section 3. Experimental setups are described in Section 4. Section 5 investigates experimental results from different methods, followed by discussion in Section 6, before concluding this work in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work proposed an adaptive fiducial-free registration approach to establish the ET–CT spatial alignment for real-time electromagnetically navigated endoscopy. We introduced a multiple point strategy to select optimal points based on ET sensor measured position and orientation information and a procedure of endoscope center calibration to tackle an assumption that an endoscope is operated along the hollow organ's centerlines during endoscopic interventions. Compared to previous methods, the current tracking accuracy of using our proposed adaptive registration approach was significantly improved from at least 5.32 to 2.59mm in static phantoms validation, as well as from at least 7.58mm to 4.71mm in dynamic phantom validation. Future work also includes validation on clinical datasets and application of our proposed method to other flexible registration cases.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.