@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wavelet shrinkage using adaptive structured sparsity constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A wavelet shrinkage method is introduced that exploits structured sparsity from the DTCWT.Structured sparsity is enforced by using a hierarchical regulariser.The regulariser is adapted according to the analysed signal to promote preservation of salient features.Results in denoising experiments show improved performance with respect to non-adaptive approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Structured sparsity,Regularised regression,Denoising,Dual-tree complex wavelet transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Structured sparsity approaches have recently received much attention in the statistics, machine learning, and signal processing communities. A common strategy is to exploit or assume prior information about structural dependencies inherent in the data; the solution is encouraged to behave as such by the inclusion of an appropriate regularisation term which enforces structured sparsity constraints over sub-groups of data. An important variant of this idea considers the tree-like dependency structures often apparent in wavelet decompositions. However, both the constituent groups and their associated weights in the regularisation term are typically defined a priori. We here introduce an adaptive wavelet denoising framework whereby a sparsity-inducing regulariser is modified based on information extracted from the signal itself. In particular, we use the same wavelet decomposition to detect the location of salient features in the signal, such as jumps or sharp bumps. Given these locations, the weights in the regulariser associated to the groups of coefficients that cover these time locations are modified in order to favour retention of those coefficients. Denoising experiments show that, not only does the adaptive method preserve the salient features better than the non-adaptive constraints, but it also delivers significantly better shrinkage over the signal as a whole.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A key attraction of wavelets is their compressive representation of data. This is fundamental to powerful nonlinear processing methods such as wavelet shrinkage [1–3]. Early approaches often regarded wavelet coefficients as statistically independent. Further developments, however, showed that for many applications involving real-world signals and images, performance improved when the dependencies between coefficients were taken into account [4–9]. Most of such methods typically focussed on the persistency property which is often apparent across wavelet scales. The simplest models account for such statistical dependencies between parent coefficients at a given level of the decomposition and their child coefficients at the following level of finer resolution. Although methods based on these models proved successful in many applications such as denoising, compression, and classification, some concerns remained about the preservation of salient features in the signal, such as jumps or sharp bumps [10]. In applications such as denoising or deconvolution these features are typically over-smoothed which compromises the quality of the estimates. Some attempts to improve performance under these conditions explore total variation filtering [11,12], combined Tikhonov and total variation regularisation [10] and decompositions based on footprints of the discontinuities in the signal [13].In this work we take advantage of the latest developments in regularised least-squares regression to promote tree-structured sparsity on the denoised estimates. Unlike previous tree-structured estimators [5,8,14–16], the method proposed here uses a lasso-like algorithm with a mixed-norm regulariser that induces structured sparsity over an overcomplete representation. A novel signal-driven approach is introduced to adapt the weights of the regulariser. The ability of shift-invariant complex wavelet transforms to detect salient features in the signal is exploited to design a penalisation term which favours estimated jumps or sharp bumps during the optimisation process. We show that this results in a denoising approach with better preservation of salient features.The manuscript is organised as follows. In the remainder of the current section we provide motivation and discuss the specific contributions of our work in the context of the current literature. In Section 2 we offer an overview of structured sparsity approaches and the dual-tree complex wavelet transform. The proposed method is introduced in Section 3. This considers both an oracle and a practical approach to account for the occurrence of salient features. In Section 4, results obtained in denoising experiments show the advantage of the proposed adaptive scheme over structured sparsity estimates set a priori. We then close with the main conclusions and a discussion of further work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
