@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
First principles modeling of electron tunneling between defects in m-HfO2

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First principles calculations of vacancy mediated electron transfer in HfO2.Defect separation dependence of electron transfer rates determined.No significant crystallographic orientation dependence for electron transfer.Electrons found to be delocalized between defects closer than 5Å.Key parameters governing electron transfer similar to that in MgO.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electron transfer,First principles,Trap-assisted tunneling,Hafnium dioxide,Oxygen vacancies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Defect assisted electron transfer processes in metal-oxide materials play a key role in a diverse range of effects of relevance to microelectronic applications. However, extracting the key parameters governing such processes experimentally is a challenging problem. Here, we present a first principles based investigation into electron transfer between oxygen vacancy defects in the high-k dielectric material HfO2. By calculating electron transfer parameters for defects separated by up to 15Å we show that there is a crossover from coherent to incoherent electron transfer at about 5Å. These results can provide invaluable input into numerical simulations of electron transfer, which can be used to model and understand important effects such as trap-assisted tunneling in advanced logic and memory devices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Defect assisted electron transfer in oxides underpins a range of important effects of relevance for devices such as memories or transistors, including leakage current, bias temperature instability and breakdown [1–3]. First principles modeling of the properties of the participating defects can provide invaluable insight into such processes [4,5]. For example, calculation of the formation-, charge-transition- and ionization-energies of defects together with associated spectroscopic properties can help determine the nature of electrically active defects in real devices [6]. On the basis of such studies it has become clear that in a range of technologically relevant metal oxides (e.g. SiO2 and HfO2) oxygen vacancies are the primary defects responsible for charge trapping and trap assisted tunneling [7]. Kinetic simulations of defect-assisted tunneling processes such as stress-induced leakage current and its evolution to breakdown are also invaluable to deepen our understanding of these effects, which are challenging to probe experimentally [8]. However, such simulations involve a large number of parameters such as defect reorganization energies accompanying electron ionization or transfer, or parameters characterizing the radial decrease of wavefunctions associated with electrons trapped at defects. Since there a few first principles studies of defect-assisted electron transfer processes in oxides many of these parameters are determined on the basis of simple models or by comparison to experiment.In this article, we employ a first principles approach to characterize electron transfer between oxygen vacancies in the wide gap metal oxide material HfO2. HfO2 finds important applications as a high-k dielectric in advanced logic devices and as the active material in resistive switching memory devices [9,10]. Our approach, which is based on constrained density functional theory (CDFT), was recently applied to model the transfer of electrons between oxygen vacancies in the simpler oxide MgO [11,12]. Here, we apply it to model the process of direct defect-to-defect electron transfer between two oxygen vacancies in HfO2 and determine activation energies and electronic coupling matrix elements for defects separated by up to 15Å which can provide input for simulations of defect-assisted electron transfer. Importantly, HfO2 has a smaller band gap and much higher dielectric constant than MgO so it is not clear whether conclusions made for MgO are transferable to HfO2. We consider electron transfer along the three principal crystallographic directions in order to investigate whether the layered structure of monoclinic HfO2 introduces any significant anisotropy in electron transfer rates. Our main result is the prediction of the distance dependence of reorganization energies and electronic coupling matrix elements, which indicate a crossover between coherent and incoherent electron transfer for defect separations larger than 5Å (with an activation energy in the large separation limit of 0.64eV). This study demonstrates the feasibility of first principles based modeling of electron transfer and similar approaches could be employed to model other fundamental electron transfer processes. Such results could provide crucial input into numerical transport models of leakage current, breakdown and forming in HfO2 films [7,13].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study we have modeled electron transfer between oxygen vacancies in HfO2 using a first principles CDFT approach. We have considered direct defect-to-defect electron transfer as an example process and have elucidated the variation of key parameters with defect separation and crystallographic orientation. We find localization of an electron at a single positive vacancy is only possible if there are no other positive vacancies within 5Å. A similar behavior was found previously in MgO but is not often considered in numerical simulations of electron transport. For example, the increased delocalization associated with electron trapping at defect pairs and clusters may affect defect ionization, which is another important defect-assisted tunneling pathway [8]. In particular, the thermal activation energy for ionization is governed by the relaxation energy associated with release of a charge from a defect, which will be reduced with increasing delocalization. The reorganization energy is also shown to vary significantly with defect separation giving an important contribution to distance dependence of electron transfer rates.Our results suggest there is not a significant crystallographic orientation dependence of the electronic coupling matrix elements in HfO2 despite its inherently layered anion structure [18]. However, this is consistent with the fact that the overlapping electronic states are primarily of Hf 5d character. In this study we have considered electron transfer between three-coordinated oxygen vacancies but qualitatively similar results are expected for four-coordinated vacancies.The approach described in this article can provide invaluable insight into electron transfer processes in oxides and parameters for direct input into numerical transport simulations. Due to the requirement for non-local hybrid density functionals and large supercell sizes these calculations are computationally demanding (necessitating significant resources on national supercomputer facilities). However, the development of more efficient approaches for large-scale hybrid density functional calculations may make such calculations a more routine prospect. The results we obtain for HfO2 are qualitatively similar to those reported previously for MgO suggesting some degree of transferability to similar wide gap metal oxide materials.All data created during this research are available by request from the University of York Research database http://dx.doi.org/10.15124/5f35bf86-9db2-4019-9ef3-35c0db0fdcdd.