@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A framework for the atrial fibrillation prediction in electrophysiological studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
HRV analysis, designed to work with R wave, also works on A-waves.pre-AFib signal portions are predictive of spontaneous AFib onset.An automatic device to alert the physician about an incoming AFib onset can be built.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Atrial fibrillation,Intracardiac signal,Heart rate variability,Signal processing,Prediction algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveCardiac arrhythmias are disorders in terms of speed or rhythm in the heart's electrical system. Atrial fibrillation (AFib) is the most common sustained arrhythmia that affects a large number of persons. Electrophysiologic study (EPS) procedures are used to study fibrillation in patients; they consist of inducing a controlled fibrillation in surgical room to analyze electrical heart reactions or to decide for implanting medical devices (i.e., pacemaker). Nevertheless, the spontaneous induction may generate an undesired AFib, which may induce risk for patient and thus a critical issue for physicians. We study the unexpected AFib onset, aiming to identify signal patterns occurring in time interval preceding an event of spontaneous (i.e., not inducted) fibrillation. Profiling such signal patterns allowed to design and implement an AFib prediction algorithm able to early identify a spontaneous fibrillation. The objective is to increase the reliability of EPS procedures.MethodsWe gathered data signals collected by a General Electric Healthcare's CardioLab electrophysiology recording system (i.e., a polygraph). We extracted superficial and intracavitary cardiac signals regarding 50 different patients studied at the University Magna Graecia Cardiology Department. By studying waveform (i.e., amplitude and energy) of intracavitary signals before the onset of the arrhythmia, we were able to define patterns related to AFib onsets that are side effects of an inducted fibrillation.ResultsA framework for atrial fibrillation prediction during electrophysiological studies has been developed. It includes a prediction algorithm to alert an upcoming AFib onset. Tests have been performed on an intracavitary cardiac signals data set, related to patients studied in electrophysiological room. Also, results have been validated by the clinicians, proving that the framework can be useful in case of integration with the polygraph, helping physicians in managing and controlling of patient status during EPS.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiac arrhythmias are abnormalities or perturbations of the normal activation sequence of the myocardium, the muscular tissue of the heart. Atrial fibrillation (AFib) is the most common sustained arrhythmia, characterized by chaotic and uncoordinated atrial activation of the atrial cells. Patients affected by cardiac arrhythmias must perform a specialistic visit conforming to analyze heart electrical activity. Superficial and intracavitary cardiac signal analysis represents the best way to study, identify and classify heart signals and to study cardiac arrhythmias. Electrocardiogram (ECG) is a non-invasive technique that acquires the signals by skin surface electrodes and reports the electrical activity of heart, mainly used as a primary diagnosis tool for cardiovascular diseases [1]. Intracavitary electrogram, also indicated as electrophysiologic study (EPS), is an invasive technique consisting in recording and studying signals captured directly from inner heart part (intracavitary signals).Nevertheless, EPS studies consist in external pacing which sometimes may induce spontaneous AFib onset. Indeed, during EPS an intraprocedural run of AFib can be elicited, mostly during atrial incremental stimulation, which requires aggressive manoeuvres for restoration of sinus rhythm, like electric transthoracic synchronous defibrillation or pharmacologic cardioversion, the latter being often excluded because it can jeopardize the actual arrhythmia that is affecting the patient (rarely atrial fibrillation pertains young individuals). The occurrence of atrial fibrillation during the invasive EPS is an undesired situation, which can be self-limiting, or can last several minutes, sometimes requiring electric external cardioversion. Early detection of an AFib occurrence is thus an important research topic both for biomedical engineers and for clinicians. Indeed, even if they expose patient to risky situation, EPS studies are often required in many cases. For instance, young patients with unexplained palpitations are usually difficult to treat, mainly because the aetiology is unclear from several non-invasive examinations performed. To date, the invasive electrophysiologic study (EPS) is helpful for diagnosing and risk stratification, and it is considered a class I indication (to be performed) for those patients with atrioventricular reentrant tachycardias such as the Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome.Under this circumstance, we started by investigating the origin of the signals from the atrial electrocatheter in order to check whether the occurrence of AFib could be predicted somehow during the EPS and thus prevented. In this direction, a new device that evaluates the triggering activity during the stimulation protocol and promptly alerts the physician to stop the stimulation for avoiding atrial fibrillation induction is indeed needed. In this scenario, we present results of three years experience of collaboration among bioinformaticians and cardiologists sharing activities in electrophysiologic room where many procedures have been studied in terms of data signals and semantics, identifying useful information for AFib early prediction. As results we propose a framework hosting a prediction algorithm that allows to predict AFib events during electrophysiological studies. The prediction algorithm allows to analyze and extract predictive information from intracavitary signals. Experimental results show that it is possible to perform early detection of AFib onset during EPS, allowing the possibility of inserting such an algorithm into an online monitoring system to alert physicians during EPS studies. A preliminary version of the algorithm has been presented in [2].In the remaining part of the section we report about state of the art and background, while the rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reports basic information about heart electrophysiology useful for algorithm comprehension. Section 3 reports the signal analysis procedures used to design the prediction algorithm. Section 4 reports results about the application of the proposed prediction framework, which includes preprocessing and signal analysis, on real patient data that have been anonymized. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.Many computer-based approaches for automated detection and classification of cardiac arrhythmias have been described in literature. Signal processing methods performed on ECG signals have been proposed to extract clinical information about cardiac activities and to perform identification and classification of cardiac arrhythmias [3,4]. In [5] wavelet-based analysis has been performed to denoising ECG and to detect the specific waves of the signal. Authors in [6] present an algorithm for the detection of cardiac arrhythmias using an online database. Other contributions in terms of arrhythmias classification have been proposed in [7,8], where Support Vector Machine (SVM) technique has been applied to ECG signals, and artificial neural network and data mining methods have been used to select and extract interesting parameters from ECG signals respectively.ECG features extraction in time and frequency domains and methods as heart rate variability (HRV) and non-linear ECG analysis have been proposed for a quantitative prediction of clinical cardiac events, prevalently used for AFib disease [9]. In [10] authors show different approaches to atrial activity extraction from ECG signal in terms of spectral properties. Information extraction from ECG signals in patients with AFib by using bispectrum and extreme learning machine is proposed in [11]. AFib prediction examples can be found in [12,13] based on the analysis of the HRV signal; both contributions work on superficial cardiac signals implementing different types of analysis. AFib termination prediction is reported in [14], in which authors present an algorithm by using HRV signals analysis. Sosnowski et al. in [15] investigate the influence on heart rate variability (HRV) in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation. In [16] authors evaluate atrial activity with HRV analysis in patients with AFib. The prediction of AFib recurrence is also proposed in [17], analyzing pre-cardioversion heart rate variability. Other examples of features extraction are reported in [18,19] in which authors investigate for the prediction of AFib in terms of HRV on normal sinus rhythms and AFib data.The above reported papers represent the interest on the here treated topic. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, in literature, there are still few works on intracavitary signal analysis and prediction; some preliminary results and studies are reported in [20,21], while recent works have contributed to the understanding of AFib by intracardiac recording [22,23] and by spectral analysis of intracardiac electrograms [24,25]. In order to better understand AF events, one of the most adopted techniques is complex fractionated atrial electrograms [26], which is able to relate AF with heart morphology, physical and geometrical parameters. Currently, intracavitary signal analysis (i.e. by means of EPS study) is not frequently performed because of the invasive techniques needed to record these signals. Sometimes, physical devices are used to record and monitor cardiac rhythms and to identify electrophysiological problems, e.g., the Holter 24h recording one to detect irregularities in the ECG signal. Innovative ones, as the one reported in [27–29], as well as new applications for smartphone or tablet [30,31] perform reliable ECGs and send data to physician for detailed diagnosis. Nevertheless, EPS studies are undoubtedly the best way to characterize local atrial activity with a high degree of detail, especially in AFib identification.We report some basic principles of the heart electrophysiology, useful for AFib analysis and to introduce proposed prediction algorithm. The attention is focused on the study of: (i) superficial and intracavitary cardiac signals, (ii) heart rate variability, and (iii) atria fibrillation arrhythmia.The cardiac electric activity can be measured by both surface electrocardiogram (ECG) and intracardiac electrogram (IEGM). The former is acquired through specific electrodes posed on skin (and well defined positions) and provides information about heart electrical activity [32,33]. An ECG is recorded through the standard 12-leads, e.g., lead V1 is an unipolar lead recording the activity of the electrode on the fourth intercostal space to the right of the sternum [34]. Intracardiac electrogram (IEGM) is gathered from heart inner parts by posing electrodes into cardiac zones reached by using vessels. It allows to gather localized electric heart activity [35–37]. One of the inner heart sites where IEGM signals are gathered is high right atrium (HRA). HRA signal allows to record a large atrial electrogram and a smaller and far-field ventricular electrogram; pacing at this position allows to evaluate the sinus node function and atrium-ventricular (AV) conduction, as well as the arrhythmias induction [38]. Examples of ECG from lead V1 and IEGM from the HRA are reported in Fig. 1; ECG signal is typically composed of five deflections (called waves); P wave represents the sequential depolarization of the right and left atria, the QRS complex reflects depolarization of the right and left ventricles and T wave represents repolarization of the ventricles. In IEGM signal, right atrial depolarization occurs during the onset of the P-wave on ECG and it is characterized by A-wave on HRA electrogram [40].HRV analysis works on R peaks of ECG signal while HRA signal contains A peaks. The signal analysis techniques described in the paper are agnostic about the clinical semantics of the signals, hence we used the same algorithm to identify A peaks instead of R ones because they appear with the same frequency.Heart rate variability (HRV) analysis is the most common procedure performed in clinical applications to extract specific parameters highly useful in diagnosis [41,42]. HRV is a signal measured by the variation in the beat-to-beat interval or correspondingly in the instantaneous heart rate (HR). HRV reflects many physiological factors that modulate the cardiac autonomic control, providing the recognition of a significant relation between the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and parasympathetic nervous systems (PNS). We mention two methods to perform HRV analysis [43]: (i) time domain methods evaluate the magnitude of the temporal variations, and (ii) frequency domain methods provide the spectral composition of temporal variations.In time domain analysis, different methods can be used to extract from signal statistics and geometric measures. A geometric method is the Poincare plot, a map of points in Cartesian coordinates in which each time interval between two consecutive R waves (RR interval) is plotted as function of the previous RR interval [44]. Poincare plot may be analyzed quantitatively by calculating the standard deviations SD1 and SD2: SD1 is an index related to the beat-to-beat variability representing parasympathetic activity; SD2 is an index describing the overall long-term variability.Time domain analysis method is not able to discriminate between sympathetic and parasympathetic contributions of HRV. For this reason, frequency domain analysis methods are used to obtain information about SNS and PNS of sinus node for both normal and pathological subjects. The most common analysis is the Power Spectral Density (PSD) of RR intervals that provides the basic information about the power distribution as a function of frequency. FFT (Fast Fourier Transform)-based methods offer great benefits regarding the ability to assign the power in different bands to a number of underlying physiological functions. The Fourier transform gives information about the frequency content of a signal but it cannot give an information at which time a frequency has occurred. The short time Fourier transform (STFT) provides this information and is useful to analyze non-stationary signals. Therefore, only short periods of the signal are Fourier transformed and the quality of the STFT is strongly dependent on the window function. The Fourier and wavelet transforms (WT) measure similarity between a signal and an analyzing function. The wavelet transform is a time–frequency transformation and, compared to the FFT, the WT gives information about the frequency content of a signal and also information at which time segment a frequency occurs.In spectral analysis of HRV, the three main spectral components are characterizing: (i) Very Low Frequency (VLF) component is related to the energy in the frequency range of 0–0.03Hz and it is connected to thermo-regulation and changes in physical activity; (ii) Low Frequency (LF) component in correspondence of the frequency range 0.04–0.15Hz is a measure of fluctuations of arterial pressure, reflecting sympathetic activity; (iii) High Frequency (HF) component in 0.15–0.40Hz reflects vagal activity modulated by breathing [41]. LF and HF components contain up to 65% of total power and are represented in normalized units to underlie the controlled and balanced behaviour of the two systems. An increase of LF/HF ratio is corresponding to an increase in LF and it is related to a predominant sympathetic modulation; on the contrary, a decrease in LF/HF ratio corresponds to an increase in HF, showing a prevailing vagal modulation.We are interested in the signal analysis reported above for the characterization of AFib based on the extraction of time and frequency parameters. Main time and frequency domain measures of HRV used in this paper are reported in [43,45].Atrial fibrillation (AFib) is a supraventricular arrhythmia characterized by chaotic and uncoordinated atrial activation of the atrial cells with a rate between 400 and 600 times per minute and by contraction which involves an irregular and rapid response of the ventricles [46,47].In the ECG, AFib is characterized by rapid atrial activity, being irregular in timing and morphology. The surface ECG during AFib shows irregular fibrillatory waves due to chaotic activation of the atria compared with normal rhythm. Fig. 2shows an AFib (part (a) of the figure) and normal sinus rhythm (part (b) of the figure) on lead I. The following features can be noted on the signal:•irregular rhythm;absence of P waves;irregular RR intervals;ventricular rate between 100 and 200beats/min and atrial rate between 240 and 540beats/min;narrow QRS complex.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Analysis of cardiac signals has been implemented to extract relevant features used by an AFib prediction algorithm. The algorithm has been proposed as a tool to support intervention procedures and has been tested on a real patients data set. Intracavitary signal analysis is relevant for cardiac arrhythmia studies. However, due to risk of AFib induction, predictor framework plays an important role. To the best of our knowledge there are no works in literature supporting AFib prediction in EPS studies. This work represents a contribution towards the implementation of an on-line instrument to be used directly in electro-physiology room during EPS procedures.