@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic cardiac T2* relaxation time estimation from magnetic resonance images using region growing method with automatically initialized seed points

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel automatic cardiac T2* relaxation time estimation algorithm from MR images.Novel automatic ROI segmentation algorithm in cardiac MR images.Segmentation results from our technique are very close to the experts’ opinions.Cardiac T2* values from our technique are very close to that calculated by experts.Our method does not need manual processes in ROI segmentation and T2* calculation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic resonance image (MRI),Iron-overload,Cardiac T2* (T2-star),Region growing,Mathematical morphology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveHeart failure due to iron-overload cardiomyopathy is one of the main causes of mortality. The cardiomyopathy is reversible if intensive iron chelation treatment is done in time, but the diagnosis is often delayed because the cardiac iron deposition is unpredictable and the symptoms are lately detected. There are many ways to assess iron-overload. However, the widely used and approved method is by using MRI which is performed by calculating the T2* (T2-star). In order to compute the T2* value, the region of interest (ROI) is manually selected by an expert which may require considerable time and skills. The aim of this work is hence to develop the cardiac T2* measurement by using region growing algorithm for automatically segmenting the ROI in cardiac MR images. Mathematical morphologies are also used to reduce some errors.MethodsThirty MR images with free-breathing and respiratory-trigger technique were used in this work. The segmentation algorithm yields good results when compared with the manual segmentation performed by two experts.ResultsThe averages of positive predictive value, the sensitivity, the Hausdorff distance, and the Dice similarity coefficient are 0.76, 0.84, 7.78 pixels, and 0.80 when compared with the two experts’ opinions. The T2* values were carried out based on the automatically segmented ROI's. The mean difference of T2* values between the proposed technique and the experts’ opinion is about 1.40ms.ConclusionsThe results demonstrate the accuracy of the proposed method in T2* value estimation. Some previous methods were implemented for comparisons. The results show that the proposed method yields better segmentation and T2* value estimation performances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Regularly blood transfusion is required for a treatment of thalassemia major patients. Multiple blood transfusions may lead to a significant risk of heart disease due to iron overload [1,2]. Several methods have been employed for tissue iron-overloaded assessment such as serum ferritin, liver iron concentration (LIC), superconducting quantum interface device (SQUID), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). LIC is the most reliable method but is invasive technique which requires liver biopsy. Due to the invasiveness of LIC approach, infection is likely to occur [3,4].Serum ferritin, SQUID, and MRI are non-invasive techniques. Serum ferritin requires a number of examinations in order to follow-up the symptom. SQUID needs an operator, yet the machine is in short supply. It can quantify iron concentration in liver and heart by investigating some parameters such as the relaxation time constant (T2*) and relaxation rates (R2*). The T2* is a relaxation parameter arising principally from local magnetic field inhomogeneities which decreases as a result of iron concentration in some internal organs (liver and heart) while the R2* is a reciprocal of T2* (1/T2*). Patients with small T2* (<20ms) which corresponds to myocardial iron loading, have significantly higher risk of resting systolic dysfunction and require more treatments than patients with T2* values in the normal range (>20ms) [3–5].Westwood et al. [6] proposed a method to compare the measurements of cardiac T2* between the established multiple breath-hold variable TR technique with a multiecho sequence that acquires all images within a single breath-hold with a constant TR. The experimental results showed that the single breath-hold, multiecho acquisition method allowed reliable quantification of cardiac T2*, good reproducibility and speed, greater accuracy, faster patient throughput, and reduced costs. The comparison between T2* calculation from different data acquisition techniques, black-blood and white-blood techniques, were proposed [7–11]. The results showed that black-blood technique gave better reproducibility than the white-blood technique.Selection of a curve-fitting model is another concern to the accuracy of the T2*. Three models are used to fit the T2* decay including mono-exponential, bi-exponential, and offset models. Some previous works also proposed the truncation model which discarded the late plateau points, the complicated points due to noise and motion which make errors for evaluating the T2*, and then fitted the remaining points with a mono-exponential model. This model helps in reducing the problem of heavily iron-loaded hearts which has very small T2* (<10ms) resulting in a rapid decay in signal intensity (SI), and leading to the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the later echo time (TE) images [8,9,11–14].In order to compute the T2* value, a region of interest (ROI) is manually selected by an expert which is a time consuming task. Hence, the automatic segmentation algorithm is used to solve this problem. There are two methods for the ROI selection in cardiac MR images, i.e., region-based method and pixel-wise method. Previous studies showed that the resulting T2* values from the two methods were similar but the pixel-wise method needed more computation. So the region-based method is suitable for the system which needs rapidity [8,9,13,15]. There are several works that tried to segment LV and analyze the endocardial and epicardial contours automatically. Many semi and fully automatic algorithms have been proposed [16–32]. In 2011, there was a survey paper which proposed the segmentation methods in short axis cardiac MR images. It separates the medical image segmentation into two main groups, i.e., segmentation with weak or no prior (no training datasets are needed) and segmentation with strong prior (need some datasets to train the system) [19].The example of segmentation methods and their improved method or hybrid method between them are thresholding [15,18], region growing [20], dynamic programing (DP) [21], deformable models [22], active contour models (ACM) [17,23,24], level-set [25], graph cuts [22], KNN classifier [26], convex relaxed distribution matching [27], edge modeling [28,29], and clustering [30]. Most of the automatic LV segmentation works were applied to calculate the cardiac function such as stroke volume (SV), mass or ejection fraction (EF) whereas only few work focused on T2* evaluation.Semi-automatic T2* assessment involving cardiac MRI was proposed. However, the ROI's were manually segmented by a user for the T2* calculation [31]. Fully automatic myocardial T2* measurement has been proposed [32]. The epicardium and endocardium was located by using circular Hough transform (CHT) followed by the improved Chan–Vese (I-CV) model to extract myocardial. After that, the right ventricle (RV) was segmented by using the thresholding method in which the threshold value was automatically calculated from the segmented LV. Finally the interventricular septum was analyzed by using the geometrical relation between myocardium and RV. The experimental results showed the comparison between T2* measurements using the proposed method and manual method by an expert.The aim of this work is to develop a fully automatic cardiac T2* assessment method by using region growing algorithm and mathematical morphologies for segmenting the myocardium in cardiac MR images without any human intervention. This means the proposed method does not require any manual processes during the ROI segmentation and T2* value calculation. This technique will be beneficial for a faster reporting result particularly in a busy center. The experimental results are not only report the comparison between T2* measurements but also show the segmentation performance by comparing between the segmentation results from the proposed method and the manual segmentation from the experts. The segmentation and T2* estimation performance comparisons with other previous methods are also conducted.MR images of 30 volunteers (19 healthy volunteers and 11 thalassemia patients) were acquired from a 1.5 Tesla Achieva Philips MRI scanner installed at the Department of Radiologic Technology, Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Chiang Mai University. The sense cardiac phase array coil 5 elements were used for this work. The pulse sequence and technique used in this study were the black-blood multi-echo gradient-echo (GRE) with free-breathing along with cardiac gating and respiratory-trigger. A single short-axis view of the mid left ventricle was acquired at ten echo times (1.675–26.027ms, an increment of approximately 2.706ms). The setting parameters were: flip angle 25°, matrix 240×232, field of view (FOV) 36cm, repetition time (TR) 28ms, and number of signal averaging 2 (2 NSAs). The pixel spacing was 1.7578mm×1.7578mm and the image size was 384×384.There are several decay models for evaluating T2* value previously described in [8,9,11–13]. The simplest one is the mono exponential decay model which will be applied in this work. It is defined as(1)SI=P0e−TE/T2*,where SI represents the image signal intensity, P0 represents a constant of magnetization, and TE represents the echo time.Fundamentally, there are two methods to construct the decay model to evaluate T2*, i.e., region-based method and pixel-wise method. In the region-based method, when the region of interest (ROI) is selected, the mean of image signal intensity (SI) is computed. The mean of SI in ROI from all TE's is used to create the decay model and then the T2* value is evaluated by fitting the resulted decay model. Meanwhile, in the pixel-wise method, when the ROI is selected, each pixel in the ROI from all TE's are used to make the decay models and the T2* values are evaluated by fitting these decay models. Then the T2* to represent all pixels in ROI is calculated from the mean of all T2*.The advantage of pixel-wise method is that it can reject the undesirable pixels, such as the vessel pixels in the liver or the bad pixels due to the susceptibility artifacts, which result in poor fitting (small R2). This method, however, is more computational expensive [13]. On the other hand, the region-based method is more computational feasible although it cannot guarantee the fitting quality since it cannot reject any undesirable or poor pixels. Previous studies showed that the result of cardiac T2* values from two methods were comparable for the R2* value less than 175Hz (or the T2* value more than 5ms) [7]. In this work, we use the region-based method due to its simplicity and also most subjects studied in this work do not have heavily iron-loaded hearts (T2*<10ms).The positive predictive value (PPV) and the sensitivity (S) were used to evaluate the segmentation performance. They can be calculated by Eqs. (2) and (3), respectively [36,37].(2)PPV=No.ofpixelspropertysegmentedbythealgorithmTotalno.ofpixelssegmented.(3)S=No.ofpixelscorrectlysegmentedbythealgorithmTotalno.ofpixelsinthesegmentedregionaccordingtotheexpert.When both the values of PPV and S are equal to one, the accurate segmentation is achieved. If S is equal to one while PPV is small, the over-segmentation occurs. On the other hand, if PPV is equal to one but S is small, the under-segmentation occurs.Moreover, the Hausdorff distance (H) [37,38] is used to evaluate the segmentation performance. It can measure the similarity between two images. Given two point sets A={a1, a2,...,ap} and B={b1, b2,...,bq}. The Hausdorff distance is calculated by(4)H(A,B)=max(h(A,B),h(B,A)),where(5)h(A,B)=maxa∈Aminb∈Ba−b,and(6)h(B,A)=maxb∈Bmina∈Ab−a.The function h(A, B) in Eq. (5) is called the directed Hausdorff distance from A to B. It means that h(A, B) measures the distance from a point a∈A to all points in B and keeps the nearest distance. Then, we move to another a and measure the distance with all points in B again. This procedure is repeated with all points in A. Finally, h(A, B) is the largest distance between A and B. Eq. (6) is called the reversed Hausdorff distance. Like h(A, B), h(B, A) is the distance between B and A. In Eq. (4), H(A, B) is the maximum of h(A, B) and h(B, A). Thus, it is the most mismatched point between A and B.In addition, to take into account the spatial overlap ratio, the Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) is considered. The DSC between 2 binary regions A and B is defined as [39,40](7)DSC(A,B)=2×AreaA∩BArea(A)+Area(B).The first step is to extract the edges of both images. Edge extraction can be done by many edge detectors such as Sobel, Laplacian or Canny edge detector. Then, the coordinate of the pixels of edge are defined as the set which is used to calculate the Hausdorff distance. In this research, the derived images were binary, and therefore, their edges were extracted easily. The extracted edges were not much different across the edge detectors. Hence, the Sobel edge detector was chosen here because of its simplicity and decent performance.Region growing is one of region-based image segmentation methods. It is a method which groups pixels into larger regions based on the predetermined criteria of growth. This approach starts by initializing “seed points” and determines whether the pixel neighbors should be added to the region by verifying the criteria of growth such as the similarity between the intensity of seeds (or the average intensities of the grown regions) and the intensity of neighboring pixels [33].It is worthwhile noting that, in this research, the LV segmentation based on region growing is performed on the slice of the first TE (minimum TE) only. For each subject, the segmented LV from the first TE is used for the other 9 images with the rest of TE's. From clinical point of view, this is the common practice that the expert performs in manual assessment because the slice with minimum TE provides the best quality image, i.e., highest contrast between LV and the surrounding parts. This good quality (contrast) also conforms with the preference from image processing point of view. Fig. 1shows a set of sample images of 10 TE's.Since the first step in region growing method requires manual initialization of seed points, i.e., the system is not fully automatic, this work presents an algorithm which can automatically select the seed points by the following steps:(1)The background in each MR image is extracted to form a binary image by using the global thresholding method. The human body is defined as an object (pixel value 1) and the others are considered as the background (pixel value 0) as shown in Fig. 2(b). The image is then inverted so that the right and left ventricles are in white as shown in Fig. 2(c).The morphological opening is used to remove some small patches and break the joint objects. Then patches that are either smaller than 200 pixels or larger than 4000 pixels are considered background. Additionally, any patch connected to the image borders are included. After that all holes in the remaining objects are filled. Fig. 2(d) shows the image including only the candidate objects which may be defined as left ventricle.The left ventricle area is selected by considering the edge of other objects (from step 2)) around each remaining candidate object (from step 3)). On the assumption that the left ventricle must locate inside the heart wall and is of round-like shape, the distances from each object's centroid to its surrounding objects should be similar in all directions. For each candidate object, a rectangle is created with the 4 sides correspond to the object's top-most, bottom-most, left-most, and right-most pixels. This rectangle is then equally expanded in all four directions by a certain amount of pixels (Fig. 2(e)). In this work, 30 pixels expansion is performed on all four sides. Examples of rectangles for two different candidate objects are shown in red in Fig. 2(f) and (g). The tricky part before distance calculation is that, when a candidate object is considered, we remove that object from the image. Then the mathematical closing is applied to the image so that it will affect only on the other surrounding objects. This explains why the objects in Fig. 2(f) and (g) are different. It is because two different candidate objects are considered in the two figures. In this research, the structuring element for the closing is a disc with 10 pixels in radius. The distance from an object's centroid to its surrounding objects is limited to be in this rectangle only. The object which gives the smallest standard deviation (S.D.) of all distances is defined as the left ventricle. Fig. 2(f) and (g) show the examples of the distance calculation of the two objects. They show that the S.D. from Fig. 2(f) is less than that from Fig. 2(g). This means the object in Fig. 2(f) is considered as the left ventricle.After the left ventricle is selected, its centroid is used as the seed point for finding the exhaustive left ventricle area. The limitation of region growing method is that the intensity variation in the chosen region should be as uniform as possible. If the chosen region is not uniform, however, the median filter with 10×10 neighborhoods can be applied to solve this problem as shown in Fig. 2(h). The median filter is a good candidate here because it is a smoothing filter that preserves edges [33]. Even though any edge-preserving smoothing filters can be applied here, the median filter is chosen due to its decent performance and simplicity.For confining the desirable area, the centroid of the left ventricle is also used as the center to create a circle to cover the left ventricle area including its wall as shown in Fig. 2(h). The other four seed points (diamond-shaped dots) are selected from the uppermost, lowermost, leftmost, and rightmost of the left ventricular endocardium and then shifted for five more pixels. They are used to grow as the wall of left ventricle.Mathematical morphological operators are used to smooth the edges (opened with 3-pixel radius disc structuring element), fill the small gaps (closed with 3-pixel radius disc structuring element), and strip away the protrusions in the areas of left ventricle (eroded with 2-pixel radius disc structuring element). Fig. 2(i) shows the myocardium labeled in green in the original image.In this work, the images with adjacent echo time (TE) values should be registered to reduce the distortion from the cardiac motion. The non-rigid registration using free-form deformations based on the B-splines was used in this work [34,35]. The global motion is modeled by an affine transformation while the local motion is modeled by a free-form deformation (FFD) based on the B-splines. In order to find the optimal transformation, a cost function that includes the cost associated with the smoothness of the transformation and the cost associated with the image similarity is minimized. The advantage of this method is that it can significantly reduce the motion artifacts between images and also correct motions in 3-D MR images which, in some cases, rigid or affine registration techniques are not sufficient to correct.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
