@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Solid on liquid deposition, a review of technological solutions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We studied the condensation of matter on liquid surfaces from the vapor phase.First solid on liquid deposition-based devices are presented.A thin polymer film can chemically react with the liquid at condensation.Encapsulation of a liquid with parylene exhibits perfect optical surfaces.We present a large variety of solid on liquid systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thin solid films,Solid on liquid,Nucleation,MEMS,Parylene,Solid on liquid deposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Solid-on-liquid deposition (SOLID) techniques are of great interest to the MEMS and NEMS (Micro- and Nano Electro Mechanical Systems) community because of potential applications in biomedical engineering, on-chip liquid trapping, tunable micro-lenses, and replacements of gate oxides. However, depositing solids on liquid with subsequent hermetic sealing is difficult because liquids tend to have a lower density than solids. Furthermore, current systems seen in nature lack thermal, mechanical or chemical stability. Therefore, it is not surprising that liquids are not ubiquitous as functional layers in MEMS and NEMS. However, SOLID techniques have the potential to be harnessed and controlled for such systems because the gravitational force is negligible compared to surface tension, and therefore, the solid molecular precursors that typically condense on a liquid surface will not sediment into the fluid. In this review we summarize recent research into SOLID, where nucleation and subsequent cross-linking of solid precursors results in thin film growth on a liquid substrate. We describe a large variety of thin film deposition techniques such as thermal evaporation, sputtering, plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition used to coat liquid substrates. Surprisingly, all attempts at deposition to date have been successful and a stable solid layer on a liquid can always be detected. However, all layers grown by non-equilibrium deposition processes showed a strong presence of wrinkles, presumably due to residual stress. In fact, the only example where no stress was observed is the deposition of parylene layers (poly-para-xylylene, PPX). Using all the experimental data analyzed to date we have been able to propose a simple model that predicts that the surface property of liquids at molecular level is influenced by cohesion forces between the liquid molecules. Finally, we conclude that the condensation of precursors from the gas phase is rather the rule and not the exception for SOLID techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Solid-on liquid deposition (SOLID) techniques for applications in the MEMS/NEMS field are generally defined as techniques where solid films coat a previously patterned liquid (e.g. in the form of drop arrays or thin liquid films) onto a solid substrate. Note that in general this solid film is deposited so that there are no bubbles within the liquid, and we are only dealing with films in this review, not the case of simply putting fluid into a container and sealing it with a solid cap.The functionalities of SOLID techniques can be classified into the following:(i)Sustainable systems where perfect encapsulation of liquids could have an impact on the optical or the mechanical properties (e.g. intraocular lenses).Drug delivery systems where the solid membrane releases the encapsulated liquid on demand.Liquid functional layers for MEMS (e.g. liquid waveguides, microfluidic systems, liquid computing).MEMS/NEMS construction concepts using sacrificial liquid volumes (e.g. free standing membranes, cantilevers, flap-valves).SOLID is not straightforward since the density of the solid tends to be higher than the liquid; hence due to Archimedes’ principle, macroscopic assemblies resulting from condensation of the vapor phase risk sedimenting to the bottom of the liquid. However, we know that gravitation forces are completely negligible compared to the inter-molecular forces keeping the molecules of the liquid together at the nanoscale. In other words, it should be potentially possible to coat any liquid surface with any solid if the length scale is on the appropriate order. Table 1summarizes existing methods and examples of SOLID solutions using these principles.In this review, we first identify SOLID systems that can be found in nature, daily life or in the laboratory. Then we present each of the examples identified in Table 1, with an emphasis on their fabrication method and potential impact for applications.Several well-known examples of SOLID can be observed in nature, in our daily life, or in the laboratory; they are all macroscopic examples and represented in Fig. 1.In Fig. 1a, plants have settled down on a lake giving the impression of a solid surface. Upon close examination, however, we note that the plants do not hermetically cover the water. In Fig. 1b, a solid layer of sulfur can be observed on top of a hot source of liquid due to bacterial activity. Fig. 1c shows blood in various states; blood coagulates as soon as it comes in contact with oxygen, forming a solid material that heals the injury. Fig. 1d shows protein denaturation in milk due to heating above 60°C resulting in solidification of the surface. In Fig. 1e, a water drop is poured onto an old sulfur containing cast iron disk; after several hours, a thin iron/sulfur oxide layer covers the drop, showing interference colors. Fig. 1f shows ice on water. The density of water is greatest at 4°C hence ice has a lower density than water. As a consequence, lakes freeze at the surface. In Fig. 1g, a skin can be observed on the surface of forgotten tea after cooling down due to solidification of impurities in the water. Fig. 1h shows partly dried paint spluttered on the lid of its can; polymerization or desiccation of the liquid occurs due to evaporation of the solvent, and after a while, the whole droplet becomes solid. If small particles such as graphite powder are spread on a droplet of water, they self-align, resulting in a solid surface as represented in Fig. 1i. Alumina on hot aluminum (Al) is shown in Fig. 1j. If solid Al is heated, it will become liquid at 660°C. Due to the presence of oxygen, Al is oxidized. Aluminum oxide has a melting point of more than 2000°C and hence will cover the liquid Al with a stable solid layer as long as the temperature is above the melting point of Al. Note that the lattice constant of Al2O3 needs more surface than the liquid Al surface can offer, hence wrinkles are formed. Fig. 1k shows the well-established technique of float-glass fabrication. In this process, liquid glass is cast onto liquid tin at high temperature; it “floats” at the surface of the tin-bath due to its lower density. The liquid phases are not miscible and the liquid tin shapes the bottom surface of the glass allowing for the glass surface roughness to be minimized. The last example, Fig. 1l, shows dried sprayed paint on liquid mercury. One more thing to note about this array of pictures is the length scale. For example, the solid layer represented in Fig. 1a is at meter scale. All other layers show rather thin layers (micrometer thickness) but their lateral extension are at macroscopic centimeter scale. It may be assumed that if the solid layer were molecular, liquids quantities in the microliter range could be totally encapsulated.In addition to not being completely encapsulated in all cases, these examples of SOLID systems also lack thermal, chemical or mechanical stability. There is little chance for importing such natural inspired SOLID systems for device purposes as summarized above in Section 1i–iv. On the contrary, the different technologies presented in the following sections will have the potential in stable solid on liquid coatings.The first promising solution to obtain SOLID structures was pioneered by the authors in previous work [1,2] and confirmed by [3]. In this work, the polymer poly-di-chloro-para-xylilene (PPX-C), also known as parylene C, was grown on low vapor pressure liquids (up to 5Pa pressure) using a conventional PPX LPCVD process also known as the Gorham process [4]. This process is summarized as follows. Parylene C is deposited by a LPCVD reactor where the precursor (the dimer dichloro[2,2]-paracyclophane) is released from the solid phase to vapor by sublimation at typically 150°C and vapor pressure of 5Pa. In a downstream set-up (Fig. 2a and b), the dimer is cracked by thermal pyrolysis at 650°C. During this process, the resulting radical polymerizes in a chain-growth of PPX (Fig. 2b). On its way to the deposition chamber (kept at room temperature), the monomer converts from the highly reactive triplet state (benzoid, paramagnetic di-radical) to the less reactive singlet state (quinonoid, diamagnetic) according to [5]. Thermodynamic dimer to monomer conversion and deposition kinetics is reviewed in detail in [5]. The monomer in the singlet state is, according to [6], physisorbed with no activation energy and has low sticking coefficient and a high surface mobility. This fact explains the high conformity of parylene-coated surfaces. Polymerization is initiated by dimerization of two monomers leading to a biradical dimer. The chain propagation is enabled by attachment of a monomer to the radical chain end [6]. This perfect coverage of surfaces of the resulting polymer was demonstrated at the molecular scale [7].When depositing parylene on a low vapor pressure liquid, a polymer layer is growing over the liquid. Typical liquids for creating such SOLID structures have a vapor-pressure at least one order of magnitude less than the process pressure (5Pa). Liquids such as glycerol or bis-(3,5,5-trimethylhexyl) phthalate allow the replication of typical liquid-driven shapes that are strongly defined by contact angle effects. The perfect replication of a liquid surface was verified by measuring the contact angle before and after PPX-C deposition [2] (see Fig. 3a), where it was shown that the shape of the drop was not affected by the thickness of the PPX layer up to 5.5μm. It is expected that increasing the PPX thickness even up to 100μm will not induce a change in the contact angle. This effect is not limited to PPX on the (bis-(3,5,5-trimethylhexyl)) phthalate liquid, but works also for a large variety of other liquids (e.g. 1,2-cyclohexanedicarboxylic acid di-isononyl ester, bis(2-ethylhexyl) adipate, different oils, silicone oils, glycerol etc.).By peeling-off and cleaning the PPX-C layer deposited on silicon oil, the roughness of the PPX-C in contact with the oil was measured to be about 1nm using AFM techniques [2] (see Fig. 3b). Assuming that the liquid is smooth at molecular level, the results let conclude that the PPX-C growth comes close to replicating the liquid’s surface. In fact, with glycerol and most oils, the surface roughness of both the top and bottom of the PPX-C is extremely small (1nm or less). However, a pronounced porosity of the film has been found [8] for some liquids like e.g. 1,3,5-trimethyl-1,1,3,5,5-pentaphenyl-trisiloxane (HIVAC-F5).The most obvious applications using this fabrication method are liquid lenses due to the outstanding optical quality at the liquid surface (smoothness at molecular level due to surface-energy minimization). Fig. 4shows conformal PPX packaging of such lenses.Apart from lens structures shown in Fig. 4 more complex 3 D structures could be prepared. In this case self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) as good chemical traps were patterned by photolithography using the molecular-assembly patterning by lift-off (MAPL) process [9]. Fig. 5a–c shows that liquid feature sizes of several micrometers can be encapsulated.Fig. 5d is similar as Fig. 4a where the shape of the drop is driven only by physico-chemical effects and not by trapping (where the contact angle depends on the quantity of liquid). Fig. 5d shows that very small droplets (<5μm) can be coated. PPX on liquid represents a real packaging layer in a way that a solid interface is created allowing subsequent MEMS processing, such as metallization [3], patterning by photolithography, ion-beam implantation and structuration [10], or laser induced patterning [11] as on any solid thin-film. Furthermore, PPX is a chemically stable, biocompatible, and mechanically resistant material [12]. Other 3 D structures that are defined by the properties of a liquid can hence be prepared. In Fig. 5e, a liquid drop at the end of an optical fiber can be packaged in PPX, in an another case the packaged drop was again dipped into the liquid and coated forming an “onion” type structure as shown in Fig. 5f.Other examples of low vapor pressure liquids are e.g. liquid crystals, ferro fluids, oils, higher alcohols and ionic liquids (IOLs). Ionic liquids have interesting properties for thermoelectric generators. For this application hermetic packaging of the IOLs is essential; promising tests have been successfully carried out by [13–14].If the PPX layer is opened and the liquid (glycerol) removed, a closed channel can be fabricated as shown in Fig. 6a. In this example, a liquid was trapped in a laser micro-machined channel in a silicon substrate. Subsequent PPX deposition (5μm) sealed the liquid hermetically. After PPX opening (e.g. laser drilling of liquid inlet and outlet) and removal of the liquid (by vacuum aspiration), the freestanding PPX coverage of the micro channel is obtained. Fig. 6b shows a large area self-supporting 5μm thick PPX layer. This layer was obtained by shearing off the bottom of a liquid-filled well after PPX deposition. The well was drilled through a silicon wafer by femto-second laser machining, and put in contact with a glass substrate. A thin oil layer ensured hermetic sealing of both substrates during PPX deposition, but it also enabled the shearing off of both substrates after PPX deposition (see Fig. 6c–e for a schematic view of the process).It can be imagined that, for any solid-on-liquid systems, the sacrificial liquid technique could be used for effective development of structures.The common feature of the solid on liquid deposited systems of Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 is that only low vapor-pressure liquids can be successfully encapsulated using PPX as promising packaging material. For applications such as drug delivery systems, it is imperative to be able to package aqueous liquids. However such liquids have a vapor pressure of about 2000Pa at room temperature. This makes LPCVD deposition impossible, as it would lead to the evaporation of the aqueous droplets. To overcome such issues, we developed an atmospheric pressure CVD process for PPX deposition on aqueous liquids.For this purpose the so-called Gorham process [4] was modified to work at pressures close to atmospheric pressure. Therefore the reactor has to be filled up with an inert gas (e.g. N2 or Ar) up to atmospheric pressure. The inert gas was preferred with respect to air for avoiding chemical reactions of the dimer vapor with air. In this way the first SOLID structures on water could be deposited at a pressure of 80kPa (Fig. 7). In contrast to the deposition scenario described in Fig. 2, the crucible for the APCVD process had to be heated up to about 220°C instead of 150°C to overcome the higher pressure in the reactor (atmospheric pressure instead of 1Pa). Here the process parameters are more delicate to control due to the exponential increase of the vapor pressure as soon as the temperature of the sublimation source varies [15–16]. As seen in Fig. 7, the PPX surface is not perfect throughout the entire surface area and some wrinkles appear, probably due to liquid loss during coating.The question arises looking at the large variety of inspirations given by natural SOLID systems (see Fig. 1) whether CVD PPX is the only material that can be deposited onto a liquid or not. The question is furthermore of scientific interest looking at the statement that at molecular level a liquid substrate appears as “hard” as a solid substrate, the forces from gravitation being neglected at this molecular scale. Therefore the authors, using e.g. silicon oil as low-vapor pressure liquid substrate, have carried out a large variety of deposition process and materials from the vapor phase. Table 2gives the overview of the processes (left column) that deliver the vapor (right column); all experiments have been carried out on anhydrous silicon oil as substrate.The SOLID layers obtained from the experimental conditions presented in Table 2 are depicted in Figs. 8–10where typical PVD systems have been used without any optimization of the deposition processes. The silicon oil has a low vapor pressure (<10−4Pa), and it was assumed that no molecules were released from the liquid at the pressure that was applied for the coating. The observation and the statements are based on visual inspection of the results using a microscope.Further test have been carried out using atmospheric plasma CVD depositions; the cold plasma corona discharge of strongly diluted silane-gas 0.5% SiH4 in Argon gas mixture was powered by a downstream tesla coil at 13.56MHz; the set-up is shown in Fig. 11a, and the deposition on silicon oil is shown in Fig. 11b. In a second series of experiments, a silent discharge downstream configuration was setup for depositing Teflon-like polymers on liquid (see Fig. 12) using a CF4–Ar mixture (5%). The results show very thin (Fig. 12b) and very thick (Fig. 12c) layers without wrinkles, like the PPX layers coated by CVD. We assume that, due to the downstream property of the coating technique, the ion bombardment-induced stress on the SOLID layer is strongly reduced, and hence very few wrinkles were created. Further systematic studies (at low and atmospheric pressures) must be carried-out on stress release effects.In summary, looking at this large variety of deposition methods from the vapor phase, all resulted in the deposition of thin solid films on a liquid substrate. However, all layers exhibited strong deformation and wrinkle formation after the nucleation due to internal stress. Apart from Teflon-like coatings at atmospheric pressure, the previously discussed PPX deposition (Section 3.1) seems to be the exception where perfect replication of the liquid substrate can be obtained. The simple sketch model on Fig. 13takes a closer look at the molecules covering the liquid phase after the very first nucleation of a thin-film on the substrate and gives an explanation as to why the strong wrinkles do appear after that. This Fig. 13 shows particles (molecules, atoms), which are arriving from the vapor phase to the surface of the liquid and attach to it by weak bonds. Further increase of the particle density let cross-link the particles by bond strengths that are typical for thin films. The residual force that brings the energy of the thin film to a minimum will be the one to determine the shape of the thin film. The liquid surface will no more determine the shape of the thin film. The more the thickness of the thin film, the more internal stress (tensile or compressive) will dominate shaping of the whole SOLID system. This is why wrinkles appear. This effect is also observed for most of the vapor phase deposition processes. A sputtered thin-film layer (e.g. Al, Ti, etc.) that is deposited onto a glass substrate peels off as soon as the layer thickness exceeds 4μm because the accumulated internal stress creates a strain that is larger than the bond strength per unit area. It appears that PPX is the only solid-state material (to the knowledge of the authors) that is not deforming its nucleation plane even up to 100μm thickness.In the previous observation it was assumed that the liquid is chemically passive looking at nucleation between the precursors of the PPX monomers. In this section, the PPX layer is still coated with the same LPCVD technique, but the liquid on which the PPX is coated will react with the PPX precursors. For liquids that have a low vapor pressure such as glycerol, (bis-(3,5,5-trimethylhexyl)) phthalate, or oils, the conventional Gorham process [4] was tested. For high vapor pressure liquids the pressure in the reactor must be increased as described in Section 3.1.3 for avoiding significant liquid loss due to evaporation during the coating process. Fig. 14a shows schematically the release of molecules from a low vapor pressure liquid that chemically reacts with the PPX precursors. In this way, the nucleation layer will be the product of the reaction and has the potential to functionalize the part of the PPX layer in contact with the liquid. The nucleation layer has the potential to have completely different physico-chemical properties as the PPX. The PPX layer will continue to grow on the nucleation layer as soon as no more molecules are released from the liquid. Such an effect paves the way to user-defined polymer-based electronics as sketched in Fig. 14b where, for example, two different liquids are first deposited by ink-jet printing onto a sacrificial substrate (e.g. glass) leading to two different functionalizations: the yellow liquid becomes a semiconductor due to PPX deposition and reaction, whereas the green liquid ends in a low refraction index layer. Peeling off the PPX layer exhibits the locally defined functionalization. Subsequent metallization (suitable patterning of a sputtered or thermally evaporated metal layer allows contacting the semiconductor, which is in plane with the waveguide. In this way, an extremely thin integrated optics photodiode could be manufactured as a new device based on SOLID technique.The very first evidence of the creation of such a nucleation layer as chemical reaction between a PPX monomer and a liquid was experimentally brought to evidence by [17]. In this work organic compounds bearing double bond(s) in combination with fluorene fragments were used as substrate. Fig. 10a shows an example where the molecule shown in Fig. 15b (obtained from 9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-bis(trimethylborate) and 4-bromostyrene oil), reacts with PPX at nucleation. In total six other molecules have been tested successfully [17].Further studies have been carried out experimentally and by developing models looking at acrylate structures having a vinyl group polarized by the carboxyl group and the electronegative R2 substituent. The activation energy for the reaction of the linear biradical paraxylylene dimer DPX with unsaturated CH2CR1–COOR2 (nucleophile attachment-bond break) was compared with the reaction channel of hydrogen abstraction and conserving the double bond (Pi-bond). Calculations comparing the energies involved in the two reaction channels A and B are shown in Fig. 16according to [19].(A).DPX+CH2CR1–COOR2→DPXCH2CR1COOR2DPX+CH2CR1–COOR2→DPXH+HCCR1COOR2→HDPXCHCR1COOR2Mechanism A was identified as the most promising reaction channel for reaction of PPX-C and acrylate, where radical addition breaks the Pi-bonds. The mechanism is briefly sketched in Fig. 17.The low value of the activation barrier of about 3kcalmol−1 is comparable to the propagation barriers of polymer chains of parylene. Further reduction of the barrier height can be obtained by modification of the electronegativity via the choice of R2 as halogenated (X) aromatic rings. The particular low activation energies let one assume that in general unsaturated CH2CR– terminations are potential candidates for further SOLID systems where the nucleations of PPX on the liquid substrate create a functionalized nucleation layer. The kind of functionalization depends on the choice of functional group (R) that is attached to the acrylate group.Further experiments showed that, indeed, the macroscopic behavior of the PPX layer could be changed. In total, the parylene layers exhibited 14 functionalities [22] such as conductivity, semi conductivity, optical properties etc… For example, we manipulated the conductivity of PPX layers by using sulfonated styrene liquids for the chemical modification of PPX-C surfaces in the course of SOLID process. The polycondensation of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene was then carried out in the presence of modified film (with chemically bonded sulfonic acid groups). The composite obtained demonstrated a surface resistivity of ca. 105Ω measured by a two probe measurement over a 5mm distance. Note that unreacted PPX-C exhibits a surface resistivity of 109Ω.In this chapter, the mechanism leading to solid layer creation on a liquid is not due to molecules coming from the vapor phase. Here, the mechanism we are interested in comes from the vapor phase, which is creating itself the cross-linking of the liquids’ molecules resulting in a solid layer. This effect depends strongly on the liquid properties, and was observed for polydimethylsiloxane, commonly referred to as PDMS.The usual polymerization of PDMS (Sylgard 184 from Dow Corning) goes like this: a liquid catalyst (part B) is mixed to a precursor (part A) (1:10 mass ratio) in order to induce crosslinking. However, another way to induce this crosslinking was to expose the precursor (part A) to a 3% H2 in Argon plasma at 13.56MHz, 20W power, and a pressure of 50Pa using a reactor as shown in Fig. 8. This plasma-induced polymerization of the surface is breaking the PDMS precursor into small catalyst molecules with the help of H2 plasma; this reaction mechanism was proposed by [23]. The atomic hydrogen exposes the liquid surface and leads to cross-linking. The thickness is found to be self-stabilizing, whereby the reaction is first reaction-limited and then diffusion-limited. Subsequent rinsing of the non-cross-linked part A with hexane or ether solvents, allows complete removal of the remaining liquid phase (Fig. 18). With this process, a 200nm freestanding PDMS layer was obtained [24–25]. Fig. 18a shows a large area petri-dish of the precursor with the layer on it; Fig. 18b shows a freestanding PDMS membrane.The PDMS solid on liquid must be rather seen as an academic example and not as a direct solution for direct packaging of devices. However it has a high potential as material for manufacturing of hundreds of nanometer thick polymer layers for e.g. sensor applications such as ISFETS membranes [26], and as membranes in the field of biomedical engineering [27–28].In this chapter different techniques are summarized where a “top liquid” is casted on a higher-density “bottom liquid”; both liquids are non miscible. If the top liquid exhibits solidification, a solid on liquid system is obtained.In this first case, the upper liquid becomes solid due to a sol–gel reaction. As experimental evidence (see Fig. 19), tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS, Si(C2H5O)4), with a density of 0.933g/cm3, was casted onto an ionic liquid such as [BMIM]+[BF4]− (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium-tetrafluoroborate) that has a higher density (1.21g/cm3). After some time TEOS solidifies forming a solid SiO2 layer on the liquid [BMIM]+[BF4]−. This SOLID system must be considered as one example among certainly a large variety of similar systems with similar combinations of top and bottom liquids.In Section 3 we saw that the solid phase is assembled by the accumulation of molecules from the vapor phase onto a liquid phase. The liquid’s intermolecular cohesion forces are stronger than gravity and hence density is not an issue. In the case of two non-miscible liquids, the density determines the starting conditions prior to solidification. But apparently, looking at the conversion from BMIM/TEOS to BMIM/SiO2, the solid SiO2 layer is not sinking either because the solid is creating one stable solid phase coverage from the beginning, or again because, the cohesion forces at the interface of the bottom liquid prevents from sinking (note the density of SiO2 is between 2.19 and 2.33g/cm3).In this second example, the upper liquid becomes solid due to a cross-linking reaction. Here the top liquid is a ter-fluoro polymer (tetrafluoroethylene, hexafluoro-propylene, and vinylidene fluoride) called THV-220 [29] (density 1.21g/cm3) dissolved in acetone. This acetone-dissolved THV-220 is casted onto glycerol as bottom liquid (density 1.26g/cm3). In this case, again, the two liquids are non-miscible and the THV 220 that is completely dissolved in acetone remains as the top liquid. After the evaporation of the acetone, the polymer cross-links (condensation polymerization) and hence coats the glycerol as shown in Fig. 20.Sonochemistry is a discipline in which chemical reactions are accelerated through the application of ultrasonic sound waves. The physical phenomenon causing sonochemical effects in liquids is acoustic cavitation. It is possible to locally create small centers of high pressure (bubbles) at frequencies of 20kHz and an ultrasound power of 500W. The increase of the bubble-size and their subsequent collapse occurs almost adiabatically, where so-called “hot spots” (temperatures between 5000 and 20,000°C) are created during 1ns. The surrounding liquid is heated up to 2000°C. And in the vicinity of those hot spots, pressures between 50 and 150MPa and extreme cooling rates of 1010K/s are observed [30,31]. “Sonicated” surfaces are exposed hence to conditions whereby activation energies are at hand to undergo chemical processes such as bond breaking but also synthesis. In 1990, water-insoluble liquids could successfully be encapsulated in proteinaceous microcapsules (PM). The effect can be explained in two steps: in a first step emulsification occurs between the non-water-soluble liquid and the protein phase; in the present case the protein BSA (bovine serum albumin) was used. For the second step, the crosslinking (denaturation of proteins) between the protein molecules needs agents such as hydroxyl, superoxide, and peroxide radicals. It was found that, at already 0.3W, aqueous sonochemistry cause implosive collapses of bubbles that supply the activation energy converting water into hydrogen peroxide [32]. Based on this effect drug delivery systems could be produced by encapsulating tetracycline (TTCL) in a solid protein shell [33]. Solid on liquid deposition is in this case reduced to the solid encapsulation of a liquid in a liquid environment. The encapsulated “containers” have the volume of the emulsified TTCL.In microscale SOLID systems, gravitation effects are negligible as compared to molecular forces. Liquid substrates for thin film deposition from the vapor phase have comparable properties as solid substrates. Based on a large variety of deposition techniques reviewed in this article, we can conclude that solid on liquid deposition is the rule and not the exception.Along those lines, we showed that any thin film technology and material can potentially be deposited on liquids, however, most of the materials accumulate internal stress leading to the creation of wrinkles and strong deformation due to the low stiffness of liquid surfaces. It seems that parylene is the particular material that does not create internal stress from nanometer to hundreds of micrometer thickness. Therefore, parylene seems to play a particular role.However, special interest must be paid to the fact that, for a certain choice of liquids, chemical reactions occur at the moment of the nucleation of parylene on the liquid. The agreement between theoretical energy barrier calculations and experiments has confirmed that unsaturated terminated molecules (Pi-bond terminated) together with electronegative substitutes reduce the activation energy needed toadd biradical PPX. This effect has the potential of creating a large variety of functionalization and manufacturing of all polymer-based electronic devices.Bubble-free and stress free coating on varying liquid geometriesbased on solid on liquid technology can enable devices such as micro lenses and liquid waveguides. Removing the liquid creates volumes or channels for fluidic systems, free standing membranes, and 3D MEMS.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
