@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MioLab, a rat cardiac contractile force simulator: Applications to teaching cardiac cell physiology and biophysics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Highlight the didactic resources of a simulator MioLab®.Tool that complements the study of the physiology and biophysics of the cardiac cell.Learning activities simulating experiments in silico.Inhibition of ATPase Ca2+ of the cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum – studies in silico.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Simulator,Teaching,Computer models,Virtual experiments,Cardiac myocyte,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionUnderstanding the basic concepts of physiology and biophysics of cardiac cells can be improved by virtual experiments that illustrate the complex excitation–contraction coupling process in cardiac cells. The aim of this study is to propose a rat cardiac myocyte simulator, with which calcium dynamics in excitation–contraction coupling of an isolated cell can be observed. This model has been used in the course “Mathematical Modeling and Simulation of Biological Systems”. In this paper we present the didactic utility of the simulator MioLab®.MethodsThe simulator enables virtual experiments that can help studying inhibitors and activators in the sarcoplasmic reticulum sodium–calcium exchanger, thus corroborating a better understanding of the effects of medications, which are used to treat arrhythmias, on these compartments. The graphical interfaces were developed not only to facilitate the use of the simulator, but also to promote a constructive learning on the subject, since there are animations and videos for each stage of the simulation. The effectiveness of the simulator was tested by a group of graduate students.ResultsSome examples of simulations were presented in order to describe the overall structure of the simulator. Part of these virtual experiments became an activity for Biomedical Engineering graduate students, who evaluated the simulator based on its didactic quality. As a result, students answered a questionnaire on the usability and functionality of the simulator as a teaching tool. All students performed the proposed activities and classified the simulator as an optimal or good learning tool. In their written questions, students indicated as negative characteristics some problems with visualizing graphs; as positive characteristics, they indicated the simulator's didactic function, especially tutorials and videos on the topic of this study.ConclusionsThe results show that the simulator complements the study of the physiology and biophysics of the cardiac cell.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With major technological advancements, many computational tools have been used to develop mathematical models related to biological systems [1]. As a result, these models, which were intended in the past only to research, are now being incorporated to education in the teaching–learning process of basic concepts of sciences in general, particularly biology. This is applied to studies in neuroscience and motor control, where a practical approach using laboratory experiments and computer simulations can complement theoretical classes [2]. This also occurs in cardiac cell physiology and biophysics, where the development of computational models for cardiac myocytes began as an extension to the Hodgkin–Huxley model [3], i.e., equations for giant squid axon, and originated a wide variety of models for cardiac cells [13].General purpose simulators were developed focusing on cardiac cell physiology and biophysics such as the LabHEART® simulator [4], which describes the properties of ionic currents and contractile forces for rabbit ventricular myocytes, and can also be used for educational purposes. However, even with implemented tutorials, the user must be an expert in the area under study, since the didactic part of the simulator is not its primary focus.Another option for a software that can be used for cardiovascular system teaching is CircAdapt – Advanced Cardiovascular Modeling and Simulation. This simulator is developed from a mathematical model that describes the overall circulation of the human heart. This cardiovascular system is modeled with a concatenation of modules that represent heart chambers, valves and blood. Currently, it is used for teaching and in fundamental research in cardiovascular pathophysiology [5]. It is possible to simulate pathologies such as stenosis of aortic and tricuspid valves. The software is open and can be downloaded for free at www.circadapt.org.Many cardiac myocyte models are available using the CellML platform, a standard language for describing cellular models based on eXtensible Markup Language (XML), in order to share and reuse the components of a given model [6]. The CellML platform has a repository of models that allows reuse by research groups. To edit, simulate and analyze the models available in this platform, two software are included: OpenCor and OpenCell (www.cellml.org). Both of them function in an open-code multi-platform modeling environment and can be executed in Windows, Linux or OS X, allowing a great advance in divulgation and reutilization of biological models by researchers. Nevertheless, its main goal is not to teach cardiac physiology. There is therefore no teaching approach in these simulators, since there are no tools related to the understanding of cardiac cell dynamics in its whole, e.g., the complex process of excitation–contraction coupling (ECC). Thus, the main purpose of this paper is to present and highlight the didactic characteristics (exercises, videos and animations) of rats’ cardiac myocytes simulator, as well as to report its advantages as useful tools for teaching physiology and biophysics of cardiac cells. MioLab® offers, as a distinction if compared with other simulators, tutorials, videos and animations that can be useful for teaching cardiac myocytes’ physiological and biophysical processes. The first version of the MioLab® simulator was developed for research on bioengineering [7]. In that article, the authors describe in detail the mathematical model on which the design of the MioLab® simulator was based, as well as the validation of the simulator using experimental data. The architecture of the model and its graphical interface and validation paved the way for its implementation for educational purposes.After the description of the main components of the simulator, also aiming to highlight the importance of virtual experiments (in silico) in computational modeling [8], this paper presents activities proposing experiments in silico, which allow using the simulator as a tool that complements the study in physiology and biophysics of cardiac cells. Finally, the results of a survey conducted with Mathematical Modeling and Simulation of Biological Systems graduate students from Masters and PhD Program in Biomedical Engineering at the University of Mogi das Cruzes will also be mentioned regarding the usability and functionality of the simulator.Results show that the simulator can be used in the classroom as a tool that complements the teaching of basic principles of physiology and biophysics of cardiac cells.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
