@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel fMRI group data analysis method based on data-driven reference extracting from group subjects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We presented a novel method to extract group intrinsic reference from all subjects in a group.A new group ICA model with intrinsic reference (GICA-IR) was further proposed for fMRI data analysis.GICA-IR was shown to better reflect the commonness of subjects in the group.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Group-independent component analysis,Functional magnetic resonance imaging,FastICA,A priori information,Intrinsic reference,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Group-independent component analysis (GICA) is a well-established blind source separation technique that has been widely applied to study multi-subject functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. The group-independent components (GICs) represent the commonness of all of the subjects in the group. Similar to independent component analysis on the single-subject level, the performance of GICA can be improved for multi-subject fMRI data analysis by incorporating a priori information; however, a priori information is not always considered while looking for GICs in existing GICA methods, especially when no obvious or specific knowledge about an unknown group is available. In this paper, we present a novel method to extract the group intrinsic reference from all of the subjects of the group and then incorporate it into the GICA extraction procedure. Comparison experiments between FastICA and GICA with intrinsic reference (GICA-IR) are implemented on the group level with regard to the simulated, hybrid and real fMRI data. The experimental results show that the GICs computed by GICA-IR have a higher correlation with the corresponding independent component of each subject in the group, and the accuracy of activation regions detected by GICA-IR was also improved. These results have demonstrated the advantages of the GICA-IR method, which can better reflect the commonness of the subjects in the group.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Independent component analysis (ICA) has been successfully applied to the study of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data as a data-driven method [1,2] since it was first introduced for single-subject fMRI data analysis by McKeown et al. [3]. ICA attempts to separate independent sources that have been mixed together. Based on different modeling assumptions, the conventional ICAs can be used to analyze the fMRI data in three different dimensions, namely, the spatial [4,5], temporal [6,7] and spatiotemporal dimensions [8]. This paper concerns ICA for the spatial dimension (spatial ICA, sICA), which models the fMRI data as a linear mixture of spatial independent components.In some cases, ICA is used for multi-subject fMRI data analysis, often referred to as group ICA (GICA) [9]. The fMRI data of multiple subjects are typically grouped in three different ways with different hypotheses imposed upon the multi-subject fMRI data, including spatial concatenation, temporal concatenation and tensor concatenation. The spatial concatenation method concatenates the multi-subject fMRI data along the spatial dimension assuming that all of the subjects have common temporal information in each corresponding independent component (IC) [10]. The temporal concatenation method concatenates the multi-subject fMRI data along the temporal dimension with an assumption that all of the subjects have common spatial independent components (ICs) [11–13]. The tensor probabilistic ICA concatenates the original multi-subject fMRI data along a separate third dimension with the hypothesis that different subjects have common group spatial ICs and time courses but a subject-specific magnitude [14,15]. The temporal concatenation method works better than the spatial concatenation method for fMRI data analysis because the temporal variations in the fMRI signal are larger than the spatial variations [16]. A comparison of the temporal concatenation method and tensor probabilistic ICA method indicates that the temporal concatenation method works better for most fMRI studies [17]. Thus, only the temporal concatenation GICA will be considered in this paper.As a blind source separation technique, classical ICA is not dependent on any a priori information, but some works have suggested that incorporating a priori information into the estimation process can improve the potential of ICA as a method for fMRI data analysis [18]. Several algorithms and methodologies have been proposed to account for a priori information on an ICA problem, such as a constrained ICA [19,20], ICA with a reference (ICA-R) [21,22] and other extension work [23,24]. Existing studies have demonstrated that these methods have better performance due to the use of a priori information, such as temporal a priori information [25], spatial a priori information [26,27], or spatiotemporal a priori information [28,29]. There are several reasons to incorporate a priori information into an ICA model when available. For example, compared to the classical ICA, ICA-R takes advantage of the a priori information to extract only the desired independent sources without extracting the whole data set of sources, and therefore, this method avoids computing the uninteresting sources and facilitates subsequent applications [30]. In addition, the incorporation of a priori information improves the quality and accuracy of the separation of interested components, and the computation time and storage requirements are reduced simultaneously [31].However, the existing approaches with a priori information usually consider only specific knowledge on the sources, such as a specific template of spatial activation or a particular feature of a source. While this knowledge about the sources is not always known, how to extract the underlying information from the existing data itself is an important consideration. Recently, the group independent components (GICs) computed by GICA have been used to guide ICA on the single-subject level, and this method is able to obtain subject specific ICs with stronger independence and better spatial correspondence across different subjects in addition to higher spatial and temporal accuracy [32]. To the best of our knowledge, currently, there are no reports on how to obtain some information from each subject in the group and incorporate this information into the GICA extraction procedure for multi-subject fMRI data analysis on the group level, especially when no obvious or specific knowledge is available on an unknown group of sources. In this paper, we present such a method, which we have called GICA with intrinsic reference (GICA-IR).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the relevant knowledge and theory of the GICA-IR method will first be presented followed by the simulated data, hybrid data and real data experimental tests, which were designed to evaluate the performance of GICA-IR compared with FastICA. Finally, the results and analysis will be presented together with interpretations and conclusions related to the advantages and limitations of this new data analysis method.The classic ICA model assumes that the source signals are not observable, statistically independent, and non-Gaussian. Let X=(X1, X2, …, XT)′ be the T×V fMRI data observed from a single subject, where Xi(i=1, …, T) is a column vector of size V×1, T is the number of time points and V is the total number of voxels within a brain image acquired at each time point. The noise-free ICA of single-subject fMRI [3] can be expressed as(1)X=MSwhere S=(S1, S2, …, SN)′ is a N×V matrix with each row representing the spatial map of a source signal, which is also called the independent component, Si(i=1, …, T) is a column vector of size V×1 and N denotes the number of source signals. M is a T×N unknown mixing matrix that mixes the N independent source signals to generate the observed fMRI images, where each column of M representing the time course of a source signal. The goal of ICA is to estimate an N×T, unmixing matrix W=(W1, W2, …, WN)′ with Wi(i=1, …, N) is a column vector of size T×1, such that Y=(Y1, Y2, …, YN)′ computed by the following equation is a good approximation of the true sources S(2)Y=WXAn error term representing residual variability in the observed data can be added to X=MS, which leads to the probabilistic ICA model [33,34]. The most commonly used ICA algorithms included Infomax [35], FastICA [36] and so on.To incorporate the reference into ICA, a distance criterion is defined to measure the closeness between the output signal y and reference signal r, and we denote the distance as ɛ(y, r), where y and r are column vectors with the same number of voxels in the brain. Several functions can be used as ɛ(y, r), e.g., mean square error (MSE), correlation or negative correlation. Then, the problem of ICA-R can be modeled in the constrained ICA framework as a constrained optimization problem(3)MaximizeJ(y)Subject to g(y)≤0andh(y)=E[y2]−1=0where J(y) is used to measure the independence of y, which can be achieved by minimizing their mutual information or maximizing their non-gaussianity by negentropy or kurtosis. g(y)=ɛ(y, r)−ξ, where ξ is a threshold parameter used to restrain the distance between y and r, such that the desired IC is the only one output signal satisfying the inequality constraint. The equality constraint h(y) is used to compel the output to have a unit covariance. To solve this optimization problem, the inequality constraint is transformed into the equality constraint,gˆ(y)=g(y)+c=0,via introducing a slack variable c. Then, the Lagrange multiplier method was utilized to search for the solution using a Newton-like learning algorithm [21] or a fixed-point learning algorithm [22].Among the existing GICA approaches, the most commonly used method is temporal concatenation GICA. Specifically, let Xi be a T×V matrix representing the observed fMRI data from subject i(i=1, …, K). Temporal concatenation GICA temporal concatenates data across the K subjects and then decomposes the KT×V group data as(4)[(X1)′,(X2)′,…,(XK)′]′=MˆSˆwhereMˆis a KT×L group mixing matrix andSˆis a L×V matrix with each row representing a GIC and L denoting the number of GICs, where the rows ofSˆare assumed to be statistically independent.In this section, we provide the detailed contents of the proposed GICA-IR. Assuming a total of K subjects in the group, all of the subjects have T time points and V voxels after normalization.First, ICA was implemented on each of the subjects in the group. As introduced in Section 2.1, for the subject i, ICA was defined as(5)Xi=MiSi,(i=1,2,…,K)where Xidenotes the T×V fMRI observed data, Midenotes the T×Ni mixing matrix,Si=(S1i,S2i,…,SNii)′denotes the Ni×V matrix with each row representing the ICs of subject i,Sji(j=1,…,Ni)is a column vector of size V×1.For simplicity, we assume that each subject of the group has just one interested IC corresponding to the GIC. The correspondence of the ICs across the different subjects corresponding to the GIC can be measured using the absolute value of the spatial correlation [37].Next, we will use principal component analysis (PCA) to extract the intrinsic reference signal from the ICs that are decomposed by ICA in Section 2.4.1.We denote the location set of voxels in the mask of subject i as VLSi(i=1, 2, …, K), andSnii(i=1,2,…,K)denote the nith IC of subject i corresponding to the GIC of interest. Then, we can calculate the location set of the common activated voxels in allSnii(i=1,2,…,K)at the same threshold θ and denote it as CAVLS, namely,(6)CAVLS={j|abs(Snii(j))≥θ,j∈VLSi,i=1,2,…,K}Letsnii(i=1,2,…,K)denote the common voxels fromSniiwith regard to the index CAVLS, wherezsniiis a column vector, which can be retrieved as:(7)snii={abs(Snii(j))|j∈CAVLS},(i=1,2,…,K)Here, the absolute value ofsniiis used in Eqs. (6) and (7) due to the possible negative activation in IC of the network of interest. Although this method may result in some noise insnii, the reference is extracted from allsnii(i=1,2,…,K)by PCA, which has the ability to reduce the noise.Next, we use PCA to calculate the intrinsic reference signal from the K×v matrix R, which consists of allsnii(i=1,2,…,K), namely,(8)R=[sn11,sn22,…,snKK]′Then, the eigenvalue λk(k=1, 2, …, K) such that λ1≥λ2≥⋯≥λK≥0, and the corresponding eigenvectors ek(k=1, 2, …, K) of the covariance matrix C=E[RR′] can be calculated, where ek is a column vector of size K×1. Finally, we select the first principal component as the intrinsic reference r, namely,(9)r=e′1Rwhere r is a row vector of size 1×v, and the corresponding contribution of r can be calculated by(10)cr=λ1∑k=1KλkWhen the intrinsic reference r was extracted from the subjects of the group, the ICA-R [26] introduced in Section 2.2 can be used for the group fMRI data analysis by incorporating r into the extraction procedure of the GICA introduced in Section 2.3 as a reference signal, namely, GICA-IR. To evaluate the performance of GICA-IR, the classical ICA [36] without prior information introduced in Section 2.1 was also performed on the group level for the purpose of comparison.The experimental tests consist of simulated data, hybrid data and real data experiments. For the real data experiments, the task-related network and the related default mode network (DMN) were considered in the task-related experiment and the resting-state experiment, respectively.The simulated fMRI data were generated by linearly mixing a set of spatially independent sources with distinct simulated hemodynamic time courses using software (http://mlsp.umbc.edu/simulated_fmri_data.html) [38]. Each simulated dataset corresponding to one simulated subject's fMRI data had 100 mixture images, which were generated by mixing eight fMRI-like source images (60×60 pixels) with the associated time courses (100 time points). Among the eight sources, the task-related source has a time course with a block-like shape mimicking an experimental paradigm. In our experiment, a group simulated dataset consisting of 10 simulated subjects was generated from the same template sources/TCs by adding subject-specific variability. The spatial variation of the sources was simulated by adding Gaussian noise to the source images, and amplitude modulation was applied to the time courses to simulate temporal variation.To assess the performance of GICA-IR for multi-subject fMRI data analysis, the hybrid data experiment was designed. We simulated the signal S with a cubic size of 7×7×7 (unit: voxel), which was added to the normalized resting-state fMRI data of five subjects at an amplitude equal to 0.02 times the average amplitude of the signal within the cubic. The signal changes in the anterior two regions corresponded to the same mixing function, which are presented in Fig. 1[39].The resting-state data set was downloaded from the public neuroimaging database (http://www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon1000/). This dataset was released by Dr. James J. Pekar and Dr. Stewart H. Mostofsky. In total, 23 healthy subjects (eight males and 15 females) were involved in this study. The BOLD fMRI data were acquired on a Philips 3.0T scanner using a multi-element receiver coil to allow partial parallel image acquisition with a single-shot SENSE gradient echo EPI with 47 slices providing whole-brain coverage and 123 volumes, a TR of 2.5s and a scan resolution of 96×96. The in-plane resolution was 2.67mm×2.67mm, and the slice thickness was 3mm. In this study, the BOLD fMRI data of five healthy subjects were randomly selected to perform the group analysis.A visual task-related fMRI dataset with five subjects were involved in this study. All five subjects were informed of the study aims and provided written informed consent prior to inclusion. The visual paradigm was OFF-ON-OFF-ON-OFF-ON in 20s block. During the “ON” state, a visual stimulus corresponded to a radial blue/yellow checkerboard, reversing at 7Hz. During the “OFF” state, the participants were required to focus on the cross at the center of the screen. The BOLD fMRI data of two of the subjects were acquired using single-shot SENSE gradient echo EPI with 37 slices providing whole-brain coverage and 70 volumes, a TR of 2.0s and a scan resolution of 64×64. The in-plane resolution was 4mm×4mm, and the slice thickness was 4mm. The data from the other three subjects were acquired using single-shot SENSE gradient echo EPI with 40 slices providing whole-brain coverage and 70 volumes, a TR of 2.0s and a scan resolution of 80×80. The in-plane resolution was 3mm×3mm, and the slice thickness was 3mm.The resting-state dataset including 10 subjects was involved in this study. The BOLD fMRI data were acquired on a Siemens Trio 3.0T scanner using a 12-channel phased-array receiver-only head coil with the implementation of parallel imaging scheme GRAPPA (GeneRalized Autocalibrating Partially Parallel Acquisitions) with a gradient echo EPI with 40 slices providing whole-brain coverage and 160 volumes, a TR of 3s and a scan resolution of 64×64. The in-plane resolution was 3.5mm×3.5mm, and the slice thickness was 3.5mm. The functional images were collected parallel to the AC-PC (anterior commissure–posterior commissure) plane, with whole brain EPI acquisition from the vertex to the cerebellum.All of the computations in this study were performed on a workstation with an operating system platform consisting of windows 7 Unlimited Service Pack1, with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-1620 3.60GHz processor and 40GB RAM. All of the preprocessing and processing algorithm steps of ICA and GICA-IR were run on the Matlab platform (Matlab, 2013a, Math-Works Inc., Sherborn, MA, USA).Common preprocessing of all of the experiments except simulated experiment was performed in SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/), including slice timing; motion correction; spatial normalization; and smoothing with the Gaussian kernel, which was set to 4mm on the hybrid data and task-related data and 8mm on the resting-state data, where SPM was a tool for fMRI data preprocessing including jSIPRO for the magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging analysis [40]. In all of the experiments, the single-subject ICA and temporal concatenated GICA were involved. All of these methods were performed using GIFT software (v2.0e) (http://mialab.mrn.org/software/). FastICA was performed at both the single-subject level and the group level, and GICA-IR was only performed at the group level. To obtain reliable ICs and GICs, ICASSO [41] with 20 runs and both ‘RandInit’ and ‘Bootstrap’ were used for FastICA. MDL [42] was used to estimate the number of GICs for the real data. Furthermore, the location and display of these networks were assessed using MRIcro software (http://www.mricro.com).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
