@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation of stable tearing crack growth events using the CZM approach with an explicit solver

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The CZM approach is applied to simulate stable tearing crack growth by explicit solver.A careful convergence study is carried out for selecting proper parameters in the artificial acceleration techniques.Simulation results are validated by experimental data.Valuable practical experience for CZM simulations in explicit analysis is provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cohesive zone,Finite element,Crack growth,Explicit analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The cohesive zone model (CZM) approach has been shown to be an effective approach for simulating fracture events. However, CZM simulations of quasi-static events using an implicit solver usually encounter numerical difficulties due to the nonlinear and softening behavior of CZM. To overcome the numerical difficulties, an explicit solver, which is intended for fast transient problems, can be employed for quasi-static events, such as stable tearing crack growth. In the current study, a CZM based approach is applied to simulate Mode I stable tearing crack growth events in Arcan specimens made of 2024-T3 aluminum alloy, by using an explicit solver. The cohesive parameters obtained in a recent study [8] that lead to good predictions for both Mode I and mixed-mode I/II conditions are used in the current study. In order to shorten the solution time, two artificial acceleration techniques are employed: (1) acceleration by reducing the time period of the analysis and (2) acceleration by increasing the mass density of the model (mass scaling). A careful convergence study is carried out to gain an understanding of the choice of proper values for the parameters in the artificial acceleration techniques for efficient and accurate simulation predictions and to provide practical experience for CZM simulations in explicit analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the complexity of and extensive plastic deformation in stable tearing crack growth events, numerical simulations are always required to analyze or predict such events. The cohesive zone model (CZM) approach has been demonstrated to be an effective approach for simulating fracture events. This approach was first proposed by Barrenblatt [1,2] and Dugdale [3]. In practice, CZM allows the introduction of interface elements along the crack path between the surrounding materials and can be readily implemented in finite element analysis codes. Due to its strong physics basis and relative ease in numerical implementation, the CZM approach has been applied to simulate fracture processes in a wide range of material systems.However, due to the softening behavior and degrading stiffness during the evolution period of a CZM, numerical analyses often encounter convergence difficulties if an implicit solver is used, especially for quasi-static problems, such as stable tearing crack growth. To overcome these difficulties, various methods have been proposed, such as the ‘line search’ with a negative step length procedure [4], the modified cylindrical arc-length method [5], and the use of an Adaptive Cohesive Model (ACM) [6].Among these methods, two are popular in the literature. One of them is to use viscous regularization of the constitutive equations to overcome the convergence difficulties. This technique [7] introduces an artificial viscosity factor and causes the tangent stiffness matrix of the softening material to be positive definite with sufficiently small time increments. In a recent study [8], the authors simulated the stable tearing crack growth using CZM approach for both Mode I and mixed-mode I/II loading conditions. In the simulations reported in [8], the technique of viscous regularization was successfully employed to complete the CZM simulations with an implicit solver and good simulation predictions were reached.Another method is to use an explicit solver instead of an implicit solver for quasi-static problems in CZM simulations (e.g. [9,10]). Explicit solvers are intended for fast transient events in dynamic analyses, employing a large number of small stable increments. To deal with a quasi-static loading problem, artificial acceleration techniques such as mass scaling are commonly used to reduce the extremely long analysis time. However, without a careful selection of the analysis parameter values used in the techniques, an artificially increased inertia force can lead to inaccurate simulation predictions that depend on the analysis parameter values. Therefore, the choice of the analysis parameter values in the explicit procedure is very important, but this issue is barely discussed in the literature.In the current study, the simulations of stable tearing crack growth in Mode I Arcan test on a specimen made of aluminum alloy 2024-T3 will be carried out with ABAQUS/Explicit solver using the CZM approach. The effects of the artificial acceleration parameters on the accuracy of the predictions are carefully studied. The predictions will be compared with experimental measurements reported in [11] and with the predictions from an implicit solver [8], in order to validate the predictions from the explicit solver in terms of convergence performance.The simulations of stable tearing crack growth are performed based on the Arcan tests. The Arcan fixture and specimen are designed to facilitate crack growth tests under mixed-mode loading conditions ranging from pure mode I to pure mode II [11]. The Arcan fixture, which is shown inFig. 1(a), is made of 15-5PH stainless steel and has a thickness of 19.05mm. The test specimen is made of 2024-T3 aluminum alloy with a thickness of 2.29mm, as shown in Fig. 1(b). A single-edge crack with a 6.35mm length is introduced on one side at the mid-section of the specimen. The fixture and specimen are connected with three hardened steel pins at each end, which provides a rigid connection compared to the specimen material. The stainless steel fixture has a Young modulus of 207GPa, a Poisson ratio of 0.3, and an initial yield stress of 1,724MPa; the aluminum alloy has a Young modulus of 71.7GPa, a Poisson ratio of 0.3, and an initial yield stress of 345MPa. Both the steel and the aluminum alloy exhibit a strain-hardening behavior, which is modeled by using the J2 flow theory of plasticity and the actual stress–strain curves. The Arcan specimen is loaded by gradually pulling apart the fixture at a pair of grip holes on the opposite sides of a radial line, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Different mixed-mode loading conditions are obtained by changing the pair of loading holes. When the loading angle, Φ, is zero, the specimen is under Mode I condition, and when Φ equals to 90°, the specimen is under Mode II condition.Finite element simulations are carried out using the commercial code ABAQUS/Explicit. The fixture and the specimen are meshed with 8-node hexahedral elements, C3D8R, while the cohesive zone is meshed with 8-node quadrilateral cohesive interface elements, COH3D8. A layer of cohesive elements is placed along the Mode I crack path, starting from the initial straight crack front (note that the crack is at the left edge of the specimen) to the end of the ligament at the right edge of the specimen (seeFig. 2). This layer is along the middle line of the specimen and is surrounded by many small volume elements (seen as a dark band in the mesh). The initial crack length is 6.35mm.A careful convergence study has been carried out to make sure that simulation predictions are not mesh dependent. Finally, a refined mesh is selected with a uniform cohesive element length of lc=0.05mm. Fig. 2 shows the overall view of a refined mesh. The cohesive elements obey the triangular cohesive law, which is available in ABAQUS, as seen inFig.3. Three parameters, cohesive strength τmax, cohesive stiffness K and final separation δsep, are chosen to define the triangular cohesive law in the simulation. In [8], a set of CZM parameter values (τmax=759MPa, δ0=0.0078mm and δsep=0.0448mm) is obtained from the simulations of Mode I Arcan test with the implicit procedure in ABAQUS/Standard, leading to good predictions of stable tearing crack growth events for both Mode I and mixed-mode I/II loading conditions. The same set of cohesive parameters will be employed in the current study for the explicit analysis.The load–crack extension curve describes the variation of the load carrying capacity of a cracked specimen or structure with the amount of crack extension during stable tearing crack growth. It is an important curve in structural integrity evaluations of critical engineering structures such as aircraft structures. In the simulation, this curve is calculated using the same method as in the experiments in order to validate the predictions. The applicability of the explicit analysis (e.g. ABAQUS/Explicit) for the CZM simulations of stable tearing crack growth events will be explored in the following section.During the simulations, since the cohesive law involves both nonlinear and softening behaviors, simulations using the CZM approach often encounter convergence difficulties in an implicit solution procedure (e.g. in ABAQUS/Standard). To overcome this problem, the authors employed the technique, viscous regularization, to assist the implicit solver to complete the solution [9] in studying the stable tearing crack growth events. But the viscosity factor is not a physical parameter of CZM, so a careful convergence study was carried out to select a proper viscosity value and found that a small value 10−6s is sufficient to lead to accurate solutions. However, when cohesive parameter values are in a certain range, such as when the cohesive strength has a sufficiently large value, the implicit analysis is still difficult to converge/complete even if the viscous regularization is employed. This is because, for example, with a large cohesive strength value, the sudden change of the stiffness is more obvious after the peek point in the cohesive law, so that the numerical difficulty is more severe. For these cases, an explicit analysis for CZM simulation is preferred.In the literature, the explicit procedure is often utilized in CZM simulations, even for quasi-static problems (e.g. [9,10]). However, since explicit solution procedures are intended for fast dynamic events with short durations, simulations of slow quasi-static events, such as stable tearing crack growth, will require a very long computational time. Thus practical simulations of quasi-static events often necessitate the use of artificial acceleration techniques. For example, in ABAQUS/Explicit, simulations of quasi-static events can be accelerated by either speeding up the application of loading or scaling up the mass of the material. In using such techniques, it is important to check that the simulation predictions are not dramatically altered by the use of these techniques; that is, solution convergence with respect to the parameter values used in the techniques must be demonstrated.In this study, convergence issues in the simulations of stable tearing crack growth events using ABAQUS/Explicit and the CZM approach are investigated for the Mode I case. An explicit analysis performs a large number of small time increments. In each increment, δt, the calculation proceeds without iterations and without requiring the tangent stiffness matrices to be formed. In ABAQUS/Explicit, the analysis employs the central-difference operator, and the time increment must be smaller than the stability limit of this operator to avoid unstable solution. The stability limit is the transit time of a dilatational wave across the distance defined by the characteristic element length. Generally, there are two ways to estimate the time increment, δt. One is based on the element-by-element stability estimate, which can be written as (see ABAQUS Manual [7])(1)δt≤min(Leρλ^+2μ^)where the minimum is taken over all elements in the mesh, Leis a characteristic length associated with an element, ρ is the density of the material in the element, andλ^andμ^are the effective Lame's constants for the material in the element. The other way is based on the global stability estimate. The time increment from the global estimate may be somewhat larger. If δt remains constant, the number of increments, n, is(2)n=T/δtwhere T is the time period of the event being simulated.Comparing with the implicit procedure, the time period in an explicit analysis has more physical meanings. Generally, it corresponds to the real event time, T0, particularly for a rate-dependent response. For quasi-static simulations, the generally very long real event time leads to an extremely large CPU cost, since the computer time involved in the explicit time integration with a given mesh is proportional to the time period of the event. In the Mode I Arcan test, the rate of the quasi-static displacement loading is 2.54×10−3mm/s (10−4in./s). If the total displacement loading in the simulation is 1mm, then the real event time, T0, of the quasi-static test is around 393s. If the time increment is on the order of 10−9s, then the required CPU cost for a real event time of T0=393s will be enormous and it will be impractical and prohibitive to perform the simulations with this cost.To achieve an economical solution, two approaches can be used in ABAQUS/Explicit either separately or in combination: (a) artificially accelerate the event by reducing the time period of the analysis and (b) artificially accelerate the event by increasing the mass density of the model (mass scaling). However, there are no empirical equations to determine the factors used in these approaches. Thus for each particular problem using the explicit analysis with the acceleration techniques, a convergence study is necessary to ensure the accuracy of the simulation predictions. The experience of the current authors in using these two techniques for efficient and accurate simulations of stable tearing crack growth events are presented below.To reduce the number of increments required, n, and speed up the simulations, we can reduce the time period of the analysis, T, compared to the total real event time of the actual process, T0. However, if the simulation is accelerated too much, the increased inertia forces will change the predicted response. To understand the convergence property of the load–crack extension curve, simulations are carried out with a time period of 0.01s (which corresponds to about 5 times of the basic frequency of the system) and repeated by doubling the time period subsequently, without changing the default values of other analysis factors, such as the time increment δt.The results of the predicted load–crack extension curves calculated using different period time are plotted inFig. 4. It is shown that, when the time period, T, is too short relative to the actual total event time, T0, the accuracy of the predicted results is bad (e.g. the predicted peak load is too large relative to the experimental value). As T increases, the accuracy of the predicted results is better (e.g. the predicted peak load decreases and becomes closer to the experimental value). Converged predictions of the load–crack extension curve are observed when T increases from 0.08s to 0.16s. Although the time period of T=0.16s is still far smaller than the actual event time, T0 (which is 393s), the converged prediction of the load–crack extension using the explicit procedure (with a computational speed up of nearly 2,500) is almost the same as that using the implicit procedure and compares well with experimental measurements (seeFig. 5).Another way to shorten the analysis time of the explicit simulation is using the mass scaling technique to artificially increase the material density by a factor, say f2. Based on Eqs. (1) and (2), this technique reduces the number of time increments, n, to n/f, which is equivalent to decreasing the time period, T, to T/f. However, at the same time of decreasing the analysis time, the accuracy of the predictions may be degraded by the effect of the artificial inertia forces. Thus, convergence of simulation predictions must be established so that the predictions are not strongly affected by the use of the artificial technique. Since the actual event time of the Arcan test is very long, an extremely large mass scaling factor is needed to make sure a reasonable analysis time can be achieved, which is not easy to handle with. Therefore, two alternative series of simulations using a combination of reducing the time period and increasing the mass of system are performed to understand the convergence property of the predictions.In the first series of simulations, the time period of analysis is fixed at 1.0s, and the value of the mass scaling parameter f2 is chosen to be 50,000, then 5000, then 500, and finally 50. Apparently, the larger the mass scale factor is, the shorter time the analysis will take (computation time varies from several days to several hours). As shown inFig. 6, when f2 is too large (e.g. 50,000), the predicted peak load is too large relative to the experimental value; and when f2 becomes smaller, the predicted peak load becomes smaller and closer to the experimental value. Convergence of the predicted load–crack extension curve is observed when f2 is decreased from 500 to 50. The converged prediction of the load–crack extension using the explicit procedure (with a computational speed up of nearly 1750) is almost the same as that using the implicit procedure and compares well with experimental measurements (seeFig. 7).In the second series of simulations, the mass scalar factor is fixed at 50,000, and the time period, T, takes the value of 1s, 2s, …, 32s. As shown inFig. 8, convergence of the predicted load–crack extension curve is observed when T is increased to 32s. The converged prediction of the load–crack extension using the explicit procedure (with a computational speed up of nearly 1700) is almost the same as that using the implicit procedure and compares well with experimental measurements (seeFig. 9).Based on the above results, three sets of artificial acceleration parameter values in the explicit procedure are found to produce converged predictions of the load–crack extension curve with good agreement with predictions using the implicit procedure and with the experimental measurements. These sets of values are listed inTable 1. In the table, the displacement loading per time increment, d, can be calculated by(3)d=DTδtwhere D is the total displacement loading. As shown in Table 1, when d is on the order of 10−8mm, the predictions converge. In light of this observation, other mass scaling values could be applied to obtain converged predictions as long as the displacement per time increment is properly small (e.g. on the order of 10−8mm in this study). In the current simulation, if the total displacement is 1mm, and the time period is kept at 1s, then the time increment should be on the order of 10−8s to ensure convergence. To confirm this observation, a value of δt=2.5×10−8s is used to perform the simulation again. Prediction of the load–crack extension curve agrees with earlier converged predictions using other parameter values, with predictions using the implicit procedure, and with experimental data, as shown inFig. 10. In this case, the computational speed up is near 2200.To summarize, by properly adjusting the time period, the mass scaling factor and the time increment, a significant reduction in CPU cost can be achieved in explicit simulations of stable tearing crack growth events without losing accuracy. Consequently, for the cases in which the implicit solver meets numerical difficulties in convergence, the explicit solver can be utilized confidently to reach complete and accurate solutions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A cohesive zone model based approach is applied with an explicit solver to simulate a Mode I stable tearing crack growth event in an Arcan specimen made of 2024-T3 aluminum alloy [11]. The cohesive parameters obtained from an implicit analysis [8] which led to good predictions for both Mode I and mixed-mode I/II cases are used in the current study. Two artificial acceleration techniques, (1) acceleration by reducing the time period of the analysis and (2) acceleration by increasing the mass density of the model (mass scaling), are employed to accelerate the simulations with the explicit solver. The aim of the acceleration techniques is to reduce the computation time without inducing significant artificial inertia effects. A careful convergence study on the effects of the acceleration parameter values is carried out in order to obtain efficient and reliable predictions. Several sets of parameter values are obtained so that the predictions of load–crack extension curve agree well with the experimental measurements and with the predictions using the implicit analysis.The two acceleration techniques studied in the current work are equivalent, which can be seen from Eqs. (1) and (2) as discussed in the first paragraph of Section 4.2. In general, either technique can be used to reach converged solutions to quasi-static problems, provided that adequate acceleration parameter values are chosen, for example, by carrying out a convergence analysis with respect to the parameter values, as done in the current work. However, one has to be careful in selecting a particular technique for some cases. If one expects the physical problem to become unstable (e.g., a crack becomes unstable and thus the problem becomes truly dynamic in nature), then the technique of reducing the time period is more appropriate since then the true dynamic behavior can be captured. In this case, the technique of mass scaling or increasing artificially the density would not yield realistic results if dynamic crack propagation (or any other unstable/dynamic phenomena) becomes important. In contrast, mass scaling is more appropriate for reducing the solution time in simulations involving a rate-dependent material or rate-dependent damping behavior.The results and experience with explicit analyses from the current study will be useful not only for simulating stable tearing crack growth events with the CZM approach but also for solving other relevant quasi-static problems using an explicit solver.