@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive path following schemes for problems with softening

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new adaptive path following technique for tracing highly nonlinear static equilibrium paths is presented.It avoids nonphysical artificial unloading for materials with softening.The method allows efficient computation with a small number of increments and minimal user interference.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Continuation methods,Adaptivity,Softening,Artificial unloading,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present contribution deals with the question how structures with softening material behavior can be controlled in a numerical analysis beyond limit points, when conventional path following schemes fail. For nonlinear problems with localized cracks, adaptive path following schemes that increase numerical robustness, minimize user interference and avoid nonphysical (artificial) unloading are presented. In the methods proposed, a control region is identified where control parameters are evaluated. This control region adapts with the continuation of the crack tip. Robustness and applicability of the schemes are illustrated by numerical examples.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The mechanical response of statically loaded structures until failure is governed by external loads, prescribed deformations or environmental effects, just to mention the most frequent ‘loading’ situations. Typically large structures are load controlled such as by gravity and life load, whereas small structural elements within a structure depend on the deformations of the neighbored structural parts; if they are less stiff than the main structure their contribution to the overall load carrying capacity diminishes during further loading of the entire structure. Depending on the controlling parameter, i.e. load or displacement, the load carrying capacity ceases at certain limit points leading to dynamic snap-through or snap-back phenomena eventually leading to complete structural failure.These typical phenomena are reflected in related experiments. Larger specimens may be loaded by increasing external loads. However, structural elements are mostly controlled by selected kinematic variables like characteristic displacements or strains; examples are the elongation in a tension test or the crack opening displacement (COD) control experiment; see for example van Mier [1] for concrete. Other controlling mechanisms exist, e.g. pressure or volume control for vessels.The situation of selecting proper controlling parameters in experiments as well as in numerical analyses is similar for geometrically and materially nonlinear response or its combination. However, for path dependent materials exhibiting damage or plasticity it becomes much more delicate due to potential local unloading. Although this is in certain cases a real physical phenomenon it may happen in conventional path following schemes like the arc-length method as a nonphysical artifact.The present contribution deals with the question how these phenomena in the post-critical regime, i.e. beyond limit points, can be controlled in a numerical analysis. We concentrate on the determination of static equilibrium paths since they are a key to predictability of these states. They contain information about stability, imperfection sensitivity, ductility and robustness as well as potential dynamic phenomena of the corresponding structure. A variety of control types can be applied for tracing static nonlinear equilibrium paths. The choice of an appropriate constraint equation for the incremental iterative scheme is crucial and affects the convergence properties decisively. For nonlinear problems, advanced procedures like the constant arc-length method have been introduced by Riks [2] and Wempner [3]. Crisfield [4] proposed a quadratic spherical or cylindrical constraint equation, Ramm [5] presented the updated normal method, iterating on an updated normal plane. Schweizerhof and Wriggers [6] proposed a consistent linearization of the constraint equation to circumvent selecting the proper root for the quadratic problem. Over the last few decades, these methods have been applied for geometrically, as well as for materially nonlinear problems. Several modifications have been introduced in the mean time, see e.g. Wriggers [7] or Geers [8], and also have been implemented in commercial codes.Most of these schemes can handle smooth geometrically nonlinear problems fairly well, but still have problems for path dependent material, in particular in the post-critical range. In this case strain localization and artificial unloading introduce additional challenges, these methods cannot always handle. It is known from the literature that global norms, appearing in the methods mentioned above, are inappropriate for many materially nonlinear problems. Geometric nonlinearity is taken into account in the numerical examples. However, particular aspects of geometric nonlinearity, like buckling, bifurcation and instabilities, are not in the focus of this paper. Dealing with this class of problems, de Borst [9] presented the indirect displacement control, for example using the crack mouth opening displacement as a controlling parameter. This method offers a robust solution technique, but requires a priori knowledge of the structural behavior in order to assign the controlling degrees of freedom before computation. Chen and Schreyer [10] prescribe selected strain components in the most critical point of the body. This total strain control necessitates continuously growing strains to gain monotonic behavior of the constraint equation. Unloading of the maximally strained element may lead to an algorithmic failure. As a generalization of these approaches Geers [8,11] proposes an adaptive scheme, the subplane control approach, that uses incremental predictor solutions to select or weigh control parameters for the subsequent iteration procedure. His approach, prescribing incremental changes instead of total values, does not require continuously growing control quantities. Rots et al. [12] introduce a sequentially linear analysis for concrete and masonry structures and apply a secant approximation replacing the softening branch by a saw-tooth approximation. In the proposal of Lorentz and Badel [13], the choice of the scalar constraint equation is based on the maximum value of the elastic predictor of the yield function. Another proposal of [13] is a normalized prescribed strain at the Gauss point exhibiting the maximum strain increment. Gutiérrez׳ energy release control[14] is a dissipation based arc-length control. In [15] it is extended to geometrically nonlinear damage and geometrically linear plasiticity. This method is well suited for dissipative parts of the path as the rate of dissipation is positive. For problems that exhibit elastic loading during the continuation of the equilibrium path, the constraint equation needs to be switched to a different control type which does not rely on dissipation. The energy release control is an elegant and consistent method. The authors hoped to get smooth transient regions of dissipative and elastic path sections by controlling a quantity implying elastic and dissipative changes. Furthermore, these transient areas should be overcome with a small number of load steps.It can be stated that several situations exist where the control equation may fail, for example at limit points or sharp snap-backs. Furthermore, artificial unloading can occur for path dependent material.For the present study the typical localized failure mechanism of an evolving individual crack based on a continuum damage model with softening is selected as a benchmark for a path following scheme. Additionally, one example without prescribed damage zone is used as a test example for the methods presented.Without loss of generality, isotropic damage with linear softening is selected; an element related fracture energy based regularization is applied. Geometrical nonlinearities are taken into account.After the basic equations for the path following schemes are summarized, the mentioned issue of artificial unloading is picked out as a central theme. In view of the mentioned complex of problems we concentrate on adaptive schemes that increase numerical robustness, minimize user interference and avoid nonphysical (artificial) unloading. Since the adaptive arc-length method either in the complete or selected displacement version cannot avoid artificial unloading the concept of an Adaptive Strain Control (ASC) is pursued. For this a control region in the most active process zone monitoring the damage related equivalent strain is picked. This leads to the selection of a control parameter which constitutes the constraint equation. By this artificial unloading can be avoided. This is underlined by several numerical examples.For the nonlinear problems studied in this paper proportional loading with a load factor λ is assumed. The problem contains n unknown degrees of freedom. Thus, the number of unknowns in a static incremental iterative scheme amounts to n+1: n degrees of freedomDand a load factor λ. Therefore in addition to the n equations equilibrating the internal and external forcesFintandFext, respectively(1)R=Fint(D,λ)−Fext(D,λ)=0a scalar constraint equation is required. In the following it will also be referred to as the control equation(2)f=c−c^=0Each incremental step allows choosing a new constraint equation. Thus, for m steps, up to m constraint equations are used during computation. The constraint or control equation filters equilibrium points out of the infinite number of equilibrium points of an equilibrium path. The points displayed satisfy prescribed selection criteria. Displacement control, for instance,f=ΔDc−ΔD^, selects points in a fixed distance and direction from the current equilibrium point with the prescribed displacementΔD^.f=Δλ−Δλ^represents a constraint equation that increments the load factor λ. A popular control function is the arc-length control,f=Δs−Δs^. The arc-length s is not a physical but a purely numerical quantity, which may be geometrically interpreted as the arc-length of the equilibrium path.In the control procedures presented in this paper, the predictor in the first increment is the scaled tangent to the nonlinear problem. In the remaining steps, the secant from the previous to the current equilibrium point is used as a predictor for the next step. Thus, the constraint equation is satisfied in every predictor step. A Newton–Raphson scheme is applied for corrector iterations. Equilibrium equations and the constraint equation are linearized as proposed by Schweizerhof and Wriggers [6].In the following, incremental changes will be marked with Δ, iterative changes will be described with δ. Note that δ is not meant to indicate variations in this paper:(3)LINR=R(Di,λi)+∂R(Di,λi)∂DiδDi+1+∂R(Di,λi)∂λiδλi+1LINf=f(Di,λi)+∂f(Di,λi)∂DiδDi+1+∂f(Di,λi)∂λiδλi+1The derivative of f with respect to load factor λ is∂f/∂λ=∂f/∂D·∂D/∂λ. i is the iteration index. Note that a derivative with respect to absolute values is exactly the same as deriving with respect to incremental changes. For prescribed displacements, e.g. for a permanent settlement, the displacements D depend on λ, then playing the role of an incrementation factor. In matrix representation(4)[KTR,λf,Df,λ][δDδλ]=−[Rf]whereKT=∂R/∂Drepresents the tangent stiffness matrix, it can be noticed that a nonsymmetric system has to be solved. This may be avoided by applying the two step solution analogous to a procedure advocated by Crisfield [4] and Ramm [5], a technique originally proposed by Batoz and Dhatt [16]. Reordering Eq. (4)1(5)KTδD=−R−δλR,λand splitting the iterative displacement fieldδD=δDR+δλδDFlead to(6)KTδDR=−RExtractingδλ, the second line of Eq. (4) leads to(7)δλ=−f+f,DδDRf,DδDF+f,λIn the present study isotropic damage is applied (see Fig. 1). Its elastic part is based on the St. Venant–Kirchhoff material.S˜is the second Piola–Kirchhoff equivalent stress. The variable d for isotropic damage is defined as the ratio of damaged areaAdwith respect to the reference area A0. d=0 marks the undamaged state, d=1 indicates full damage of the Gauss point. In all the following examples equivalent strains are computed as the energy norm of the Green–Lagrange strainsEGLnormalized with respect to Young׳s modulus E:(8)ε˜=EGL:Cel:EGLEThis implies that damage will appear in tension as well as in compression. Current equivalent strainsε˜are compared to equivalent strains reached in previous increments. The largest reached value is stored asκ(t)=maxτ≤tε˜(τ).(9)d={0,κ≤κ0κmκκ−κ0κm−κ0,κ0<κ<κm1,κ≥κmκ0 represents the threshold value for damage initiation,κ=κmleads to d=1, describing a fully damaged state (see Fig. 1). The stress–strain relation of this strain-based formulation follows from Rabotnov׳s concept of effective stresses[17] combined with the strain equivalence hypothesis, which can be attributed to Lemaitre [18].As the material law applied has no localization limiter, a fracture energy related regularization technique based on the element size is applied (see [19–21]). The constant material specific fracture toughnessG¯fis assumed to be equal to the valueGfof the discretized system. The crack band width is denoted as w and is related to the smallest element edge size h of the damaging elements. The failure strainκ¯mof the real material is transferred to the valueκmof the discretized setting:(10)Gf=12κmEκ0h=12κ¯mEκ0w=G¯f.Eq. (10) allows us to computeκmfor the numerical model:(11)κm=2G¯fEκ0h=κ¯mwh.Complete static equilibrium paths can rarely be realized in an experiment due to dynamic effects, for example in snap-through or snap-back situations. As said above, artificial unloading phenomena can appear in numerical experiments having no physical justification. The arc-length method, for instance, may artificially unload if material is allowed to elastically unload like in plasticity or as in this case in damage. These effects can for example be provoked by strain localization or snap-back phenomena. Thus, in the overall structural response unloading may be observed, even though it has neither been prescribed in the problem statement nor an unstable bifurcation point has been passed. This unloading phenomenon is referred to as artificial unloading; it can be observed in the numerical example of an L-shaped plate in Fig. 9, right.Moreover, this situation is schematically illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3. Fig. 2shows that an incremental computation step, starting at the current equilibrium point, could either turn back leading to artificial unloading or continues showing the desired failure progress. The cause for artificial unloading is described in Fig. 3for the simple case of a one dimensional example with damage. The circle around the current equilibrium point represents the equation of a spherical arc-length constraint. At points where the unloading paths intersect the constraint equation, equilibrium and constraint are satisfied. This complies with the algorithmic requirement and those equilibrium points are formally correct. Continuing the computation, the structure starts to return to an undeformed and stress free configuration even though unloading has not been prescribed in the problem formulation.Thus the objective of the path following scheme must be that the computation follows an equilibrium branch with a continuous increase of dissipation and artificial unloading does not take place.As said, tracing static equilibrium paths of geometrically and materially nonlinear structural problems may lead to algorithmic difficulties in the post-critical regime. This can be demonstrated by means of a localized single crack where only few degrees of freedom dominate the structural behavior while the crack evolves. This fact can lead to numerical failure of control methods dealing with all degrees of freedom. Often only few specific degrees of freedom affect the damage process. This leads us to the application of adaptive control methods.In most applications of constraint equations, monotonically growing parameters are chosen to control the deformation process of a structure. However, often monotonically increasing control parameters cannot be identified in advance. For a standard displacement control, for instance, a monotonically growing displacement degree of freedom is required. If snap-backs with limit points of the controlling parameter occur, the computation fails. Some path following methods do not use monotonically growing parameters for the constraint equation but apply incremental quantities disregarding the history of the selected control variable. Then, however, it is a demanding task to control the process and identify the direction of deformation behavior of the structure avoiding for example artificial unloading.In this work, a parameter being related to increasing damage is considered in the evaluation of the constraint equation. Thus, the direction of the desired deformation behavior is identified through a state of maximum dissipation energy, where the damage process progresses. The set of all possible equilibrium points is not randomly selected. The controlling parameter has to be capable of robustly tracing dissipative as well as elastic parts of an equilibrium path thus avoiding a switch of different control types during computation. Since in each incremental step the computation has to reflect certain properties and requirements it is appropriate to resort to adaptive methods. The basic idea of the present work is based on the identification of the current control region for the evaluation criterion for adaptivity and the control parameter used in the path following scheme.As mentioned above, arc-length methods selecting only few relevant degrees of freedom or their functions have already been proposed, see for example de Borst [9]. They have been designed to capture a localized deformation state, in which only few degrees of freedom dominate the structural behavior, for example for problems with localized buckling or material failure. In the present study these methods are based on a cylindrical arc-length control and generalized in the sense of an adaptive scheme. Since they are utilizing only displacement degrees of freedom they are denoted as Adaptive Displacement Control (ADC). Geers [8,11] proposed already two approaches to adaptive schemes, based on the evaluation of the incremental predictor solutions. The first approach selects one out of a set of control parameters, the second proposal contains only a single weighted control function. In both cases, the control function contains either the degrees of freedom themselves or functions of these degrees of freedom; for example displacements, relative displacements or strains are chosen as control quantities. The predictor solution defines weighting factors for the entries of the single weighted control function according to their size in the predictor equation. For the first approach, the maximum entry of the predictor solution chooses the active subplane from a set of subplanes. An active subplane describes a degree of freedom or a function of it that constitutes the constraint equation.Unlike Geers׳ proposition, the selection of the active degrees of freedom for the ADC in this paper is based on the system behavior of the previous converged incremental step. The constraint equation(12)f=Δs−Δs^=0(13)Δs=ΔDcTΔDc,ΔDc∈ΔDcontains a subset of displacement incrementsΔDc, chosen from the complete incremental displacement fieldΔD, and the scalar arc-length parameters^. Depending on the adaptivity criterion, the increments of a certain number of displacement degrees of freedom or just one single displacement increment constitutes the constraint equation. Due to this variation in the number of degrees of freedom in the constraint equation, the step size has to be adapted accordingly. It can be assumed that the dominant increments of the preceding step will be influential in the following step as well. Consequently, candidates for a feasible choice ofΔDcare all entries of the last step׳s incremental displacement vector that exhibit significant changes; one possible choice is displacement increments that do not fall below a threshold value. Another possibility can be to choose all increments exceeding the average of increments.According to our numerical experience, the most efficient and robust choice is the maximum component of the displacement increment vectorΔDof the previous converged step:ΔDc=maxΔD[i]fori=1‥ndof. This method is an adaptive extension of the classical displacement control method; however it can only be recommended for elastic problems, for which it provides a robust and fast control type. For nonlinear material behavior still artificial unloading can appear using the proposed method. In the equationΔs=ΔDcTΔDcthe controlled displacement incrementsΔDcdo not necessarily represent damage progress.In the next subsection modified control equations are developed, which avoid artificial unloading, as it may occur when using a standard arc-length method or ADC (described in Section 4.1).Before these control or constraint equations are derived, the underlying concept is elaborated. It is based on the distinction between the control region and the control parameter entering the constraint equation. The control region is the most active process zone in the structure, e.g. close to the tip of an individual crack. It can be identified with an element in which the most strained Gauss point satisfies the following three requirements (see Fig. 4).•ε˜>κ:persisting damage at the evaluated Gauss point(κm−ε˜)≥0:completely damaged Gauss points are not considered in the control function(κm−ε˜)→min:Gauss point being closest to full damageHere we start from the conventional arc-length method. The cylindrical arc-length is multiplied by the current increment of an equivalent strainΔε˜=ε˜−κ, evaluated at the above mentioned Gauss point in the respective element (control region).(14)f=ΔDTΔDΔε˜−Δs^=!0The control equation is satisfied since the equivalent strain increment is per definition positive, cf. the three above stated requirements. Thus, artificial unloading is automatically excluded in this increment; the procedure is repeated in all subsequent increments. Since the method is constrained through the requirements it is denoted as the Constrained Adaptive arc-length Method.This approach, however, is rather sensitive regarding the incremental step size. Table 1for Example 5.2 shows that a large number of increments are needed to trace the equilibrium path. The corresponding computation has been carried out with a particular case of the general arc-length Eq. (14) based on only one displacement degree of freedom, which is the maximum displacement increment of the former incremental step:f=ΔDcΔDc·Δε˜−Δs^. In view of this drawback the question may be raised whether dropping the arc-length part of the constraint equation has a stabilizing effect on the method regarding step size sensitivity. This brings us to the Adaptive Strain Control.In Adaptive Strain Control the variables evaluated to identify the control region are directly chosen as control parameters; the incremental equivalent strainΔε˜is evaluated at the Gauss point satisfying the three requirements listed above. In this case the constraint or control equation reads(15)f=Δε˜−Δε^=(ε˜−κ)−Δε^=0with the prescribed scalar step sizeΔε^. The outcome is a direct control of damage initiation and progress.The idea of controlling strains instead of displacements has first been proposed by Chen and Schreyer [10]. Their particular method requires monotonically increasing total strains for the constraint equation. If the element with the maximum strain unloads, the method fails. Later, Geers [8] also used functions of degrees of freedom, e.g. strain increments, in the constraint equation but the evolution of the damage process is not considered. The major difference of the present approach to the method proposed by Chen and Schreyer is that the controlled equivalent strain follows the crack propagation. Elements that have reached a damage value d=1 are excluded from the constraint equation as they may load or unload in subsequent steps. The strain increment applied in the constraint equation of the Adaptive Strain Control has to satisfy the requirements listed in Section 4.2.Prescribed constant strain increments lead to uneven distances of equilibrium points in a load–displacement curve; these equilibrium points accumulate once failure starts. This can be considered as a kind of self-regulated step size adjustment. It is obvious that the step size changes when the mesh is refined.An alternative to the above described Adaptive Strain Control denoted as Adaptive Displacement Control of Process Zone (ADC-PZ) brings us back to the appealing concept of controlling individual displacement parameters. Also in this method, the progress of damage and the process zone are identified first monitoring the equivalent strains at Gauss points. Again a Gauss point satisfying the requirements listed in Section 4.2 is selected and the associated element is stored as control region. Finally the maximum displacement incrementΔDcof this element is controlled. Thus the constraint equation follows a simple displacement control:f=ΔDcΔDc−ΔD^=0. The constraints selected to avoid artificial unloading are not attached to the monitored quantities (equivalent strains) any more but only to the region of their evaluation for the control equation.This simplification leads to some essential advantages compared to ASC:•The constraint equation and consequently all linearizations are kept simple. It is easier to implement than the Adaptive Strain Control and leads to reduced computational cost.The constraint equation of ADC-PZ does not explicitly depend on equivalent strains. Thus, the equation and its linearization become independent of the choice of the equivalent strain measure.Step size and deformation behavior become more assessable as the control parameter is an evident and ‘visible’ quantity.Incremental control schemes can be applied. The total value of a quantity does not necessarily need to increase monotonically.A flow chart for the most important steps of the algorithm for ADC-PZ is given in Fig. 5. It can also be adapted to ASC, skipping two steps: first, after the Gauss point loop, the equivalent strainε˜is saved and the increment is computed. This is the variable to enter the constraint equation for ASC. The identification of the control region is not explicitly necessary for ASC and looping the element degrees of freedom can be skipped. The following steps again are identical for ASC and ADC-PZ.In all numerical examples plane stress conditions are assumed and four-noded four-point integrated Q1 elements are used. The fact that these elements lock for slender structures or coarse discretizations is disregarded as it is not in the focus of the present work. The isotropic damage model described in Section 2.2 with linear softening and the fracture energy related regularization is applied. Geometrical nonlinearity is taken into account in all numerical examples, even though no stability problems are shown.An L-shaped plate, which is supported and loaded according to Fig. 6, is investigated. The structure is discretized with a rather coarse and a finer mesh. For the isotropic damage model the following material parameters are chosen and applied to all elements: Young׳s modulus E=10kN/m2, Poisson׳s ratio ν=0 and κ0=0.01. Due to a regularization technique based on element size, κm=0.1 for the fine mesh and κm=0.02 for the coarse mesh. These rather academic values are selected to design a challenging problem. All curves displayed in Fig. 7have been computed using the Adaptive Strain Control (ASC) described in Section 4.4. The corresponding deformation states are shown in Fig. 8left and right respectively.In Fig. 6 two displacement degrees of freedom D1 and D2 are marked. Intuitively, one may expect them to grow monotonically during loading and thus they seem to be well-suited candidates for a displacement control. Looking at the load displacement curves in Fig. 7 on the left, however, it becomes apparent that both D1 and D2 exhibit local snap-backs and are not suited as control parameters.The load displacement curve in Fig. 7 on the left clearly shows that the mesh is too coarse. Controlling the computation with either D1 or D2 leads to a collapse of the algorithm due to control limit points. Clearly, these snap-backs are artifacts emanating from the coarse discretization. However, even when using a finer mesh, it is still not possible to control D2 because of a global snap-back phenomenon (Fig. 7, right).Fig. 9shows results obtained with cylindrical arc-length control. With a step size ofΔs^=0.18, the algorithm fails to converge at the peak load. Using an arc-length increment ofΔs^=0.10, it unloads artificially. See Fig. 9 left and right, respectively.Fig. 10shows the crack evolution of a very fine mesh with mesh size 0.05 ×0.05m. Here, it becomes obvious that the crack path has not been prescribed. To underline this, loading direction of the L-shaped plate of Fig. 6 on the right has been changed to a 45° angle (see Fig. 11). The crack path obviously differs from the one in the previous example.The example of a perforated cantilever beam has been designed along the lines of a numerical experiment proposed by Verhoosel [22]. Two point loads on the free edge of the cantilever (Fig. 12) are applied, the left hand side is clamped. An isotropic damage model as described in Section 2.2 is applied in the horizontal row of elements in the middle axis to trigger damage along this line. All remaining elements have elastic material properties and are modeled with a St. Venant–Kirchhoff material law. This setup is chosen to mimic modeling of the process zone with interface elements used by Verhoosel [22]. Young׳s modulus E=1000N/mm2 and Poisson ratio ν=0.3 are applied to all elements. The threshold value for damage initiation is κ0=0.01. Full damage is reached for κm=0.5.The equilibrium path of the perforated cantilever exhibits dissipative and non-dissipative sections. The projection of the equilibrium path onto displacement u and loadλFis shown in Fig. 14. Verhoosel [22] switches from load control for non-dissipative parts of the equilibrium path to dissipation control, presented earlier in [15], for dissipative sections of the path. Both control types are interchanged, when the corresponding load or dissipation increments become smaller than a threshold value.Fig. 13shows the current damage state when the failure reaches the fifth segment between the holes. It corresponds to the end of the equilibrium path in Fig. 14. Each of the ‘fingers’ in the diagram indicates the opening of a hole and the damage process in the corresponding segment. During the opening of the hole, the path is stable for increasing displacements u. As soon as damage starts in a segment, the equilibrium path becomes unstable. As already mentioned in [22], the area underneath the load displacement curve of such a section corresponds to half the energy dissipated during the failure of a segment. In Fig. 14, the load displacement curve is plotted for different control methods. The deformation process of the structure does not offer any obvious degrees of freedom applicable for a conventional displacement control. Spherical or cylindrical arc-length methods do also not lead to reliable results. Depending on the step size they either fail to converge or exhibit artificial unloading. From Fig. 15it becomes obvious that the largest total strain is also not a feasible choice for controlling the computation. On the left hand side a detail of the free edge of the perforated cantilever is sketched. Equivalent strainsε˜of three representative elements, marked by A, B, C on the left, are plotted versus the increments. Thoughε˜of element A is always larger than the strains in B and C, in the range between step 150 to step 180 the value ofε˜of element A decreases. It is clear that controlling the smaller but increasing strains of element C is necessary.Fig. 14 shows two artificially unloading paths for ADC and cylindrical arc-length control. Both methods start unloading at a certain point. The reasons for artificial unloading are related to the current tangent or iteration direction with respect to the chosen step size. Adaptive Strain Control (ADS) as well as ADC-PZ is capable of tracing the entire load displacement curve without artificial unloading.In order to assess performance and robustness of the methods proposed in Section 4, they have been further tested and compared for the perforated cantilever example. The number of increments and iterations required for each method until the third connecting segment fails are displayed in Table 1 for computations with and without adaptive time stepping. Step size adjustment according to Ramm [5] is applied. Adaptive Strain Control and ADC-PZ lead to significantly lower computational costs than ADC in this example. ADC is used with the maximum displacement increment of the former incremental step as described in Section 4.1. ADC-PZ allows computation of the entire path in only 38 steps when adaptive step size adjustment is activated.An alternative to obtain, at least partly, static equilibrium paths are dynamic relaxation. In this approach a transient analysis is performed, taking into account inertia effects, along with damping. Therefore density ρ=0.1g/mm3 is chosen. Fig. 16shows the results of transient dynamic analyses of the perforated cantilever problem, without damping and with approximately critical damping. Here, the point loads are replaced by prescribed displacements to avoid total failure of the structure at the first limit point. As expected, an undamped simulation provides extremely noisy results and overshoots the first ‘finger’ after the peak load. Applying approximately critical damping removes the noise. Quite naturally, the dynamic analyses only capture stable parts of the static equilibrium path. Moreover, they are usually computationally more expensive than static computations, however result in a physically possible solution.In the last example, crack propagation through a plate with a nonsymmetric hole subject to uniaxial tension is examined. A similar example can be found in [13]. Fig. 17shows the structure with the finite element mesh. Again, an isotropic damage model as described in Section 2.2 is applied to the horizontal element row on the middle axis. A St. Venant–Kirchhoff material model is used for the remaining elastic elements. Young׳s modulus E=1000N/mm2 and Poisson׳s ratio ν=0.2 are assumed in the whole structure. The threshold value for damage initiation in the elements with isotropic damage material is set to κ0=0.00015. Full damage is reached for κm=0.00357, which equals a fracture surface energy Gf=0.1N/mm. ADC-PZ with step sizeΔD^=0.002is used for the computation displayed in Fig. 18. In Fig. 19, three deformation states with different damage progress are shown. They are affiliated with the deformation states A, B and E in Fig. 18. Here, loadλqis plotted versus the hole opening displacementP1−P2. Until the first peak of this load displacement curve is reached, cracks develop on either side of the hole. After A has been passed, the left crack stops and only the right crack propagates and reaches the right edge at point B. A similar behavior has been reported in [13]. In the range from point B to point C the right crack opens. From point C to point D, the opening displacement of the hole increases. After D, the left crack is reactivated and continues growing until it has almost entirely propagated through the left segment (point E). At this point, no convergence can be obtained, because the structure is cut into half and a kinematic system has developed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Conventional path following methods like arc-length methods became powerful solution schemes, also in commercial codes. They have been proven as reliable tools for relatively smooth geometrically nonlinear problems and also for materially nonlinear problems for path independent materials. However they may fail in the post-critical regime, in particular for softening of path dependent materials like damage and plasticity; here artificial unloading can occur not at all representing the real physical behavior. This observation was the starting point for the present study. The objective is finding parameters which continuously control the entire range from the very beginning up to the complete failure. This brings us to self-adapting procedures that do not necessitate user interference, once the input parameters are set. Here, the concept of using fixed parameters as controlling variables is given up in favor of permanently changing parameters during the ‘loading’ process. Previously proposed methods, where incremental displacements were chosen according to the solution of the secant-predictor solution may still show artificial unloading. A typical representative of this group is the Adaptive Displacement Control (ADC); the choice of the maximum displacement increment in a quadratic constraint equation is apparently not sufficient to represent the dissipative character of damage propagation. A key element in the present study is the selection of the current control region in the process zone where the equivalent strains are monitored and the most strained Gauss point satisfying the requirements listed in Section 4.2 is picked for further evaluation. Constraining the conventional arc-length equation with the increment of the related equivalent strain leads to the Constrained Adaptive Arc-Length Method. Although it remedies the artificial unloading defect it is rather expensive. In contrast the Adaptive Strain Control (ASC) as well as the Adaptive Displacement Control of the Process Zone (ADC-PZ) has been demonstrated to be reliable and efficient.According to our experience, both methods effectively avoid artificial unloading. The example of the plate with a nonsymmetric hole demonstrates their capability to ‘identify’ system behavior in a case where a crack has temporarily stopped and is reactivated later on.The control quantity can be directly related to the damage process which is represented by equivalent strains in this case. Choosing ADC-PZ as control type, only the identification of the control region relies on the equivalent strains. The control quantity is here simply a displacement degree of freedom. Three major advantages arise when the control region is identified first and the control parameters are chosen in a further step:•Since incrementally adaptive control schemes are applied, the total value of the control quantity does not necessarily need to increase monotonically in every step. Artificial unloading can be avoided because the control method depends on history variables.Constraint equation and related linearizations are kept simple.The constraint equation does not rely on the specific definition of equivalent strains. However, when different dissipative mechanisms occur within one analysis, identification of the control region may be biased by the specific choice of the control equation. The effect on stability and efficiency of the proposed method has to be further investigated.