@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of the deformation energy of straight composite z-frames subjected to critical buckling loads

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An advanced analysis technique for the buckling of composite z-frames is presented.A reliable model is established by analytical verification and a sensitivity study.A framework for automated analyses and data processing is configured.The method is applied to quantify deformation energy at the critical buckling load.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Structural analysis,Buckling,Z-section column,Aerospace,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper the correlation of deformation energy and critical buckling loads is examined. An advanced analysis technique is derived for the investigation of z-section frames typically applied in composite aircraft fuselage. This technique is verified through closed form solutions of z-section columns under quasi-static loading conditions. The method is applied to study the effects of flange width and laminate thickness on the critical failure modes of composite frames. Therein, the focus is on composite structural elements favourable for deformation kinematics in aerospace applications subjected to crash loads.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research and technology projects on aircraft fuselage pursue the application of lightweight materials to achieve improved structural efficiency. Thermoset carbon fibre reinforced plastics (CFRPs) in particular comply with the designer׳s need for excellent specific material properties. Structural designs applying such composite materials need to satisfy the authorities׳ airworthiness code for an ‘equivalent level of safety’ [1] compared to current metallic fuselage designs.Due to the plastic deformation capacity of state-of-the-art metallic fuselage designs, those certification requirements are achieved almost naturally by the design׳s intrinsic energy absorption capabilities. In contrast to metallic materials, thermoset CFRPs mostly exhibit brittle fracture behaviour when loaded beyond their elastic limits. Energy absorption by large deformation of structural elements is therefore unsatisfactorily limited. A current countermeasure is to attach energy absorption elements to the structural elements. Since the attached elements only act in crash landing scenarios, they are considered dead weight in standard aircraft operation scenarios thereby negatively affecting the mass balance. However, integrating the energy absorption functionality into the structural elements appears beneficial with respect to the mass balance. With respect to CFRPs, energy absorption principles such as fibre breakage and matrix cracking are utilisable.The deformation kinematics of structural elements in the sub-floor area of a composite fuselage are of special interest. Favourable deformation kinematics put loads on those structural elements in a beneficial manner during crash landing conditions. Heimbs et al. [2] and Weiß et al. [3] highlighted the significance of the frame׳s structural response, such as buckling deformation and limit load, in a crash landing scenario. Since the frame is the circumferential stiffener, its deformation characteristics determine the overall deformation kinematics. The critical loads and their corresponding deformation energy are essentially the decisive parameters. In order to favourably guide the overall deformation kinematics of the sub-floor area under crash load conditions, those key parameters need to be investigated.Such a study would naturally focus on the deformation characteristics of a curved frame under dynamic loading conditions. Prior to starting the study, the results obtained through the finite element method (FEM) must be verified, which could be achieved by comparison with analytical solutions. The FEM has been applied effectively to limit load analyses as reported by Rust and Schweizerhof [4] as well as Waimer et al. [5]. Analytical solutions are available in Shan [6], Qiao and Shan [7], and Kollár and Springer [8] for statically loaded straight z-section columns in CFRP constitutive models. The investigations outlined in this paper therefore concern straight frames instead of curved frames. This verification is carried out for quasi-static loading conditions without limiting the potential use of the proposed method for dynamic loads.Although studies are available on buckling of composite frames, they focus on the estimation of critical loads [9,10] and post-buckling behaviour [11,12]. It is somewhat surprising that the deformation energy is hardly covered and that the correlation of deformation energy and critical buckling loads is not examined. This paper consequently provides an analysis technique for the investigation of critical loads and their corresponding deformation energy in CFRP z-section frames. This technique is verified against closed form solutions of straight z-section columns under quasi-static loading conditions. Once verified, the method is applied to study the effects of flange width and laminate thickness on the critical failure modes of a CFRP z-section column. The proposed method provides valuable assistance in considering deformation energy alongside load bearing criteria in order to evaluate deformation kinematics of CFRP structural elements in aerospace applications. The approach is not limited to z-section frames. Following the recommended steps, see Section 5, any cross-section may be analysed when analytical formulae are accessible.This section provides an approach for the verification of quasi-static buckling analyses executed with the nonlinear explicit FEM solver LS-Dyna. This method starts with an analytical buckling analysis based on state-of-the-art literature [6–8]. Secondly, a linear static and a nonlinear buckling analysis are carried out to verify the numerical model and to quantify the influence of geometric nonlinearities on the estimated buckling loads. Finally, the quasi-static nonlinear explicit analysis is related to the previous analyses in order to assess the deviations. Furthermore, a recommendation for basic analysis settings is derived based on a mesh sensitivity study and a loading rate evaluation. These basic settings are used to numerically investigate the buckling response of straight CFRP columns under axial compressive load. The CFRP columns therein feature a z-shaped cross-section as depicted in Fig. 1.Critical buckling load estimations on CFRP columns are outlined in, for example, Wiedemann [14]. Considering open sections such as the present CFRP z-section, closed form solutions are provided by Shan [6], Qiao and Shan [7], and Kollár and Springer [8] for the local buckling behaviour under uniaxial static compressive load. The elastic restraints between the three z-section segments are regarded therein by analytical formulae. These formulae are derived for orthotropic and symmetrical laminates. Since quasi-isotropic laminates are a subset of a set of orthotropic laminates, the applied formulae remain valid for the stacking sequences investigated here.Following Kollár and Springer׳s approach, the critical buckling load of a CFRP z-section column is calculated as outlined in Eqs. (1)–(7). Table 1provides the material properties used throughout this study. It features CFRP data published by Feraboli et al. [13]. Table 2contains the input parameters derived from these material properties and the subsequent stacking sequence [0/45/−45/90/90/−45/45/0]S. This stacking sequence was kept constant for all the calculations within this verification section.Prior to the critical buckling estimation, the long plate approximation was reviewed for the web bwand the flange bfconstituents by(1)l>3bwD11/D224l>3bf2D11/D224While Aijdenote the membrane stiffnesses, Dijdenote the bending stiffnesses of the stiffness matrix used within the classical laminate theory. It is important to note that the dimension bwfeatures the mid-plane distance of the flanges. The dimension bfcovers the entire section width. In order for the formulae to be applied correctly, the whole section is examined for the constituent buckling first. The flange buckles first when(2)(Nx,cr)fss(a11)f<(Nx,cr)wss(a11)wwhere(Nx,cr)ssis the critical compressive load for a simply supported section segment. a11 denotes the 11 element of the compliance matrix of the respective constituent, as the laminates of the flange and the web are identical(a11)f=(a11)w.For the z-section, the flange is simply supported at one end and is free at the other end, whereas the web is simply supported at both ends. The buckling loads of the individual segments according to Kollár and Springer [8] are therefore(3)Flange:(Nx,cr)fss=12(D66)(bf/2)2Web:(Nx,cr)wss=π2bw2(2D11D22+2(D12+2D66))Eq. (3) identifies which of the cross-section constituents buckles first. So far, this decision process neglects elastically restrained edges. The effect of elastic restraints is respected in the following equations, where the critical buckling load of the entire cross-section is determined.When the flange buckles first, its rotation is elastically restrained by the web. The spring constant, which will be used for the coefficient ζ in Eq. (6), is(4)k˜=D22bw(1−(Nx,cr)fss(Nx,cr)wss)The buckling load of the flange is calculated by the expression(5)K>1:(Nx,cr)f=D11D22(bf/2)2(K(15.1η1−υ+6(1−η)(1−υ)))K≤1:(Nx,cr)f=D11D22(bf/2)2(K(15.1η1−υ+6(1−η)(1−υ))+7(1−K)1+4.12ζ)Within Eq. (5) the coefficients used are defined as(6)K=2D66+D12D11D22υ=D122D66+D12ζ=D22k˜bf/2η=11+(7.22−3.55υ)ζWhen the web buckles first, a conservative estimate is taken withk˜=0. The buckling load of the web is(Nx,cr)was outlined in Eq. (3).The critical buckling load of the entire z-section is(7)Fcrit=min{(Nx,cr)f(bf+bw)(Nx,cr)w(bf+bw)Eqs. (3)–(7) refer to the local buckling behaviour of flanges and webs of thin-walled z-sections. Euler-type buckling, lateral-torsional buckling and interactive buckling modes are not covered by the formulae. Furthermore, these are only valid for sufficiently long plates (see Eq. (1)). The verification example was purposely selected to suit these conditions. However, some cases studied by FE analysis in Sections 3 and 4 are not entirely compliant with these conditions. Since the authors intend to survey the structural response across a substantial range of z-section slenderness ratios, FE analyses are executed although the respective analytical analyses would deliver wrong results.This section features finite element analyses (FEAs) executed with ANSYS. The script language APDL allowed an automated evaluation of the investigated z-section. The pre-processing, the solution, and the post-processing are entirely script-based. The linear analyses determine eigenvalues.The degrees of freedom (DOFs) on the boundaries of the numerical analyses are identical to those of the analytics outlined above (see Fig. 2). These boundary conditions were kept constant for all buckling analyses and explicit numerical analyses executed.The element size of the finite element mesh was set to 10mm edge length. SHELL181 was the selected element type. It is a four-noded element using uniform reduced integration. The accuracy of the results determined by means of the FE method depends on the mesh density. Therefore, a mesh density study was carried out.Fig. 3shows the buckling shape of the first eigenmode obtained from the linear bifurcation analysis. Similar to Qiao and Shan [7] the buckling mode shape can be classified as local buckling. The buckling load is provided in Table 3.The nonlinear finite element buckling analysis used the same column dimensions, material properties, and load and boundary conditions as outlined in the previous section. In fact, the same ANSYS ADPL script was used with two essential modifications. One is the utilisation of nonlinear geometry. The other modification is the conditioning by initial imperfections.Since the nonlinear analysis is not an eigenvalue analysis, the initial conditioning became necessary. Buckling analyses on straight columns under axial compressive load exhibit stability problems. When the applied axial load approaches the theoretical buckling limit, large deformations perpendicular to the loading direction suddenly occur. To avoid bifurcation problems at low load levels, the perfectly straight geometry of the z-section was disturbed by the buckling mode shape obtained from the previous eigenvalue analysis. The mode shape deformations were scaled such that a maximum initial geometric imperfection of 0.10mm was achieved. This value was found to be the minimum for the desired buckling mode to occur in the nonlinear calculation. In fact, 0.10mm geometric imperfection is approximately 3.7% of the shell thickness, which is well within the range of geometric imperfection proposed by Orifici and Bisagni [15] (shell thickness), Lindgaard et al. [16] (1/8 shell thickness), and Beerhorst et al. [17] (5% of shell thickness) regarding buckling analyses of thin walled CFRP shell structures.The membrane stresses at linear buckling were used to calculate the critical axial displacement. This displacement was then used as the input value for the nonlinear buckling analysis in order to compare the response to the linear buckling analysis. The axial forces were obtained at the constrained ends for both calculations (see Table 3). By applying nonlinear geometry, the buckling load is reduced by about 4% with respect to the linear buckling analysis.Fig. 4shows the buckling mode shape using buckling analysis with nonlinear geometry. However, from the contour plot the buckling pattern as well as the overlaying axial displacement of the free end becomes obvious. The maximum value of the superposed deformations is 1.26mm.The nonlinear explicit finite element buckling analysis used the same column dimensions, material properties, load and boundary conditions as outlined for the previous buckling analyses. In fact, the same ANSYS ADPL script is used for pre- and post-processing. Similar to the nonlinear buckling calculation, an initial geometric imperfection was applied by updating the geometry with the mode shape pattern used previously. LS-Dyna is used as a solver with double precision arithmetic for the following calculations. In order to load the structure in a quasi-static manner, the displacement was applied at a rate of 1mm/min.The z-section column was meshed using shell elements of Belytschko–Lin–Tsay type, including the corresponding warping stiffness algorithm. The Belytschko–Lin–Tsay shell element is based on a combined co-rotational and velocity–strain formulation. It was implemented in LS-Dyna for its computational efficiency [18]. To control possible hourglass effects, the stiffness form of Type 2 was used to define the hourglass viscosity. The hourglass formulation Type 2 suppresses the hourglass deformation modes that accompany shell elements with reduced integration, hourglass stresses are added to the physical stresses at the local element level. The hourglass coefficient was set to 0.1. All other control options were set to default, following the suggestions of the LS-Dyna manual [19].The material properties summarised in Table 1 are assigned to the shell elements. The properties provided by Feraboli et al. [13] are specified for a mesh size of 2.54mm edge length. Explicit FEA codes are known to be particularly mesh-sensitive when progressive failure such as composite material crushing is computed. For buckling analyses, a significant relation between the buckling load and the mesh density was not found.In the case of compact columns, the dominating failure mode under compressive loading conditions changes from local buckling towards compressive material failure. For the current study, the onset of compressive failure marks critical load-bearing behaviour. Feraboli et al. [13] point out that even the onset of failure is mesh-sensitive. However, the material model used allows adjustment of the compressive failure load by parameter adoption. Parameter adjustment is only reasonable when numerical simulations are compared against experimentally obtained data. Since this research is a purely numerical study, the material properties suggested by Feraboli et al. [13] are directly employed. Although highly recommended by Rohwer [20], an experimental validation is not the goal of this paper.Nevertheless, material model MAT54 is used for the current study. Developed by Chang and Chang [21], the material model MAT54 enables anisotropic linear elastic material behaviour when undamaged. Nonlinearities are incorporated by means of a nonlinear shear stress–shear strain relation and a progressive damage model. Material failure detection follows the criteria stated by Chang and Chang [21], which is based on the criteria initially developed by Hashin [22]. As a major difference, the Chang-Chang model neglects shear for the tensile fibre failure mode. MAT54 allows for visco-plastic material behaviour by parameter adoption. However, visco-plasticity was not considered for this investigation.This section provides an approach for the review of quasi-static buckling analyses executed with the nonlinear explicit solver LS-Dyna. For this purpose, the specific local buckling mode from the previous subsections was investigated. The axial load corresponding to that buckling mode was well below the compressive strength of the material outlined in Table 1.Fig. 5shows the buckling mode shape using explicit analysis. However, from the contour plot the axial displacement of the free end as well as the overlaying buckling pattern becomes obvious. The maximum value of the superposed deformations is 0.71mm. The buckling mode shape is not as present as for example in the previous buckling calculations. Furthermore, the reaction forces obtained are reduced by 9% compared to the previous analysis, see the summarising Table 3.This subsection summarises the verification method outlined above. Table 3 provides an overview of the three steps from an analytical estimation towards the prediction of the buckling load using explicit nonlinear FEA. Due to the application of initial geometric imperfection, the analyses feature the same mode shape which was obtained from the eigenvalue analysis in the first step. The critical buckling load and its corresponding axial displacement were evaluated. This displacement was subsequently used as a guideline for the following analyses in steps two and three. The third step featured an explicit nonlinear calculation, executed at a displacement rate of 1mm/min, which is considered quasi-static loading.With respect to the numerical analyses, the buckling loads of the analytic solution are conservatively estimated. The offset to the numerical solutions results from the following assumptions. The thin-walled z-section undergoes small deformations, the material behaves in a linear elastic manner, shear deformations are neglected and the Bernoulli–Navier hypothesis is adopted, according to which the originally plane cross-sections of a beam undergoing bending remain plane and perpendicular to the axis of the beam [8].Effect of loading rate: Additionally, a loading rate study was executed to evaluate the effect of in-plane loading rate sensitivity to the buckling load. This is reported by Zhang and Taheri [12] to be of significant impact. The boundary conditions, the initial imperfection, and the prescribed displacement remained constant, only the loading rate, by means of displacement per time increment, were increased.Table 4provides a summary of the reaction forces obtained at the fixed end. From a loading rate of 2m/s onwards, the inertia of the thin walled segments delays the out-of-plane displacement and thus the development of the mode shape. The structural stiffness increases and higher loads were transmitted to the fixed end.In order to reduce the calculation time for each run, the load may be applied at a loading rate above the quasi-static regime, for example 100mm/s. There are, however, two major criteria to be considered for this approach. (1) The kinetic energy of matter should be at least three orders of magnitude lower compared to the internal energy due to deformation of the same matter. This is an indirect measure of the presence of dynamic inertia, which would falsify the results. (2) The reaction forces obtained should not vary significantly compared to the quasi-static loading rate. Since all of the criteria are fulfilled for 100mm/s loading rate, it was selected for all further explicit calculations.The LS-Dyna manual suggests an additional approach for the reduction of calculation time. For the analysis of quasi-static events, the mass or the density of the subjected item may be altered to increase the minimal time step required for a converging solution. Explicit analyses will be subsequently carried out at loading rates of 10m/s. Within these calculations, dynamic effects such as inertia are to be considered. A mass or density scaling would increase inertia beyond physical limits. The suggestion is therefore discarded for the method proposed in this paper.Effect of mesh density: Results of numerical buckling analyses are known to depend on the mesh density. A mesh density study was therefore executed in order to determine a reasonable element size at acceptable calculation time. For the sake of conciseness the full set of results was omitted intentionally.Concerning the result quality as well as the analysis duration, a 10mm edge length was selected as a compromise. However, this element size correlates well with literature. Qiao and Shan [7] as well as Nguyen et al. [23] used an element size of 12.7mm×12.7mm while their investigated FRP columns had comparable dimensions and laminate stiffnesses. For the investigated flange or web thicknesses (see Table 6) and the selected edge length, the thickness to size ratio is above 1/10, which is a best practice value. Furthermore, the aspect ratio of the finite elements was specified approximately one for mesh construction.Commenting on imperfections: When numerically analysing components prone to buckling, initial imperfections are of interest. Hühne et al. [24] provide a summary on imperfections and discuss the effect of imperfections on the buckling response of cylindrical shells.However, an imperfection study was not performed for two main reasons. Bifurcation problems did not occur for the calculations outlined in Sections 3 and 4. The buckling modes therein did not alternate and the critical loads obtained were not affected. Secondly, when the numerical modelling approach has been verified for straight frames, it will be applied to studies on curved frames. The initial curvature of curved frames minimises the risk of bifurcation problems, since the curvature itself acts as a large scale geometric deviation.Concluding the analysis verification section, 10mm edge length for the FE mesh, 100mm/s loading rate, and no imperfections were the selected settings for all following runs.After the verification process, the three steps of pre-processing, solving (LS-Dyna), and post-processing are controlled by a Python script [25], which allows automated structural analysis of the investigated z-section with different input parameters. For this section Table 5provides an overview of the key parameters. Since the present investigation is related to a practical application, the dimensions are different compared to the previous verification example. The length l of the z-section was altered in a step-wise manner to plot data across a range of slenderness ratios.The slenderness ratio λ of CFRP columns may be evaluated, similar to the case of columns made from isotropic materials, using the following equation. It relates the column length l to the moment of gyration r.(8)λ=l/rSince there are two distinct principal axes of inertia ι and ξ, λ is found with respect to these. Following Barbero [26] Eq. (8) is rewritten to(9)λι,ξ=l/rι,ξTo derive moments of gyration, the bending stiffnessEIιι,ξξwith respect to the principal axes and the cross-section area A are used.(10)rι,ξ=EIιι,ξξ/AThe respective bending stiffnesses are calculated with the following expression:(11)EIιι,ξξ=EIyy+EIzz2±(EIyy+EIzz)24+EIyz2The following rotation matrix R is provided to clarify the angular rotation θ of the principal inertia axes relative to the global x–y–z coordinate system (see Figs. 1 and 2).(12)R(θ)=(1000cos(θ)−sin(θ)0sin(θ)cos(θ))Using the parallel axis theorem and the mechanical properties of each segment in the z-section, the bending stiffnessesEIyy,EIzz,EIyzare derived with respect to the axes y and z with their origin at the mechanical centre of gravity (MCOG). In this case, classical engineering mechanics are applied and not outlined in detail. However, the necessary formulae can be found in Wiedemann [14].Fig. 6indicates the methodology applied to obtain the critical buckling load and its corresponding internal energy. Since explicit analyses have been run, the corresponding internal energy value was obtained at the unique time increment of critical buckling occurrence. For this study, critical buckling is defined as the load at the onset of nonlinear structural behaviour with respect to the force-displacement response. At this load a characteristic peak occurs in the structural response. This characteristic peak is used to determine the critical buckling load. From a data analysis point of view, the gradient is calculated numerically at each data pair using a central differencing scheme. Eventually, the gradient tends to zero which marks the characteristic peak. Since the data consists of distinct data points, the function connecting these points becomes piece-wise linear. Therefore, the gradient may not be exactly zero. A suitable threshold value based on the initial stiffness is defined in order to assist the detection of the characteristic peak.Across the λ-range investigated, the critical modes vary from (I) compressive material failure prior to buckling, and (II) local buckling, via (III) distortional buckling, to (IV) lateral-torsional buckling. However, modes III and IV were superposed by a local component as shown in Fig. 7.Fig. 7 provides an overview of representative critical modes found for the investigated λ-range, the corresponding cross-sectional deformations, overall deformations, and the structural responses. The cross-sectional deformation (thick lines) is depicted with respect to the cross-section shape of the unloaded z-section. The length-wise or overall deformation of the z-section is provided in order to emphasise the characteristic buckling pattern. The structural responses by means of force-displacement relations are included in order to highlight one important fact. Independent of the critical mode, all curves show a characteristic peak at the onset of nonlinear behaviour (see Fig. 7). This allows the detection method to be applied consistently across the investigated λ-range.Fig. 8depicts the critical buckling load and the corresponding internal energy across the slenderness ratio of the column. The length was subject to modification in this study. The slenderness ratio was calculated according to Eq. (9) for each discrete step of column length variation.As the length of the column increases, the critical modes change from I to IV as outlined above. Examining the buckling force data, a typical buckling curve shape becomes obvious as, for example, reported for stiffened plate buckling by Mittelstedt and Beerhorst [27] or isotropic cylindrical shells by Yamaki [28]. This relation is not surprising, since the z-section is an assembly of three plates stiffening each other by the elastic restraint at their edgewise connection.The peak atλ=45actually results from a change in mode shape. The geometric dimensions as well as the laminate stiffnesses relate in such a manner that the buckling mode changes from two half-waves to four half-waves along the length of the z-section. The mode shape eventually changes towards six half-waves along the length atλ=86. Only even-numbered half-wave modes were retrieved from deformation plots. Since the column length was increased in a step-wise manner, the odd-numbered half-wave modes were not explicitly detected. Within range III, the distortional buckling mode is superposed by local deformation. The mode change towards distortional buckling is therefore not directly obvious from the curve. Another peak is present atλ=100. It marks the mode change from distortional towards lateral-torsional buckling (IV).Following the internal energy response, the interaction with the buckling response curve becomes obvious. The peaks along the energy curve coincide with the mode shape change occurrences. The maximum elastic internal energy is found at the mode change from distortional towards lateral-torsional. In general, the formation of the first lateral-torsional mode (depicted in Fig. 7) appears to require the most internal energy compared to previous critical modes. However, the internal energy curve decreases fromλ>120, which marks the onset of a second lateral-torsional mode.The progress of the two curves reveals an offset between maximum buckling force and maximum elastic deformation energy. This is an important point to consider when energy absorption capabilities and deformation kinematics are of interest. Often the flange width as well as the laminate thickness are subject to variation in fuselage design [29]. In order to investigate the effects of flange width and laminate thickness, the following section contains a sensitivity study featuring those parameters.In the previous section, a framework for automated analysis and data processing was configured. It makes extensive use of a parameterised numerical model. The advanced analysis technique enables an investigation of critical loads and their corresponding deformation energy for various CFRP z-section frames. However, this section features the variation of the cross-sectional dimensions bfand t. Since the thickness t is the result of a composite stacking sequence, it is varied in three discrete steps as outlined in Table 6. The following convention applies, the number i in SEQi represents the amount of individual plies in the quasi-isotropic stacking sequences. The values specified are generic but of similar scale as reported in Woodson [29] and Heimbs et al. [2].Effect of flange width: The effect of the flange width on the critical buckling load as well as the internal energy is studied. In this case the composite thickness was kept constant applying SEQ16.Recalling the analytics from Section 2.1, the flange and the web restrain each other elastically when buckling modes develop. Therefore, the flange width affects the critical buckling load and the occurrence of certain mode shapes. Fig. 9depicts the critical buckling load curves for three different flange widths across the slenderness ratio λ, obtained as explained in Section 3. BF42 denotes an overall flange width of 42mm, 21mm on either side of the web. This configuration was discussed in detail in the previous section (see Fig. 8).In order to provide an upper and a lower boundary for a reasonable range of flange widths, BF28 and BF56 were selected. While BF56 denotes an overall flange width of 56mm, BF28 features an overall flange width of 28mm. Similar to BF42, the other two cases are symmetric with respect to the central web (see Fig. 1).Examining the critical loads across λ for the BF56 case, the response features the same critical modes as outlined in the previous section for the BF42 configuration. Since the increased flange width has a stiffening effect, the buckling forces are generally higher at comparable λ. The range of lateral-torsional buckling mode (III) increases to both sides of the λ-range. The local mode is shifted towards smaller values and the lateral-torsional mode is shifted towards higher values of the slenderness ratio.The opposite behaviour is found for configuration BF28; the range of the distortional buckling mode is not present anymore. The lateral-torsional buckling directly follows the local buckling fromλ=75onwards. Since the stiffening effect is reduced with respect to configuration BF42, the critical buckling loads are significantly lower as well.There is an exception to that theory for slenderness range20<λ<30. The critical buckling forces are above the two previous configurations. Within this range, the critical mode switches from material failure (III) towards local buckling (II). In that range, the overall mode shape development of the BF28 configuration is governed by the web instead of the flanges. Since the web is restrained on the whole circumference, it requires more axial load to buckle. For the other two configurations, the overall buckling response is purely within the range of the local buckling mode, where the overall buckling is governed by the flanges. Since the flanges feature a free edge, see Fig. 1, they buckle at lower axial loads.The stiffening effect of the flanges appears to be nonlinear, converging against an upper boundary. The buckling load increases significantly by approximately 15% from configuration BF28 towards BF42, considering the values at onset of lateral-torsional buckling. Although the flange width increases by 1/3 from BF42 towards BF56, the critical buckling loads increase by approximately 4% for the values at onset of lateral-torsional buckling.Fig. 10depicts the corresponding internal energy which is the elastic deformation energy, derived using the methodology explained in Section 3. For all configurations, the responses relate to the critical buckling load curves. The peaks along the energy curve coincide with the mode shape change occurrences. In all cases, the maximum energy values are found for the onset of the lateral-torsional buckling mode. Since the flange width shortens from configuration BF56 towards BF28, the amount of deformed material reduces. The internal energy decreases accordingly to about 65% from BF56 to BF42 and about 40% from BF42 to BF28.In order to relate critical buckling load and internal energy, Fig. 11depicts these two parameters for the three investigated configurations. Each data point corresponds to a unique slenderness value λ. This combined presentation of internal energy across critical buckling force reveals the following finding. A broad range of deformation energy may be put into the frame, at almost constant critical buckling load. When a structure is subjected to a certain amount of energy as, for example, strain energy acting axial compressive, it may not be loaded critically, based on favourable dimensioning. This is a significant point when structural elements with integrated energy absorption capabilities are under consideration.Effect of composite thickness: The effect of the composite thickness on the critical buckling load as well as the internal energy is investigated. For this purpose, the flange width was kept constant at BF42 configuration. Instead, the laminate thickness was varied in three discrete steps as outlined in Table 6.Fig. 12shows the critical buckling loads across the slenderness ratio λ. The composite thicknesses SEQ08 and SEQ24 are selected as upper and lower boundaries of reasonable thickness variations with respect to the cross-sectional dimensions of the z-section frame. Comparing the three responses, the buckling loads vary significantly with the composite thickness. However, this variation reduces forλ>60. The buckling forces of SEQ24 decrease to approximately 50% within60<λ<120. In contrast, for SEQ08 the buckling load remains nearly constant for a wide range of slendernessλ>40.Accordingly, these findings are related to the development of the critical buckling modes. While for SEQ08 the change from one critical mode into another is almost seamless without any significant change in buckling force, for SEQ16 those changes are more obvious, as explained in Section 3.For SEQ24, the changes from one mode shape into another affect the critical buckling load immensely. Up toλ=20, the critical mode is material failure prior to buckling. For the slenderness ratio20<λ<90, the critical mode is not easy to distinguish. Due to the thick laminate, the stiff elastic restraint at the edges prevents the development of pure local or distortional mode shapes. Yet for20<λ<50, the flanges only buckle with a mode shape consisting of one half-wave. For50<λ<60, a second half-wave develops while buckling is still only present in the flanges. For60<λ<90, the buckling deformation tends towards the distortional mode shape. The peak atλ=90marks the onset of lateral-torsional buckling which, in contrast, develops explicitly.Fig. 13provides the corresponding internal energy by means of elastic deformation energy. While the SEQ08 configuration shows no maximal value within the λ-range provided, configuration SEQ16 exhibits the maximum of 93J at the onset of lateral-torsional buckling, and SEQ24 indicates the maximum of 300J at the onset of lateral-torsional buckling. The deformation energy increases with increasing composite thickness. Since the thickness of configuration SEQ24 it is not considered thin-walled anymore, i.e. the flange width to laminate thickness ratio is<10, the development of buckling mode shapes appears to be affected. Similarly the internal energy is affected with the maximum deformation energy shifted to the onset of lateral-torsional buckling.The internal energy is plotted across the critical buckling for three different composite thicknesses in Fig. 13. Each data point corresponds to a unique slenderness value λ. Similar to the stiffening effect of the increased flange width, a range of deformation energy appears, at almost constant critical buckling load for increased composite thickness. However, the laminate thickness not only shifts the critical buckling forces but also scales the energy-force relation. The development of critical buckling modes is affected, which prevents a generalised interpretation. In order to determine the effect of composite thickness, an analysis of the specific case under investigation is deemed necessary. This makes it a major task regarding energy absorption characteristics of structural elements in deformation kinematics of the aircraft fuselage sub-floor area. From a design point of view, increasing the laminate thickness is more effective in terms of increasing deformation energy and buckling loads, compare Figs. 10 and 14, but it affects the buckling mode development.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper provides a methodology for relating deformation energy to critical buckling loads based on explicit numerical analyses of CFRP z-section columns. The results presented here allow the designer to not only estimate critical buckling loads but also to simultaneously consider deformation energy aspects following the recommended steps below:Step 1: Establish a reliable parametric numerical model. Initially, a numerical model shall be established using state-of-the-art modelling techniques (see Rohwer [20] for composite modelling), in order to reliably capture the events under investigation. This involves a verification process against analytical solutions as well as a sensitivity study of influential parameters.Step 2: Configure a framework for automated structural analyses and data processing. Secondly, a framework for automated analysis and data processing needs to be configured which makes extensive use of the parameterised numerical model. This provides the basis for generating results and understanding the investigated effects, rather than trailing of in repetitive work tasks.Step 3: Apply the methodology to obtain the elastic deformation energy as well as the corresponding critical buckling loads. Once the framework is established, the proposed methodology may be adopted in order to obtain the necessary data on significant case studies. Similarly, the relation between deformation energy and critical buckling force may be quantified.Step 4: Determine the desired ratio of load and energy. Finally, maps of feasible energy-force relations are available. Incorporating these into the structural design process, provides valuable assistance in the selection of design parameters with respect to bearable amounts of deformation energy and critical buckling loads.The findings of this investigation are summarised as:1.In this study, the use of explicit FE analyses led to approximately 15% lower buckling load compared to analytical solutions. The verification required the use of updated geometry, which partially explains the lower buckling load. The remaining offset results from the utilisation of nonlinear geometry and material.Deformation energy maxima are present when the mode shape changes. For the investigated slenderness range, the global maximum deformation energy coincides with the slenderness at which lateral-torsional buckling becomes the governing deformation mode.When structural elements are subjected to a certain amount of energy as, for example, strain energy acting axial-compressively, they may be loaded beyond their critical load limit. Based on favourable dimensioning of the flange width or the composite thickness, subcritical loading states are achievable. From a design point of view, increasing the laminate thickness is more effective compared to increasing the flange width, for the purpose of achieving a subcritical loading state. Thicker laminates increase the required deformation energy at the critical buckling loads, but at the same time affect the critical deformation mode.Using the methodology presented here, an analysis of curved z-section frames becomes viable. Moreover, parametric modelling and automated data analysis allow the incorporation into structural optimisation, as outlined by Köke et al. [30].