@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A coupled constitutive model for fracture in plain concrete based on continuum theory with non-local softening and eXtended Finite Element Method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate fracture in concrete elements.We use a coupled continuous and discontinuous constitutive model for concrete.The effective transition algorithm between non-local models and XFEM is formulated.We compare numerical results with experiments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Continuous–discontinuous cracks,Damage mechanics,Elasto-plasticity,Non-locality,XFEM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper presents a constitutive model for concrete which combines a continuous and discontinuous fracture description. In a continuum regime, two different constitutive laws were used. First, a plasticity model with a Rankine failure criterion and an associated flow rule was used. Second, a constitutive law based on isotropic damage mechanics was formulated. In order to capture the width of a localized zone and to obtain mesh-independent results, both models were equipped with a characteristic length of micro-structure by applying a non-local theory of an integral format. In order to describe a macro-crack as a displacement jump along/across a localized zone, the eXtended Finite Element Method (XFEM) was used. A transition algorithm between a non-local continuum model and XFEM was formulated. The implementation details of a coupled approach were given. The performance of two coupled models were numerically analysed based on several 2D benchmarks with a dominating mode-I (e.g. uniaxial tension and bending) and under mixed-mode conditions. The numerical results were compared with our experimental ones. The advantages of a continuous–discontinuous coupling in describing crack patterns were outlined.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fracture is the salient feature of concrete-like materials. It is responsible for both strength and stiffness reductions and precedes the structure failure. At the beginning, a thin zone composed of diffused micro-cracks is formed, called a fracture process zone (FPZ) or a localized zone [1]. Later, during further deformation, a distinct discrete macro-crack emerges. An adequate description of fracture in numerical FE calculations (composed of localized zones and macro-cracks) is extremely important to obtain physically realistic outcomes [2].Within continuum mechanics, there exist two main approaches to describe cracks. The first one describes them in a smeared sense as strain localized zones of micro-cracks with a certain finite width. The material behaviour may be described using e.g. enhanced elasto-plastic, damage mechanics or smeared crack and coupled constitutive laws [2]. These formulations include material softening and have to be equipped with a characteristic length of micro-structure to preserve the well-posedness of BVPs and the mesh-insensitivity of FE results and to properly capture the width, inclination and spacing of localized zones. A characteristic length can be included by means of e.g. non-local, gradient and micro-polar theories. As an alternative, displacement jumps (discontinuities) along cracks may be introduced while keeping the remaining region as a continuous one. The oldest solutions used interface elements which were defined along finite element edges. The modern ones allow for considering displacement jumps in the interior of finite elements using embedded discontinuities or XFEM (eXtended Finite Element Method) [3,4], the latter based on a concept of the partition of unity. A smeared approach is more appropriate when describing a micro-crack formation process while a discontinuous one allows for a more realistic simulation of a discrete macro-crack propagation. The application of a continuum description at the fracture onset provides automatically a algorithm to determine directions of the smeared crack growth. It also updates the set of dominant active cracks (e.g. their direction) if necessary. Such a modification usually cannot be achieved with XFEM. In contrast, the regularized continuum often fails to properly simulate the final deformation stage with almost zero stress conditions. Usually, one approach is solely used to simulate a fracture process in concrete during the entire deformation process [4]. A combination of a continuous and discontinuous approach makes it possible to realistically capture all stages of concrete fracture occurring in experiments [5].One of the first coupled continuous–discontinuous crack descriptions was formulated by Jirásek and Zimmerman [6]. They tried to remove the stress locking observed in simulations with both smeared and conventional embedded crack models. In order to avoid this pathological behaviour, a delayed embedded crack model (DEC) was used in which a transition from a smeared crack approach into an embedded displacement discontinuity formulation occurred at a certain degradation stage. As a regularization technique with respect to the load–displacement diagram, a crack band approach was used in a continuum regime. A softening curve in a discrete regime was tuned to ensure a smooth and energy conserving transition. Moreover, in order to eliminate the observed mesh-induced directional bias, they postulated a coupling of an isotropic damage model enhanced by integral non-local theory with embedded cracks. Wells et al. [7] combined the traction-free XFEM with a viscoplastic constitutive law with softening. The regularization of a boundary value problem at high loading velocities was assured by a visco-plastic constitutive model by Perzyna [8]. Simone et al. [9] proposed a numerical model with a transition from an implicit gradient-damage model into XFEM. The transition point was assumed at the fully damaged state, so again traction-free discontinuities were being inserted in a discrete regime. Comi et al. [10] formulated a constitutive law based on a coupling of an integral non-local damage model with XFEM using cohesive cracks. They analysed carefully the transition process and used their model to simulate mode-I problems. Cazes et al. [11] developed a thermodynamically motivated algorithm to construct a cohesive law equivalent to a differential non-local model. Seabra et al. [12] formulated a model for ductile fracture which a combined isotropic continuum damage law enhanced by a non-local integral formulation with macro-cracks defined by XFEM. These macro-cracks were inserted at the final failure stage, so solely traction-free discontinuities were considered. Cuvilliez et al. [13] used an implicit gradient model together with cohesive interface elements to simulate the behaviour of quasi-brittle materials. Recently, Tamayo-Mas and Rodriguez-Ferran [14] presented a coupling between a gradient enhanced model based on smoothed displacements and XFEM with cohesive tractions. All models described above assumed a transition process at the material point at a specified time moment. The second group of coupled formulations assumed a diffuse nature of this phenomenon. Moonen at el. [15] formulated a general continuous–discontinuous framework based on a ׳time-continuity׳ concept introduced by Papoulia et al. [16]. It allowed for a gradual transition from a continuous to discrete crack description. Benvenuti et al. [17] formulated the REXFEM (the regularized XFEM) approach to simulate a transition point from a continuous to discontinuous displacement. They replaced a standard Heaviside jump function by a continuous regularized Heaviside function with a parameter called a regularization length. It allowed for simulating localized zones of a finite width. They also proposed a new integration technique when calculating the stiffness matrix of finite elements. REXFEM was later used by Benvenuti [18] and Benvenuti and Tralli [19] to capture a smooth transition from a local continuum damage model to cohesive discontinuous cracks.In all above papers isotropic damage constitutive laws were used only (elasto-plastic laws were not employed). Specimens under tensile dominated (mode I) loading were solely simulated under 2D conditions (uniaxial tension, three-point bending or wedge splitting test). Thus the mixed-mode failure modes were not investigated. No convergence analyses and detailed numerical performances of algorithms used have been carried out which are particularly important when switching from a smeared description to discontinuity for large tractions (far from a traction-free state).The main aim of our research group is to formulate a reliable coupled constitutive model for concrete under monotonic and cyclic loading which links a continuous and discontinuous fracture description defined within continuum mechanics. In a continuous phase, an elasto-plastic-damage constitutive model with non-local softening will be used [20,21]. In turn, a discontinuous displacement jump will be described by XFEM [4]. This paper presents a coupled quasi-static constitutive model for numerical simulations of two-dimensional (2D) plain concrete under quasi-static monotonic loading (thus the stiffness recovery was not needed to be taken into account). Tensile dominated loading was considered only. Branching and crossing of cracks were not taken into account. In the continuous phase, two different constitutive laws were assumed: the elasto-plastic model with a Rankine criterion or isotropic damage model with non-local softening. In the discontinuous phase, XFEM was used. The proposed model was implemented into the commercial FE code Abaqus/Standard [22]. Several benchmark simulations were performed under a dominated mode-I (e.g. uniaxial tension and bending) and mixed-mode conditions (shear-tension) in order to assess the numerical robustness and physical validity of the model. Attention was laid on a smooth transition from plasticity/damage with non-local softening to XFEM with respect to oscillations emerging on load–displacement and stress–strain curves. The transition point between a non-local model and XFEM was determined with the help of the Digital Image Correlation (DIC) technique during three-point bending experiments on notched concrete beams [21].As compared to other coupled models, the innovative points are: a) numerical analyses of mixed-failure modes for concrete (in the literature mainly the mode I was studied), b) a comparison of numerical results with experiments on concrete beams with respect to displacement and strain evolutions in a fractured zone, c) an improved transition algorithm with respect to existing ones dealing with a continuous–discontinuous transition in order to avoid unwanted oscillations on load–displacement curves and d) a careful study of transition algorithms for 2 different continuum laws (elasto-plastic and damage) with non-local softening and XFEM.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, two continuum constitutive laws enriched by an integral non-local theory are presented. The general information about the Extended Finite Element Method (XFEM) with a description of a discrete cohesive law and a crack propagation algorithm is given in Section 3. The formulation of a transition phase from a continuous to discontinuous approach is described in Section 4. Section 5 includes the details of the implementation and other numerical issues. The results of numerical tests are analysed in detail in Section 6. The final conclusions are listed in Section 7.An elasto-plastic model was defined within a standard plasticity theory. In a tensile regime the classical Rankine criterion was used [2,23,24]. The yield function f was:(1)F=f−σt(κ)=max{σ1,σ2,σ3}−σt(κ),where σ1, σ2 and σ3 are the principal stresses, σtis the tensile yield stress and κ is the hardening/softening parameter (equal to the maximum principal plastic strainε1pin uniaxial cases). An associated flow rule f=g was assumed. A linear or an exponential curve was chosen to describe softening under tension:(2)σt(κ)=max{0,ft(1−κκu)}orσt(κ)=ftexp(−κκu),where the parameter κucontrols the slope of a softening curve (it can be interpreted as an intersection point of a tangent line from the peak point with a horizontal axis). This curve was chosen to obtain a better agreement with XFEM for a 1-dimensional case (Section 6). It should be noted that a formulation with this simple exponential softening curve produces very similar results to ones obtained with more sophisticated curves, e.g. the non-linear curve by Hordijk [25] which was calibrated with the aid of laboratory experiments. The cases with active two or three yield planes of the Rankine criterion were taken into account by applying a standard multi-surface plasticity model with the Koiter׳s rule to calculate increments of plastic strains. The only difference was that the hardening parameter κ was the same for all active yield planes (the plastic multipliers dλiwere however independent for each active surface ׳i׳). Although the choice of a plasticity theory to simulate concrete under tension raises some controversies (e.g. unphysical origin, lack of the stiffness reduction), the Rankine׳s criterion provides realistic results under monotonic loading [2] and is still widely used (e.g. in commercial FE codes).The second constitutive law was defined within continuum isotropic damage mechanics [5,20,26]. The initiation and propagation of micro-cracks was described by a scalar damage parameter D. The virgin state with the elastic stiffness corresponds to D=0 while a completely cracked material was captured by D=1. The damage variable D can be interpreted as an indicator of the mechanical degradation of the material. It acts as a stiffness reduction factor:(3)σij=(1−D)Cijkleεkl.Note that isotropic damage causes a degradation of Young׳s modulus only while Poisson׳s ratio remains not affected. The growth of the variable D was controlled by a monotonically increasing damage history parameter κ which was defined as the maximum of the equivalent strain measureε˜reached during the entire load history (it is totally a different quantity than the κ-parameter in plasticity):(4)κ(t)=maxτ≤t{ε˜(τ)}.During loading, the parameter κ grows, and during unloading and reloading, it remains constant. The equivalent strainε˜is a scalar which takes into account the sensitivity of a degradation process to different principal strain components. Here a definition proposed by Jirásek [26] for tension (equivalent to the Rankine criterion in plasticity) was used:(5)ε˜=max{σieff}E,whereσieffare the principal values of the effective stress tensor defined as:(6)σijeff=Cijkleεkl,In order to describe the evolution of the damage variable D, an exponential softening law was used:(7)D=1−κ0κ(1−α+αe−β(κ−κ0)),wherein κ0 – the initial value of the damage threshold parameter κ, and α and β – the material parameters. The parameters α and β were calibrated based on a force–displacement curve in softening from uniaxial tension tests.Standard constitutive laws are not able to properly describe strain softening of materials when using FEM. Since these models contain no information about the size and spacing of localized zones, their enrichment by a characteristic length of micro-structure is absolutely necessary. A characteristic length restores also the well-posedness of boundary value problems and makes the FE results mesh-independent [27,28].In the paper, this model enrichment was performed by means of a non-local theory in the integral format [27] which is based on a spatial weighted averaging of a local tensor or scalar state variables. The non-local averaging can be applied only to internal variables coupled with a dissipative process or softening of materials. The influence of the material neighbouring points in determining the state of the analyzed point is taken into account. As a consequence, the principle of local action is not valid any more. In the calculations within elasto-plasticity, the softening parameter κ was assumed to be non-local [28] using the so-called over-non-local formulation:(8)κ¯(x)=(1−m)κ(x)+m∫Vω(‖x−ξ‖)κ(ξ)dξ∫Vω(‖x−ξ‖)dξ,whereκ¯(x)is the non-local softening parameter, m is the additional non-locality parameter, V denotes the body volume,xare the coordinates of the considered point,ξare the coordinates of the surrounding points and ω stands for the weighting function. For m=0, a local formula is retrieved and for m=1, a classical non-local model is recovered. In order to obtain mesh-independent results, the parameter m has to be greater than 1 (a classic non-local model with m=1 does not fully regularizes a boundary value problem) [2,28]. This non-local parameter was used next to define the tensile yield stress σt. The Gaussian function was chosen to calculate the weighing function:(9)ω(r)=1πl2exp(−(rl)2),where r denotes a distance between considered two material points and l is a characteristic length of micro-structure which determines the size of localized zones (note that in plasticity the geometry of localized zones depends also on the non-locality parameter m). Although the Gaussian function has an unbounded support (for any distance r it returns a non-zero value), the averaging is restricted practically to a small area around each material point (the influence of points at the distance of r=3l is only of 0.01%). In the simulations the truncation radius was taken as rmax=3l. The calculations with the larger values of rmaxprovided the identical results. The softening non-local parameter near boundaries and at both sides of a localized zone was always calculated with the aid of Eqs. (8) and (9) (which satisfy the normalizing condition). Other approaches to a non-local averaging were proposed by Polizzotto [29], Borino et al. [30] and Jirásek et al. [31].In the simulations within isotropic damage, the equivalent strain measureε˜was replaced by its non-local counterpartε¯[27] in Eq. (4)[2]:(10)ε¯(x)=∫Vω(‖x−ξ‖)ε˜(ξ)dξ∫Vω(‖x−ξ‖)dξ,A characteristic length of micro-structure may be estimated e.g. by means of displacement measurements on the beam surface using the non-invasive Digital Image Correlation (DIC) technique [21].The method assumes that a displacement field is discontinuous across the crack just after its initiation. It is based on a local partition of unity (PUM) concept by Melenk and Babuška [32]. It enables adding ‘ad hoc’ extra terms to a standard FE displacement field interpolation. These extra functions are responsible for capturing displacement jumps. In XFEM cracks do not have to be placed along finite element edges; they may pass through elements without a remeshing need. Due to a local nature of the enrichment, extra displacement degrees of freedom are solely introduced in finite elements cut by a discontinuity. They are gradually added to subsequent finite elements when a crack propagates. The formulation used in the paper follows (with some improvements and modifications) the original concept by Wells and Sluys [33]. In order to describe jumps in the displacement field, the so-called shifted-basis enrichment was used [34]. The shifted-basis enrichment simplifies the implementation of XFEM (two types of the finite elements exist only). Moreover the total nodal displacements are equal to the standard displacements. The details of the derivation can be found in Zi and Belytschko [34] and Tejchman and Bobiński [2].Two constitutive laws have to be defined to describe the behaviour of a solid body with a cohesive crack. In a non-cracked region, a linear elastic relationship was defined for XFEM. For a coupled formulation, the continuum constitutive law of Sections 2.1 and 2.2 was assumed. Second, the softening cohesive law which links tractionstwith displacement jumps [[u]] on the discontinuity was defined. Here the following format of the loading function was chosen:(11)f([[un]],κ)=[[un]]-κ,with the history parameter κ equal to the maximum normal displacement jump [[un]] achieved during a loading history. The softening phase of the normal component of the traction vector was described using either a linear relationship:(12)tn=Dfft(1−ftκ2Gf)or an exponential one:(13)tn=Dfftexp(−ftκGf),wherein Gf- the fracture energy and Df- the correction term defined as:(14)Df=1−exp(−κdfftGf),where dfis the so-called drop factor [35]. This factor improves the convergence during tension-compression changes. With increasing df, the term Dfapproaches 1. As a third alternative a softening curve assembled from linear segments was also used. A set of n points (κ(ι), tn(ι)) was defined with a linear interpolation of the tnvalue between points. During unloading, the secant stiffness was used with a return to the origin (damage format). In a compressive regime, the penalty stiffness in a normal direction was used (which depended upon the drop factor df). In a tangential direction, a linear relationship between a displacement jump [[us]] and traction tswas assumed with the stiffness TS.In a coupled model, the crack propagation was governed by the algorithm described in Section 4. Since some results with the pure XFEM are presented in the paper for comparison purposes, the crack propagation procedure used in these simulations will be also described in this section. A new crack could be activated or an existing crack could propagate if the standard Rankine criterion (σmax>ft) was fulfilled at least in one point of the element at the front of a crack tip. The direction of a crack extension was asumed to be perpendicular to the direction of the maximum principal stress of the stress vector σtipat the crack tip. These stresses were calculated as the averaged values [33]:(15)σtip=∫VσwdV,wherein V denotes the semi-circle domain at the front of a crack tip and w denotes the averaging function. The function w was defined in 2D calculations as [33]:(16)w(r)=1(2π)lav2exp(−r22lav2),where r is the distance from the crack tip and lavis the averaging length related to the size of finite elements (note that this averaging operation is not intended to introduce an additional characteristic length of micro-structure into a constitutive model). If the direction of the crack propagation is known in advance, a fixed value may be obviously applied [2].Initially, in all finite elements (integration points), a continuum constitutive law with non-local softening (elasto-plastic or isotropic damage constitutive model) was solely active. A new crack segment was created in elements if the following condition for the continuum softening parameter κ (described by Eq. (1) for the elasto-plastic model or by Eq. (4) for the damage model) was fulfilled in any of element׳s integration points at the front of a crack tip:(17)κ>κcd,where κcdis the transitional softening parameter. In some cases, the examination of this condition in the finite element only at the front of the crack tip may cause a locking or a delay of the crack growth. Therefore an extended version of the crack growth criterion was also formulated. In this approach the inequality given by Eq. (17) was checked both in all integration points of the finite element at the front of the crack tip and in all integration points in a circle section with the radius lcrkand angle φcrk. This section was symmetrically located along the extension of the last crack segment (Fig. 1).The direction of a discrete crack propagationpwas determined by (similarly as by Wells et al. [7]):(18)p(x)=∫Vκ(ξ)w(‖p¯‖)p¯‖p¯‖dV,wherep¯is the direction from the crack tipxto any pointξin V and w denotes the weight function defined by Eq. (16). The more advanced algorithms may be also used to determine this direction, as e.g. the medial axis method proposed by Tamayo-Mas and Rodriguez-Ferran [14].A proper description of a switch from a continuous degradation mechanism to a cohesive crack development requires the fulfilling of two principles: the dissipated energy balance and stress equilibrium [10,14]. The first idea assumes that the energy dissipated with a continuous model is equal to the energy dissipated in a coupled continuous–discontinuous model. Usually this equivalence is derived from an one-dimensional bar analysis and then it is adopted to a general case. Since the proposed model was used for tension dominated problems only, the activation of a discrete crack depended on the behaviour under tension in one normal direction. Thus the same 1D procedure was used here. In the simulations of the Nooru-Mohamed test with curved cracks, the zero shear stiffness was assumed (the consideration of shear terms require the fracture energy definition under shear).Fig. 2 shows the general stress–displacement diagrams obtained for a bar under tension. The transition point ׳T׳ is characterized by the tensile stress σinit. The total energy Gf(per unit area) is a sum of the dissipated energy Gdand remaining energy Gr(not yet dissipated). These energies are different for the both analysed continuum laws for the same value of the stress σinit. This comes from the fact that material softening of an isotropic damage model is connected with the stiffness degradation, while for an elasto-plastic constitutive model this stiffness is intact. As a consequence, the elastic strain energies are also different (they are the parts of the remaining energies Gr).Let us consider the bar with the length L, cross-area A and Young modulus E. Its continuum (bulk) elongation ubulkis equal to(19)ubulk=∫0Lεdl=∫0Lσ(1−D)Edl=PEA∫0L11−Ddl.It can be reformulated as (K is the secant stiffness of the bar):(20)ubulk=PKwithK=EALeffandLeff=∫0L11−Ddl.After inserting a discrete crack, the total elongation of the bar u is the sum of the elongation of the bulk (continuum) material ubulkand displacement jump in the crack [[u]]. Applying Eq. (20), the following formula is obtained for [[u]]:(21)[[u]]=u−PK.This formula allows for a curve definition of the traction t - displacement jump [[u]] for a cohesive crack equivalent to a force–displacement diagram from a continuum damage model. In simulations a set of discrete points was defined to reproduce this curve. Eq. (21) provides the same results if the sufficiently large bar׳s length L is taken in order to capture the entire localization zone. The identity of force–displacement diagrams guaranties the equilibrium of dissipated energies in both approaches. Note that after inserting a discrete crack, the degradation in bulk points ceases and a softening mechanism in cohesive cracks is active only. Therefore the secant stiffness K is constant after a crack creation although its value depends on a distribution of the damage parameter D along the bar. Moreover the displacement jump at the moment of the crack creation [[uinit]] is equal to zero, so the secant stiffness may be evaluated as:(22)K=Pinituinit,where Pinitand uinitare the force and total displacement at the crack creation (this formula comes directly from the definition of K). If an explicitly defined softening curve in XFEM was assumed, e.g. the exponential relationship given by Eq. (13), then the extra data about the remaining energy Grhave to be provided. This was done by defining the remaining energy Gr- traction t relationship based on force–displacement curves from pure continuum analyses.In contrast to damage model, there is no a stiffness change in bulk points while switching from a continuous to discrete approach. After the crack creation there is elastic unloading in the entire bar. There is not a growth of plastic strains and deformation in the bulk is elastic. The incremental bulk stiffness becomes elastic:(23)dubulk=dPLEA.As a consequence, a special technique is not required to preserve the dissipated energy amount. In order to obtain the same response in plasticity and XFEM in the material softening region, the fracture energy Gffrom XFEM had to be related with the ultimate softening parameter κuin plasticity. However in softening plasticity, the slope of a force–displacement curve depends not only on κuand ftbut also on the non-local parameters m and l. The solution is to perform some numerical simulations and to fit these values. Such a comparison of the force–displacement curves in uniaxial tension was performed and the following relationship was identified for linear softening (with the parameter m=2):(24)Gf=0.95ftmlκuand exponential softening:(25)Gf=1.89ftmlκu.The numerical constants in Eqs. (24) and (25) not depend on the characteristic length l, tensile strength ftand softening parameter κu. However, they decrease with increasing non-locality parameter m. Such a calibration process enabled us to calculate the identical force–displacement curves and to dissipate the same energy amount.The second principle requires the equilibrium of stresses in a newly cracked finite element. The stresses in new integration points were calculated by interpolating values from old integration points. The same procedure was performed for strains and state variables. The initial tractions tninitand tsinitwere computed by projecting continuum stresses onto a crack segment line at the crack creation moment. In the elasto-plastic-XFEM coupling, the initial displacement jumps were determined at the moment of the crack creation: [[uninit]] and [[usinit]]. They were not zero because the discrete softening process did not start with the tensile strength value. They depended upon the initial traction values (Fig. 2). The starting softening parameter κ in XFEM was also modified by adding [[uninit]]. With the damage-XFEM coupling, the softening curve was defined with the algorithm given in Section 4.3.The coupled elasto-plastic-XFEM constitutive model requires 10 material constants: E and v in elasticity, m, l, ftand κuin softening plasticity and Gf, df, and TSin XFEM plus the transitional parameter κcd. In the coupled damage-XFEM formulation, 10 material constants have to be also declared: E and v in elasticity, κ0, α and β in damage softening, Gf, df, and TSin XFEM and κcd. In addition a set of points to describe the degradation in XFEM has to be specified.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A coupled continuous–discontinuous constitutive model was presented in order to realistically describe fracture in plain concrete (localized zones and cracks). The model preserves the well posedness of the boundary value problem in crack descriptions using both integral non-local theory and XFEM at the continuous and discrete level. Its ability to capture a change in a fracture description of a localized zone/crack without energy losses was successfully examined under uniaxial and mixed stress state conditions. The coupled model was able to reflect basic properties of concrete specimens and to reproduce satisfactorily a complex crack geometry during a mixed failure mode in the Nooru-Mohamed test with respect to their shape. The calculated displacements and strains in a fractured zone were in agreement with the experimental ones. An approximate value of a transition point between a continuous to discontinuous formulation was identified with the aid of the analysis of experimental results using the DIC technique.Algorithmic aspects of the coupled model were carefully studied and the numerical performance of the algorithm was examined in detail. An efficient algorithm was developed to activate discrete cracks with non-zero traction forces. A new method was proposed to include a mixed zone of an active continuous and discontinuous description of the crack growth at the same time in order to avoid numerical oscillations. The method proposed significantly improved the existing solutions with coupled constitutive models with respect to the reduction of emerging bumps on load–displacement diagrams in the entire softening regime. It also allowed for applying different continuum constitutive laws (e.g. isotropic damage and elasto-plastic models).The one-phase algorithm ׳B1׳ was found to be the best choice in simulations with coupled constitutive laws. This method allowed for switching off non-local softening in integration points perpendicular to a newly created crack segment. The proper choice of a mixed zone length was a crucial issue. For coupled laws within elasto-plasticity, it should be approximately equal to a characteristic length while a zero value should be defined within continuum damage mechanics. Such assumptions allowed to obtain smooth force–displacement curves with a time distributed crack propagation history.In spite of improvements, the proposed algorithm was however characterized by a slow convergence in more complex BVPs. Another issue to be solved was a possible blockade of a discrete crack growth caused by the simultaneous coexistence of a smeared and discrete degradation mechanism in the same area. The examination of a crack activation criterion in the region ahead the crack tip (with more finite elements) can be regarded as a partial solution only. These aspects require further investigation and some improvements to formulate a numerically fully efficient coupled continuum-discrete constitutive law.