@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical modeling of cell differentiation and proliferation in force-induced substrates via encapsulated magnetic nanoparticles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A 3D model is developedto study how force-induced substrate controls cell differentiation and/or proliferation.Cells are cultured within 3D Neo-Hookeanhyperelastic hydrogels with encapsulated magnetic nanoparticles.Internal forces can play an outstanding role in remotelycontrolling the lineage specification of MSCs and cell proliferation.A new perspective to delineate the role of force-induced substrates in controlling the cell fate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Differentiation and proliferation,Force-induced matrices,Mechanosensing,Numerical simulation,Finite element method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveCell migration, differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis are the main processes in tissue regeneration. Mesenchymal Stem Cells have the potential to differentiate into many cell phenotypes such as tissue- or organ-specific cells to perform special functions. Experimental observations illustrate that differentiation and proliferation of these cells can be regulated according to internal forces induced within their Extracellular Matrix. The process of how exactly they interpret and transduce these signals is not well understood.MethodsA previously developed three-dimensional (3D) computational model is here extended and employed to study how force-free substrates and force-induced substrate control cell differentiation and/or proliferation during the mechanosensing process. Consistent with experimental observations, it is assumed that cell internal deformation (a mechanical signal) in correlation with the cell maturation state directly triggers cell differentiation and/or proliferation. The Extracellular Matrix is modeled as Neo-Hookean hyperelastic material assuming that cells are cultured within 3D nonlinear hydrogels.ResultsIn agreement with well-known experimental observations, the findings here indicate that within neurogenic (0.1–1kPa), chondrogenic (20–25kPa) and osteogenic (30–45kPa) substrates, Mesenchymal Stem Cells differentiation and proliferation can be precipitated by inducing the substrate with an internal force. Therefore, cells require a longer time to grow and maturate within force-free substrates than within force-induced substrates. In the instance of Mesenchymal Stem Cells differentiation into a compatible phenotype, the magnitude of the net traction force increases within chondrogenic and osteogenic substrates while it reduces within neurogenic substrates. This is consistent with experimental studies and numerical works recently published by the same authors. However, in all cases the magnitude of the net traction force considerably increases at the instant of cell proliferation because of cell–cell interaction.ConclusionsThe present model provides new perspectives to delineate the role of force-induced substrates in remotely controlling the cell fate during cell–matrix interaction, which open the door for new tissue regeneration methodologies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ability of Stem Cells (SCs) to differentiate into multiple cell types allows multiple tissues to be generated and reconstituted from a single cell source. Despite the advantages, the results may sometimes be disastrous if SCs differentiate at an inappropriate place and time or into undesirable phenotypes. This can lead to a pathological state or non-functional tissue construction. To avoid such abnormal conditions, cells have to be particularized in such a way as to differentiate or proliferate in response to appropriate biological stimuli.Experiments have shown that, besides other factors [58,59], the mechanical structure of cellular micro-environments plays an important role in cell differentiation and proliferation [21,22,31,71]. For instance, Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs) differentiate into specific phenotypes with high sensitivity to the tissue rigidity where they reside in. The mechanical interaction between a cell and its Extracellular Matrix (ECM) is considered symbiotic. Although cells are able to remodel their surrounding micro-environment, the mechanical structure and characteristics of their surroundings can also regulate intracellular signaling. This mutually dependent relationship between cells and their surrounding matrices is often referred to as dynamic reciprocity [13]. Consequently, besides other cell reactions [38,39,41], cells may respond to changes in their mechanical environment, such as changes in matrix rigidity, by undergoing differentiation and/or proliferation [13,43]. For instance, experiments have demonstrated that for soft matrices that resembling brain tissue (0.1–1kPa) SCs differentiate to neurogenic cells, for intermediate matrices that mimicking cartilage tissue (20–25kPa) they differentiate into chondrogenic cells, and comparatively hard matrices that mimic the tissue of collagenous bone (30–45kPa) they differentiate into osteogenic cells [13,26,40,56]. Although MSCs have demonstrated quicker differentiation and an increase in the proliferation rate when cultured on osteogenic substrates [40,42], mechanical forces induced into their micro-environment can actively accelerate these processes [34,35]. This has been attributed to protein anchorage densities and configurations which are proportional to substrate stiffness and rigidity [69]. However, the process of how exactly mechanical force regulates the MSC lineage specification is not well-known [40].The findings of Kurpinski et al. [34] indicate that mechanical strain due to force inducement increases MSC proliferation and plays an important role in MSC differentiation. They show that the differential cellular responses to an anisotropic mechanical environment in a force-induced micro-environment have important implications in tissue engineering and remodeling due to alterations in the signaling pathway. In another study, the same group demonstrates that these mechanical stimulations play unique and important roles in the regulation of MSCs at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. In addition, they suggest that an accurate combination of micro-environmental cues may promote MSC differentiation [35].Previous observations concerning cell differentiation and proliferation at the SC-material interface may assist to control a broader range of stem cell behaviors. Murphy et al. [52] have documented a series of diverse work reporting that inherent material properties, such as chemical functionality, adhesivity, binding affinity, nanostructure or degradability, can be engineered to dictate stem cell fate decisions due to dynamic micro-environment of the SC-material interface. In other words, materials can send signals to SC micro-environment by their nano-structural properties, such as surface topographies, and also receive signals from cells by means of molecular sequestering, as in the binding and unbinding of growth factors through material-associated ligands. Therefore, the cell fate and behavior can change due to this dynamical variation of cell-material adhesiveness, nano-structure, stiffness and ECM degradability. For instance, switching of degradable hydrogels into non-degradable ones demonstrates that cell-traction forces are crucial for osteogenic lineage specification of human MSCs in 3D substrates. Although, it is proved that substrate stiffness lead to stem cell differentiation [13,26], it is not yet well-known how extent “switching” material stiffness can trigger broad phenotypic changes, or how the rate of change in material stiffness can influence cell behavior. Therefore, emerging material-screening strategies may quickly improve our mechanistic knowledge about effects of distinct inherent material properties. Beyond the available investigations that considering the effect of elastic modulus on MSC differentiation, many experimental investigations reviewed by Murphy et al. [52] confirm that the inherent material properties, such as dynamic changes in stiffness and frequency-dependent stress responses, may also regulate the MSC lineage specification.Among the wide range of biomaterials employed as cell substrate for in vitro investigations, hydrogels are a relevant option. These are composed of water-swollen networks of cross-linked polymer chains. While hydrogel stiffness depends on factors such as its concentration and cross-linking, due to its nonlinear behavior, the stiffness can be altered as a result of internal contractile forces exerted by cells or by another internal compressing and/or stretching forces exerted within it [1,2]. Several approaches have been proposed in the literature to enhance the local stiffness of the hydrogel, including plastic compression [6], cross-linking techniques [3] and magnetic field alignment of collagen-based hydrogels [1]. A helpful alternative approach to remotely induce an internal force within hydrogels and to change their relative local stiffness is to incorporate magnetic nanoparticles within them. Inducing magnetic force on these magnetic nanoparticles causes compression and/or stretching of the hydrogel, leading to an increase in the bulk elastic modulus and the hydrogel rigidity.Several numerical models have been developed for considering the general patterns of tissue reconstruction resulting from the external mechanical stimuli during fracture healing [9,10,20,30,32,36,37,66]. For example, Stops et al. [66] have considered cell differentiation and proliferation within a collagen-glycosaminoglycan scaffold subjected to mechanical strain and perfusive fluid flow. Kang et al. [30] developed a model for bone fracture healing based on the density of different cell phenotypes by coupling cell differentiation and proliferation to the magnitude and frequency of the mechanical stimuli. Although these models are useful to predict tissue repairing, they consider neither cell differentiation and/or proliferation due to the mechanosensing process during cell substrate interaction nor the nonlinearity of cell micro-environment. The dermal equivalent (DE) for skin tissue contains a dermis substitute of human fibroblasts which grow into a 3D collagen matrix. It is widely used in many processes such as fibroblast proliferation and migration, ECM matrix remodeling, wound healing response and skin grafting. Ramtani and Geiger [62] have specifically studied DE, in order to model its mechanical behavior under unconfined compression loading. To model the experimentally observed mechanical behavior of the DE, they employ an internal state variable approach which is implemented through finite deformation viscoelasticity. In their model, the parameters of the optimized material are identified according to the stated thermodynamic restriction. Their considered non-linear model assume incompressible, homogeneous and mechanically isotropic specimens in which the strain energy is decomposed into elastic and viscous terms simultaneously. The elastic component is expressed by Fung's exponential function including first and second deformation tensor invariants, which verifies stress-free initial state and convexity of the elastic potential conditions. The viscous strain energy is formulated as a function of two invariants, the deformation and the rate of deformation tensors. Their results indicate that both the strain rate and the time of culture are essential. Since under low strain rate, the DE responds elastically while under higher strain rate (0.1s−1), the viscous contribution is obvious and consequently the levels of stresses are notably increase.A numerical model considering cell differentiation and proliferation based on the mechanosensing process within a force-free linear elastic substrate has been previously developed and presented by the present authors [47]. The main aim of the present work is to extend the previously presented model to include the effect of the nonlinearity of the hydrogel on cell differentiation and proliferation when an internal force is applied within the substrate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
MSCs are self-renewing and have significant potential to undergo lineage specification. Many studies [13,34,35,40] have been devoted to achieving a better understanding of the mechanisms which regulate the lineage specification of these cells. Recent experimental studies demonstrate that the mechanical properties of cell micro-environments and the stimulation of the micro-environment by an external force trigger many aspects of cell response such as differentiation and proliferation [13,40]. Although the precise mechanical pathway by which the cell micro-environment controls the cell differentiation and proliferation is not still well-known, various hypotheses have been proposed to clarify how mechanical signals regulate cell fate [10,40].Recently, a 3D numerical model was developed by the same authors to study the influence of substrate stiffness on cell fate [47]. To acquire accurate control over cell differentiation and proliferation, the previous model is extended to investigate the effects of substrate induced internal force on cell fate. We believe that this is the first nonlinear numerical model to interpret existent knowledge of cell fate when the cellular micro-environment is induced by a substrate internal force.In this study, we have investigated how 3D force-free and force-induced substrates affect cell proliferation and differentiation of MSCs. The results are qualitatively consistent with experimental observations [13,14,18,26,34,35,76]. We found that for a typical cell, cell internal deformation, which is developed through integrins during focal adhesions, is a key molecular mechanism in the mechanosensing process. Therefore, any change in the substrate rigidity due to a matrix induced internal force changes the cell internal deformation which in turn moderates the cell proliferation and differentiation [17,34]. This is why within a substrate stimulated by an internal force, cell differentiation and proliferation is accelerated [14,35]. In line with our previous work [47] and experimental observation [18], in the case of force-free and force-induced substrates, the net traction force generated by a typical cell may lead to a sudden increase (osteoblasts and chondrocytes) or decrease (neuroblast) in the moment of MSC differentiation. This sudden jump or drop in the net traction force may be due to the perfect alignment of stress fibers of the cell when the matrix and the cell stiffness are similar at the moment of MSC differentiation. Moreover, in all cases considered here, proliferation of a typical cell significantly increases the average net traction force. This is due to the cell–cell interaction which results in an asymmetric distribution of the traction force on the cell membrane, as discussed in [45]. In addition, the cell behavior in terms of cell differentiation or proliferation strongly depends on the cell maturation. Consistent with the observations of Her et al. [24], our findings illustrate that cells might need a longer time to become fully mature within force-free substrates (see Fig. 4) which is another reason for quicker cell fate achievement within force-induced substrates.Altogether, the results obtained from the present model, in agreement with the previous experimental observations [14,18,34,35,76], show that internal force exerted within the cell micro-environment can play an outstanding role in remotely controlling the lineage specification of MSCs and cell proliferation, which open the door for new tissue regeneration methodologies. Although this 3D numerical model can successfully predict fundamental aspects of cell maturation, differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis within nonlinear substrate, further investigations into physical and mechanical factors such as colony size and cell shape are essential for a better understanding of the precise mechanism behind cell fate decisions.