@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enabling systematic, harmonised and large-scale biofilms data computation: The Biofilms Experiment Workbench

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There is a critical need to develop bioinformatics tools that expedite the interchange and comparison of microbiological and clinical results among laboratories.Biofilms are a prominent subject within Biomedical research.The Biofilms Experiment Workbench (BEW) is a novel software workbench for the operation and analysis of biofilms experimental data.The Biofilms Markup Language (BML) is a new data representation format for modelling biofilms experiments.BEW is able to manage information of microbiological studies with various purposes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical microbiology,Biofilms,Bioinformatics,Experimental data workbench,Interchange format,Harmonised vocabulary,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveBiofilms are receiving increasing attention from the biomedical community. Biofilm-like growth within human body is considered one of the key microbial strategies to augment resistance and persistence during infectious processes. The Biofilms Experiment Workbench is a novel software workbench for the operation and analysis of biofilms experimental data. The goal is to promote the interchange and comparison of data among laboratories, providing systematic, harmonised and large-scale data computation.MethodsThe workbench was developed with AIBench, an open-source Java desktop application framework for scientific software development in the domain of translational biomedicine. Implementation favours free and open-source third-parties, such as the R statistical package, and reaches for the Web services of the BiofOmics database to enable public experiment deposition.ResultsFirst, we summarise the novel, free, open, XML-based interchange format for encoding biofilms experimental data. Then, we describe the execution of common scenarios of operation with the new workbench, such as the creation of new experiments, the importation of data from Excel spreadsheets, the computation of analytical results, the on-demand and highly customised construction of Web publishable reports, and the comparison of results between laboratories.ConclusionsA considerable and varied amount of biofilms data is being generated, and there is a critical need to develop bioinformatics tools that expedite the interchange and comparison of microbiological and clinical results among laboratories. We propose a simple, open-source software infrastructure which is effective, extensible and easy to understand. The workbench is freely available for non-commercial use at http://sing.ei.uvigo.es/bew under LGPL license.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Infectious diseases are a major worldwide cause of morbidity and mortality, and biofilm formation stands out as a key virulence factor contributing to the emergence and dissemination of antibiotic resistance traits in chronic and nosocomial infections [1–4]. Pneumonia in cystic fibrosis patients, chronic wounds, and catheter-associated infections are meaningful examples of biofilm-based infections.The severity and widespread dissemination of these infections, and most notably the increasing emergence of multi-drug resistant strains, have promoted dynamic research on the molecular interplay underlying these microbial agglomerates. The ultimate aim is to discover new drug targets and design drugs with alternative, and more effective modes of action [5–8]. To this end, conventional microbiological experimentation is giving place to high-throughput and multidisciplinary experimentation [9]. Cell viability, biomass formation, respiratory activity, morphological characterisation, and transcriptome and proteome profiling are among the variety of analytical methods commonly used now.These experiments are producing a wealth of data, but experimental results could be better explored if only the interchange and comparison of data among laboratories was not so limited. Often, different laboratories report contradictory results about similar infection scenarios. The comparison of raw data and the unequivocal characterisation of experimental methods would allow the evaluation of the possible cause(s) of such nonconformity. Notably, it is of upmost importance to differentiate between procedural discrepancies and natural-occurring biological variation and thus, to be able to assure the reproducibility and ruggedness of the results. A first step in this direction is the specification of a common computer-readable and interchangeable data format, which establishes the minimum set of information necessary to guarantee the comprehensibility of the experiment (both in terms of the procedures used and the data obtained), and the representation of the data itself.The MIABiE initiative,22http://miabie.org/encompassing an international body of Biofilms experts, is working on the definition of guidelines to document biofilms experiments and the standardisation of the nomenclature in use [10]. Biofilms-centred databases such as BiofOmics33http://biofomics.org/[11] and MorphoCol44http://morphocol.org[12] are already endorsing these guidelines and making experimental data publicly available. However, the community lacks computational tools to assist researchers in the preparation of experimental data files, and the individual and comparative analysis of experimental results. Typically, researchers organise and document their experiments as most convenient at the moment, and research articles show only selected results, e.g. plots and some statistical significance values, that sustain the conclusions in a more intuitive way. This ad hoc style of analysis can lead to human error and misinterpretation, loss of data and results, and lack of verifiability, repeatability and extensibility. Moreover, this approach prevents the experiments from being easily uploaded to public databases (namely, being available on the Web in a query-able form for the community), and being computed straightforwardly by other researchers than the authors.To bridge this gap, this work introduces the Biofilms Experiment Workbench (BEW), the first software tool dedicated to biofilms data operation and analysis [13]. BEW aims to make analysis more systematic by consolidating data, analysis and results. Towards this end, this work also proposes the Biofilms Markup Language (BML) as a new data representation format for modelling biofilms experiments, and effectively promoting data interchange across resources and software tools. BEW endorses BML and supports main data operation and analysis functionalities, such as: (i) the customised, but standardised documentation of experiments, (ii) the statistical assessment of various analytical results, (iii) on-demand and Web-publishable experiment reporting, (iv) the deposition of experiments in public databases, and (v) the comparison of results between laboratories. Although emphasising the unique ability of BEW to work with biofilms experimental data, it is noteworthy that researchers may still put it to use for documenting more general microbiological studies. Biofilm research is built upon biofilm-specific experiments as well as experiments common to other scientific areas. So, BEW is able to manage information of microbiological studies with various purposes.The next sections detail the BML, the architecture of BEW and its main functionalities. Further documentation can be found at its Web site (http://sing.ei.uvigo.es/bew), including some sample data and demos. The workbench is available free of charge for non-commercial use under LGPL license.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Biofilms are a prominent subject within Biomedical research. In this paper we present BEW, the very first bioinformatics tool developed to meet the data processing and analysis requirements of the Biofilms research domain. In complement, we introduce the BML for the formal computerised representation of biofilm experiments, in the broader benefit of the development and use biofilms resources and software packages. With greater interaction between tools, and a common data format for publications and databases, researchers will be able to perform systematic experiment comparison and data interchange.Ongoing work is mostly centred in refining the analytical capacities of the workbench, providing new advanced and specialised functionalities. For example, we are working on multidimensional data analysis and the processing and analysis of image data. Based on users’ feedback, we devote additional efforts to satisfy domain-specific requests (both in terms of data management and analysis) and to improve the interface (easy-to-use and the intuitiveness) of the workbench. In close cooperation with the MIABiE consortium, we are also planning some hands-on courses to introduce the software to biofilms practitioners.The software, the documentation, and example datasets are publicly available at http://sing.ei.uvigo.es/bew under the LGPL license.The authors do not have any competing interests.