@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling sleep fragmentation in sleep hypnograms: An instance of fast, scalable discrete-state, discrete-time analyses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore associations of sleep-disordered breathing and sleep structure.5-state hypnograms are systematically compared to 3-state.We analyze a community cohort of 5598 subjects (2.7 million rows total).We reduce analysis time from 8 hours to 30 s.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Competing risks,Multi-state,Poisson regression,Recurrent event,Sleep-disordered breathing,Stratified,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Methods are introduced for the analysis of large sets of sleep study data (hypnograms) using a 5-state 20-transition-type structure defined by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Application of these methods to the hypnograms of 5598 subjects from the Sleep Heart Health Study provide: the first analysis of sleep hypnogram data of such size and complexity in a community cohort with a range of sleep-disordered breathing severity; introduce a novel approach to compare 5-state (20-transition-type) to 3-state (6-transition-type) sleep structures to assess information loss from combining sleep state categories; extend current approaches of multivariate survival data analysis to clustered, recurrent event discrete-state discrete-time processes; and provide scalable solutions for data analyses required by the case study. The analysis provides detailed new insights into the association between sleep-disordered breathing and sleep architecture. The example data and both R and SAS code are included in online supplementary materials.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An individual’s sleep is conceptualized as a hypnogram, a discrete-state discrete-time stochastic process (Fig. 1). Currently, the field of sleep science broadly generalizes a typical sleep progression as Wake (W, on the hypnogram axis) to Stage 1 (1) to Stage 2 (2) to Stage Slow-wave (S) back to Stage 2 and then Rapid Eye Movement (R). The progression makes up one sleep cycle, which lasts approximately 60–90 min and repeats through the night.Judging from the three examples of Fig. 1, sleep is often more complex than the purportedly ‘typical’ pattern shown of the top panel. The top panel fits the generalization well, but the other two do not, with many detours and interruptions to the charted course of a “typical” sleep: the middle panel has more alternations between Stage 2 and Stage Slow-wave; while the bottom panel has a duration in Wake before leaving Stage 1 and a much more fragmented Stage Slow-wave portion. Given that every 30 s the trajectory can change to any other of the four states or remain in the current state makes for a diverse functional space for one hour snippets of three individuals, let alone for an overall sleep time of typically 7 h for the thousands of individuals in sleep epidemiology investigations.To remove potential confusion about novelty, we provide a brief review of related publications with the problems they addressed, along with a summarizing graphic (Fig. 2). Hypnogram data have been the topic of previous analytic frameworks and data applications demonstrated on modest sample sizes involving one homogeneous group or for comparing no more than two groups. For example, previous statistical methodology for sleep focused on an important clinical goal of relating time-varying hormone levels to the sleep process modeled as a reduced set of transition-types for the number of states considered (see Fahrmeir and Klinger, 1998; Yassouridis et al., 1999; Aalen et al., 2004; Kneib and Hennerfeind, 2008; Kalus et al., 2009). Norman et al. (2006) established differences in the stability of sleep and severity of sleep-disordered breathing in a sleep-runs analysis (which is a 2-state 1-transition-formulation with no intra-subject repeated events clustering). ForSstates, a full and flat model paradigm would include allS×(S−1)pairwise transition-types. Swihart et al. (2008) analyzed the full 3-state 6 transition-type paradigm with Poisson regression for relative transition counts and multi-state survival models for relative transition rates to study sleep stability. Swihart et al. (2012) implemented a random effects Bayesian Poisson regression.The development of a new approach was spurred by epidemiologic sleep studies, which often have thousands of subjects and research goals involving comparisons of multiple subgroups. The methods described above, save for a modification to the Poisson regression in Swihart et al. (2008), were unable to scale to 5598 subjects under the 5-state 20-transition-type paradigm with the focus of analyzing group differences in the transition process.Thus, the goal is to provide statistical models that: (1) are not more complex than necessary for comparing (more than 2) groups; (2) characterize transition-type-specific features of the frequency and rate behaviors observed in Fig. 1; and (3) do not over-simplify the sleep state transition process, as done by the currently accepted 3-state characterization of sleep cycles.The hypnogram data is supplied by the Sleep Heart Health Study (Quan et al., 1997). Discrete-time discrete-state hypnograms are ASCII files of one line, displaying a symbol to represent the occupied state for sequential and mutually exclusive 30-s epochs. For example, RRRR22121W could be the 10 epoch tail-end of a string, where one R is 30-ss of REM sleep, 2 is Stage 2, 1 is Stage 1, and W is wake (Fig. 3, top left). A transition occurs whenever there is a change of symbol adjacent to one another. There are 5 transitions in this string, chronologically: a REM-Stage 2 (labeled R2) transition, Stage 2–Stage 1 (labeled 21) transition, Stage 1–Stage 2 (labeled 12) transition, Stage 2–Stage 1 (labeled 21) transition, and a Stage 1–Wake (labeled 1W) transition. A corresponding time-at-risk (interchangeably, duration in state, transition time, survival time, sojourn time, failure time, or time-to-event) can be assigned to each transition. The time-at-risk is state-specific and is assigned to all possible transitions (observed and censored) that have the same starting state. In the current example, the observed transitions had the following times at risk: R2 was 2 min, transition-type 21 had 1 min, transition-type 12 had 0.5 min, the second occurrence of transition-type 21 had 0.5 min, 1W had 0.5 min, and no transition out was recorded of the final Wake epoch.The stages of sleep are collapsable, yielding hypnograms of fewer states. The collapsibility is biologically motivated. For instance, to go from a 5-state to 3-state hypnogram, Stage 1, Stage 2 and Stage Slow-wave are combined into Non-REM (NREM) sleep stage. In our example, RRRR22121W becomes RRRRNNNNNW (Fig. 3, middle left). Continuing in this vein, both NREM and REM sleep stages of 3-state sleep can be collapsed into an “Asleep” stage, making sleep a 2-state process, where RRRRNNNNNW becomes AAAAAAAAAW (Fig. 3, bottom left).Two methods of analysis are proposed to characterize the sleep transitions and assess covariate effects on these transition measures. A well-known equivalence exists between the likelihoods of a Poisson regression via the generalized linear model (GLM) framework and a parametric survival model with exponentially distributed survival times which feature (piecewise) constant hazards (Holford, 1976, 1980; Laird and Olivier, 1981; Swihart et al., 2012). The aforementioned equivalence prompts the investigation of a Poisson regression via a generalized estimating equations (GEE) log-linear model as an approximation to a multi-state proportional hazards model, which are each fitted to a 5-state and 3-state representation of the sleep hypnogram. Evaluating the presupposed, approximate equivalence of these two models is needed, as each serves as a near but distinct approach to those known in the exact equivalence. Herein, “Poisson regression” will be used for the GEE log-linear model, and “multi-state survival model” will represent the stratified multi-state proportional hazards model for competing risks and recurrent events.For each hypnogram resolution (5-,3-, or 2-stage), the two models described above each require a different data format. A multi-state survival model requires a format detailing chronologically each possible transition in a separate row, whether the transition was observed or censored, and the time to transition (Fig. 3). Poisson regression requires transition-type specific total counts of occurrence and total time at risk (tar) for those counts, which is straightforwardly borne of summing the observed (obs) and time-to-event (tte) variables of the properly constructed multi-state survival model format, respectively, by transition-type (shift).Consider groupgand transition-typeh: for a survival analysis yielding a transition-type specific log-hazardαh(t)and effectβg:h, the multi-state survival model is stratified on transition typehand regressed upon the interaction term involvingh:αh(t)=αh0(t)+g:h+x,whereg:hrepresents the interaction terms sans the main effects, as discussed in Therneau and Grambsch (2000). Thetis the associated time-to-event (tte) of the transition. The event may be censored (obs = 0) or observed (obs = 1, see Fig. 3). Thexrepresents demographic covariates as typically included in a multi-state survival model. The coefficientsβg:hare the focus of the analysis—the demographic covariates are included for adjustment only. Directly exponentiatingβg:hgives the hazard ratio of groupgto the reference group for transition-typeh.To fit the 3-stage, 6 transition-type competing risks model for many subjects among the 4 SDB groups (see Fig. 3 for variable descriptions), the following could be coded in SAS and R:Ultimately, the proportional hazards assumption is vital and the group effect and other covariates assumed to follow the proportional hazards property can be tested for each of the stratified hazards. A violation of this assumption can be tested by testing for inclusion of the covariate interacted withlog(t)or testing if the corresponding Schoenfeld residuals andlog(t)have a correlation of zero. If the test is significant, then inclusion of thelog(t)interaction in the model is the remedy for the violation. In addition to the stratified model considering all transitions types, an analysis of 20 separate survival models of one transition-type each will be considered.The mean of a Poisson process can be modeled log-linearly with a log-offset of the total time at risk (tar),logλ(gh)=g+h+g:h+offset{log(tarh)}+x.The quantityλ(gh)is the rate for groupgand typehand exponentiating linear combinations of coefficients will yield relative rates of the overall counts between groupgand the reference group for transition-typeh. The following could be coded in SAS and R:Noting that each individual has the same number of rows and that each (ordered) row within individual corresponds to the same attribute (transition-type), these log-linear models are well-suited for fitting with GEE. A hallmark of the GEE is the sandwich estimator, which is also used in the multi-state survival model. The method of GEE modeling is widely used, computationally fast, and can potentially model correlation structure. TheH×Hcorrelation matrix conveys the correlation of the time-adjusted frequencies of a transition-type occurring. Intuitively, negative correlations could be expected due to the competing risks nature of transition-types sharing the same starting state (e.g. transition-type 1W is negatively correlated with 12 because the greater instances of 1W implies fewer instances of 12); whereas positive correlation could be anticipated for transition-types that share the same state as their ending and starting state (e.g. 1W could be positively correlated with W2 because the higher counts of 1W means more occasions of entering wake, from which W2 can occur). Common parametric structures (“exchangeable” or “AR-1”) do not admit both negative and positive correlations, and the unstructured specification is computationally difficult. The realization that correlation is a nuisance in the GEE framework and that the analytic goals are point estimates and confidence intervals gives motivation to initially take a working independent structure. Consistent estimates are produced regardless of correlation structure, and the possibility of bootstrapping subjects to correct confidence intervals is explored. Further discussion on this approach is found in Section  5.The transition rates for each group are of interest and are estimated as relative transition-type specific transition rates among the groups. Such estimation necessitates the inclusion of interactions of binary indicator variables for the transition-types and non-reference groups. In each of the previous two models discussed, main effects play a different role. In the multi-state survival model (stratified on transition-type), the interaction between group and transition-type essentially becomes the group indicator in that stratum, rendering the inclusion of the group main effect unnecessary, as well of course the main effect for transition-type. The baseline hazard acts as the referent group. However, in the Poisson regression, the model is not stratified and thus the main effects of group and transition-type are included to provide backing for the interaction terms. For instance, if the main-effects were omitted in the log-linear analysis, the effect for the design variable forg:hwould be the transition rate for groupgof transition-typehcompared to all other transition-types{1,…,h−1,h+1,…,H}for the reference group. That is, without stratification to restrict the comparison, the interaction effect alone is not fully transition-type specific.The analysis concerns modeling the association between sleep structure and sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) severity. SDB is a condition where the throat fully or partially collapses during sleep, causing a desaturation in blood oxygen levels. The desaturation is corrected through a sympathetic nervous system response dubbed “arousal” to re-open the airway. The arousal affects many systems, including the cardiovascular system, thus the naming of the Sleep Heart Health Study. SDB typically is categorized into 4 levels of severity: Absent, Mild, Moderate, and Severe corresponding to ranges of the respiratory disturbance index at 4% oxygen desaturation (rdi4p) of average events/hr: [0,5), [5,15), [15, 30), [30,∞). The SDB-Absent group will serve as the reference group.In the Sleep Heart Health Study, 6369 subjects had polysomnograms, and 5639 had polysomnograms of high enough quality to be reliably processed into 5-state hypnograms. Of the 5639, 5598 had complete demographic and covariate information (age, race, rdi4p, sex, and smoking status). For the 5-state resolution, all 20 possible transition-types were formulated into a Poisson regression format dataset (111,960 rows) and a multi-state survival model format (2,716,188 rows). For the 3-state resolution, all 6 possible transition-types were formulated into a Poisson regression format (33,588 rows) and a multi-state survival model format (728,966 rows).Fig. 3 depicts three hypnogram resolutions for one subject’s 10-epoch (5 min) portion of sleep, visualized with spaghetti plots. For populations of sleep hypnograms, visualizing several hypnogram trajectories in a spaghetti plot is prone to over-plotting. A lasagna plot, by contrast, is a heat map of a matrix where elementSijis the state occupied by theith subject at thejth epoch (Swihart et al., 2010). Therefore, a lasagna plot is a heatmap that displays clustered longitudinal data, with clusters in the rows and time in the columns and eliminates the overlapping of trajectories that plagues spaghetti plots. In addition, lasagna plots are capable of dynamic sorting. Fig. 4displays three lasagna plots for each of three different state resolutions for 5598 subjects over 1218 epochs (10 h, 9 min). The top panel for a given resolution is unsorted with respect to subjects. The middle panel shows the same lasagna plot where subjects are organized into the four SDB groups (in descending order of severity, for ease of interpretation) and within SDB group by total sleep time. The bottom panel is a within-column within-SDB-group sorting of the lasagna plot in the middle panel, which shows group-level temporal behavior. Note, as the legends of Fig. 4 collapse (from left to right) how much information is lost: Stage Slow-wave has well-defined peaks that alternate with REM across disease severity, and the prevalence of each group being in Stage 1 in the first epoch of sleep onset is decidedly over 50%, decreasing drastically and then stabilizing over the night.Another way to look at the sleep data is through empirical transition probabilities from one epoch to the next averaged every 10 min for 8 h (Fig. 5). Fig. 5(A) and (C) shows that the transition probabilities over the night look very similar across SDB severities. The plots on the diagonal in Fig. 5(B) compared to those off diagonal indicate that staying in a state once in a state are the higher probability occurrences. Also note that some transition-types occur rarely, such as 1S, RS, and S1 (Fig. 5(D)).A two-model analysis is conducted each on 3-state and 5-state resolution data. The two models are competitors, in a sense: the (stratified, recurrent event, competing risks) multi-state survival model stands to honor the sleep process better, but may be more computationally intensive than the Poisson regression via GEE. The application will show the Poisson regression gives computationally faster yet similar results. The two resolutions are competitors as well. If the 3-state analogues of the 5-state estimates reflect direction, magnitude, and significance of results then consideration could be given to using the 3-state resolution of sleep, as collapsing states did not obscure finer-level effects. In addition to comparing the analogues, the 5-state resolution transition-types with no 3-state analogue must also be analyzed for effects when deciding to use exclusively a lower resolution.For each transition-type, the 95% confidence intervals and point estimates of the relative rate ratios (RR) for the Poisson regression and hazard ratios (HR) for the multi-state survival model can be clustered as three vertical lines, left-to-right increasing in terms of SDB severity. The three lines represent the three comparisons of the risk of transition for increasingly severe SDB versus the referent SDB-absent group. Those clusters of three lines by transition-type can then be organized in plots with other clusters to give view of the modeled relationship of SDB on sleep itself.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
