@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Growth assay of individual pollen tubes arrayed by microchannel device

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We describe a new pollen tube growth assay using a microchannel device.The microchannel restricts the growth of the pollen tube to a single focal plane.The growth of each pollen tube can be observed under a microscope and quantified.This method might enable exploring the effects of signaling molecules on pollen tube.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Plant reproduction,Pollen tube,Torenia fournieri,PDMS,Microchip,Microchannel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To restrict pollen tube growth to a single focal plane is an important subject to enable their accurate growth analysis under microscopic observation. In the conventional method to assay pollen tube growth, the pollen tubes grow in a disorderly manner on solid medium, rendering it impossible to observe their growth in detail. Here, we present a new method to assay pollen tube growth using poly-dimethylsiloxane microchannel device to isolate individual pollen tubes. The growth of the pollen tube is confined to the microchannel and to the same focal plane, allowing accurate microscopic observations. This methodology has the potential for analyses of pollen tube growth in microfluidic environments in response to chemical products and signaling molecules, which paves the way for various experiments on plant reproduction.Sperm-carrying pollen tubes (PTs) penetrate surrounding tissues in a style to deliver gametes to egg cells in female tissues to achieve fertilization and initiate seed development. PT growth is achieved by finger shaped cellular protrusion that grows at its tip and is able to orient its growth direction following guidance cues. A pushing force for this invasive growth is generated by the internal turgor pressure [1]. Communication among female tissues and pollen tubes (PTs) also plays an essential role in plant reproduction because signals from female tissues guide the PTs to the egg cells to achieve fertilization. Recently, various secreted polypeptides have been reported to be involved in communication during PT–female tissue interactions [2]. For example, the defensin-like polypeptides, LUREs, were shown to be the PT attractants secreted from synergid cells [3]. However, there have been few quantitative studies on the mechanisms of PT growth and PT–female tissue communication. One of the major obstacles has been the difficulty in quantitatively analyzing PT growth. Conventional in vitro assays monitor PT growth on agar gel medium in Petri dishes; however, PTs grow in a disorderly manner in these conditions (Fig. 1A) [4]. In addition, the chemical environment that develops on agar plates allows spatial control only in the order of millimeters [5,6], which is far below the resolution required cellular-level studies. A new and widely applicable method that allows precise handling of both individual PTs and signaling molecules is required for quantitative studies on PT–female tissue communications during plant reproduction.Microfluidic-systems, typically fabricated using MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems) technology [7], have been used for various biological experiments at the cellular [8,9] and molecular level [10,11] taking advantage of miniaturization for handling small volume of liquids. A microfluidic system has much potential to further research on plant reproduction, since it allows precise handling of the PT itself, and also allows the development of a chemical environment at a high spatial resolution on a micrometer scale. Such a system also can be used to develop an environment that mimics the internal micro-environment of the pistil during in vivo PT growth. Considering those advantages, a microsystem-based assay was developed to study the attraction of PT to ovules in Arabidopsis thaliana[12]. In another study, a microfluidic network analysis was used to examine the growth response of PTs to various mechanical challenges [13] and the device was designed for experimentation and phenotyping of PTs [14]. However, those studies were conducted on scales of a few tens to hundreds of micrometers, which are far larger than the size of the PT itself. To observe the growth of PTs continuously and to precisely measure their growth rate, PTs must be isolated and confined to the same focal plane during microscopic observations.In this report, we describe a method to analyze growth of individual PTs confined to the same focal plane using a microchannel device. We developed a poly-dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microchannel device to isolate individual PTs and restrict the meandering in z-direction (Fig. 1B). We have adopted Torenia fournieri as a model plant because it enables us to perform live-imaging of the interaction between PT and female tissue. The design and dimensions of the microchannel device were optimized for handling individual PTs of T. fournieri, whose diameter is 8.6±0.8μm in our condition.The PDMS microchannel devices prepared in this study consisted of a buffer and style inlet, buffer outlets, micro-slits, and microchannels with widths ranging from 5 to 20μm on the same device (see Fig. S1 in Supplementary material). Thus, the device allows for growth assays of multiple PTs, even from the same sample, in parallel channels with various width. The heights of the channels varied from 5 to 20μm. The distance between the center of the style inlet and the entrance of the microchannels was 2mm. The microchannel devices were developed using the fabrication process described elsewhere [15]. Namely, the negative master for the molding of PDMS was fabricated on a silicon wafer with an ultrathick photoresist (SU-8 3005 and SU-8 3010, Microchem Corp., Newton, MA, USA). The prepolymer of PDMS (Sylgard® 184, Dow Corning, Midland, MI) was cast onto the master, which had a frame to hold the prepolymer in place. The prepolymer was degassed in the vacuum chamber for more than 20min. After 90min incubation at 65°C, the cured PDMS was peeled off from the master, and the through-holes for style and buffer inlets (1.5mm in diameter) were punched out manually.The experimental protocols were as follows: First, the PDMS microchannel device was placed in the middle of a glass-bottomed dish. The dish was kept moist at room temperature throughout the assay. Second, after degassing the device in a vacuum chamber at 10kPa for at least 40min, 20μL modified Nitsch’s Medium [16] was injected from the style inlet to fill all the channels via the power-free pumping mechanism of the PDMS microchannel device [15]. Third, a hand-pollinated style of T. fournieri Lind. ‘Crown Violet’, cut to a length of 1cm, was directly set in the style inlet of the device. The PTs grew and passed through the style after the pollination, and appears from the other side of the style in the microchannel device. The growth experiments were conducted under no-flow condition. Finally, at approximately 4h after pollination, the PTs entered the microchannels and were observed by bright field microscopy on an inverted platform. To determine the measured rates in this experimental condition, an image of the growing PTs was captured every 30s using a CCD camera mounted on the microscope.The protocol using liquid media allowed for successful assays of PT growth in the channels with dimensions comparable to those of a single PT. PTs were isolated and straightened while they grew in the microchannels (Supplementary material 2). We also observed PTs entering channels less than 8-μm high, even though the diameter of PT tip is 8.6±0.8μm. The PTs were able to squeeze into the channels less than 8-μm wide. In those conditions, even though PTs were deformed and stressed by the channel to some extent, they did not stop growing, nor did their tips rupture. Similar phenomena were observed with Camellia japonica PTs that they passed through the gap narrower than their diameter by changing cell shape [17]. Thus, this protocol using liquid medium allows for growth assays of individual PTs by separating them among PDMS microchannels. The appropriate range of channel dimensions to assay growth of a single PT was defined by the height and width allowing entry of one PT. We investigated PT behavior depending on channel height, and then PT behavior depending on channel width. When the channel was less than 5-μm high, a single PT could not enter it. More than two PTs entered the channel higher than 12μm (Fig. 2A). When the channel width was less than 5μm, a PT could not enter the channel, while more than two PTs could enter the channel wider than 12μm (Fig. 2B). Therefore, the appropriate channel height, and also the width, for a single PT observation were determined to be between 5 and 12μm.For more detailed investigations, PTs must be tightly confined vertically so that the growth proceeds in the same focal plane. Even a slight vertical displacement at the micrometer scale causes defocusing during microscopic observation. Within the range of appropriate channel heights, measured value of PT growth rates (hereinafter measured rates) were plotted against channel height to determine the “ideal height” of the channel for further quantitative growth analysis (Fig. 3A). The measured rates were highest, around 50μm/min, in channels between 8 and 10-μm high. The measured rates decrease with channel height at the range higher than 10μm. Our previous study reported measured rate of 16.3±2.5μm/min (n=10) in microchannels of 100-μm high and 100–1000-μm wide [18]. These results might be explained by both reduction of growth rate and the underestimation of the growth rates in the liquid environment caused by the meandering of PTs in z-direction. In channels less than 8-μm high, the measured rates were also lower. This may be caused by the spatial confinement as well as the lack of the nutrients since smaller PT’s surface area contacts with the surrounding medium. Thus, the “ideal height” the microchannel to assay growth of a single PT was determined to be between 8 and 10μm. Measured rates of pollen tubes did not appear to depend on microchannel width (Fig. 3B). This is because their horizontal meandering restricted on the focal plane is relatively easy to trace during microscopic observation.We also compared the newly developed “on-chip” method with a conventional “off-chip” method. The “off-chip” condition was prepared by placing the modified Nitsch’s Medium on the glass surface in a Petri dish. After the pollination, a pistil was immersed in the liquid medium. Approximately 4h after the pollination, we observed the PTs emerging from the pistil, which kept growing in the liquid medium (Supplementary material 3). An image of the growing PTs was captured every 30s using a CCD camera to determine the measured rates in this method. Then, the measured rates were obtained by measuring the displacement of the tips of the PTs from the series of images. The measured rates were compared between the off-chip liquid medium assay and the newly developed method with microchannels 7.5–10-μm high and 8–12-μm wide. The measured rates obtained by the microchannel method was 50.2±9.6μm/min (n=16), which was higher than that determined using the conventional off-chip in vitro method (19.8±5.3μm/min; n=10). This large difference in measured rates is not surprising because the in vivo growth rate in pistil was about 40μm/min estimated from the time for PTs to come out from a pistil cut into 1cm length after the pollination; this is also consistent with the previous report [19]. One of the major reasons for this difference is that PTs were able to grow straight in the microchannel. In contrast, the PTs tended to grow randomly in both horizontal and vertical directions in the liquid medium. This might have caused an underestimation of the measured rate by the conventional method in the liquid medium. The newly developed method using the microchannel device eliminates this problem, allowing measurement of the growth rate close to the in vivo environment.In conclusion, we present a new method to assay PT growth using a microchannel device. This method allows precise analysis of PT growth by isolating individual PTs confining their growth to the same focal plane, allowing for accurate visualization under a microscope. The ideal height of the channel for microscopic analysis of PT growth was 8–10μm and the appropriate width of the channel for single PT isolation was 5–12μm, for the PTs of T. fournieri. This method is applicable to other species once the channel dimensions are customized. Recently, oscillatory growth dynamics of Camellia PTs were studied in microfluidic environment [20]. Camellia PT growth analysis in microfluidic platform revealed that PTs do not have a directional memory in contrast to other tip-growing cells, which is a novel finding in terms of pollen biology [14]. Those platforms might pave the way for large-scale phenotyping of tip-growing cells under precisely controlled, reproducible conditions. PDMS-based microfluidic devices can be used to analyze the effects of various biochemical materials, including signaling molecules, and are highly compatible with single molecule techniques [21,22]. This is a great advantage considering future PT–female tissue communication studies since the signaling molecules, which guide PTs to female gametophyte, extracted from synergid cells are already identified and both PTs and the signaling molecules are ready to use on microfluidic platform. For instance, the use of T-channel design will allow PTs to grow towards either ‘left’ or ‘right’. By introducing chemical products or signaling molecules from either side, we can observe if the PTs respond to those signals and grow towards the particular channel side. If the potential of this method is fully realized, it may open new possibilities and serve as a powerful tool for research on plant reproduction, especially research on aspects of PT–female tissue communication.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
