@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An unsupervised acoustic fall detection system using source separation for sound interference suppression

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A data description method is applied to detect falls by collected acoustic signals (footstep sound signals) from normal activities.A spectral subtraction based binaural dereverberation method is applied to reduce the sound reverberation for pre-processing.A time-frequency (TF) mask based blind source separation technique is applied to separate the sound signal with the interferences of noises.One class support vector machine method is employed for the data description of the Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient features to distinguish fall and non-fall sounds.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health care,Fall detection,Unsupervised classification,Source separation,Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient,One class support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a novel unsupervised fall detection system that employs the collected acoustic signals (footstep sound signals) from an elderly person׳s normal activities to construct a data description model to distinguish falls from non-falls. The measured acoustic signals are initially processed with a source separation (SS) technique to remove the possible interferences from other background sound sources. Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient (MFCC) features are next extracted from the processed signals and used to construct a data description model based on a one class support vector machine (OCSVM) method, which is finally applied to distinguish fall from non-fall sounds. Experiments on a recorded dataset confirm that our proposed fall detection system can achieve better performance, especially with high level of interference from other sound sources, as compared with existing single microphone based methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently, there is an increase in aging population across the globe particularly in developed countries. As presented in Carone and Costello [5], the ratio between the number of 65+ people to those between 15 and 64 in the European Union (EU) is projected to double to 54% by 2050 and the topic of home care for elderly people is receiving increasing attention as a consequence. Within the field of health care for elderly people, one important issue is to detect whether an elderly person has fallen or not [9]. As shown in Hsieh et al. [9], falls can cause problems for an elderly person physiologically, such as broken bones, connective and soft tissue damage, even death; although some falls do not result in physical injuries, the elderly people who fall cannot get up without assistance and this period of time spent immobile also affects their health. Due to the serious damage which can be inflicted by falls to elderly people, detection of falls is an important aspect of assisted living. Instead of assigning nurses to monitor whether elderly people fall or not in their homes in a 24/7 manner, an automatic fall detection method is required, which will detect a fall event when it happens so that alarm signals will be sent to certain caregivers (such as hospitals, health centers or relatives) to provide assistance to the elderly person.Different methods have been proposed for detecting falling activities in recent years. Karantonis et al. [10] proposed a real-time classification system for the types of human movement associated with the data acquired from a single, waist-mounted, triaxial accelerometer unit. In their approach, acceleration signals generated due to gravity and body motion were sampled and processed by certain types of digital filters, and a hierarchical binary structure classifier was then applied on the processed data for classifying different types of movements and detecting falls based on a second-by-second decision process. This system was able to distinguish between periods of activity and rest; recognize the postural orientation of the wearer; and detect events such as walking and falling. According to their experimental results, a fall detection rate of 95.6% was obtained. Instead of fixing the accelerometer at the waist position, Kangas et al. [21] tested the performance of a triaxial accelerometer attached to the subject׳s body in different positions: head, waist and wrist to detect fall activities. The acceleration information measured by the accelerometer in different positions was compared with an appropriate threshold to determine a fall. The results showed that fall detection using a triaxial accelerometer worn at the waist or head together with a simple threshold-based algorithm is efficient, with a sensitivity of 97–98% and a specificity of 100%. Acceleration sensors can be used with other devices to achieve a comprehensive fall detection system, in Estudillo-Valderrama [6], a low-power waterproof biocompatible accelerometer smart sensor (ACSS) was applied and an additional user interface module was integrated in the second layer (denoted as personal server (PSE) in this paper) to allow the elderly person to access some of the most important data being processed; from the algorithm aspect, an additional time analysis was used by convolving the resulting acceleration data segment with certain defined waveforms, to detect some problematic fall events such as a knee fall. A total of 332 samples of fall and non-fall activities simulated by 31 young and healthy males and females were tested, 100% sensitivity and 95.68% specificity were obtained and a further reduction of false positives can be obtained by manually canceling the fall alarm through the user interface.Due to advances in computer vision and camera/video and image processing techniques, camera sensor based computer vision methods were also widely applied to detect falls. Some computer vision methods extract video features from the recorded image sequences and the feature values are compared with a certain threshold to determine whether a fall happens or not. Miaou et al. [24,25] proposed a detection system consisting of an omni-dimensional camera and a computer server, which had the advantage of capturing 360° simultaneously in a single shot to remove blind spots. In this approach, a clean background was first obtained. After that, the foreground of interest was obtained by subtracting the background model from the current image and a rectangle enclosing the foreground object was created. The height to width ratio of this rectangle was taken as a feature and compared with a particular threshold to detect falls. The threshold value in this system was customizable depending on the personal physique. The experimental results showed a detection rate of 78% without personal information that increased to 90% with personal information. Rougier et al. [31] proposed a fall detection system based on the motion history image and some changes in the shape of the person. The movement amplitude was measured by the motion history image (MHI) obtained from the frame differencing results and when a large amplitude movement was detected, the shape change feature (such as the changes of the aspect ratio and the orientation angle of the fitted ellipse) was compared with proper thresholds for fall detection. The threshold values were chosen empirically and the experimental results showed a good rate of fall detection with a sensitivity of 88%, and an acceptable rate of false detection with a specificity of 87.5% was obtained, assuming a fixed threshold. Instead of 2D features, some 3D features can be extracted and compared with proper thresholds for fall detection. Auvinet et al. [2] applied calibrated cameras to reconstruct the three-dimensional shape of a person and fall events were detected by analyzing the vertical axis׳s volume distribution. When the major part of this distribution was abnormally near the floor over a predefined period of time, it is implied that a person had fallen on the floor and an alarm was triggered. The experimental results showed good performance of this system (achieving 99.7% fall detection rate or better with four cameras or more) and a graphic processing unit (GPU) was applied for efficient computation. Considering that sometimes the Euclidean distance between extracted features may not reflect the real semantic similarity between images, Yu et al. [37] propose a novel semantic preserving distance metric learning (SP-DML) algorithm to encode the visual features and semantic contents in a new distance metric construction. The new distance metric could be applied to measure the dissimilarity between two images in a more accurate way by integrating the semantic contents.Extracted features could also be applied together with a classifier, to classify falls/non-fall activities. Mirmahboub et al. [26] proposed a view-invariant fall detection system by using a single camera. The silhouette area extracted by background subtraction combined with inclination angle was extracted from a video sequence as features. And these were then fed into a support vector machine (SVM) for classifying fall activities and non-fall activities. Different kernels were tested in this work and the experimental results on a public dataset showed that the polynomial kernel of second degree can achieve the best performance with 100% fall detection rate and less than 1% of mistaking non-fall activities as falls. Yu et al. [39] extracted ellipse features and projection histogram features from postures obtained from background subtraction results, and the obtained features were applied to construct a directed acyclic graph support vector machine (DAGSVM) classifier to classify four different types of postures (stand, bend, sit and lie). The classification results, together with the floor region detected during a floor detection phase, were applied to detect falls. The fall detection system was tested on a dataset of 15 people, a high fall detection rate (97.08%) and very low false detection rate (0.8%) were achieved.We need to notice that it is not always easy to label all the training features for the classifier construction; in order to solve the problem, Yu et al. [38] propose an adaptive hypergraph learning method. The proposed method inherits the advantage of the traditional hypergraph learning method as in Zhou et al. [40], which models the high-order relationship among samples. Besides, compared with the traditional hypergraph learning method, an improved hypergraph construction approach is adopted in Yu et al. [38] by varying the size of the neighborhood for multiple hyperedges construction. And both the labels of unlabeled training samples and the weights of hyperedges could be learned in a simultaneous way to improve the classification performance. Sometimes, multiview features (different types of features such as color, shape, and texture) may be available to be exploited. Liu and Tao [17] and Liu et al. [18] exploit multiple type features for image annotation application by multiview Hessian regularization (mHR)/multiview Hessian discriminative sparse coding (mHDSC) methods respectively, which effectively solve the poor generalization performance problem of the traditional Laplacian regularization (LR) method designed for a particular type of single view features. Yu et al. [36] propose a novel high-order distance-based multiview stochastic learning (HD-MSL) method, which combines multiple types of features into a unified representation and integrates the labeling information based on a probabilistic framework. The proposed HD-MSL method can automatically learn a combination coefficient of different types of features, which can exploit complementary information and by the aid of the alternative optimization, the classification scores are obtained simultaneously. The experimental results presented the effectiveness of the HD-MSL method compared with other state-of-the-art ones with much higher classification accuracy. In summary, the methods in Yu et al. [38], Liu and Tao [17], Liu et al. [18] and Yu et al. [36] have potentials to be applied for building up a more efficient classifier for classifying falls/non-fall activities from multiview, partly labeled features.For the accelerometer sensor based method, there is a need for the elderly person to wear the accelerometer sensor so that it is both obtrusive and inconvenient. For the computer vision based method, there is a privacy issue due to the fact that the daily life of an elderly person is recorded by a camera, but this is unlikely to deter an elderly person using the system if it preserves their independence. Besides, change in a room environment, such as the movement of furniture and illumination change, will affect the performance of the computer vision based method. In order to overcome these limitations, the acoustic sensors (microphones) could be applied and we therefore propose a novel fall detection system based on acoustic sensors in this work. Compared with other related acoustic sensor(s) based methods, our proposed technique is more robust to background acoustic noises because a novel SS technique removes the possible interferences from other sound sources by using only two microphones. Considering the difficulty to obtain the actual falling sounds to build up the supervised two class classifier, in our proposed method, only non-fall sounds from normal activities are applied to build a data description model, which can effectively distinguish falling or non-fall sounds. The organization of this paper is as follows: Section 2 gives a brief overview of the proposed acoustic sensor based fall detection system and other related work; the implementation details of this proposed fall detection system are given in Section 3. Section 4 describes the evaluation of the proposed fall detection system and the final discussions and conclusions are provided in Sections 5 and 6.In order to overcome the limitations of the accelerometer based methods and computer vision based methods, some researchers use acoustic sensors (microphones) to detect falls based on the acquired audio signal. In Zigel et al. [41], a fall detection system based on a floor vibration sensor and a microphone was proposed; the vibration and sound signals were obtained from the hardware equipment and temporal and spectral features were extracted from the resulting signals. Bayes׳ classifier was then applied to classify fall and non-fall activities based on the extracted features. In their work, a doll which mimicked a human was used to simulate falls and their system detected such falls with a fall detection rate of 97.5% and a false detection rate of 1.4%. In Li et al. [16] an acoustic fall detection system was developed, which automatically detected a fall and reported it to the caregiver. The study used an 8-microphone circular array which provided a better 3-D estimation of the sound location by using the steered response power with the phase transform (SRP-PHAT) algorithm Mungamuru and Aarabi [27], and the sound signal was then enhanced by a beamforming technique with the aid of the resulting location information. Mel frequency cepstral coefficient (MFCC) features were extracted from the enhanced sound signal and the kth nearest neighbor method was applied to discriminate a fall from a non-fall activity. A pilot experiment on a dataset containing 30 fall activities and 120 non-fall activities was performed, all the falls were detected and only six non-fall activities were taken as fall activities. An improvement of Li et al. [16] was proposed in Li et al. [15] by introducing height information for the sound source estimated by an eight-microphone array; if a sound source׳s height was larger than a particular threshold, then it was unlikely to be a fall. In this way, the false alarms due to background noise were reduced to a large extent. A larger dataset which contained 120 simulated fall sounds and 120 simulated non-fall sounds generated by three stunt actors was used for evaluation. A good performance was obtained with 100% fall detection rate and 3% false detection rate. In order to solve the problem that it is not easy to obtain realistic fall sound for training, a one class classifier technique was proposed in Popescu and Mahnot [29] using only the non-fall sound recorded from a single microphone for one class classifier construction. The sound signals were initially pre-processed by a Wiener filter for noise removal and the extracted MFCC features were then used to build the corresponding classifiers. In this work, three types of one class classifier: nearest neighbor classifier, the one class support vector machine classifier and mixture of Gaussian classifier were tested. From the preliminary results, it was found that the fall detection results achieved by the three one class classifiers were comparable with those by using the popular two-class support vector machine in terms of the ROC curve analysis.A new acoustic sensors based fall detection method is proposed in our work, which applies a novel SS technique to remove background noises; besides, the one class support vector machine (OCSVM) technique is applied and only the MFCC features from non-fall sounds are applied to construct the OCSVM data description model to distinguish falling/non-fall sounds. The block diagram of the proposed two-microphone based fall detection system is shown in Fig. 1; initially, an elderly person undertakes normal activities in a room environment and the generated acoustic signals (footstep sounds) are collected. The system is targeted at the situation where a single person lives alone and interference by pets is beyond the scope of this study. For each sequence of the collected acoustic signal, the method in Loesch and Yang [19] is applied to estimate the number of sound sources. If the estimated number of sound sources is larger than one, which implies the acoustic signal is mixed with some interference (such as a mixture of footstep sounds and TV sounds), the SS technique proposed in Khan et al. [12] is applied to separate the mixed acoustic signals to obtain the individual signal coming from each source. Moreover, the position of each sound source is also estimated, which can be taken as a cue to determine the interferences (such as the most common TV interference in a real home environment as mentioned in [41]) and can be reinforced by the fact that the prior position knowledge of an interference source (usually the TV position is fixed and can be obtained in a real home environment). The MFCC features Ganchev et al. [7] corresponding to the non-interference acoustic signals are next extracted and applied to construct a data description model based on a one class support vector machine (OCSVM) technique. This constructed OCSVM normal model is finally applied to distinguish normal sounds (footstep sounds generated by normal activities) from abnormal sounds (falling sounds).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
