@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of seal wear with thermal–structural coupled finite element method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A thermal–structural coupled finite element method for wear prediction of seal.A mesh reconstruction strategy for reflecting the evolution of geometry of seal caused by wear.Thermal behavior coupled with structural analysis in comprehensive FE model.Sealing force is chosen as the criterion to evaluate the performance of seal.O-seals are more suitable for low-fluid-pressure and high-speed environment than R-seals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
O-seal,R-seal,Wear,Thermal–structural coupled simulation,FE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a thermal–structural coupled finite element analysis method for wear prediction of seal is proposed. The methodology is built with iterative wear prediction procedure in which the geometry of the contact interface is progressively changed according to the wear model. To perform finite element simulation of wear process, a novel mesh reconstruction strategy to reflect the evolution of geometry caused by the wear is presented. Considering that friction heat in the sealing area normally has important effects on wear process, thermal behavior of wear process analysis is carried out and the friction heat flux density is calculated as one of the boundary conditions in each wear simulation circle. Two kinds of seals, namely O-shape seal (O-ring) and rectangular-section seal (R-ring), are investigated in this paper. As the sealing force is important for seals to evaluate the sealing capability, the effect of wear is reflected through the change of sealing force. The numerical results supply a suggestion for the applications of both seals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In hydraulic systems, seals may contact directly with a moving components due to high extrusion force of the fluid. Wear will be one of the most important factors which essentially affects the lifetime of the seals. In addition, material removal of the seals will decrease the contact pressure in the sealing area and the leakage will be increased in the same time. Extent leakage is able to lead to the failure of the entire hydraulic system, even safety problems sometimes. Thus, a comprehension of the wear evolution of the seals and its effect on the change of the sealing pressure can be useful for the designers.Standard pin-on-disc experiment is widely applied to investigate the wear of the materials. As the boundary and initial conditions can be highly different in different cases even for the same material, pin-on-disc experiment is not satisfactory for wear prediction of the seals in designing phase. A full-scale experiment is sometimes applied to simulate the true operating conditions to predict the wear of the seals precisely. However, much time and much money are needed for this kind of experiments.Numerical simulation methods have gradually replaced the position of the experimental methods because the former is able to overcome the shortcomings of the latter. For example, numerical simulation methods assist to investigate the effect of the wear on the contact pressure and the deformation of the seals which are hardly obtained through experimental methods. In addition, numerical simulations can be applied for parametric investigation if validated by the reliable experiment. More similar complicated problems can be predicted through the verified numerical methods.Many numerical methods have been developed to simulate the wear process. Among them finite element technology is a popular method. An FE simulation was applied to model the wear behavior of metals and ceramics by Podra and Andersson [1]. The process of the particle removed from the steel when the steel sliding on a rough surface was investigated by Balogh [2] and Eleod [3]. A wear of pin-pivot oscillating contact was investigated by Mukras et al. [4]. The wear process of the disc brake system was studied by Sorderberg and Andersson [5]. Theoretical analysis combined with FE model was proposed by Salib et al. [6]. The model was simplified as spherical contact in this research. Ashraf et al. [7] modeled the wear process of the rear view mirror. A wear procession of the aircraft clutch was simulated by Zhao et al. [8]. The wear processes of some composite materials were studied. The friction and wear behaviors of polymer composite materials were studied through FE models by Goda et al. [9]. Teoh et al. [10] studied the wear process of a polyethylene cup of hip prosthesis.The researches mentioned above focused on the wear simulation of hard materials. However, there is a limitation: only the element layer of the surface can be worn. The accuracy of FE simulation method is not severely influenced for hard materials because a little loss of the hard materials is able to lead to the huge variation of the contact area and the pressure distribution. But for soft materials such as rubber, the loss of the top material in micrometer magnitude cannot influence the contact condition obviously for its hyperelastic property. The wear volume which leads to the failure of the rubber material is much more than that of the steel. Therefore, only the top layer of the elements worn in FE model cannot satisfy the need for the simulation of the rubber. One way to solve this problem is to increase the size of the elements on the top layer. But the accuracy will be decreased in the same time. Some other methods combined with FE models are given in [11]. However, the model is limited to a theoretical model. No specified operating conditions are considered. In addition, as the seals used in the hydraulic systems may contact with the shaft which rotates in a high speed, the effect of friction heat on the wear cannot be neglected.As the sealing force is a criterion that is always applied to evaluate the capability of the seals, the prediction of the effect of wear on the sealing force for the seals which contact with a rotating shaft in the hydraulic system is the goal of this paper. Since the material of the seals is traditionally defined as rubber, a strategy that is able to simulate the wear process of soft materials without the limitation of the size of the elements is presented in this paper. In addition, the pressure and the temperature of the hydraulic oil are also incorporated in boundary conditions to model the real operating environment. Considering that friction heat normally has important effects on wear process under high speed rotation situation, another contribution of this paper is to employ thermal–structural coupled analysis into seal׳s wear prediction.The subject of this paper focuses on the rotating sealing system. In the rotating sealing system, O-seal and R-seal are commonly used. Thus, these two kinds of seals are the research objects in this paper.Fig. 1 shows a typical geometry of a common rotating sealing structure using O-shape and R-shape seals. The seal is installed in the slot in the chamber and fixed with the chamber while the shaft rotates independently. There is a relative motion in the area where the seal contacts with the shaft. The function of the seal is to prevent the flowing of the fluid on both sides of the seal.According to the geometric model of sealing system, a finite element model of this structure is built. In this paper, the material of the chamber and the shaft is set as steel while the material of the seals is selected as rubber. Since rubber is a kind of hyperelastic material, hyperelastic element is adopted for the seals in the FE model. As the elastic modulus of the steel is much bigger than that of the rubber, the deformation of the chamber and the shaft is ignored. It means that both the chamber and the shaft can be treated as rigid bodies in our finite element model. Therefore, the profiles of the chamber and the shaft will be taken as constraints on the boundary of the seals.Besides, in order to save the computing cost, considering the symmetrical feature of the sealing systems shown in Fig. 1, only half of the 2D finite element model is needed. Asymmetrical meshing strategy is adopted when meshing the domain of the seal. As mentioned above, there is a relative motion between the seal and the shaft. So the wear of the seal mainly occurs on this area. In order to simulate the wear behavior of the seal precisely and reduce the computing time, the area where the seal contacts with the shaft is densely meshed while the other area of the seal is coarsely meshed because there is no relative motion and the wear cannot be considered.The FE models of O-seal and R-seal are given inFig. 2. The aim of the structural analysis is to obtain the contact pressure distribution. Thus, analysis type for this model is static mechanics. In order to compare the wear behavior of the two kinds of seals, the geometries of the two models are set with the same values.In reality, deformation often occurs when the seal is installed in the slot. But the deformation cannot be pre-calculated in the FE model. So the pre-compression effect is not included in the FE model but will be accomplished in the following step.Considering the true working conditions, there is fluid scattering in the outer and inner of sides the chamber. Therefore, both sides of the seal contact directly with the fluid. That means the pressure of the fluid will be acted on the seal. The left side of the seal is assumed to bear the pressure from the inner side fluid while the right side of the seal bears the pressure from the outer side and the pressure from inner side is supposed to be higher than the outer side in this study.To sum up, the nodal contact pressure distribution can be obtained through two steps. The compression of the seal is accomplished in the first step. The height of the slot is set as Dsand the height of the clearance between the chamber and the shaft is set as Δ. The sectional diameter of O-seal is marked with ΦOand the sectional width and the height of R-seal are marked with WRand HR, respectively. Both the horizontal and vertical freedom degrees of the boundary of the shaft are fixed and only the horizontal freedom degree of the boundary of the chamber is fixed. A y-displacement dh(dh=ΦO−Ds−Δ for O-seal and dh=HR−Ds−Δ for R-seal) is applied on the boundary of the chamber to achieve the required compression.The effect of the fluid pressure is taken into account in the second step. As mentioned above, the left side of the seal is assumed to bear a higher pressure. Supposing that the seal will be compressed to right wall of the slot due to the higher pressure from left side and the fluid on the right side can rarely contact with the seal, only the left-side pressure is applied. When the seal is deformed, part of the left side of the seal contact with the fluid directly which is marked with red curves in Fig. 2. Therefore, the fluid pressure Pfluidis set at the nodes on the red line in the horizontal direction. In the meantime, both the horizontal and the vertical freedom degrees of the shaft and the chamber are constrained.The influence to the wear of the seal caused by the friction heat in the sealing area cannot be neglected when the shafts rotates with a high speed. The circumferential shear stress at node i on the seal׳s surface can be given as(1)τi=fpiwhere f is the friction coefficient, piis the normal nodal pressure.In high speed rotating sealing system, the friction heat will affect the wear of the seal while the loss of the material will affect the pressure in the contact area and the friction heat will be influenced in return. Coupled effect of the thermal and structural stress is required to analyze the wear behavior of the seal considering friction heat. It is a complicated coupled problem. Recently, some researchers have adopted the method that the thermal effect and structural effect are independently analyzed for this subject [12–14]. So this method is also applied in this work. The heat flux density at node i on the surface of the seal can be expressed as(2)qi=ψτiv=ψfpivwhere ψ is the percentage of transition from mechanical work to friction heat, v is the relative circumferential speed. According to Ref. [15], the friction heat can be thought to be completely transformed, it means ψ=1.0.Fig. 3 shows the thermal analysis model of O-shape seal and R-shape seal with finite element method respectively. The aim of these models is to obtain the evolution of temperature distribution in the seals. A transient analysis is needed here. Deformation is calculated as introduced above before thermal boundary conditions are set. It is more close to real situation that set thermal boundary conditions on the deformed finite element model. Steady-state boundary conditions are set on the non-sealing area (green curves in Fig. 3). It is assumed that the fluid on both sides of the seal and the chamber are in thermal equilibrium state and their temperatures are treated as the same value, Tfluid. The value of Tfluidkeeps independent of time. The heat flux density of the friction heat is applied on the sealing area (red lines in Fig. 3) and it varies with time. The heat flux density at each node on the contact area can be written as the following according to Eq. (2):(3)q(u,t)=fp(u,t)vu is the coordinate of the nodes which contact with the shaft.Though the thermal conduction coefficient of the steel is several orders of magnitudes bigger than that of the rubber, the thermal expansion coefficient of the rubber is several orders of magnitudes greater than that of the steel. Thus, the effect of thermal deformation of the seal cannot be ignored. It should be noted that though the thermal conduction coefficient and thermal expansion coefficient of both materials vary with the temperature, the variation stays in a small extent because the friction heat is not much enough to change the environmental temperature greatly. Thus, both of the two parameters are thought to be independent of temperature. In addition, as the volume of the shaft is much bigger than that of the seal, the expansion of the shaft is neglected. But most part of the friction heat dissipates through the shaft for its high thermal conduction coefficient. Thus, only the thermal conduction within the seal is treated. The heat flux density accepted by the seal in the sealing area is approximately krubber/ksteelof the total value. So the boundary condition in the sealing region qsealcan be calculated as(4)qseal(ucontact,t)≈krubberksteelq(ucontact,t)In addition, the initial condition is given as(5)T(u,t=0)=TfluidThe change of temperature will lead to linear expansion of the seal. The strain caused by thermal deformation can be taken as initial strain set on the finite element model. For 2D model the initial strain can be given as(6)ε0=α(T−T0)[110]'where α is the thermal expansion coefficient, T0 is the initial temperature, T is the transient temperature.In the present work, Archard׳s wear model is applied to calculate the local wear rate at each node:(7)dV=KHF×dLwhere dV is the lost of volume, dL is the sliding distance, K is the dimensionless wear coefficient, H is the hardness of the softer material and F the normal force. If kH=K/H is defined as the wear coefficient and both sides of Eq. (7) are divided by the contact area s, the wear depth can be written as(8)dh=kHPv×dtwhere the sliding distance dL is expressed as the product of the sliding velocity v and the time increment dt.Mesh reconstruction is a key technique to realize wear process simulation with finite element method. Though global remeshing strategy proposed by Nandor Bekesi [16] can be used to simulate the wear process of the seal, the whole domain needs to be remeshed. Once the worn profile owns some sharp corners which are generated due to the movement of the profile points, the remeshing work will be more complicated. Killing elements strategy is more suitable for finite element analysis software. If the contact pressures in the elements exceed the pre-defined threshold, these elements will be ‘killed’. However, the wear depth is limited by the size of the contact elements. Only the wear process whose wear depth is larger than the size of the contact elements can be simulated. To overcome this restriction, in the current work, not only the contact elements are remeshed but also the elements adjacent to them can be remeshed by the wear processor, if required.Mesh distribution of the seals when the seals have been compressed is shown inFig. 4. After being compressed, the elements near the sealing area are quadrangles. Since the wear only occurs in the elements near the sealing area, the proposed remeshing method is applied to the elements in this region.The presented remeshing strategy is demonstrated inFig. 5. In this figure, domain of the seal contacts with the surface of the shaft. One of the contact elements and its neighboring elements are chosen as an example. Node N1 is moved based on the increment wear process. The wear depth of N1 equals to h1 after some iterations. H1−2 is defined as initial vertical distance between N1 and N2. The current vertical distanceH1−2cbecomes the following:(9)H1−2c=H1−2−dh1H1−2preis defined as the critical vertical distance between N1 and N2. OnceH1−2cis not more thanH1−2pre, the relative position of N1 and N2 is fixed with the vertical distanceH1−2preand the wear processor moves node N2 to N3. By moving N2, the current vertical distance of N2 and N3H2−3cbecomes:(10)H2−3c=H2−3−dh2In this equation, H2−3 is the initial vertical distance between N2 and N3. dh2 is the vertical displacement of N2. Similar to node N1,H2−3preis defined as the critical vertical distance between N2 and N3. OnceH2−3cis not more thanH2−3pre, the relative position of N2 and N3 is fixed with the vertical distanceH2−3preand the wear processor moves node N3 to N4. Here, dh2 is the difference of dh1 andH1−2prethat can be given as dh2=dh1−H1−2pre. So the current vertical distanceH2−3ccan be expressed as(11)H2−3c=H1−2pre+H2−3−dh1Repeat the process and the wear depth can be expanded to any number of layers of elements in the proximity of the contact region. More generally, the vertical distance between node Ni and Ni+1 can be written with a similar way:(12)Hi−(i+1)c={Hi−(i+1),dh1≤∑n=1i−1Hn−(n+1)preHi−(i+1)pre,dh1≥∑n=1iHn−(n+1)pre∑n=1i−1Hn−(n+1)pre+Hi−(i+1)−dh1,∑n=1i−1Hn−(n+1)pre<dh1<∑n=1iHn−(n+1)preTo avoid the excessive thinning element which may lead to the divergence of the simulation, the value ofHn−(n+1)preshould be pre-defined. As the size of the elements in the densely meshed region is similar,Hn−(n+1)precan be defined with the same value. The value ofHn−(n+1)prein this paper is specified as one third of the size of the elements in the densely meshed region.With this method, the wear depth of the simulation process is no longer limited by the size of the contact elements. Besides, a safe aspect ratio can be ensured for these contact elements through this way. The value of total wear depth can be bigger than the size of the contact elements. The worn effect for both seals is displayed inFig. 6. The initial profile is marked as ‘Before’ while the worn profile at t=3min is marked as ‘After’. The structural boundary conditions introduced before are applied.In general, wear phenomenon is a continuous process. However, in order to simulate the process with a numerical method, the continuous material removal in time needs to be approximated at a discrete set of time. Iterative mechanism is widely used in the subject of wear analysis and simulation. In our approach, the geometry of seal is updated at each iteration to reflect the evolution caused by the wear. At each iteration, a cycle of entirely coupled thermal–structural simulation analysis is carried out. The flowchart of analysis and simulation process is shown inFig. 7. One cycle of the simulation process contains four main tasks, namely initial contact analysis, thermal analysis, comprehensive contact analysis and wear simulation.A pre-compressed FE model is built in the first task. The seal is compressed on the surface of the shaft in the first step to simulate the radial compression. The axial load is set on the left surface of the seal in the second step to simulate the pressure distribution of the fluid.According to the contact pressure distribution determined in the first task, a transient thermal FE analysis is carried out in the second task. The effect of friction heat on each node is calculated in the third task and the heat flux density of the contact nodes are applied as one of the boundary conditions in the thermal FE model of the seals. The temperature of the fluid is assumed as the initial condition of the entire model at the beginning of the simulation. The initial temperature distribution in the following cycles can be obtained from the result of the previous thermal simulation.In the third task, another FE contact model which takes into account the effect of thermal expansion is performed. The nodal wear depths can be calculated from Eq. (8) in the last task of the cycle. Once the wear depth at each node is known, we move the nodes to their new positions based on the remeshing strategy mentioned above.The purpose for calculating the worn volume of the seals is to determine the time increments which will be used in the simulation process. The computational results of the time increments are compared with the experimental data which will be introduced in the following section and the optimal time increments will be adopted for both seals.The wear volume can be calculated through the following way. The wear on each section is absolutely the same if the gravity influence is neglected. We can suppose that if the seals are cut off and stretched, the worn volume can be seen as columns. So the worn volume can be calculated through the column volume formula.The geometry models for the calculation of the worn volume are displayed inFig. 8 where r represents the inner radius of the seals. The height of the columns can be approximately replaced by the circumference of the inner circle. Since the worn section is irregular, an approach based on the FE nodes is proposed to calculate the area of the worn region approximately. Only the changes of the positions of the contact nodes are considered. If the worn height of node i is marked as dhi, make a rectangle with the length of dhiand the width of Liand the value of Lican be obtained through its neighboring nodes i−1 and i+1. Lican be given as following:(13)Li=12(L(i−1)−i+Li−(i+1))where L(i−1)−1 and Li−(i+1) represent the horizontal distances between node i−1 and i and between node i and i+1 respectively.So the worn volume of the seals can be expressed as(14)V=2πr∑i=1nLi×dhiwhere n represents the number of the contact nodes on the profile of the seals.The test system for modeling the working conditions of the seals is shown inFig. 9. This system is composed of execution system, hydraulic system and measurement and controlling system. This test system is not only designed for this work but also for a further research. Only the variations of wear volume of the seals are investigated in this work.The execution system is mainly composed of (2) motor, (5) shaft, (6) bearing, (8) end cover, (9) sealing seat, (10), (11) static seals, (12) chamber, (14) gland cover and the tested O-rings. At first, the oil whose pressure and temperature are 1MPa and 80°C respectively is injected into the chamber. The (2) motor rotates in a speed of 1500r/min and 1800r/min respectively, and the (5) shaft rotates with it. The seals to be tested are installed in the slot in the (9) sealing seat, contacting with the shaft.Hydraulic system is composed of (15) motor, (16) pump, (17) heating wire, (18) relief valve, (19) tank, (20) piston, (21) check valve. Initially, the oil in the (19) tank is heated by the (17) heating wire to the required temperature 80°C. Then, the (15) motor drives the (16) pump and the heated oil with pressure of 1MPa is injected into the chamber. The (18) relief valve is in charge of the security of the hydraulic system and the flowing direction of the oil is guided by the (21) check valve.The concern of test is on the variations of wear volume of the seals. However, the wear volume is not obtained through the measurement and controlling system. Another measuring method is adopted in this work. Before testing, net weights of the seals are weighed on a high precision electronic scale whose precision reaches 0.001g. Being worn sometime, the seals are weighed again. The worn mass will be obtained through the difference between the former and the latter weight. If divided by the density of rubber, the worn volume of O-ring will be got. The oil will be adsorbed by the rubber due to long-time soak which leads to a huge error for weight weighing. Therefore, the seals need to be dried in the drying box for 24h to get rid of the oil before each weighing.A suitable time increment is significant for the accuracy and the feasibility of the simulation method. Theoretically, the simulation result approaches to the reality as the time increment is decreased. However, the feasibility of the simulation will be seriously affected because plenty of computational resources are occupied during the simulation process due to the choice of excessively short time increment. The simulation process may last for months, even years, for common computers and this is definitely not accepted in the engineering. Conversely speaking, if the increment time is defined excessively long simply for saving computational resources, there will be a huge error between the experimental and the simulation results. That means the simulation method loses its value. Thus, one of the aims in this paper is to determine what time increment is suitable for the simulation.The coupled simulation process is finished with the commercial finite element software ANSYS. The simulation parameters are summarized inTable 1. In order to take into account the hyperelastic property of the rubber, Mooney–Rivlin model is applied and the parameters that C10=289.33MPa, C01=72.33MPa are given according to [17].In order to determine which time increment is more suitable for the simulation, three alternative time increments are given: 4s, 8s and 10s. The wear simulations are run three times for each seal and each time is operated with one alternative time increment. According to the wear volume model, worn volume of the seals will be easily obtained. To decide which result is more approachable to the reality, the simulation results are compared with the experimental results. Since the aim of this section is only to determine which time increment to choose, the simulation time as well as the experiment time is unnecessary too long. Both the simulation time and the experiment time are defined as 30min here. The results are displayed inTable 2.Through the comparison of the results we can have the following inclusions. When 4s is selected as the time increment, the simulation result is well consistent with the experiment result with the error approximately 2%. If 8s is chosen as the time increment, the error is less than 5%. Once 10s is selected the error exceeds 5%. In the engineering, it is acceptable if the error is not more than 5%. So as to keep the accuracy of the simulation and save the computing time, 8s is more suitable. Therefore, 8s is selected to be the time increment in this work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The central contribution of this paper is to provide a practical thermal–structural coupled finite element analysis method for wear prediction of seal in hydraulic systems. Two ideas were proposed to realize the goal of this work. First, thermal behavior analysis is carried out and coupled with structural analysis in comprehensive finite element model. Second, a novel mesh reconstruction strategy is presented to reflect the evolution of seal profiles caused by the wear. The methodology is built with iterative wear prediction procedure in which the geometry of the contact interface is progressively changed according to the wear model.Contact behaviors of two kinds of seals, namely O-shape seal (O-ring) and rectangular-section seal (R-ring), are investigated in this paper. According to the results, R-seal is more sensitive to the change of relative speed. The sealing ability of R-ring is stronger than that of O-ring while the stability of O-ring is better. These conclusions can be useful for engineering designers to determine which kind of seal is needed according to the specific working conditions.