@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Methodology of a dynamic test bench to test ultra-high-frequency transponder ear tags in motion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dynamic test bench.UHF transponders comparison.UHF cattle/pig ear tag development.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Radio-frequency identification,Ultra-high-frequency,Test bench,Ear tags,Transponder,Animal identification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The electronic identification of sheep and goats has been obligatory in the European Union since 2010 by means of low-frequency radio-frequency identification systems. The identification of pigs and cattle is currently based on a visual ear tag, but electronic animal identification is gaining in importance. The European Union already offers the additional use of electronic identification systems for cattle in their council regulation. Besides the low-frequency radio-frequency identification, an ultra-high-frequency ear tag is a possibility for electronic animal identification. The benefits of the latter frequency band are the high range, the possibility of quasi-simultaneous reading and a high data transmission rate. First systematic laboratory tests were carried out before testing the ear tags in practice. Therefore, a dynamic test bench was built. The aim of the experiments presented in this study was to compare different ear tags under standardised conditions and select the most suitable for practical use. The influence of different parameters was tested and a standard test procedure to evaluate the quality of the transponder ear tag was developed.The experiments showed that neither the transponder holder material (polyvinyl chloride vs. extruded polystyrene) nor the reader settings examined (triggered read vs. presence sensing) had a significant influence on the average of readings of the different transponder types. The parameter ‘number of rounds’ (10 vs. 15 vs. 20) did not show a significant effect either. However, significant differences between speed (1.5ms−1,3.0ms−1), transponder orientation and the fourteen transponder types were found. The two most suitable transponder ear tags for cattle and pigs have been determined by comparison.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electronic animal identification in livestock farming has gained in importance over the last few years. The identification of individual animals using radio waves is one possibility of electronic animal identification and is known as radio-frequency identification (RFID). This technology provides great benefits not only regarding process control on farms, animal or disease monitoring, prevention of fraud, and registration of movements, but also for other administrative purposes (Artmann, 1999; Doluschitz et al., 2006; Geers, 1994). The RFID technology will be explained more precisely in the following.RFID is regarded nowadays as a key technology which covers a wide spectrum of applications (Klindtworth, 2007). The technology behind this system is based on the communication between a transponder (attached to the animal) and a reader (mobile or static) via radio waves. Both transponder and reader contain an antenna for transmission and reception, and a chip for processing the radio signals. The communication between both units occurs remotely with coded radio waves, which are decoded by the respective electronic circuit (Finkenzeller, 2012; Kern, 2006). Distinctions are made between active RFID transponders, which generate their power from an integrated battery, and passive RFID transponders, with no battery. The passive transponders receive their power from the signal transmitted by the reader antenna (Jansen and Eradus, 1999; Zhu et al., 2012). Passive systems are predominantly in use in animal production. Three frequency bands are mainly usable in animal identification: low-frequency (120–135kHz), high-frequency (13.56MHz) and ultra-high-frequency (868MHz, 915MHz) (Kern, 2006).The electronic identification of sheep and goats has been obligatory in the European Union for all such animals born after 31/12/2009 (EC, 2004). The identification of pigs and cattle is currently based on a visual ear tag, but replacement of the latter with an electronic ear tag is already permitted for cattle (EC, 2000). Currently, systems working with low-frequency (LF) are state-of-the-art in animal husbandry (Fröhlich et al., 2007). The structure of the animal number and the functional principle are controlled by the ISO standards 11784 and 11785 (ISO 11785, 2008; ISO 11784, 2010). The combination of the country code (ISO 3166, 2013) and the national animal number ensures a unique number for an individual animal (Schwalm et al., 2009). Besides the unique number, which is obligatory for the legal regulations, free memory on the ear tag can be used for further management applications, such as the recording of animal characteristics (sex, size, weight) or medical treatments.The farmer has many possibilities to attach the transponder to the animal. Starting with a rather expensive collar, a transponder integrated into a bolus or an encapsulation for implantation, and ending up with a transponder attached to an ear tag. There are many different agricultural applications on the market using LF systems. Low-frequency is mainly used in extensive husbandry conditions with sheep and goats to improve the traceability of individual animals and to reduce the risk of spreading diseases (Ribó et al., 2001). Low-frequency is very useful in sow keeping and dairy farms when combined with automatic feeding stations. An individual feeding schedule for each animal and stage can be implemented and food intake can be measured (Blair et al., 1994; Chapinal et al., 2008). This technique is offered by many companies for barn equipment. Junge et al. (2012) showed that the registration of drinking events and the calculation of a minimal walking distance for each sow is also feasible with LF technology (Junge et al., 2013). Using this information, as well as a preparation of the data by software, the health status of each individual animal could be monitored. The biggest benefit of this technology is the low susceptibility against shadowing by metal or liquids. Problems arise when reading many animals at the same time and over a greater distance (Caja et al., 2005; Thurner and Wendl, 2007), whereby some LF transponders with an anti-collision algorithm have already been tested by Burose et al. (2010). Even if the so-called anti-collision systems, where quasi-simultaneous reading of different transponders is possible, can be used with basically all RFID systems, the reading rate will be reduced (Burose et al., 2010).Another possibility for animal identification are high-frequency (HF) systems. The HF systems offer a higher data transfer rate than LF systems (Chawla and Ha, 2007). Thus, the identification of moving transponders is feasible even when using anti-collision algorithms. The HF systems are mainly used in access control systems, smart cards and different logistic areas (Thurner and Wendl, 2007). Fröhlich et al. (2007) think that the commitment of HF transponders in animal identification would have its benefits in the industry-wide movement of goods from the point of animal production right through to transportation and slaughter. Hessel et al. (2008) used a self-made circular HF antenna on top of two different feeding troughs to read ear tags in piglets. The reading rate of both feeding troughs was around 97%. The high activity of the piglets, the water content of their bodies, the material of the feeding station and the orientation of the transponder to the antenna of the reader are seen as reasons for missed reading events (Hessel et al., 2008; Reiners et al., 2009). Further experiments with a round feeder were performed by Maselyne et al. (2014). Eight antennas connected to a single reader using a multiplexer were installed above the troughs of the feeders. The RFID system was validated by video observation of 20 focal pigs (two HF ear tags each). Therefore, several time window sizes were tested and examined. A sensitivity of 88.58% and a specificity of 98.34% were achieved (Maselyne et al., 2014).A third possibility of electronic animal identification are ultra-high-frequency (UHF) systems. The UHF systems are increasingly used in other industries, such as the pharmaceutical and retail industries (Desmons, 2006; Impinj, 2006; Umstatter et al., 2012), as well as for the identification of goods containing liquids or metal (Catarinucci et al., 2013). The clear benefits of this frequency band are the high range, the possibility of quasi-simultaneous reading (anti-collision system) and a high data transmission rate (Baadsgaard, 2012; Clasen, 2007; Finkenzeller, 2012; Umstatter et al., 2012). Such systems were considered as unsuitable for animal identification because of the high absorption potential of water in the UHF band; however, over time, there have been further developments in terms of performance and robustness (Catarinucci et al., 2012; Finkenzeller, 2012; Stekeler et al., 2011). There have only been a few projects testing UHF for animal identification in pigs, sheep, cattle and deer (Baadsgaard, 2012; Cooke et al., 2010; Hartley, 2013; Hogewerf et al., 2013; Swedberg, 2012; Taylor, 2013). In these projects, the UHF transponder was tagged to the animal in the form of a rigid or flexible ear tag. The material of the item to which the tag was attached or embedded, the size and stability, the orientation of the tag to the reader, and the environment in which the system operated were named as reasons for performance degradation and reliability problems (Baadsgaard, 2012; Chawla and Ha, 2007).Test benches are well-suited to test transponders under controllable and comparable conditions. Burose et al. (2010), for instance, built a test bench to analyse LF transponders with an ISO standard and with an anti-collision algorithm. This test bench consisted of a plastic slide which was drawn by a wire rope hoist on two wooden tracks. Using this test bench, the following parameters could be varied: the distance to the ground, the velocity, the number of transponders and the orientation of the transponder to the reader (Burose et al., 2010). Barge et al. (2013) also used a test bench to move LF transponders (HDX, FDX) through a reader field under standardised conditions. This test bench consisted of a wooden trolley pulled by a rubber belt and driven by an electric motor, simulating a group of animals passing a reader gate. Different combinations of transponders and velocity could be varied (Barge et al., 2013). Thurner and Wendl (2007) designed a test bench for testing HF transponders and readers. In this case, up to four parallel running V-belts clamped to two bicycle rims and powered by an electric motor carried the transponders through the reading field. Six holders carrying up to five transponders each were attached to one V-belt. The height of the reader, orientation of the transponder, velocity and direction could be varied on this test bench (Fröhlich et al., 2007; Thurner and Wendl, 2007). Wehking et al. (2007) built a test bench to test UHF transponders for application in logistics. Their test bench consisted of a nine-metre haulage road with a conveyor speed of 0.5ms−1. Loading units up to a weight of 300kg could be examined. There were two UHF antennae centred on top of both sides of the conveyor. Additionally, one LF antenna was centred on each long side of the conveyor. On this test bench, mainly the transponder orientations (two- and three-dimensional) and the content of small load carriers could be varied. Ten thousand cycles were performed for each test series (Wehking et al., 2007). McCarthy et al. (2009) developed a test bench in the agricultural sector similar to Wehking et al. (2007). The movement of different packaging boxes, to which the transponders had been attached, was facilitated with a variable-speed conveyor belt system. The boxes were filled with atmosphere-packaged meat. One empty box was used for reference purposes. The arrangement of the transponders on the boxes, the direction of motion, the velocity and the antenna-transponder distance could be varied (McCarthy et al., 2009). Kern (2006) described simple methods of testing for LF, HF and UHF transponder-reader applications for the RFID user. Reading ranges, reading rates and coupling curves could be determined with these different test benches. However, Kern (2006) emphasised that all of these test benches were especially made for practical applications, by which limitations concerning accuracy and repeatability may occur. An anechoic chamber should be used to test UHF transponders under real standardised conditions in an environment free of reflection and RF disturbances. The European EPC Competence Centre (EECC, 2011) tests transponders in an anechoic chamber which “consists of a mechanical test bed and a RF test apparatus”. Both are operated by a controlling unit. This “setup allows test sequences without interaction of test personnel” (EECC, 2011). Derbek et al. (2007) also carried out their experiments on this breadboard construction. They collected sensitivity threshold, read range and backscatter range of various transponders in a band from 800MHz to 1GHz. Directional characteristics of the transponder were analysed by a controllable turntable (Derbek et al., 2007).This study is part of a research project which is concerned with the production and testing of in-house designed flexible UHF ear tags for animal identification. First systematic laboratory tests were carried out before testing these UHF ear tags in practice. One central part of the laboratory tests was conducted with a dynamic test bench. The aim of this test bench was to produce an environment within which the quality of an UHF transponder can be reproducibly tested. A proper methodology and test bench settings had to be determined for testing different UHF ear tags under standardised conditions. The hypothesis of this study was that the number of readings achieved on the test bench differs in terms of transponder type and test bench settings. The results should give a reliable assessment of the quality of a transponder under laboratory conditions.With the aid of the dynamic test bench, the impact of the parameters•speed (1.5ms−1 vs. 3.0ms−1),number of rounds (10 vs. 15 vs. 20),material of the ear tag holder (PVC vs. XPS),reader setting (TR vs. PS),transponder orientation (six orientations 1–6), andtransponder type (fourteen types)Traunecker et al. (2012) described a dynamic test bench which constituted the basis of this breadboard construction. The dynamic test bench consisted of a rectangular timber frame secured by metal elbow brackets at the corners (Fig. 1). These elbow brackets were used to secure the axes and V-belt pulleys. One of the four V-belt pulleys was driven by a direct current transmission motor (24V, RE40/GP42C, Maxon Motor). Thus, a variable stepless adjustment of the V-belt speed was possible.The transponder ear tags could be fixed into a holder which could be easily attached to or removed from the V-belt.One type of holder was made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and the other was made of extruded polystyrene (XPS, Styrodur®) (Fig. 2). The XPS was chosen because of its low influence on electromagnetic radiation (Webster and Eren, 2014). Three transponder ear tags could be attached to the PVC holder. Only one transponder ear tag per holder was used in the following experiments to eliminate a possible interaction between transponders during the reading process. Six different transponder orientations were feasible with the holders currently used (Fig. 3). All of the main orientations between transponder and reader were tested.The transponders were tested during several rounds. The rounds were counted by a lap counter using a light barrier. The reflector of the light barrier was also attached to the V-belt right in front of the transponder holder. The number of readings was recorded each circuit the transponder passed the reading area of the reader.The reader was located at ground level at a fixed point on one of the long sides of the test bench and radiated upwards. Any kind of UHF reader could be used here. A reader with an internal antenna emitting circular polarised radiation with an opening angle of 90° was used for the experiments presented. A robust IP67 housing protected the integrated antenna and the electronics of that reader. The reader adjusted itself to its environment with an auto-tune function. It worked with an effective radiated power (ERP) of one watt where the antenna gain is already included and a frequency between 865 and 868MHz (EU). Different reader settings were chosen by changing the software settings. The reader setting “triggered read” (TR) was mostly used. At that setting, the antenna field was switched on and off manually. The transponder reset time (reset of the inventoried flag in the anti-collision procedure) was set at 100ms. A second setting was selected to examine if another reader setting could be used for our purposes. At that setting, called “presence sensing” (PS), the antenna field switched on after a predetermined time (100ms) and looked for a transponder answer. If no answer was detected, the antenna field turned off immediately. If a transponder answered, the antenna field remained active and the reader started the reading process. When the transponder left the antenna field, the field stayed on for another 500ms and then turned back to the 100ms sensing interval.The distance between reader and transponder was fixed at 1050mm in the experiments presented. All of the test settings were managed by software developed in-house and were stored in a database.Several transponders were used to test the effects of various test bench settings sufficiently. Not only the test bench settings, but also the quality of the transponders were analysed. The subjects of the investigation were passive transponder patterns developed in the project (A1, B1, B2, B3, B3-4, B4, B4-4, B5, C0, C1, C1-4, C2) and a commercially available passive UHF transponder cattle ear tag (ZT). One commercially available passive transponder was part of each experiment for reference purposes (A) (Table 1).These transponders mainly differed in their antenna construction (antenna length, antenna arrangement and mass) and, therefore, in their directional radio pattern.Transponder types B1, B2, B3 and B4 showed the structure of a PIF antenna. These antennas belonged to the group of dipole antennas, where the length of the antenna can be shortened if the mass area is big enough (Schoblick and Schoblick, 2005). The four transponder types named differed in the length of the last part of their antenna. The shorter the antenna of a transponder, the higher the transponder’s resonance frequency. The aim of the different antenna constructions was the adjustment to the influence of ear tag material and ear tissue. These materials reduce the resonance frequency through their permittivity.Transponder type B3-4 and B4-4 represented a second generation of B3 and B4 because the high potential of these types was observed in pretests. Transponder type B5 was a further development of B4-4. Here, the antenna length was shortened again to increase the resonance frequency. Furthermore, the label material was changed to polyimide foil for the second generation and transponder type B5.Transponder type A was a transponder with a folded dipole antenna, which was originally made for use and application in a metal-rich environment. The suitability for use in a metal-rich environment is based on the pre-detuning of the antenna. The resonance frequency desired could be achieved by interaction with metallic substances underground. Transponder type A was glued onto a normal plastic cattle ear tag by the authors. Transponder type ZT had the same structure as type A, but it was included in a plastic ear tag by the manufacturer.Types A, ZT, and B1 to B5 (including B3-4 and B4-4) had an appropriate size for cattle ear tags. The antenna structure of transponder type A1 was inspired by transponder type A, but was just minimised in size.Types C0 and C1 showed the structure of a Pif antenna, too. They were also built in a smaller size for application in ear tags for smaller animals, such as pigs. Type C1-4 and C2 also represented a further development of type C1 with a higher resonance frequency and a polyimide foil as the label material.An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to test whether the speed, transponder orientation, number of rounds, holder materials and reader settings have an influence on the number of readings per round. The average of readings per round (ARR) was used as a dependent variable in all studies (Eq. (1)).(1)Average of readings per round=∑Number of readings∑Number of rounds(for all exemplars of one type)The parameters investigated were set as fixed effects. The number of rounds one transponder ear tag was driven on the dynamic test bench represented measurement repetitions. Repetitions for the factor transponder type were caused by the exemplars of the transponder types. A mixed model was calculated to compare the quality of the different transponder types. Again, the parameters investigated were set as fixed effects, while the interaction between transponder type and transponder exemplar was set as a random effect. Statistical significance was considered at P<0.05. All calculations were carried out with IBM® SPSS® Statistics 22.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It was demonstrated in the experiments that the methodology of the dynamic test bench can be used to show differences between transponder types. Their behaviour in terms of various speeds, transponder holder materials, reader settings and number of rounds could be reliably determined. All of these results were repeatable. Only the transponder orientations did not always match the directivity of the different antenna structures. Here, the test bench needs to be adapted for further experiments. The comparison of the fourteen different transponder ear tags could demonstrate the one most suitable for either cattle or pigs. Because of the good repeatability of the results, it is sufficient for this purpose to use the dynamic test bench, and we did not see the need to do all the tests in an anechoic chamber.