@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive multi-view feature selection for human motion retrieval

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An Adaptive Multi-view Feature Selection (AMFS) algorithm is proposed to fuse multiple features formotion data retrieval.The local regression model isused to learn a datum-adaptive graph for each feature to preserve local structure information.The selection matrix is learnt from all local graphs by exploiting the complementary information between different features.An efficient iterative optimization approach is designed to solve objective function represented in trace ratio form.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human motion retrieval,Feature selection,Multi-view learning,Trace ratio minimization problem,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Motion capture (MOCAP) is a prevalent and powerful technique to record the movement of human or other objects. It has been widely used in various areas such as computer animation, computer games, film production, sports medicine and athletic training. Since the commercial MOCAP systems are very expensive and the motion capture process is time-consuming, it becomes critical to reuse the abundant pre-captured motion data. With the rise of some novel motion capture systems and technologies like depth-based MOCAP [1,2], it brings explosive growth of motion data. A huge mass of human motion data have been accumulated in these years. Therefore, an efficient and effective human motion retrieval algorithm plays an important role in managing and accessing these available data.Due to the high complexity and diversity of human motion, human motion retrieval is a very challenging task in computer animation and multimedia analysis communities. Similar to other multimedia retrieval tasks like image retrieval and document retrieval, feature representation is the corner-stone of human motion retrieval algorithm and system. A compact and discriminative motion feature representation cannot only significantly improves the performance of the retrieval algorithm but also dramatically reduces the consuming time of the algorithm. As we known, there is a big gap between the low-level visual feature and the high-level semantic meaning, so single low-level visual feature is usually unable to fully characterize all aspects of the motion data. In other words, it would be beneficial to fuse multiple visual features for motion data representation.However, many researchers tended to use a single type of visual feature as motion data representation in the past years, which leads to under-performing retrieval performance [3,4]. In contrast, recent studies have shown that using multi-view features can dramatically boost the algorithms׳ performance in computer vision and machine learning [5–7]. The core problem in these methods is how to exploit these multi-view features that has specific statistic property and lies on some low-dimensional subspace space in the feature fusion phase. An intuitive way is to concatenate these multi-view features into a high-dimensional feature representation, which would bring in the risk of dimensional explosion as well as the redundancy of information. Because each visual feature characterizes different aspects of human motion and has dissimilar discriminative power with respect to a specific class of motion, it is wise to jointly take these multi-view features into account and exploit the embedded complementary information. In addition, we notice that although multi-view feature learning is a hot topic in computer vision and machine learning, less research effort have been made in the problem of multi-view feature learning and feature selection for human motion retrieval.To this end, we propose an Adaptive Multi-View Feature Selection (AMFS) method in this article, which can automatically assign multi-view features with adaptive feature weights and select out a compact and discriminative feature subset from the original high-dimensional multi-view features. With the selected low-dimensional feature representation, it not only improves the motion data retrieval accuracy but also speeds up the whole motion data retrieval processing.The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, some recent research work on motion feature representation and multi-view feature selection for motion data related tasks will be introduced. Then, the details of our proposed AMFS and its optimization method will be presented in Section 3. Finally, the experiments and some discussions are given in Sections 4 and 5, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
