@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Aid decision algorithms to estimate the risk in congenital heart surgery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an alternative system for classifying the risk in paediatric congenital heart surgery.Four methods are tested: a perceptron multilayer, self-organising maps, a radial basis function neural network and decision trees.We obtain an accuracy of 99.87% (using pre and post-surgical data) and 83% (using just pre-surgical data).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artificial neural networks,Classifiers,Congenital heart disease,Data analysis,Decision trees,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveIn this paper, we have tested the suitability of using different artificial intelligence-based algorithms for decision support when classifying the risk of congenital heart surgery. In this sense, classification of those surgical risks provides enormous benefits as the a priori estimation of surgical outcomes depending on either the type of disease or the type of repair, and other elements that influence the final result. This preventive estimation may help to avoid future complications, or even death.MethodsWe have evaluated four machine learning algorithms to achieve our objective: multilayer perceptron, self-organizing map, radial basis function networks and decision trees. The architectures implemented have the aim of classifying among three types of surgical risk: low complexity, medium complexity and high complexity.ResultsAccuracy outcomes achieved range between 80% and 99%, being the multilayer perceptron method the one that offered a higher hit ratio.ConclusionsAccording to the results, it is feasible to develop a clinical decision support system using the evaluated algorithms. Such system would help cardiology specialists, paediatricians and surgeons to forecast the level of risk related to a congenital heart disease surgery.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) are among the most common congenital anomalies, becoming a major global health problem. The 28% of the most critical congenital anomalies are heart defects, causing high rates of morbidity and mortality in neonates [1,2]. If these anomalies are not discovered and treated appropriately in an early stage, children will have a low quality of life and they can even die in the course of time [3].A CHD is an abnormality that appears in the intrauterine life which in many cases is only detected during the birth and, in the worst cases, much later. These defects can affect the heart walls, valves, arteries and veins, hindering prenatal diagnosis. Congenital heart defects can change the normal flow of blood through the heart [4,5].The prevalence of CHDs varies widely among studies worldwide; in Europe, it was reported as 8 per 1000 live births/year [2]. The most commonly reported incidence of congenital heart defects in the United States is between 4 and 10 per 1000 live births [6]. Table 1shows reported birth prevalence of the eight most common CHD in the world.Many symptoms and signs can be associated to CHDs, such as cyanosis, heart failure, murmurs, aortic regurgitation, rapid breathing, short of breath and faint (during exercise), among others [4]. CHDs the medical diagnosis is complex because there are a lot of variables to assess. Furthermore, cardiologists require extensive knowledge and many years of practice before carrying out an adequate diagnostic process. In order to achieve an accurate diagnose, which would allow an appropriate intervention, the use of new technologies has been added to medical practice, e.g.: perinatal echography, decision support systems (diagnosis, treatments), etc.In order to get the best classification rate of the risk in congenital heart surgery we have compared four different methods of classification. The classification of the risk has been based on the Risk Adjustment for Congenital Heart Surgery: RACHS-1, which has been taken as gold standard; this risk measure is based on the categorization of surgical interventions, palliative or corrective, which is used to compare the mortality among hospitals. The diseases are assigned to six risk categories (being six the most complex and one the least complex), according to the expected mortality rate predicted for each disease [7].Within computer science, the field of artificial intelligence offers algorithms that are currently applied to multiple environments, due to their ability to provide computer programs that perform intelligent tasks as learning, recognition or classification. From the different techniques used in artificial intelligence, those related to classification, such as artificial neural networks (ANN) or decision trees, have been used in medical research showing good performance in clinical diagnostic tasks [8–10].The objective of our work is to achieve a system for classifying the risk of paediatric cardiac surgery independent of RACHS-1 method by means of different machine learning techniques with pre-surgical and post-surgical input data, allowing clinical experts to have better understanding and prior knowledge of the mortality and the risks associated to a patient undergoing surgery because of a CHDs. This could improve plans of care for each service (intensive care unit, hospitalization, etc.) according to the complexity associated to each patient.This paper is organized as follows: next we present a survey of works related to the use of classification tools to aid in medical diagnosis; secondly, we explain learning and classification methods used in our research; then, we describe clinical data used, the experiments developed and their results; finally, our conclusions and a final discussion are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
