@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical simulation of the roll forming of thin-walled sections and evaluation of corner strength enhancement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper presents a FE model for simulating cold roll forming.Stainless and high-strength steels are considered.The corners strength enhancement is reported for each simulation.The numerical predictions are compared with theoretical models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cold rolling,Channel,FEM,High-strength steel,Stainless steel,Corner enhancement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cold roll forming modifies the mechanical properties of thin-walled profiles by strain hardening. The understanding of this phenomenon, which is rather good for profiles made of traditional construction steel, is mandatory for assessing the member resistance. Less information is however available for profiles made of materials exhibiting a pronounced degree of non-linearity of the stress–strain curve such as high-strength and stainless steels. Current codes generally encounter difficulties for modelling this fabrication process because of the size of industrial mills. Indeed, accurate modelling of the continuous cold roll forming process using finite elements requires a huge number of elements leading to excessive CPU times. Therefore, modellers usually reduce the geometry of the formed sheet or increase the size of the finite elements, inducing a loss of accuracy in the results. In this work, the finite element software METAFOR is used to model cold roll forming of channel profiles made of high-strength and stainless steels. The numerical results, expressed in terms of corner strength enhancement versus radius-to-thickness ratio, are compared against an existing predictive model.Corners total areaCross-section area without the cornersGross cross-section areaArbitrary Lagrangian EulerianCentral Processing UnitInter-stand distanceYoung's modulusFinite element modelPenalty coefficientAverage coil radiusCross-section corner radiusCross-section internal corner radiusStandard deviationSection thicknessvelocityStrainEquivalent plastic strainTotal strain corresponding to 0.2% proof stressUltimate tensile strainAverageStressProof stress at 0.2% plastic strainAverage yield stressPredicted corner 0.2% proof stress, using FEMPredicted corner 0.2% plastic strain, using theoretical modelUltimate tensile stressMill certificate 0.2% proof stressMill certificate ultimate stressYield stressPoisson's ratioCold roll forming and press-braking are two common manufacturing processes used for fabricating thin-walled structural sections. Roll forming is a continuous bending process during which the thin sheet of metal is successively passed through a set of rolls that incrementally bend it until the desired cross-section is obtained. The movement of the sheet through successive combinations of rollers produces the final cross-section (seeFig. 1). During cold rolling, the profile undergoes successive states of deformation according to the flower pattern. This process of fabrication implies longitudinal stresses as well as relatively high shear stresses. Consequently, the goal of the manufacturer is to find a good combination of successive rollers (and subsequently a good flower pattern), distance between rollers and speed of rotation to minimise the undesired deformation such as cross-sectional distortion or buckling waves in the flats. In press braking (seeFig. 2) – a semi-manual forming process during which the sheet of metal is bent via a punch onto a die – strength enhancement is restricted to corner regions while in roll forming there may also be moderate gain in the flat regions given that longitudinal forces occurring during the forming process may be relatively high and thus lead to plastic straining.The finite element (FE) method is regarded by many engineers as an indispensable tool for achieving parametric studies, as for instance when modelling cold roll forming mills. In order to meet high quality and low cost requirements, high precision of the FE models (FEM) is required for the evaluation of the manufacturing parameters: distance between rollers, speed of rotation etc. Nowadays, FE simulations of sheet metal forming that include complex contact and springback problems (such as FEM of stamping processes) can be achieved with good accuracy. Most of the current studies focus on comparisons between different types of finite elements, formulations or integration schemes in order to capture the deformations occurring in the bent areas of the strip (which are named hereafter “the corners”), the change in thickness or the springback when several stamping processes are considered as well as the correct consideration of the material mechanical behaviour. However, describing the continuous roll forming process using FEM is a quite complex problem mainly because it requires the building of complicated 3D models that become very CPU expensive due to the large number of finite elements that must be used to get an accurate solution.The very first FE model trying to describe this continuous process highly simplified it in order to examine it in 2 dimensions ([1–3]). In parallel, Liu et al. [4] and Han et al. [5] used a finite strip method that allows for a reduced size of the model compared to a full 3D model. The early 3D models were usually limited to a low number of stands as well as relatively short sheet of metals such as in the FE model of Heislitz et al. [6] in PAM-STAMP [7]. Authors such as Tehrani et al. [8] modelled the roll forming of a symmetrical U-shaped profile using the explicit version of Abaqus (Abaqus/Explicit) which were later studied by Daniel et Meehan [9] in the implicit version of the same software (Abaqus/Standard). In [10–12], Bui et al. used METAFOR [13] – a finite element software developed at the A&M Department of the University of Liège mainly dedicated to the modelling of metal forming processes – to model the same kind of problems. The results of the analyses were compared against experimental measurements taken on site after the sheet of metal has taken its elastic springback.Present software dedicated to roll forming try to involve as many phenomena as they can. As an example, PROFIL [14] allows the user to export a profiling machine in Abaqus/Explicit to subsequently model the process of fabrication. Another example is COPRA [15] with its module COPRA-FEA coupled with the solver MSC-MARC [16]. However, they usually encounter difficulties for modelling roll forming processes generally because of the length of industrial mills. Indeed, accurate modelling of continuous cold roll forming using finite elements based on a classical Lagrangian formulation requires a huge number of elements leading to excessive CPU times. Modellers thus usually reduce the geometry of the formed sheet or increase the size of the finite elements, inducing a loss of accuracy in the results. In this context, different formalisms have been investigated as an alternative to the classical Updated Lagrangian approach. As a matter of fact, Eulerian stationary models [17] were developed in the code SHAPE-RF [18] and authors demonstrated their utility for significantly reducing the CPU time [19–21]. Those models nevertheless suffer from generalisation. They completely neglect, for instance, the elasticity and hardening behaviour of the material. Eulerian stationary codes are therefore specialized codes offering a narrow application field but nevertheless providing a high speed of calculation (unsurpassed by classical Lagrangian code). In the case of very long industrial forming lines, the Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) formalism has been considered as an efficient alternative to the classical Updated Lagrangian approach [22,23] exhibiting the advantages of both previous approaches. As in a stationary Eulerian mesh, the ALE mesh is fixed in the forming direction (material flow direction inFig. 3). This alternative method consists in decoupling the movements of the material from those of the finite element mesh. Starting from an initial guess of the sheet geometry between the rolls, the numerical simulation is carried out till a stationary state is reached with a mesh whose nodes are fixed in the rolling direction but free to move in a perpendicular plan, following the geometrical boundary of the sheet. The mesh is refined only in the vicinity of the forming tools where bending and contacts mostly occur. This concept enables to model the whole forming line with a limited amount of bricks and contact elements. Furthermore, as it takes its roots in Lagrangian codes, the ALE algorithm automatically profits from all the technical developments or improvements such as new material laws or new finite elements which necessitate almost no further developments in order to be included in ALE applications. The ALE algorithm is used in the homemade finite element software METAFOR [13] of the A&M Department of the University of Liège. This code is mainly dedicated to the modelling of metal forming processes and was duly validated in the frame of roll forming simulations (see Fig. 3 illustrating the modelling of roll forming). Previous works ([24,25]) focused on experimental measurements and numerical predictions of the springback angle as well as other kinds of shape defects like twist and bow. In [22,23], ALE results (including springback) are compared to more classical Lagrangian simulations and on-site experimental measurements on a thin-walled channel made of mild steel.Mechanical properties of cold-formed profiles are well known as being significantly enhanced by strain hardening occurring during the roll forming process resulting in higher yield stress and lower ductility of the material. The knowledge on the enhanced properties is rather good for profiles made of traditional construction steel (carbon steel with yield strength between 200 and 400MPa) characterised by a bilinear elastic perfectly plastic stress–strain behaviour. Karren [26] first studied the strength enhancement of cold-formed carbon steel sections due to plastic deformation and established an equation providing the yield stress increase in the corners in terms of the internal radius ri-to-thickness ratio. The author suggested that since the corner region can represent between 5% and 30% of the total cross-sectional area, the influence of the enhanced strength should be included in structural verifications. This starting point was taken over by numerous researchers demonstrating the importance of work hardening and its implication on the global stability of members especially when made of metallic materials exhibiting a stress–strain curve with a high level of strain hardening [27–30]. Predictive models were established, generally on the basis of experimental results but, despite their importance, tests on coupons cut out of the corners of formed sections were not frequent mainly because such a characterisation requires an expertise in cutting and testing curved coupons.The enhancement of the mechanical properties can of course influence the behaviour of the member submitted to axial tension but it can also modify the buckling behaviour of such profiles used as columns or energy absorbers. In the current context of sustainable use of resources, it is of prime importance to go on focusing research towards a better understanding of this behaviour, in such way to optimise material consumption on the base of rational design procedures. This is especially the case for stainless steel or high-strength steel, where the higher cost of the material compared to ordinary steels comes into play.In the case of stainless or high-strength steels, the materials are characterised by a nonlinear stress–strain relationship, requiring the development of specific approaches with respect to what is used for carbon steel. Such approaches have recently been proposed for cold-rolled open stainless steel profiles and compared against the experimental data available in the literature [31–33]. The database covers a wide range of section types made of carbon steel and stainless steel grades and a reliability analysis has been carried out to determine the safety level of the proposed formulations.Within this general frame, a finite element model allowing the assessment of the effect of the forming process in the corners of roll-profiled channel sections was successfully developed using the above-mentioned FEM code METAFOR. The model was then used to simulate the forming process of profiles made of high-strength and stainless steels. In this paper, the results of the numerical simulations as concerns corners enhanced proof strengths are compared with the results obtained using the aforementioned predictive formula.During cold rolling, the profile undergoes successive states of deformation implying tension-compression through-thickness bidirectional (longitudinal and transverse) stresses as well as relatively high shear stresses [34]. Literature review on the residual stresses distribution in cold-formed sections and on their influence on the structural behaviour of members as well as predictive models can be found in [35–37]. Upon release of the forming force, the profile has a natural tendency to partially come back to its original shape because of the elastic recovery. The springback is influenced by the mechanical properties of the material, but also by the thickness of the formed sheet t and by the radius riand angle of bending. Although other parameters influence the phenomenon, the springback angle globally increases as the material yield strength and ratio ri/t increase. During the present research work, the springback angles were observed at the end of the numerical simulations showing that the higher the yield stress, the more springback produced [38]. However, both studied materials are thought to exhibit relatively high anisotropy mainly due to the cold reduction of the thickness [39]. But the considered material models use the same yield stress in all planar directions and, as such, they are unsuitable to conclude about springback of anisotropic steels.Practically, it is usually quite difficult to measure the through-thickness residual stress distribution, and even impossible when thin-walled profiles are under consideration [35]. About this matter, one can cite the experiments conducted by Weng and White during which a high-strength steel plate was bent by means of press-brake operations [41]. The stresses after the forming were measured through the thickness of the plate by the sectioning method. A zigzag type biaxial residual stress distribution pattern was observed from the released residual strain. In [42], those experimental results together with the theoretical developments of [40] were taken as a basis for developing a simple analytical tool deriving the through-thickness residual stress distribution and strength enhancement induced during cold manufacturing. Flats and corners of hollow sections and corners of cold-rolled open sections were studied and the theoretical results were compared to reference results. These developments considered metallic materials exhibiting a pronounced degree of non-linearity of the stress–strain curve as well as classical carbon steels. During this study, the complexity of the forming process was summarised in a definite number of steps in order to be able to analytically implement the problem: the coiling-uncoiling step in the rolling direction – bending of radius Rcoiling– was supposed to be followed by transverse bending – radius riThe results of the theoretical analysis were used to show the influence of each step of the forming process for hollow sections (for which transverse bending is, in fact, composed of rolling into a circular tube that is subsequently deformed into a square or rectangle) and open sections. And it was thus possible to assess whether the coiling-uncoiling step could be neglected or not. For that purpose, different combinations of coiling radius Rcoilingand corner radius riwere examined. It was shown that, (1) for increasing radius-to-thickness ratio ri/t, the coiling-uncoiling step has negligible effect on the residual stress distribution, and, (2) the corner biaxial residual stress distribution is a zigzag type distribution, the amplitude of which is also provided in [42].In the present study, the finite element software METAFOR is used to model a symmetric U-shaped channel (length=1.5m) formed on a 6-stand existing mill located in Montataire [22,24,25]. Its width w and thickness t (Fig. 4) are the parameters of this study. Fig. 4 shows the flower diagram of the process with the angle taken by the sheet at each mill: 15°, 32°, 50°, 68°, 80° and 90°. The inter-stand distance D is constant along the mill and is set to 350mm (seeFig. 5).Given the symmetry of the cross-section, only one half of the sheet width is meshed with hexahedra brick elements using a structured transfinite mesher (seeFig. 6). The Enhanced Assumed Strain finite element [10], developed and previously validated by the METAFOR group, is used. A preliminary sensitivity analysis showed that four layers of finite elements through the thickness are a fair compromise between results accuracy and CPU time. The sheet is uniformly meshed along its length with 5mm-long elements resulting in a total of 300 elements along the sheet length. A similar meshing (6mm-wide elements) is chosen along the transverse direction except in the corner region where most bending occurs. In this region, along a distance equal to πRc/2 (where Rcis the corner radius taken at the level of the mid-plane surface i.e. the internal radius ri+t/2), 8 elements are necessary to accurately describe the imposed final corner of radius Rc. In total, the number of elements along the profile width w equals 46 and 4 elements were placed through the thickness, resulting in 27,600 elements (the symmetry is used to reduce the total number of elements).The rolls are modelled by rigid geometric entities directly coming from the roll design software COPRA RF [43]. Although the numerical handling of the rolling tools is a rather complex task, the frictional behaviour and the contact modelling were set up to remain as close as possible to what happens in real forming process. For that purpose, a powerful procedure established in previous researches was used [25]. The contact between the sheet and the rolls is taken into account by a penalty method considering a penalty coefficient pNequal to 1GPa/mm. Unlike numerical models found in the literature [4–6] which consider frictionless contact and, therefore, require some artificially prescribed displacements on the symmetry plan to force the sheet going through the rolls, the proposed model includes Coulomb friction and rotating rolls to better fit the reality. The Coulomb coefficient mcis taken equal to 0.2.At the beginning of the simulation, the sheet lies ahead of the forming line as depicted in Fig. 5. It is then pushed between the upper and lower rolls of the first stand of the mill. Friction is then sufficient to establish a constant forward velocity of v=0.2m/s. The simulation ends when the sheet entirely leaves the last stand. The time evolution of stresses and strains are recorded during the whole simulation in a section located in the middle of the sheet (see Fig. 5). Since these fields are only known at the integration points of the finite elements (Gauss scheme), an extrapolation is needed to get back the values on the upper and lower surfaces of the mesh. This is done to obtain the stress fields presented in the following paragraph.The time integration is performed using a dynamic implicit scheme of Chung Hulbert [44]. Compared to explicit methods, this scheme does not require any hazardous mass or load scaling techniques and provides thus far more reliable results concerning the final state of the channel beyond the last stand and after springback.Two different metallic materials are under consideration in this study, i.e. stainless steel and high-strength steel. Both of them exhibit a fundamental difference compared to carbon steel: they are characterised by a stress–strain curve departing from linearity at an early stage and, for the ferritic stainless steel, a larger extent of work hardening capabilities (up to 30% of ultimate strain). The pronounced yield plateau, familiar to classical structural steel, is absent and therefore the well known bilinear elastic perfectly plastic stress–strain law cannot be used. An equivalent so-called proof stress is used in structural design, which corresponds to a specified limited permanent strain of a tensile test piece. A plastic strain of 0.2% is commonly used as reference to define the proof stress. Presently, both material constitutive laws are characterised using von Mises isotropic yield locus together with isotropic hardening Swift's law (power law). The material parameters included in the hardening law were fitted against tensile coupon test results (mill certificate values), for more information the interested reader can refer to [39,46].The first material is a ferritic grade 1.4003 stainless steel, with Young's modulus E=178GPa and Poisson's ratio ν=0.298, the hardening of which is modelled using(1)σy=758.22(0.0127+ε¯p)0.1939where σyandε¯pare the yield stress and the equivalent plastic strain, respectively and the proof stress σ0.2=334.5MPa.The second material is a high-strength steel S700MC, with Young's modulus E=210GPa and Poisson's ratio ν=0.3, characterised using the following law:(2)σy=996.4(0.0034+ε¯p)0.0618where σ0.2=721.6MPa.Both hardening laws are plotted inFig. 7. Since the ultimate tensile strength of the S700MC is experimentally reached at 12% of strain, the corresponding hardening curve (Eq. (2)) is crudely truncated beyond this value (σu=875MPa).In order to sweep a relatively wide range of radius-to-thickness ratios, eight simulations are performed for each material, with the values of Rcand t that are presented inTable 1. The strength enhancement induced by cold-forming is characterised herein by the 0.2% plastic deformation stress σ0.2 extracted from the FEMs along the cross-section of the profile at the end of each simulation, i.e. when the material is hardened. This increased 0.2% proof strength along the section (x coordinate, Fig. 4), also showing the corner strength enhancement and the extension of the latter i.e. the zones belonging to the web and flanges that are influenced by the corner hardening, are depicted for both materials inFigs. 8 and 9 for one cross-section. Significant enhancement is observed in the corner region with an extent that can affect a relatively large part of the flanges and web of the profile, sometimes up to about 50% of the flange width for the smallest radius (see Figs. 8 and 9). On average, for the smallest Rc/t ratio, the average strength enhancement in the flanges and web reaches 15% of σ0.2. In [31], Ashraf has performed numerical simulations to assess the carrying capacity of thin-walled stainless steel angle and lipped channel sections. The author introduced corner properties beyond the corner up to a distance equal to the thickness t at first and then equal to 2t secondly. The numerical studies revealed that if the corner properties are extended up to 2t, the results are in better agreement with the experimental results for roll-formed stainless steel profiles, while better agreement is achieved with an extent of t for press-braked sections. Following the findings of Cruise and Gardner [45], for cold-rolled box sections, the enhanced corner strength extends the curved corner region by 2t, beyond the corner radius into the flat faces of the section. In [33], the same assumption is used to evaluate the cross-section weighted average enhanced 0.2% proof stress for press-braked sections and cold-rolled box sections. The present numerical results confirm the aforementioned conclusions for what regards roll-formed profiles.Using the aforementioned numerical results – i.e. σ0.2 along the cross-section width w (x coordinate) – it is possible to compute the corner strength enhancements σ0.2,ci.e. on average along πRc/2. This is what is provided inTable 2 for both materials and for the eight geometries. Since the difference between the numerical results in terms of proof stress at the level of the inner and outer skin is not pronounced (see for instance Figs. 8 and 9), the average values are provided in Table 2. For the high-strength steel case, it is worth pointing that the numerical strains exceeded the ductility capacity for the first case-study and it could thus be suspected that cracking may occur in the corner regions. It is however usually admitted that, for S700MC, the bending radius should only not be smaller than 1.5t (for thicknesses smaller than 3mm), which is in fact the case for each case-study presented herein. No further conclusion can be drawn about this point on the basis of the numerical models in their current state since more finite elements should be required through the thickness in order to estimate more accurately the surface plastic strains.An average enhanced yield stress σya,numis also calculated for the sixteen case-studies-considering that the corner strength σ0.2,cwas the one obtained by FEM-using the following formula:(3)σya,num=σ0.2,millAflats+σ0.2,cAcornersAgwhere Aflatsis the area of the cross-section without the corners, Acornersthe area of the corners, Agthe gross cross-sectional area and σ0.2,millthe yield stress of the unformed material (denoted as mill for mill certificate values).For thin-walled structural sections, Eurocode 3 [47,48] accounts for enhanced strength at corners in the design of cold-formed carbon steel sections (only for cross-sections that are fully effective), by allowing an increase in the average strength of the entire section. The increased average yield strength, namely σya, is calculated on the basis of the yield stress and ultimate stress of the unformed material (σ0.2,milland σu,mill) as well as of the number of corners n and of the thickness t of the wall (see formula (3.1) in Section 3.2 of [48]):(4)σya,EC3=σ0.2,mill+(σu,mill−σ0.2,mill)knt2Agbut≤(σu,mill+σ0.2,mill)2where k=7 for roll forming and k=5 for other methods of forming.The numerical models yield accurate predictions with an average μ and standard deviation SD of the Eurocode 3-to-numerical predictions ratio of 1.00 and 0.01 for the high-strength steel cases. Even if the Eurocode 3 formula is not intended for stainless steels, the same calculations were performed and produced similar results for the eight geometries although they show slightly lower precision and higher scatter: μ=1.03 and SD=0.03. The figures are summarised inTable 3.For stainless steels, Ashraf [49] analysed results from a wide variety of fabrication processes and provided empirical models for the evaluation of the corner yield strength of sections made of stainless steel. The model employs the 0.2% proof stress combined with the ultimate stress of the unformed material to evaluate the enhanced proof strength in the corner of cold-rolled sections. Ashraf also developed a second model in which only the 0.2% proof stress of the unformed material is required. Both empirical models were calibrated against tests results including corner radius-to-thickness ratio ranging from 1.0 up to 7.0. The power model proposed by Ashraf was later recalibrated by Cruise and Gardner [45] based on a more comprehensive experimental database to predict the 0.2% proof stress of the corners in cold-rolled sections. In [42], another theoretical model predicting the strength increase in cold-rolled sections made of metallic materials is proposed. This model is essentially relying on the determination of the plastic strains caused during the fabrication process and on the evaluation of the corresponding stresses, based on an appropriate material model. Therefore, the traditional material parameters such as the Young's modulus E, the Ramberg–Osgood's material parameter n and ultimate strain εu are required to evaluate the 0.2% proof strength after fabrication. In such an approach, the result is different for each distinct material considered. For the mathematical expressions of those, the interested reader can refer to [33] in which a review of predictive models from the literature for harnessing the strength increases in cold-formed sections as a result of plastic deformation during fabrication has been carried out.In [33], in order to overcome the shortcomings of the aforementioned models, a power law material model (with the same form of Swift's model), with new strain measures, is proposed to predict the strength enhancement in cold-formed structural sections. Statistical analyses are carried out to ensure that the current level of reliability of the European design standards is maintained when the new predictive model is incorporated in design. The new proposed model provides good predictions of the test data, is simple to use in structural calculations and is applicable to any metallic structural sections.(5)σ0.2,c=0.85[p(εc,av+εt,0.2)q]but≤σu,millwhereεc,av=0.5[(t/2)/Rc]andRc=ri+t/2and εt,0.2 is the total strain corresponding to the 0.2% proof stress. The coefficient p and the exponent q may be calculated directly from the basic properties of the unformed material, as provided in(6)p=σ0.2,millεt,0.2q(7)q=In(σ0.2,mill/σu,mill)In(εt,0.2/εu)For the ferritic grade 1.4003 stainless steel, the coefficient p and the exponent q equal 710.0 and 0.1355 respectively (εu=28%) and for the high-strength steel S700MC, they equal 999.7 and 0.0625 respectively (εu=12%). Therefore, Eqs. (5)–(7) provide yield strengths expressed in MPa that can be compared to what is depicted in Figs. 8 and 9 in the corner region, i.e. to σ0.2,c num. This comparison is presented in Table 2 in which the theoretical values of the enhanced proof strength are named σ0.2,c theo. For all cases, the numerical results are in good agreement with the predictive model. For stainless steel sections, the accuracy in terms of the ratio σ0.2,c theo/σ0.2,c numyields an average value μ of 0.82 and a standard deviation SD of 0.01. For high-strength steel sections, the drawn conclusion is similar although a slightly higher average but lower scatter is observed (μ=0.83 and SD=0.01). In the theoretical model, to allow for the increased variability associated with the prediction of material strength and for asymmetry in the stress–strain response, a factor of 0.85 was proposed to be used in conjunction with the predictive equation (see Eq. (5)), which maintains the same level of reliability as current codified guidelines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper, the finite element code METAFOR developed at the A&M department of the University of Liège is used to simulate the forming process of symmetric channel profiles made of high-strength and stainless steels. Different values of the radius-to-thickness ratio of the corners are considered in the simulations. The main outcome presented in this paper is the increased 0.2% proof strength along the profile, also showing the corner strength enhancement and the extension of the latter (i.e. the zones belonging to the web and flanges that are influenced by the corner hardening). A Comparison between the numerical results and theoretical predictive models is also presented.The following conclusions can be drawn from the numerical results.1The FE model developed with METAFOR according to numerical techniques set up during previous research works and allowing a proper account for friction and contact problems occurring along the forming line yields very efficient calculation and valuable results.From all the cases, it can be stated that the average enhanced numerical yield stress σya,numis very close to the proposed Eurocode formula predictions. The Eurocode–to–numerical predictions ratios yield μ=1.00 and SD=0.01 for the high-strength steel and μ=1.03 and SD=0.03 for the ferritic stainless steel.The predictive analytical model described in [33] yields good predictions of the corner enhancement when compared to FEM results for stainless steel sections and for high-strength steel sections, with a global average μ=0.82 and standard deviation SD=0.01 of the σ0.2,c theo/σ0.2,c numratios. The safety level of the theoretical model is as expected seen the hypotheses that form its basis. The difference is thought to originate from (1) the expression of the through-thickness averaged plastic strain assumed in the theoretical model and the (2) the factor 0.85 to allow for asymmetry in the stress–strain response and the required reliability level.The increase of the proof strength obtained using the FE model is rather uniform along the perimeter of the corners. The forming process is additionally seen as significantly affecting the mechanical properties of a relatively large part of the flanges and the web. It is suggested that, in FEM, corner properties be extended up to a length of 2t on both sides of the corner.