@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-scale damage model for high-cycle fatigue at the fiber-reinforced polymer–concrete interface

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Material model of the fiber reinforced polymer–concrete bond under high-cycle fatigue is developed.Implemented two-scale damage model as a material model for a 3D an eight-node interface element.Developed a new cycle jump approach.Comparisons of the results from the (FEM) model with experimental data have been performed.The sensitivity of the model at maximum cycle load to the different parameters has been determined.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Damage,High-cycle fatigue,Finite element,Bond behavior,Fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP),Concrete,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new two-scale damage model of the fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP)–concrete bond under high-cycle fatigue. The material behavior is modeled as elastic-plastic coupled with damage for the microscale analysis and as elastic for the mesoscale analysis. A new damage law for the interface joint is described. The two-scale damage model has been implemented as a material model for a three dimensional an eight-node interface element of zero thickness and used to simulate a double shear joint specimen under high cycle fatigue. The numerical calculations were performed with a full incremental cycle solution and a new cycle jump approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Repeated cyclic loading on reinforced concrete (RC) structures such as bridges can cause reduced service life and structure failure from fatigue even when the stress ranges applied to the structural components are very low. However, the use of fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) composites to strengthen and increase the fatigue life (service life) of these structures is a promising technology, and this technique might be the optimal choice for consulting engineers. The bond between the FRP materials and the concrete must be durable to ensure that the strengthening system remains effective for its expected service life. Several test methods have been used to evaluate the bond behavior of externally bonded FRP composite sheets and plates under high- or low-cycle fatigue loading, including the single shear (single lap joint) test [1,2], the double lap joint test [3,4], the pullout specimen method for measuring peeling stresses [5], and the partially bonded beam test [6]. In the high-cycle fatigue test, the maximum applied fatigue load is lower than the limit of linearity (yield load of the joint), and the joint behavior is elastic. In contrast, the joint is in the non-linear phase in the low-cycle fatigue test. The behavior of the FRP–concrete bonded joints under high-cycle fatigue is classified into three phases, seeFig. 1. The damage in the first phase occurs mostly from microcracks that cause residual plastic strain with negligible stiffness degradation. In the second phase, macrocracks start to cause stiffness degradation, with keeping the ability of the joint to resist the applied load. Finally, debonding occurs (fracture process) from crack propagations that produce loss of both the stiffness and resistance capacity of the joint. The period of any phase and the possibility of their presence in the behavior of the joint is dependent on the maximum applied stresses as well as fatigue limit stress of the joints. Where, the first phase be prevalent of the joints behavior when the applied maximum stresses are a somewhat more than the fatigue limit stress.A few models have been developed for FRP–concrete interfaces under fatigue load, and most researchers analyzing FRP-strengthened RC beams subjected to fatigue load have simulated the FRP–concrete bond as a perfect bond (full composite action) [7–9]. The models described in the literature are mainly based on the fracture mechanism, which is unsuitable for simulating high-cycle fatigue, especially in the first phase. Loo et al. [10] developed a model of the interface bond under fatigue load based on the degradation of the joint stiffness cycle, Eq. (1), whereEbandEboare the stiffness of the joint at cycleNand at the first cycle, respectively.∆τaveis average bond stress range,τave,fis average bond stress at failure, and the constants∝,βandγare parameters to fit the experimental data.(1)Eb=Ebo[1+∝(logN)β.(∆τaveτave,f)γ]This model did not produce good results when used to analyze the joint behavior with high-cycle fatigue.Diab et al. [11] presented a model to assess the bonding fatigue behavior of the FRP–concrete interface. The model of the joint before the initiation of debonding and subsequent fatigue crack growth was based on the creep-fatigue interaction, which was represented by the degradation of the interfacial stiffness, Eq. (2), whereKfoandKftare the interfacial cycle-dependent stiffness at time zero and at time, and∅is creep-fatigue coefficient.(2)Kft=Kfo1+∅This is also not accurate for the first phase of high cycle fatigue.In the present study, to get accurate results at the first phase of high cycle fatigue a two-scale model has been implemented for modeling FRP–concrete joints under high-cycle fatigue in the first phase when the stress level lower than the engineering yield stress. Plasticity coupled to a damage model for the microscale analysis and an elasticity model for the mesoscale analysis has been used. A double shear joint specimen under high-cycle fatigue using the three-dimensional finite element method (FEM) was modeled. After validating the model by comparison to experimental data, a parametric study was completed.Damage to a material refers to gradual deterioration of mechanical strength from the development of microcracks and micro-cavities [12]. Most models of damage in a material introduce a damage variable [13]. The damage variable is the ratio of the effective area or volume of the intersections of all microcracks or micro-cavities to the total undamaged area or volume. We designed the damage model according to this definition.A suitable damage model for the joint interface represented by an interface element under fatigue load must allow for the different materials of the joint and must relate directly to the accumulated microplastic strain. In addition, the parameters must be easy to determine from static test. To meet these criteria, we need to describe the behavior of the joint under monotonic load.Fig. 2 shows the schematic of the general behavior of the FRP–concrete joint under static load constructed from an experiment [14], where the stress is the applied average bond stress and slip represents the slip of FRP with respect to the concrete block. The joint behavior has two stages, the elastic stage and the fracture stage. The fracture stage starts after the maximum load is reached, which means that the damage behavior of the bond occurs only during the elastic stage and thereby the first phase of fatigue joint behavior take place at entire this stage only. The fatigue behavior phases can be represented, schematically, with regard to static behavior in Fig. 2(b). To describe this damage behavior, we define the damage variableDjfor the 3-D joint as a function of the total strain (elastic and accumulated plastic strain) within the elastic stage as(3)Dj=(1−εj3Le,j)(α−1α),whereεj3is the current total strain (interface slip which has the dimension of length) in normal and shear directions(j).Le,jis the total length of the elastic stage obtained from static tests of FRP–concrete joints with different modes, by this parameter the state of stress (mode I, mode II, mode III) is taken into the damage.αis the damage exponent that determines the shape of the damage evolution curve and should be greater than one.In the FEM analysis, concrete and FRP are modeled at the mesoscale, the scale of the representative volume element. The behavior of material at this scale is linear elastic. The bond between the concrete and FRP, which is represented by the interface element, is treated with a two-scale damage model. The two scale model is considered as inclusion within in an elastic meso-matrix [15] as shown inFig. 3. This inclusion is modeled as elastic-plastic coupled with damage.The general principles of a two scale damage model for FRP–concrete bond under high cycle fatigue are as follows:–The behavior is considered as elastic at the mesoscale, the scale of representative volume element. Where, the material engineering yield stress being usually not reached in high cycle fatigue.The behavior at microscale is elastic-perfectly plastic coupled with damage, the scale of micro-inclusion. Where, the weakness of the inclusion being represented by a yield stress at microscale taken equal to the fatigue limit of the joint.The standard form of the linear elastic relationship between generalized stress (σ) and strain (ε) for the elements used in this paper is(4)σ=Eεe,whereEis the elastic stiffness matrix for the interface element{Kn,Ks,Kt}wherendenotes the normal components andsandtdenote the shear components. The stress and strain tensors have six components for the 3-D eight-node brick element and three components for the 3-D eight-node interface element. The full details of the constitutive equations of the eight-node brick element can be found in for example known finite element literature [16].Lemaitre et al. [15] developed a micromechanical model of a weak micro-inclusion subjected to plasticity and damage embedded in an elastic meso-element for high-cycle fatigue. We used the principle this model, which is schematically described inFig. 4, for the discontinuum interface element. The behavior is elastic-perfectly plastic with damage, and the plastic stress threshold is lower than the mesoscale yield stress and is equal to the fatigue limit. This means that there is no microplastic strain below the fatigue limit, and no damage occurs. The damage threshold limits the damage (the microcrack initiation).According to these assumptions, the total strain is divided into a microelastic (εj3μe)part and a microplastic (εj3μp)part (recall thatμ-upper- script stands for variable at microscale):(5)εj3μ=εj3μe+εj3μp.The microelastic strain is calculated at mesoscale, where the strain at the mesoscale is equal to the strain at the microscale, see Fig. 4. The microplastic strain rate is derived from the yield criterion function [17]:(6)fμ=1(1−D)σμTAσμ−1=0,whereσμ={σ33μτ13μτ23μ},A=[1σf3320001τf1320001τf232],1−D=Dj,σμT={|σ33μ|τ13μτ23μ}andσfandτfj,3are the normal and shear fatigue stress limits of the joint.By the normality rule, the microplastic strain is(7)ϵji.μp=∂fμ∂σμλ̇=Aσμg(σμ)λ̇(1−D)iffμ=0andfμ̇=0,(8)g(σμ)=σμTAσμ,whereλ̇is the plastic multiplier derived from the accumulated plastic strain rate(Ṗ)which must always be positive and increasing. The simplest combination of this kind, which is dimensionally correct, is defined in accordance with discontinuity consideration:(9)Ṗ=(ε̇jiμP)Tε̇jiμP=λ̇(1−D)σμTATAσμg(σμ),which can be arranged as(10)λ̇(1−D)=Ṗg(σμ)σμTATAσμ.The microscale stresses are related to the mesoscale stresses as follows:(11)σμ=σj3iffμ<0,(12)σμ=σj3Djiffμ≥0,where(13)σj3=E(εj3−εj3μp)andDj=(1−εj3μLe,j)(α−1α).The eight-node zero thickness interface element shown inFig. 5 is used to simulate the joint interface connecting the FRP laminate face with the concrete face. In the initial configuration, the two rectangle surfaces of the interface element are joined with no gaps. The surfaces separate when the adjacent solid elements deform.Interface elements allow discontinuities in the displacement field and establish a direct relation between the tractions (t) and the relative displacements along the interface (∆u), which are given by:(14)t={τsτtσn}(15)Δu={ΔusΔutΔun}Here, these quantities are conveniently defined as generalized stress vectorσand generalized strain vectorε, so that the same notation is adopted for continuum and discontinuous elements. The local nodal displacements for the top and bottom faces of the element are defined as(16)utop={us1ut1un1……………….us4ut4un4}T,ubot={us5ut5un5……………….us8ut8un8}Twheresandtrepresent the tangential directions andnrepresents the normal direction. The displacement jump between two paired nodes ofutopandubotcan be written as [18](17)εlocal={εsεtεn}=utop−ubot.The displacement jumps in the local directions (normal and tangential to the contact surface) can be obtained from the global displacement jumps:(18)εlocal=θTεglobal,whereϵglobal={ϵxϵyϵz}andθ=[Vn,Vs,Vt].TheVn,Vs, andVtare the local normal coordinate and tangential coordinates vectors respectively. The components ofVn,Vs, andVtrepresent the direction cosines of the local coordinate system in the global coordinate system (Xi,i=1,2,3)and are obtained from(19)Vηi=Xi,η,Vξi=Xi,ξin the following:(20)Vn=VξiXVηi|VξiXVηi|,Vs=Vξi|Vξi|andVt=VnXVs.An incremental load procedure for each cycle is used to analyze the structure system under fatigue load as shown inFig. 6. The method of integration is strain driven and consists of two steps: the calculation of trial elastic stress, also called the elastic predictor, and the return mapping to the yield surface, also called the plastic corrector. The solution must satisfy the yield functionfμ=0, which is solved locally by the Newton–Raphson iterative method. The derivation of the elastic predictor and plastic corrector is included in Appendix A.The following algorithm is performed at each integration point at any time during the cycles:1.Compute mesoscale elastic stress:σ=Eεe.Compute trial elastic microstress:σμ=σeD.Check for plastic behavior:Iffμ<0, the integration point is elastic. Update stress and strain.Iffμ≥0, the integration point is plastic.For iterations i=0…………n,Update cumulative plastic strain(P)by plastic corrector(CP):∆Pi+1μ=∆Piμ+CPi+1μ,Update stress(σμ)by elastic predictor(Cσ):Update microplastic strain and total strain and check and update the damage variables:εj3μ=εj3μe+εj3μpDj=(1−ϵj3μLe,j)(α−1α)ifPμ≥Pthμ,Dj=1ifPμ<Pthμ,wherePthμis the damage threshold estimated as [19](21)Pthμ=εuμ(σu−σfσmax−σf).εuμandσuare ultimate static strain and stress,σfis the fatigue limit stress of FRP–concrete joint, andσmaxis the maximum stress at maximum cycle load applied on the joint.Compute the equivalent nodal forces produced by residual plastic strain and reanalyze the structure to compute the equivalent nodal displacement and other variables.The increment-by-increment calculation for each cycle of the elastic-plastic model is computationally expensive, and simulating fatigue behavior for a large number of cycles might take several days depending on the available computational resources. Therefore, we implemented a simple cycle jump strategy in the FEM model. Because the long-term response of the structure can be determined without modeling the details of each cycle, the computation can “jump” across a large number of cycles. A several authors have considered accelerated numerical simulations for cyclically loaded structures. To save computations for a model subjected to cyclic loadings Kiewel et al. [20] were extrapolated the internal variables (displacements, stresses and strains) over a certain number of cycles. For each material point in the model, a spline function is obtained based on the evolution equations of the internal variables. The variables are then extrapolated using the obtained spline functions. Based on this method, Wang et al. [21] utilized a linear shape function for extrapolation. Bogard et al. [22] developed an accelerated scheme where a cycle jump algorithm is incorporated. The internal variables are described as functions of time, and expressed in Taylor series up to second order. In this paper the cycle jump method is dependent on the nearly constant amount of residual stress or plastic strain present before the damage starts for each cycle at the integration point. The damage variable, strain, and stress at an integration point are computed for each cycle at maximum cycle load without the complete analysis of the structures during the cycle jump.Fig. 7 shows the schematic of an evolving strain for a structure subjected to cyclic loading during the analysis with using the cycle jump method. Should be noted that the finite element results in the figure it is not real, it is just to show finite element analysis stage. In jump steps eliminate the need of simulation each individual cycle and significantly reduce the time of analysis. The proposed method is based on conducting detailed finite element analysis for a set of cycles to establish the residual microplastic strain or stress in all integration points of structure, implementing the cycle jump method using the procedure listed below, and use the jumped variables as initial variables for additional finite element analysis simulation.The cycle jump method is implemented as follows.(22)εcycle+1μ=εcycleμ+∆εμp(23)∆εμp=Dcycle+1.∆εG.Pμpwhere∆εG.Pμpis the maximum residual microplastic strain at an integration point.(24)σcycle+1μ=Dcycle+1.σ(25)Dcycle=1ifPμ<Pth(26)Dcycle+1=(1−ϵcycleμLe)(α−1α)ifPμ>PthWe computationally analyzed a double shear joint specimen under high-cycle fatigue without fracture (no stiffness degradation) using the bond slip model and compared these results to the corresponding experimental results from Yun et al. [4] (test specimen F-EB-A in that paper). We also completed a parametric study to determine how the model parameters influence the fatigue behavior of the specimen. The material parameters used for the FRP–concrete joint are given inTable 1, and these were determined from the static test of the joint which was done by Yun et al. [4]. The dimensions, boundary conditions, and load conditions of the joint for the fatigue load case are shown inFig. 8. We completed the computation for one fourth of the model due to symmetry. The fatigue load was distributed over an area of 25mm×200mm, which is the size of the contact area between the FRP and concrete block when fully bonded.Fig. 9 shows the FEM and experimental results for the loaded-end slip at each cycle number for the minimum and maximum cyclic loads. The computed loaded-end slip corresponds well with the experimental results. There is an 11% difference between the FEM and the experiment in the last cycle. This difference might have occurred because the damage of FRP plate was not accounted for in the model.Fig. 10 shows the slip computed at each cycle jump.After verifying the FEM model, we determined the sensitivity of the model at maximum cycle load to the following parameters: the damage exponent(α), damage threshold strain(Pth), the length of the elastic zone(Le), and the fatigue limit(τf). Each parameter was varied separately while the other parameters remained constant.Fig. 11 shows the loaded-end slip versus the number of cycles for different values ofα. As can be seen, the slip damage under fatigue loading increases as the damage exponent decreases. The low values ofαresult in a low initial damage rate of residual stress. This causes an increase in plastic strain that produces an increase in slip damage during the initial stage. We can conclude from this that the lower values ofαare more suitable for materials with limited ductility.Fig. 12 shows the effect ofLeon the joint behavior. It can be seen that the slip at the initial stage increases asLeis increased. IncreasingLedelays the initiation of damage and reduces the damage rate. This increasing in slip is due to only the reduction in damage rate because the damage threshold and other parameters were fixed.Fig. 13 shows the loaded-end slip versus the number of cycles with a constant applied load for different values ofτf. Whenτfis higher than the maximum applied stress(τf=3N/mm2), no plastic strain or damage occurs. However, reducingτfto below nominal applied stress increases the plastic strain because of increased residual stress. The constant damage rate at very lowτfit is due to the other parameters were held constant.The effect ofPthon the fatigue behavior is shown inFig. 14. IncreasingPthincreases the period of microcrack nucleation and creates a large amount of plastic strain before the damage starts.Finally, the behavior of the damage propagation with cyclic loading with respect to the longitudinal displacement along the bond length zone in the middle of the FRP plate is shown inFig. 15. We observed that the microcracks started at the loaded end and propagated toward the free end as the number of fatigue cycles increased. The reduction in curvature of the displacement line, especially after 10,000 cycles, indicates an insignificant dissipation of energy due to the small plastic deformation (microcracking) of the bond at the loaded end.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
