@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A practical constitutive model for AZ31B Mg alloy sheets with unusual stress–strain response

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A practical constitutive model representing yielding asymmetry and anisotropy of Mg alloys is proposed.The model is formulated and implemented in the sheet forming oriented FE software by user subroutine.The unique concave-up and sigmoidal stress–strain curves during in-plane cyclic loadings of AZ31B Mg sheets could be exactly reproduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Twining/untwining,Yielding asymmetry,Tension/compression loading,User-defined material subroutine,PAM-STAMP®,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Magnesium (Mg) and its alloys have been increasingly used in the automotive industry owning to their superior mechanical compared to other metals. Sheet forming of Mg alloys requires not only a good understanding of the materials but also an appropriate material model. The hardening behavior of Mg alloy sheets during plastic deformation is the main concern in tool design and product manufacturing processes. A simple but computationally effective constitutive model is suggested to predict the mechanical behavior of Mg alloy sheets. The proposed material model is implemented as a user-defined material subroutine in the commercial finite element code PAM-STAMP®, then calibrated and validated using in-plane cyclic loading tests with different values of prestrain. The continuous tension–compression–tension and compression–tension–compression tests are conducted on a newly developed testing system. After calibration, the model can accurately predict the yielding asymmetry behavior and the stress–strain curve featured by the unusual sigmoidal shape which is the result of the activation of twinning and untwinning deformation mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of magnesium (Mg) and its alloys has been increasing in the automotive industry to develop light weight and fuel-efficient vehicles. Mg alloys with unique combination of low density, high specific strength and stiffness and good recycling capability have been replacing traditional materials such as steels and aluminum in certain vehicle parts. Mg alloys have also been applied to many consumer electronic appliances owning to their good mechanical properties, resistance to corrosion and aging, and electromagnetic shielding capability.The mechanical properties of Mg alloy sheets are different from those of other metals due to their hexagonal close-packed (HCP) structure and to the strong basal crystallographic texture caused by the rolling process [1,2]. At room temperature (RT), AZ31B Mg sheets showed significant deformation by twin during compression and untwin (or de-twin) during subsequent tension [3–5]. They inherently have a low number of active slip systems that might not accommodate strain along the c-axis of the hexagonal lattice at RT [6–8]. At RT, basal and prismatic 〈a〉 slip systems are favorable due to their lower critical resolved shear stress than the other 〈a〉 and 〈c+a〉 pyramidal slip systems. However, they can only provide four independent slip systems. Referring to the von Mises criterion, five independent slip systems are required for a generalized homogeneous deformation of polycrystalline metals [9]. Twining provides additional deformation but can only accommodate a limited amount of tension strain along the c-axis. Therefore, the mechanical response of magnesium exhibits tension/compression asymmetry and is highly anisotropic under loading path changes. Reversed loading after twinning may lead to untwinning phenomenon which is energetically reversible to the twinning. Untwinning occurs in the twin areas at subsequent reversed loading when the tensile stress is applied along the c-axis of the twinned materials. In other words, twin can disappear or become narrower under reversed loading, and reappear under reloading [4]. Twinning and untwinning were experimentally observed to appear alternately in cyclic loading tests [4,10].Accurate but computationally effective modeling for the plastic anisotropy and yielding asymmetry of Mg alloy sheets is still a challenge. At present, only a few material models are available for the forming simulation of Mg alloy sheets. Existing models, including crystal plasticity and phenomenological approaches, are still complicated or computationally expensive to be applicable in modeling [11–14]. In addition, experimental approaches need to be developed to characterize the complex constitutive responses of Mg alloy sheets. Difficulties in capturing the strength differential effects and the unusual sigmoidal shape of stress–strain curve by using classical isotropic or kinematic hardening models have led to other options [5,13,15]. For instance, it is well known that the original Chaboche model based on single backstress component could not simulate the permanent softening phenomenon [16,17]. Lee et al. [5,15] have successfully applied a practical two-surface model to predict the springback of Mg sheets at RT. To represent the behavior of metals under low-cycle loading in sheet metal forming, a hardening model should include the following three important aspects: (1) the Bauschinger effect, (2) highly nonlinear transient behavior, and (3) permanent softening phenomenon.The aim of this study is to develop a simple but computationally efficient constitutive model for practical use of Mg alloy sheets for the sheet metal forming. The proposed constitutive model includes the simple von-Mises yield function and a pure isotropic hardening model capturing the unique sigmoidal (S-shaped) stress–strain curves of Mg alloy sheets at RT. A new testing system is also introduced to characterize the stress–strain response of AZ31B Mg alloy sheets under continuous cyclic loading conditions, which enables the tension–compression–tension (TCT) and compression–tension–compression (CTC) tests with different prestrain values for the validation of the proposed constitutive model. The constitutive model is implemented in an user-defined material subroutine in finite element (FE) software, PAM-STAMP®[18], and the simulated results were compared with experimental results.Commercial AZ31B magnesium alloy sheets with 1mm thickness provided by POSCO were used in this study. The specimens were hot-wire machined parallel to the rolling direction (RD) from a single lot of material.Fig. 1 shows the specimen geometry with a rectangular cross-section of 25mm width, 50mm length. A gage length of 30mm was assigned to monitor the deformation of specimens during testing. To obtain the main features of AZ31B sheets at large strains during the reverse loading, a special testing system is needed [3]. In this study, the newly developed testing system, which applies side force to suppress buckling of a typical tensile specimen, was used. All monotonic and cyclic loading tests were carried out at room temperature using the newly developed testing system with a 30kN load cell and a laser extensometer as shown inFig. 2. Moreover, monotonic tension tests were also conducted with a universal testing machine (Instron 5582) to calibrate the data obtained by the newly developed testing system following a specific procedure [3]. As described in our previous papers [3], the new testing system can perform continuous, uninterrupted tension and compression cycling tests, i.e. the non-proportional load can be applied smoothly during the test without re-setup the system. An accurate strain measurement within the specimen gage length using a non-contact laser extensometer showed that total compressive strain of about 12% could be obtained without buckling.After being clamped at both ends by the jigs, the specimen is further constrained when the anti-buckling device contacts the top surface providing a side force. An optimal value of the side force can be determined by experimental case study. A nominal strain rate of 10−3/s and a side force of 100kgf were applied in this study. Through these settings, the continuous TCT and CTC tests were carried out to examine the effect of strain path change on the typical stress–strain behavior of AZ31B Mg alloy sheets. The limit strain values in each cycle were controlled to obtain different prestrain values of the cyclic loading tests.Since the side force was applied directly on the specimen surface to suppress buckling during compression, effects of biaxial loading and friction should be corrected [3,19,20]. The biaxial stress effect was proved to be minor and usually negligible [20]. However, the effect of friction force was significant and cannot be neglected [3].Fig. 3 shows the stress–strain curves of the specimen under tensile and compressive monotonic loading conditions. While the tension curve exhibits the usual flow stress behavior like steel and aluminum alloys, the compressive behaves more complicated response.The corrected data shown inFig. 4 reveals the behavior of Mg AZ31B in terms of prestrain/strain reversals. The compression and tension following compression curves show the concave up or inflected characteristic due to the activation of deformation twinning. An early low stress plateau was observed during reverse loading after a tensile prestrain. From experimental observations, main features of AZ31B Mg sheets can be characterized by the yielding asymmetry and unusual hardening behavior.The strong in-plane tension–compression asymmetry has been attributed to the mechanical twinning {101̄2}〈101̄1〉 during compression along the rolling direction (RD) but not during the tension along the same direction [21,22]. This is primarily the result of strong textures, where a significant fraction of grains orientated with their c-axis nearly perpendicular to the prior working direction RD, and the polar nature of twinning.Twinning is the only active deformation mode that can provide straining along the c-axis at room or low temperature [23] even though the hard deformation mechanism of the dislocation slip with 〈c+a〉 Burgers vectors was reported elsewhere [24,25]. The monotonic compressive curve with the activation of twinning typically exhibits a sigmoidal shape, where a low stress plateau was initially observed, followed by a higher hardening evolution rate.Common phenomenological constitutive models consist of two parts: a yield function and a hardening law. The yield function defines criterion of yielding and the plastic flow rule, and the hardening law defines the evolution of the yield surface upon plastic straining. In most modeling applications, mainly for simplification purpose, classic yield criteria were applied for Mg alloy sheets, e.g. von-Mises condition [5,13,15], Hill 1948 function [26]. More sophisticated criteria have been introduced to model HCP metals in general, or Mg alloys in particular [14,27–29]. In this study, we focused on the hardening behavior rather than the anisotropic yield function. Therefore, without loss of generality, the von-Mises yield function was employed to demonstrate the concept; i.e. we introduced a simple model that can represent the anisotropic as well as asymmetric yielding. Besides the common interests of a proper hardening model to be applied to sheet metal forming analysis, requirements for the prediction of hardening behavior of Mg alloy sheets should include the strength differential effect and the unusual sigmoidal stress–strain curves at low temperature.Before discussing in detail the proposed hardening model, a new approach for yielding condition is explained here: the existence of multiple yield surfaces. There are different descriptions for the onset of plastic behavior for different deformation modes. Only one yield surface corresponding to the current deformation mode becomes active. The initial size and center of the activated surfaces depend on the loading history (or plastic prestrain experienced in the previous deformation mode). These surfaces are assumed to have the same shape, i.e. they are defined by the same form of the yield function. Evolutions of these surfaces are controlled by the proposed hardening rules as will be discussed in the following.Details on the proposed constitutive model incorporating the anisotropy and strength differential are provided in this section. Presumably, the strength differential effect is attributed to the activation of twinning/untwinning at low temperature (below the twin-slip transition point). Criterion on twinning and slip deformation mode is then introduced to define the activation of yield surface under given loading condition. A reverse loading condition is also provided to monitor the change in deformation mode with the variation of applied loading.The shapes of the yield surface can be defined by sophisticated forms of the yield function accounting to account for the strong anisotropy [14,28–30]. In this section, for demonstration of the proposed hardening model, the von-Mises yield criterion is assumed. It is also assumed that, in the early stress stage with twinning/untwinning-dominant deformation mode represented by the stress plateau, plastic strain can be solely accommodated by the evolution of twinning/untwinning in the absence of dislocation slip. Then, the formulation of continuum plasticity is still applicable with only one difference: the twinning and untwinning yield functions are used instead of a regular slip yield criterion in this domain.The condition for initial twinning mode (thickening) from the undeformed state for the plane stress problem [5] is defined by:(1)Δε1+Δε2≤0where Δε1 and Δε2 are the major and minor principal in-plane strain increments, respectively. The yield surfaces for the plane-stress problems are illustrated inFig. 5. Criterion for the corresponding deformation modes of these yield surfaces in the principal strain space is also described on the same figures to give a better illustration. In Fig. 5(a), the slip, twinning and untwinning deformation modes are denoted by MODE 1, 2, and 3, respectively.Slip mode (MODE 1) is activated when (1) tension loading is applied to the initial undeformed state or (2) after exhaustion of twinning or untwinning of the previous deformation modes. Only the former is considered in the yielding condition of MODE 1, that is Δε1+Δε2>0 as shown in Fig. 5(b). The latter is accounted for in the hardening behavior of the present model. For tension following compression, untwinning mode (MODE 3) becomes active. MODE 3 is identified as the consequence of reverse loading from the twinning mode (MODE 2), see Fig. 5(c).A criterion on the subsequent loading step [13,17,31] is defined by using the relative angle between two stresses representing the previous, dold, and current loading directions, dnew:(2)m=σn|σn|:σn+1|σn+1|=dold⋅dnewwhere σnand σn+1 are stress tensors of the previous and the current time steps, respectively. If m≤cosθref, the reverse loading occurs. Here θrefis a prescribed reference angle. Typical value for this critical angle is set as π/2. The reverse loading criterion is graphically illustrated inFig. 6.The hardening law represents the expansion of the yield surfaces activated following slip, twinning and untwinning deformation mechanism. All the yield surfaces were assumed to expand isotropically; i.e., the size of the yield surface is controlled by the accumulated plastic strain in the activated mode and influenced by prestrain of the previous mode. Note that twinning or untwinning deformation modes are followed by a slip deformation mode upon further straining when all twins exhaust resulting in the concave up or sigmoidal shape of the stress–strain curve. The transition from twinning/untwinning mode to slip mode is accounted for in the hardening law.In this deformation mode, the loading condition is tension from undeformed state. A regular slip isotropic hardening behavior is applied, i.e. the slip yield surface is assumed to expand isotropically. Several different forms have been proposed in the literature to capture the isotropic hardening behavior, i.e. expansion of the yield surface, of ordinary slip deformation mode. For example, Chun et al. [17] suggested a modification of the original Chaboche model to accommodate the experimental data, and Sung et al. [32] employed an empirical function combining the Hollomon and Voce strain hardening equations. A review of various functions describing the flow stress can be found elsewhere, e.g. [33]. In this study, the isotropic hardening response for the slip mode is obtained from uniaxial tension test data of undeformed specimen:(3)σ¯iso-slip(ε¯Sp)=RS+σ0,S=σtenswhere σtensand σ0,Sare the flow and initial yielding stresses for the slip deformation mode, respectively. RSis the isotropic hardening term expressed by a special function [16]:(4)RS=QS(1−exp(−bSε¯Sp))where QSand bSare material parameters,ε¯Spis the plastic strain accumulated during slip deformation.The isotropic hardening response for twinning mode is obtained from uniaxial compression test data as follows:(5)σ¯iso-twin(ε¯Tp)=RT+σ0,T=σcomp(6)RT=aT1+exp(−((ε¯Tp−ε¯T,0⁎)/cT))+QT(1−exp[−bT(ε¯Tp−ε¯T,1⁎)])The smoothness of the stress–strain curve is maintained by using the two parametersε¯T,0⁎andε¯T,1⁎. Especially, the transition from twin-dominant mode to slip-dominant mode is controlled byε¯T,1⁎. Note that parameters defining the hardening rule of twining deformation mode are expressed as functions of tensile prestrain which in turn is identified by accumulated plastic strain (if any) in the previous slip mode.The isotropic hardening response for untwinning mode is obtained from the subsequent tension after previous compression as follows:(7)σ¯iso-untwin(ε¯Up)=RU+σ0,U=σre−tens(8)RU=aU1+exp(−((ε¯Up−ε¯U,0⁎)/cU))+QU(1−exp[−bU(ε¯Up−ε¯U,1⁎)])Again, parameters in Eqs. (7) and (8) are functions of compressive prestrain and have similar meaning of those in the twinning rule. In Eqs. (3)–(8) subscripts S, T, and U indicate the slip, twinning and untwinning deformation modes, respectively. Material constants to be determined from the fitting of experimental stress–strain curves with different prestrain values are a, c,ε¯0⁎, Q, b,ε¯1⁎, and σ0. One simplification method to reduce the number of constants is to assign the values of the corresponding initial yield stress to σ0 for the three modes. These values are directly calculated from the experimental data. The number of constants can be further reduced depending on the stress–strain response and the range of data obtained from tests and will be discussed later. Therefore, a simplified version of the hardening rule can be applied as long as the fitting can predict the stress–strain relation properly. Note that in the general form of Eqs. (6) and (8), the first term on the right hand side defines sigmoidal functions which take into account the contribution of twin and untwin activation, respectively. Likewise, the second term represents the physical phenomenon (experimental observation) that slip mode occurs upon exhaustion of twin/untwin [4]. The slip hardening rate after all twins are nucleated (if the material does not fail) is expected to be lower than that of the slip deformation mode itself due to twin boundaries acting as barrier to dislocation motion [34].As discussed above, the initial size of the twinning yield surface is obtained by the compressive loading test from the undeformed state. For reverse loading case from a previous tension, the size is updated in accordance to the level of prestrain:σ¯iso-twin=σ¯iso-twin(ε¯Sp,⁎). The update process accounts for the fact that a small amount of twin observed in tensile loading experiment [4] may slightly affect the yield stress. Experiments revealed that twin can develop during tensile loading leading to a hardening behavior in the consequent compression loading [10]. Moreover, different levels of prestrains in the initial tension resulted in different values of yield stress of the reverse loading, even with the twinning-dominant deformation as shown inFig. 7. Similarly, to take into account the effect of compressive prestrain on the subsequent untwinning yield stress the size of the yield surface of MODE 3 can be expressed as a function of the twinning compressive prestrain,σ¯iso-untwin=σ¯iso-untwin(ε¯Tp,⁎).The proposed constitutive model in the previous section was implemented using the user-defined material subroutine in the PAM-STAMP® commercial software [18]. Within the framework of incremental plasticity [35–37], the formulation presented in this section can be applied with a relevant yield function as listed in the introduction part. The yield surface is generally described by(9)F=f(σ)−σ¯isom=0where f is the yield function with the m-th order homogeneous function, σ is the Cauchy stress.σ¯isois the effective stress, which can be hardening or softening, measuring the size of the yield surface as a function of the effective strainε¯p(≡∫dε¯p). It is worth noting that there are three yield functions to handle different deformation mechanisms, i.e.(10)f={f1forslipmode(MODE=1)f2fortwinningmode(MODE=2)f3foruntwinningmode(MODE=3)The effective quantities are defined using the plastic work equivalence principle by(11)dw=σ⋅dεp=σ¯isodε¯pwheredε¯pis the effective plastic strain increment,σ¯isois the effective stress of the Cauchy stress σ. The consistency condition requiring that the applied stress remains on the yield surface for loading and neutral loading gives(12)dF=∂f∂σdσ−∂σ¯iso∂ε¯pdε¯p=0Consider the plastic strain increment from normality rule as(13)dεp=dλ∂f∂σ=dλ(mσ¯isom−1)∂σ¯iso∂σ=dε¯p∂σ¯iso∂σwhere dλ is the plastic multiplier increment. From Eq. (13), a relation between the effective plastic strain increment and the plastic multiplier increment is obtained(14)σ¯isodε¯p=σ⋅dεp=dλ∂f∂σ⋅σ=mσ¯isomdλ,ordε¯p=mσ¯isom−1dλThen, the consistency condition (12) becomes(15)dF=∂f∂σdσ−mσ¯isom−2∂σ¯iso∂ε¯pσ⋅dεp=0Using the linear isotropic elastic constitutive law,dσ=C⋅dεe=C⋅(dε−dεp), yields(16)∂f∂σ⋅C⋅dε−∂f∂σ⋅C⋅dεp=mσ¯isom−2hisoσ⋅dεpwhere C is the elastic moduli tensor,hiso=(∂σ¯iso/∂ε¯p)is the slope of theσ¯iso(ε¯p)curve. Note that different degradation law of Young's modulus in tensile and compressive loading-unloading test can be taken into account by considering the elastic moduli tensor as a function of accumulated plastic strain:(17)C={CT(ε¯p)fortensileloadingCC(ε¯p)forcompressiveloadingwhereCT(ε¯p)andCC(ε¯p)are different elastic moduli tensors of tensile and compressive loading, respectively. In a simplified fashion, only the variation of Young's modulus reported in our previous study was taken into account, i.e., the value of an effective Young's modulus was updated following the expression:(18)Eeff=E0−(E0−Ea)[1−exp(−ξε¯p)]where E0 and Eaare the values of the initial and an infinitely large plastic strain of the effective Young's modulus, respectively; ξ is a material parameter; andε¯pis the effective plastic strain. The fitted curves of the relative modulus, Eeff/E0, are shown together with the experimental data inFig. 8.Substitution of Eqs. (13) and (14) into Eq. (16) yields(19)dλ=(∂f/∂σ)⋅C⋅dε(∂f/∂σ)⋅C⋅(∂f/∂σ)+Aisowhere(20)Aiso=m2σ¯iso2m−2hisoThe stress increment is then written as(21)dσ=[C−C⋅(∂f/∂σ)⋅(∂f/∂σ)⋅C(∂f/∂σ)⋅C⋅(∂f/∂σ)+Aiso]⋅dε=Cep⋅dεAt every time increment with a prescribed strain increment,dε=(dεxx,dεyy,0,dεxy,0,0)in the plane stress problem, the plastic strain increment is determined by Eqs. (13) and (19). The thickness strain is calculated asdεzz=dεzze+dεzzp=−(ν/(1−ν))(dεxxe+dεyye)−(dεxxp+dεyyp). The Cauchy stress is updated by Eq. (21).Numerical stress update schemes have been discussed by many authors, e.g. [38]. The backward Euler scheme with the Newton–Raphson algorithm was used to integrate the constitutive Eq. (21). Details of the stress update algorithm based on incremental theory of plasticity can be found in [39,40]. Successful applications of the algorithm were reported elsewhere [35,41]. The following discussion provides information on how the proposed model was implemented the above-mentioned formulation in PAM-STAMP via the user-defined material subroutine, USRMAT184 (see Appendix A).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
