@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new element for the analysis of composite plates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An element has been developed for the analysis of composite plates.The element has six nodes in its final form, each with the usual degrees of freedom.It has a correct rank, is free from spurious modes, with no signs of shear locking.The respective orders of deflection, rotation, moment and shear are preserved.The element performs very accurately and is computationally economic and efficient.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Laminated composite plate,Plate bending element,Shear deformation,Shear locking free,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An element has been developed for the analysis of laminated composite plates. The element is capable of representing high orders of displacement using very few degrees of freedom. The respective orders of deflection, rotation, moment and shear have been preserved through scrupulous choice of field variables. The element is found to have a correct rank and is free from shear locking. Performance of the element has been tested in a wide range of problems which indicate that combining all these features can help to achieve great accuracy at reduced computation cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Composite laminates are being increasingly used in a number of areas including aerospace, automobile, nuclear, marine, civil and biomedical engineering. This is mainly due to their high stiffness and strength-to-weight ratios and other superior material characteristics such as long fatigue life and ability to manipulate fibre orientations to meet design requirements. However, composite laminates are at the same time significantly weak in shear, which demand special attention on the part of designers. A clear understanding of the structural behaviour of laminated plates is thus needed to fully utilise their potential in the design of various engineering components. Finite Element is one of the most successful analytical tools used in the analysis of laminated composite plates. The research on simple, accurate and efficient finite elements for the analysis of laminated composite plates has been receiving much attention in recent years. A large number of finite element models have been developed for the analysis of laminated composite plates in the last two decades [1]. Still, ‘no single element’ has been reported [2,3] to have ‘emerged as the so-called “best”' or ‘comprehensive enough for the entire range of applications.’ This provides the background and motivation for the present research paper in framing a general purpose, efficient and elegant element.The classical laminated plate theory (CLPT) does not account for the transverse shear deformation, and is therefore inadequate for modelling composite plates. Moreover, a CLPT model requires C1 continuity to be satisfied across inter-element boundaries, which proves to be computationally expensive. When using a first-order shear deformation theory (FSDT) like Reissner–Mindlin's theory (RMT) to model plates, a linear variation of shear across the plate thickness is assumed, and the continuity requirements are brought down to C0. An additional shear correction factor may be introduced to account for the discrepancy between the actual parabolic variation of shear and the postulates of RMT. Higher-order plate theories of course provide a slightly improved accuracy, but at the cost of a significant increase in computation time. Thus, RMT is known to give the best compromise between economy, simplicity, and accuracy in prediction of the global response of composite plates [4]. The displacement type finite element models based on FSDT suffer from the problem of shear locking. This is primarily due to the inconsistent and low order interpolation of different displacement variables. Studies with higher order shape functions have been able to solve the problem considerably, and have been a topic of much interest to researchers for the last three decades [4].The major research work presented in this paper is centred on the development of a new element for the analysis of laminated composite plates. In a previous article by Sheikh and Dey [5] an element was developed for the analysis of thick isotropic plates. A similar concept has been applied here to design a new element for the analysis of laminated composite plates. The element is a displacement type model based on Reissner–Mindlin's theory. The proposed element has an arbitrary triangular shape with seven nodes in the initial stage—three at the vertices, three at the mid-sides, and a seventh node at the centroid of the element (Fig. 1(a)). Each of the six external nodes has five degrees of freedom: two inplane displacements u and v, a transverse deflection w, and two rotations of the normal θxand θy. The central node is allotted w, θxand θyas its degrees of freedom, which are later eliminated by static condensation to give the element a simple and elegant form (Fig. 1(b)). This results in a thirty-degree-of-freedom element in the final stage with six nodes, each containing the five usual degrees of freedom. The field variables taken in the formulation of the element are the translations u, v, w, and the rotations of a normal due to shear γxand γy. While u and v are represented by complete quadratic polynomials, a complete fourth order polynomial is used to approximate w, whereas γxand γyare represented by complete linear polynomials. The basic underlying concept behind the proposed element lies in choosing γxand γyas independent field variables, while using the conventional degrees of freedom θxand θyat the nodes. The consequent advantages are manifold. Firstly the deflection and rotation fields are represented by complete fourth and third order polynomials respectively, which warranties a high order of accuracy. Secondly, the rotation of the normal due to bending is not modelled separately, but obtained by differentiating the deflection; this not only increases the accuracy of the model, but also reduces the computation time by involving less degrees of freedom. Most importantly, a consistent order of polynomials representing deflection, rotation, moment and shear helps to avert shear locking—a crucial drawback of most Mindlin elements. As a backup, the element passes the patch test for moment, shear and twist, and has been noted to be free from spurious modes. Finally, a large number of examples solved with the element proves its efficiency and performance in a wide variety of conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
