@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Splines in geometry and topology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Many varieties X have a graphGXthat describes their essential geometric features.The splinesS∞0(GX)form the equivariant cohomology ring and encode key data about X.We describe geometric tools to analyze splines that differ from classical tools.We give an algebraic and combinatorial generalization called generalized splines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Generalized splines,Equivariant cohomology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This survey paper describes the role of splines in geometry and topology, emphasizing both similarities and differences from the classical treatment of splines. The exposition is non-technical and contains many examples, with references to more thorough treatments of the subject.The goal of this survey paper is to describe how splines arise in geometry and topology. Geometric splines usually appear under the name GKM theory after Goresky–Kottwitz–MacPherson, who developed them to compute what is called the cohomology ring of a geometric object. Geometers and analysts ask many of the same questions about splines: what is their dimension? can we identify a basis? can we find explicit formulas for the elements of the basis? However geometric constraints can change the tone of these questions: the splines may satisfy various symmetries or have a basis satisfying certain conditions. And some questions are specific to geometric splines: geometers particularly care about the multiplication table with respect to a given basis.In Section 1 we discuss GKM theory, followed in Section 2 by some important families of geometric examples, some of which are well-known to students of analytic splines and some of which may be useful in future. Section 3 sketches some techniques that are natural from the perspective of a geometer/topologist, including Morse flows and symmetries that come from geometric representation theory. Finally in Section 4 we generalize splines to a more abstract ring setting, both as a useful conceptual framework and because it provides new combinatorial tools.This paper is targeted at researchers in geometric design, especially those with an analytic background. Our aim is to give an overview of theoretical tools and techniques from geometry and topology; we often illustrate concepts by example and refer to the literature for details on technical aspects. A reader with a different mathematical perspective may be interested in surveys like Holm (2008), Tymoczko (2005, 2008).Cohomology is an algebraic gadget associated to a geometric object X that encodes various properties of X. Among other things, the cohomology of X indicates the dimension of X, the number of connected components (how many separate pieces X has), how many holes X has, whether X has singularities, and how different subspaces of X intersect.We could treat very general kinds of geometric objects but for simplicity in this survey we take X to be a compact complex manifold. When we say that cohomology is an “algebraic gadget” the most general interpretation is that cohomology is a ring. In the cases of interest here, the cohomology ring is actually an algebra, namely a vector space in which one can multiply vectors. The technical condition we assume is that cohomology has coefficients inQ,R, or especiallyC.In fact we will consider an enhanced version of cohomology called T-equivariant cohomology. Equivariant cohomology has strictly more information than ordinary cohomology yet surprisingly can be easier to compute. In our case T is a torus, namely the groupT=C⁎×C⁎×⋯×C⁎whereC⁎denotes the group of nonzero complex numbers.Remark 1.1In the literature algebraic geometers tend to use the torus above while differential geometers tend to use a product of circlesT=S1×⋯×S1. This makes very little difference in practice becauseC⁎contracts toS1. In other words, thinking ofC⁎as the plane with the origin removed, we can squeeze it thinner and thinner until onlyS1remains. This squeezing process respects the constructions that underly cohomology. The outcome after formalizing is that in cases where eitherS1×⋯×S1orC⁎×C⁎×⋯×C⁎can be used, the equivariant cohomology is the same.We require T to act on X “nicely”, which for us means:1.X has a finite number of T-fixed pointsX has a finite number of one-(complex)-dimensional T-orbitsX is “equivariantly formal”X is a smooth complex projective algebraic varietyX has no odd-dimensional ordinary cohomologyX has a T-stable cell decompositionWe refer to this set of hypotheses as the GKM hypotheses.Definition 1.2If X is a compact complex manifold with the action of a torusT=C⁎×C⁎×⋯×C⁎that satisfies (1)–(3) then we say X and T satisfy the GKM hypotheses.Consider the collection of lines through the origin in the plane, which we callP1. Each point(x,y)in the plane other than the origin gives rise to a point inP1by taking the unique line through(x,y)and(0,0). Of course many points give rise to the same line; in fact multiplying the vector(x,y)by a nonzero constant won't change its direction and thus won't change the line through the origin on which it lies. We use square brackets to indicate points inP1itself, which are equivalence classes of points in the plane. In other words we could writeP1={[x,y]:x,y∈Cand at least one ofx,yis nonzero}[x,y]∼[λx,λy]for all nonzeroλ∈C⁎to indicate that two different equations for a line are equivalent if they differ by a nonzero constant multiple.There are different ways for a torus to act onP1. Of interest to us is the following action ofT=C⁎onP1. Suppose thatt∈C⁎and that[x,y]∈P1. Thent⋅[x,y]=[x,ty]At this point the reader should pause and try to identify the fixed points ofP1under this torus action as well as the (only) one-dimensional orbit.Notice that[x,0]is fixed by this T-action. Sincex≠0we conclude that[x,0]is actually the single point[1,0]by definition ofP1. In other words[x,0]∼[1,0]In fact[x,0]∼[x′,0]for any nonzerox,x′∈C⁎since[x′,0]=[x′xx,x′x0].A similar argument shows that[0,y]is the single point[0,1]inP1. It is also a T-fixed point, sincet⋅[0,1]=[0,t]by definition of the group action and[0,t]∼[0,1]by the argument above.In fact these are the only T-fixed points. Indeed suppose that[x,y]is T-fixed, meaning that[x,ty]∼[x,y]for every possiblet∈C⁎. Then there exists a nonzero scalar λ with[λx,λy]=[x,ty]. On the one handλx=xso either λ is one or x is zero. On the other handλy=tyso eitherλ=tor y is zero. Since t is arbitrary we conclude that one of x or y must be zero.In this example there is exactly one one-dimensional T-orbit consisting of all points[x,y]with bothx≠0,y≠0. Indeed any such point[x,y]can be written[x,y]∼[1,y′]by multiplying byλ=1/x. Any two points[1,y′]and[1,y″]are in the same T-orbit because we can chooset=y′/y″. (The choices of λ and t are valid because all of x,y′, andy″are nonzero.)The projective planeP2consists of all lines through the origin inC3. We can describe it similarly to the projective line:P2={[x1,x2,x3]:x1,x2,x3∈Cand at least one ofx1,x2,x3is nonzero}[x1,x2,x3]∼[λx1,λx2,λx3]for all nonzeroλ∈C⁎We choose a different torus action forP2thanP1in order to lay the foundations for general projective spacePn. However the analysis is very similar.TakeT=C⁎×C⁎×C⁎and define an action of(t1,t2,t3)∈Ton[x1,x2,x3]∈P2by(t1,t2,t3)⋅[x1,x2,x3]=[t1x1,t2x2,t3x3]Again the reader should pause to identify T-fixed points and one-dimensional orbits before continuing with the exposition.By the same argument as above we can see that the three points[1,0,0],[0,1,0], and[0,0,1]are all fixed by this T-action and in fact that they are the only T-fixed points. (If[x1,x2,x3]is a point with at least two nonzero entries, we can restrict attention to the two nonzero entries and literally use the previous argument to conclude that the point cannot be fixed.)Identifying one-dimensional orbits seems more complicated forP2than forP1. However suppose we consider a subset ofP2in which exactly two entries are nonzero, for instance{[x1,x2,0]:x1,x2are nonzero inC}We can divide by the nonzero coordinatex1to get{[x1,x2,0]:x1,x2are nonzero inC}∼{[1,x,0]:xmis nonzero inC}wherex=x2x1. The torus acts on each element of this subset by(t1,t2,t3)⋅[1,x,0]=[t1,t2x,0]and by previous arguments we know that[t1,t2x,0]∼[1,t2t1x,0]. In other words T preserves the set{[x1,x2,0]:x1,x2∈C⁎}. Of course which two entries were nonzero was immaterial. We conclude thatP2has at least three one-dimensional T-orbits, each obtained by choosing two entries to be nonzero.In fact those three are the only one-dimensional T-orbits. Ifx1,x2,x3are all nonzero then[x1,x2,x3]∼[1,x2x1,x3x1]The image under an arbitrary element of the torus is(t1,t2,t3)⋅[1,x2x1,x3x1]=[t1,t2x2x1,t3x3x1]which is the same point inP2as[1,t2t1x2x1,t3t1x3x1]. The last two coordinates can be any pair of nonzero complex numbers becauset1,t2, andt3are all arbitrary nonzero complex numbers. In other words if all three entries are nonzero then[x1,x2,x3]lies on a two-dimensional T-orbit.More generally projective spacePn−1consists of all lines through the origin inCn. As before we can writePn={[x1,x2,…,xn]:x1,x2,…,xn∈Cand at least one ofx1,x2,…,xnis nonzero}[x1,x2,…,xn]∼[λx1,λx2,…,λxn]for all nonzeroλ∈C⁎Fix the torusT=C⁎×C×⋯×C⁎with n copies ofC⁎and define an action of T onPn−1by(t1,t2,…,tn)⋅[x1,x2,…,xn]=[t1x1,t2x2,…,tnxn]The same analysis as before shows that the T-fixed points ofPn−1are the n coordinate points[1,0,0,…,0],[0,1,0,…,0],…,[0,0,0,…,1]in which exactly one entry is nonzero. Each one-dimensional orbit consist of points in which exactly two entries are nonzero; the set of pairs(i,j)with1≤i<j≤nindexes the set of one-dimensional orbits, determining which entries are nonzero.InP2we saw that every one-dimensional T-orbit essentially looked like the one-dimensional T-orbit inP1. In fact the closure of each one-dimensional T-orbit is exactlyP1. This holds not just forPnbut for all X that satisfy the GKM hypotheses.Proposition 1.3Suppose X and T satisfy the GKM hypotheses and O is any one-dimensional T-orbit O in X. Then the closure of O is homeomorphic toP1and consists of O together with two T-fixed points N and S (essentially the north and south poles).This means we can record the data of T-fixed points and one-dimensional orbits more concisely: as a graph.Definition 1.4Suppose X and T satisfy the GKM hypotheses. The moment graph or GKM graph of X is defined from the T-orbits of X as follows:T-fixed points↔vertices1-dimensionalT-orbits↔edgesweight ofT-action↔label on edge(Section 1.3 explains how the moment gets into moment graph.)The weight of the T-action essentially records the direction of the T-action. For instance when studying the one-dimensional T-orbits inP2we found that(t1,t2,t3)⋅[1,x,0]∼[1,t2t1x,0]In other words the torus pushed the point[1,x,0]in thet2t1direction. We typically linearize this and (with a slight abuse of notation) record the weight ast2−t1. Fig. 1gives the moment graphs forP1andP2. In the moment graph forPn−1the edge indexed by(i,j)for1≤i<j≤nis labeledtj−ti.We can now give Goresky–Kottwitz–MacPherson's theorem (Goresky et al., 1998).Theorem 1.5Goresky–Kottwitz–MacPhersonLet X be a compact complex manifold with the action of a torus T that satisfies the GKM hypotheses. LetGXbe its moment graph. Then the equivariant cohomology ringHT⁎(X;C)satisfies the ring isomorphismHT⁎(X;C)≅{p∈C[t1,…,tn]|V|:for each edgeuvthe differencepu−pvis inα(uv)}From the perspective of splines, the point is the following:Corollary 1.6Suppose X is a compact complex manifold with a torus action that satisfies the GKM hypotheses. The equivariant cohomology of X is isomorphic to the ring of complex splinesS∞0(GX).What precisely does this mean? Classically the splinesSdr(Δ)consist ofCrpiecewise polynomials of degree at most d on the combinatorial object Δ. We take Δ to be a pure polyhedral complex whose maximal faces are all d-dimensional polytopes inRdand use the example of a triangulation of a region of the plane.The graphGXis the dual graph to Δ, namelyGXhas one vertex for each d-dimensional face and an edge between two vertices if the corresponding faces intersect in ad−1-dimensional face. For instance if Δ is a triangulation thenGXis the classical dual graph: it has one vertex per triangle and an edge between vertices if the corresponding triangles share an edge.We can label the edges ofGXas well. Ifσ1∩σ2is ad−1-dimensional face in Δ then the affine span ofσ1∩σ2is a hyperplane. Label the edge corresponding toσ1∩σ2inGXwith the affine form that vanishes on that hyperplane. For instance when Δ is a triangulation the label on each edge ofGXis essentially the slope of the line between the corresponding triangles. Section 2.1 shows an example in detail.Billera first used dual graphs in the context of splines, proving that the ring of splines on the dual graph is isomorphic toSr(Δ)when Δ is a hereditary pure polyhedral complex (Billera, 1988). (Hereditary complexes are essentially those without holes or pinchpoints; for instance any triangulation of a convex region inR2is hereditary. For details see e.g. Billera and Rose, 1991, 1992.)The GKM perspective uses graphs because of the historical evolution of the result. Pieces of Goresky–Kottwitz–MacPherson's approach predate them significantly. The T-orbits on X had been studied extensively in different contexts: when X is a symplectic manifold with a Hamiltonian T-action there's a natural mapμ:X→Rncalled the moment map that linearizes the action of the torus, “straightening out” the torus orbits. Kostant noticed that the image of the moment map for one important manifold was a convex polytope (Kostant, 1970), leading to work by Atiyah, Guillemin–Sternberg, and Heckman that collectively proved that the image of the moment map is a union of convex polytopes (Atiyah, 1982; Guillemin and Sternberg, 1982; Heckman, 1982). In fact the points and 1-dimensional faces of the moment map form precisely the moment graph that arises in GKM theory.Another crucial step of the GKM proof is to construct a map from the equivariant cohomologyHT⁎(X)into a product of polynomial rings. It turns out that the equivariant cohomology of a point is simplyC[t1,…,tn]and in fact the natural inclusionι:XT↪Xof T-fixed points into X induces the desired map on cohomologyι⁎:HT⁎(X)→C[t1,…,tn]|V|. This map plays an especially important role in symplectic geometry and topology, in the work of Kirwan (1984), among others. Chang–Skjelbred analyzed the image of this map in very general settings, where the image is determined by a complicated spectral sequence (Chang and Skjelbred, 1974). One of Goresky–Kottwitz–MacPherson's deep contributions is to identify a package of GKM hypotheses for which the general picture simplifies so dramatically.At the same time, some work on equivariant cohomology leads to the classical spline perspective, especially when X is a toric variety. Each toric variety X is associated to a polytope, making it more natural to consider piecewise polynomials on the faces of the polytope. This is what Payne (2006) and Bahri et al. (2009) do.I have not found indication in the literature that any of these geometers or topologists were aware that they had recreated the classical notion of splines. Schenck appears to be the first person to work in both splines and equivariant cohomology (Schenck, 2012).Remark 1.7SingularitiesFor simplicity we assumed that X is a manifold. In fact GKM theory applies to many singular varieties as well, including Schubert varieties (see Sections 2.2 and 2.3 below). Geometers often find this surprising, but the GKM hypotheses reduce the calculation of equivariant cohomology to an analysis of zero- and one-dimensional orbits, where geometric singularities don't significantly arise.Singularities in the sense of analytic splines correspond to faces like the subgraph shown in Fig. 2. They have no relationship to geometric singularities of the variety X. Singular faces appear frequently in moment graphs; for instance Fig. 2 also shows the moment graph of the GrassmannianG(2,4). Section 2.2 describes the Grassmannian in more detail; the edge-labels of the moment graph ofG(2,4)can be found in many other sources (Knutson and Tao, 2003; Tymoczko, 2005).The difference in perspective between students of analytic splines and what we will call geometric splines affects the kinds of data we assume and the kinds of questions we ask about splines.•Geometers typically consider the splinesHT⁎(X,C)as modules over the polynomial ringC[t1,…,tn]rather than vector spaces because the GKM construction does not naturally impose any degree constraints on splines. In addition the GKM hypotheses guarantee thatHT⁎(X,C)is a free module over the polynomial ringC[t1,…,tn]. (In some contexts this free-ness is taken as the definition of equivariant formality.)Geometers typically know the dimension of the splinesHT⁎(X,C)as a module over the polynomial ring for geometric reasons.Geometers, like analysts, want explicit formulas for bases for the space of splines. In many cases the torus action can be used to construct geometric bases or to suggest preferred forms for bases. In other cases a group action on the spline module can be used to construct representation-theoretic bases. But these constructions guarantee existence of a basis or set of splines rather than concrete descriptions that can be used in calculations. Section 2.3 says more about bases when X is a flag variety and Section 3 discusses bases in general.Geometers care about the multiplicative structure of the ring of splines. In particular geometers want explicit multiplication tables in terms of a basis for the splines. Section 2 describes some context behind this problem in the case of ordinary and equivariant cohomology of specific families of manifolds X.Geometers focus onS∞0(GX)since these are the splines isomorphic toHT⁎(X;C). Billera asked what kind of geometric meaning the ringsSd0(GX)carry as d increases.This section describes some of the most important examples for geometers and topologists. Some are already used in analytic splines; projective space turns out to be essentially the Alfeld split. We present others both to expand on the questions that concluded Section 1 and to suggest tools that may be useful within analytic splines.We described projective space extensively in Section 1.1. The moment graph of projective space is better-known within analytic splines as the Alfeld split (Alfeld, 1984) or sometimes the Clough–Tocher split (but see the comment in Kolesnikov and Sorokina, 2014, Section 2). We are particularly grateful to Alexei Kolesnikov and Gwyneth Whieldon for pointing this out.We describe the Alfeld split following Kolesnikov and Sorokina (2014) and Schenck (2014). LetT=[v1,…,vn+1]be an n-simplex inRn. Given a central interior vertexv0the Alfeld split is defined by taking the cone over the boundary. Without loss of generality we can assume thatv0is the origin, eachviis the standard basis vectorei, andvn+1=−∑i=1nei. Then there aren+1facetsF1,F2,…,Fn+1of the Alfeld split, each containing all but one of the verticesv0,v1,…,vn+1. Specifically for eachi=1,…,n+1the ith facet is the face that does not containvi. The intersection of two facetsFiandFjlies on the hyperplane defined byFi∩Fj={xi−xj=0if1≤i<j≤nxi=0if1≤i<n+1andj=n+1Thus the dual graph of the Alfeld split is the complete graph onn+1vertices indexed without loss of generality by{F1,F2,…,Fn+1}with edgeFi↔Fjlabeled as above.Proposition 2.1The ring ofC0splines on the moment graph of projective spacePnis isomorphic to the ring of splines on the Alfeld splitASn.ProofFor eachi=1,…,nletαi=ti+1−ti. Define a mapφ:R[α1,α2,…,αn]→R[x1,x2,…,xn]on the generatorsα1,…,αnbyφ(αi)=xi−xi+1ifi∈{1,2,…,n−1}andφ(αn)=xnThe map φ extends to a ring homomorphism. It is surjective because for eachi=1,…,n−1we havexi=φ(αi+αi+1+⋯+αn)This also shows that the map φ sends the moment graph ofPnto the dual graph of the Alfeld split, in the sense that it sends each edge-label to the corresponding edge-label.The map φ is injective because{x1−x2,x2−x3,…,xn−1−xn,xn}are algebraically independent. Indeed a polynomialp(α1,…,αn)is in the kernel of φ only ifφ(p)=0. Butφ(p)=p(x1−x2,…,xn)is zero only if p is identically zero.In other words φ is an isomorphism of polynomial rings that sends the moment graph ofPnto that of the dual graph to the Alfeld split. It follows from Billera's result (Billera, 1988) that the ring of splines on the moment graph ofPnis isomorphic to the ring of splines on the Alfeld split, as desired.  □The Grassmannian is a natural generalization of projective space in which we consider higher-dimensional subspaces ofCnthan lines. More precisely the GrassmannianG(k,n)consists of the set of k-dimensional vector subspaces ofCn. Note thatG(1,n)is another way to write the projective spacePn−1.Grassmannians occur naturally in different geometric contexts. For instance the tangent bundle of a smooth k-dimensional manifoldM⊆Cncan be thought of as a map from M to the GrassmannianG(k,n). Explicitly each pointp∈Mis mapped to the k-dimensional subspace obtained by translating the tangent space to M at p to the origin.The cohomology ring of the Grassmannian is particularly interesting. Just like we identified the one-dimensional orbits ofP2by choosing which entries were nonzero, we can partition the Grassmannian into a natural collection of subspaces by choosing which entries in the k-dimensional planes are pivots. The sets of pivots are indexed by partitions of n and the collection of subspaces corresponding to the partition λ is called a Schubert variety. The Schubert varieties induce a basis of Schubert classesσλfor the cohomology ringH⁎(G(k,n),C). Since they are a basis, we can write the productsσλ⋅σμagain in terms of the basis of Schubert classes:σλ⋅σμ=∑νcλ,μνσνThe entriescλ,μνin this multiplication table have remarkable properties.•The entriescλ,μνcount the intersections of linear spaces in a vector space. The 19th-century mathematician Hermann Schubert, a pioneer of enumerative geometry, computed these intersections by hand. His name is now given to Schubert calculus, which is more generally considered the study of the cohomology ring of the Grassmannian and related spaces.The entriescλ,μνalso describe the ring of symmetric polynomials. A polynomial is a symmetric polynomial if it is invariant under all permutations of the variables. One main direction of research in algebraic combinatorics studies the ring of symmetric polynomials with respect to different bases, including an important basis of Schur functionssλ. It turns out that writing a product of Schur functions in terms of Schur functions givessλ⋅sμ=∑νcλ,μνsνfor the very samecλ,μνthat appear in the cohomology of the Grassmannian.The entriescλ,μνalso describe the representations of the groupGLn(C)ofn×ninvertible matrices. The irreducible representationsVλofGLn(C)are indexed by partitions, just like Schubert classes and Schur functions. The tensor productVλ⊗Vμof the vector spaceVλandVμcan be decomposed into a sumVλ⊗Vμ=⨁νcλ,μνVνof irreducible representations. The tensor product multiplicities also turn out to be precisely the coefficients in the multiplication table ofH⁎(G(k,n),C).The structure constantscλ,μνforH⁎(G(k,n),C)are well-understood. The classical combinatorial formula forcλ,μνin terms of the underlying partitions λ, μ, and ν was discovered by Littlewood–Richardson. More recently Knutson–Tao discovered a combinatorial formula for the equivariant structure constantscλ,μνforHT⁎(G(k,n),C)using splines (in the form of GKM theory) (Knutson and Tao, 2003). Their proof has three steps: 1) use splines to determine the base case of a recurrence, 2) prove that any set of numbers that satisfy the base recurrence are the same; and then 3) miraculously identify a second formula that satisfies the same recurrence and thus is the same ascλ,μν. A particularly interesting element of the proof is that while splines play a key role, it is in some sense an indirect role. Geometrically splines have proven very difficult to calculate.Flag varieties form another important family of spaces that satisfy the GKM hypotheses. Consider the general linear groupGLn(C), namely the collection ofn×ninvertible matrices. The subgroup of upper-triangular invertible matrices is called the Borel subgroup and typically denoted B. The flag variety is the quotientGLn(C)/B.On the one hand a flag is a coset gB. On the other hand a flagV•can be realized geometrically as a nested collection of subspacesV1⊊V2⊊V3⊊⋯⊊Vn−1⊊CnTo see that these two descriptions are equivalent, write the columns of g as vectorsv1,v2,…,vnwhere〈v1,…,vi〉=Vi. The different matrix representatives for a given flagV•are exactly the matrices in the coset gB. Indeed the matrices in gB contain all possible nonzero vectors inV1as their first column; their second column contains all vectors inV2that are linearly independent fromV1, and so on.The moment graph of the flag variety is defined as follows:•The vertices are the permutationsSn.There is an edge between each pair of permutationsw↔(ij)wthat are related by multiplication by a transposition. (Here(ij)indicates the permutation that exchanges i and j and leaves all other numbers fixed.)The label on the edgew↔(ij)wistj−ti. (Typically we assumej>i.)There are many symmetries in the moment graph of the flag variety and in the equivariant cohomology of the flag variety. For instance, the permutation groupSnacts on the verticesSneither by left- or right-multiplication. At the same time, the groupSnalso acts by permuting the variablest1,t2,…,tn. Some of these actions extend toSnactions on the splines, too, as we discuss in Section 3.The careful reader may also notice certain similarities between the moment graph ofP2and that ofGL3(C)/B. In fact the moment graph ofGL3(C)/Bis a twisted product of the graph consisting of a single edge together with the moment graph ofP2. Fig. 4shows how the single edge (drawn in boldface) is transported around the cycle with a Möbius-like twist on the back edges (drawn with dotted lines). This is part of a general phenomenon studied extensively by Guillemin et al. (2012, 2013). Each GrassmannianG(k,n)can be identified with the quotientGLn(C)/Pkof the flag variety by the larger groupPk⊃Bofn×ninvertible matrices whose bottom-leftn−k×n−kblock is zero. This gives rise to a fiber bundlePk/B↪GLn(C)/B↠G(k,n)whose equivariant cohomology satisfies the module isomorphismHT⁎(P/B)⊗HT⁎(G(k,n))≅HT⁎(GLn(C)/B)This result is often called the equivariant Leray–Hirsch isomorphism; it can be realized as a straightforward product of splines in two different submodules ofHT⁎(GLn(C)/B)(Drellich and Tymoczko, in press).Just like projective space and Grassmannians, the flag variety has a natural collection of subvarieties called Schubert varieties that induce a basis for (ordinary and equivariant) cohomology. There is also a remarkable formula for the polynomial associated to the restriction of the equivariant Schubert classσvat the fixed point w. This formula is often referred to as Billey's formula forσwvand was discovered by Andersen–Jantzen–Soergel and Billey independently (Andersen et al., 1994; Billey, 1999). We give the formula in the case ofGLn(C)/Bthough it holds in more generality, including projective spaces and Grassmannians, so long as appropriate permutations are chosen to represent the Schubert classes inHT⁎(G(k,n),C).Theorem 2.2Billey's formulaWrite w as a product of simple reflections(i,i+1)in as few reflections as possible. Denote this factorization of w by(i1,i1+1)(i2,i2+1)⋯(ik,ik+1). Let R be the collection of subsets{j1<j2<⋯<jℓ}of minimum cardinality for whichv=(ij1,ij1+1)(ij2,ij2+1)⋯(ijk,ijk+1). Thenσwv=∑{j1<j2<⋯<jℓ}∈R∏r=1ℓ(i1,i1+1)(i2,i2+1)(i3,i3+1)⋯(ijr−1,ijr−1+1)(tjr−tjr+1)where permutations act on variables by exchanging the indices.For instancew=(13)could be written either(12)(23)(12)or(23)(12)(23). If we pickw=(12)(23)(12)andv=(23)then the set R contains only {2} andσwv=(12)(t3−t2)=t3−t1If instead we takew=(23)(12)(23)andv=(23)then the set R contains {1} and {3} andσwv=(t3−t2)+(23)(12)(t3−t2)=t3−t2+t2−t1=t3−t1This example demonstrates that it is nontrivial even to see that the formula is well-defined. Fig. 5gives all of the equivariant Schubert classesσvinHT⁎(GL3(C)/B,C)listed in orderv=e,(12),(23),(13),(12)(23),(23)(12)Each splineσvin Fig. 5 is denoted by a copy of the graph with vertex w labeled by the polynomialσwv. The top vertex of the second spline is labeled with the polynomialt3−t1that we just computed.We close this section with an open question. Recall that there is a closed formula for coefficients in the multiplication table for the cohomologyH⁎(G(k,n),C)of each Grassmannian. Perhaps surprisingly there is no good formula for the analogue in the case of the flag variety, either in ordinary or equivariant cohomology. What does “good” mean? It means an explicit, positive formula—essentially a formula that counts some quantity rather than restating Billey's formula with inclusion/exclusion. This is a problem that has attracted enormous attention within Schubert calculus with only limited success. We suspect that the problem needs radically new tools or perspective.In this section we describe three very natural tools for geometers and topologists working on splines. We focus on how these tools are used to identify bases for the module of splines.It bears repeating that one significant difference from the analytic approach to splines is that geometers typically think about splines as modules over a polynomial ring rather than over the base fieldCorR. Geometers also tend to use bases of splines whose polynomialspuare either zero or homogeneous of a fixed degree depending on p. This means that each module basis spline corresponds to a family of vector-space basis splines. For instance inS21(Δ)the constant module basis element 1 gives rise to the six vector-space basis elements{1,x1,y1,x21,xy1,y21}while a degree-two basis element p gives rise only to itself as a vector-space basis element. (If there were degree-one basis elements p they would generally correspond to the three vector-space basis elements{p,xp,yp}.) In some settings one needs to worry about whether the module is actually free over the polynomial ring, which would imply that minimal generating sets of splines are actually bases. Spaces that satisfy the GKM hypotheses are always free modules so this is not a concern for GKM theory.We now discuss some geometric strategies to identify module generators for splines.Recall in what follows that geometers traditionally studyS∞0(GX)since those are the splines isomorphic to equivariant cohomology (though Section 4 describes interpretations of the ringSdr(GX)).Given a torus acting on a space in X, one of the most natural things for geometers and topologists to do is to push subspaces around in X using the torus. This technique goes by different names in different fields (e.g. Morse theory for analysts/topologists, Bialynicki–Birula decompositions for algebraists/geometers). Regardless of the name, the techniques have consequences for splines that can be described precisely without reference to the underlying geometry.These techniques often use a one-dimensional torus chosen “suitably generically” from a possibly larger torus action on X. From a combinatorial perspective, choosing a one-dimensional torus corresponds to directing the edges of the graphGX. The “suitably generic” condition helps ensure that the directed graph is a poset, namelyGXhas no directed cycles.These techniques give an analogue for splines of upper-triangularity, though the definition we give here is independent of geometry.Definition 3.1Suppose that G is a directed, edge-labeled graph. A spline p on G is poset upper-triangular if there is a vertex v in the graph for whichpv≠0andpu=0for all vertices u in the graph without a directed path to v. (The second condition can be writtenu≯vwith the partial order > defined by the direction on the graph.) A basisBfor the set of splines on G is a flow-up basis if its elements can be indexed with distinct vertices so that the basis elements are all poset upper-triangular.Intuitively each element of a flow-up basis collects the points that “flow up” from a specific vertex according to the action of the torus.For some graphs, like cycles, poset upper-triangularity is equivalent to ordinary upper-triangularity. Fig. 6shows a flow-up basis for the equivariant cohomology ofP2. Each spline is denoted by a copy of the graph with vertices labeled by polynomials. For the reader's convenience, we left the edge-labels on the graph; they are indicated in grey. Flow-up bases for more general graphs do not correspond as naturally to upper-triangular bases. For instance Fig. 5 shows a flow-up basis forHT⁎(GL3(C)/B,C). We can impose a total order on the vertices to make this basis upper-triangular, but that requires an arbitrary choice; poset upper-triangularity is the more natural condition. (For flag varieties, Grassmannians, and more general partial flag varieties, the flow-up basis is precisely the Schubert basis.)Geometers generally require a stronger condition on flow-up classes than in Definition 3.1: that the flow-up classpvrestricted to the fixed point v is the product of the labels on the edges directed out of v. Our definition applies in greater generality, discussed at greater length in Section 4.Many natural spaces X satisfy an additional geometric condition called Palais–Smale, which ensures that if a flow-up basis exists then it is unique. Combinatorially the Palais–Smale condition says that the graph G satisfies the property that for each directed edgeu↦vthe number of edges directed out of u is greater than the number of edges directed out of v. Informally the number of out-edges increases along each path up in the graph. While the geometric Palais–Smale condition is stronger, the combinatorial Palais–Smale condition suffices to guarantee uniqueness of flow-up bases. At the same time many natural manifolds are not Palais–Smale. For instance Fig. 7shows a family of manifolds called regular semisimple Hessenberg varieties parametrized by certain nondecreasing vectors recorded below each moment graph. The third example from the left is not Palais–Smale. Explicitly the vertex associated to the permutation (12) has both the flow-up class in Fig. 5 and the flow-up class whose only nonzero labels are at vertices (12) and(12)(23), labeled by the polynomialst2−t1andt2−t3respectively.A second geometric tool for working with splines comes out of geometric representation theory. The fundamental idea is that graph automorphisms (namely bijectionsV(G)→V(G)that preserve the adjacencies in G) sometimes preserve the spline relations as well. In this section we sketch the general philosophy using flag varieties; for a deeper discussion and more examples, see e.g. Tymoczko (2008).Recall that the vertices in the moment graph of the flag variety are associated with the elements of the permutation groupSn. Each element v in the groupSnacts onSnin two different ways: either by left multiplicationv⋅w↦vwor by right multiplicationv⁎w↦wv−1. Both of these actions give rise to an action on splines as follows.Right-multiplication on the vertices induces an action on the splines in the equivariant cohomology ring because the labels on the edges come from left-multiplication by transpositions. In other words the moment graph for the flag variety contains an edge(ij)w↔wif and only if it contains an edge(ij)wv−1↔wv−1for eachv∈Sn. Fig. 8shows what right-multiplication by the simple reflection (23) does to a flow-up class.Left-multiplication of the vertex labels by (23) corresponds to exchanging labels on either side of the edges of positive slope. That does not preserve splines: for instance it would send the flow-up class of Fig. 8 to a class whose central vertical edge hadt3−t2on the bottom andt3−t1on the top. However if we also permute the variables by (23) the outcome is again a spline, as shown in Fig. 9. (This action on polynomials appeared in Billey's formula in Section 2.3 as well.)These geometric representations lend themselves to two different kinds of tools. The first is a collection of degree-lowering operators on the collection of splines that behaves particularly well with respect to flow-up bases. Bernstein–Gelfand–Gelfand and Demazure originally defined divided difference operators for flag varieties (Bernšteĭn et al., 1973; Demazure, 1973). The essential formula for a divided difference operator∂iis:∂ip=(i,i+1)⋅p−pti+1−tiAs written the formula could apply to polynomials p with(i,i+1)exchanging the ith andi+1thvariables, or it could apply to splines p with the left action ofSndefined above. A similar formula can also be written for the right action but instead of dividing by the constantti+1−tiwe divide by the label on the edgev(i,i+1)↔vincident to each vertex v. One key property divided difference operators satisfy for the flow-up (equivalently Schubert) basis{σv:v∈Sn}of the flag variety is∂iσv={σ(i,i+1)vif(i,i+1)vis belowvin the moment graph0otherwiseDivided difference operators are an important tool in algebraic combinatorics; for instance, part of the proof of Billey's formula is an elementary application of divided difference operators (Billey, 1999).The second tool has been much less studied. Representations can also be used to create symmetrized bases for splines or subsets of splines. In this case the group action can be used to transport a particular polynomial around the vertices, creating splines that are fixed by the overallSnaction. Fig. 10shows a symmetrized basis for splines on the flag varietyGL3(C)/B. In each case the polynomial at the bottom vertex was transported by the group action around all of the vertices. ThisSnaction actually descends to Grassmannians as well. Fig. 11shows the symmetrized basis for splines onP2as a comparison. Guillemin–Sabatini–Zara constructed examples of symmetrized bases as a step towards identifying bases for splines that arise as fiber bundles (Guillemin et al., 2012, 2013).Symmetrized bases are not nearly as common as flow-up bases in the literature. In one sense the construction is more algebraic than geometric since it relies on a representation on cohomology. Moreover this symmetrization only describes the whole module if the representation on splines is trivial, which is not usually the case. For instance the left action ofSnrestricts to the splines on the Hessenberg varieties shown in Fig. 7. In general the number of symmetrized basis elements decreases as the parameter h changes, as shown in Fig. 12. Currently the only known formula computes the number of symmetrized class rather than the classes themselves. It is an open question to find an explicit formula for a maximal set of basis classes for the equivariant cohomology of regular semisimple Hessenberg varieties that is also symmetric under theSn-action. (These symmetrized basis classes generate a subring that is isomorphic to the cohomology of a different family of Hessenberg varieties called regular nilpotent Hessenberg varieties (Abe et al., 2015).)Containment is another natural geometric relationship to consider, though one with more limited uses. This has been most extensively considered for a GKM space Y which is a subvariety of another GKM space X, both with respect to the same torus action. Schubert varieties are one example, as are other examples that come from flowing subspaces as far as possible in one particular direction. In these cases information about bases and geometric representations for X can be applied directly to splines on Y.In general some of the most interesting results about subvarieties come from leveraging information about bases for splines of the ambient space. For instance both the GrassmannianG/Pand the quotientP/Bcan be viewed as submodules of the splinesHT⁎(GLn(C)/B)by restricting the Schubert classes to specific fixed points in the moment graph. Together with Billey's formula, this permits calculations that aren't as easy whenG/PorP/Bare viewed just in their own right (Drellich and Tymoczko, in press).The technique of restricting splines to the fixed points lying inside certain subvarieties has been used even when the subvariety Y is not a GKM space with respect to the same torus action (Harada and Tymoczko, 2010). This technique—called poset pinball—can be used to construct theC⁎-equivariant cohomology of Y. In some sense this is a geometry/topology problem more than a problem about splines: it restricts splines to various subsets of vertices, but often the cohomologyHC⁎⁎(Y)is not a spline ring itself.We conclude with an algebraic generalization of splines that gives a more abstract framework for some of the problems that we have considered here.To define this more general version of splines, fix a graphG=(V,E). For simplicity we assume that G has a finite vertex set, no multiedges (so each pair of vertices has at most one edge between them), and no loops (so there are no edges from a vertex to itself). Let R be any commutative ring with identity. A mapα:E→{ideals inR}is called an edge-labeling of the graph G.The ring of splines on the edge-labeled graph(G,α)is defined to beRG,α={p∈R|V|:for each edgeuvthe differencepu−pvis inα(uv)}Different choices of parameters inRG,αnaturally recover the parameters r and d in the classical ring of splinesSdr(G). The parameter r arises from a map α that sends each edge uv to an ideal〈ℓuvr+1〉whereℓuvis a homogeneous linear form determined by the slope of the edge uv in the standard way (see also Billera's dual graph construction Billera, 1988). The parameter d arises by choosing the ringR=R[x1,x2,…,xn]/〈monomials of degree at leastd+1〉Intuitively (and somewhat inaccurately) this means: compute splines over the ringR[x1,x2,…,xn]and “throw away” everything whose degree is too big. One subtlety is that the division algorithm does not hold for multivariable polynomial rings; the field of Gröbner bases developed in order to deal with the complications that arise.Geometers have not studied the rings corresponding toSdr(G)when d is finite or r is nonzero, though it seems likely thatSd0(G)carries useful geometric information (as Billera noted). The geometric implications of varying r are more mysterious, and interesting.A few words on bases in this context are useful. Again we consider module bases rather than vector space bases. Indeed splines over an arbitrary ring R do not necessarily have vector-space bases (for instance when R is the integers, described more below). Of more concern, the module of splines may not even be free, both in interesting (DiPasquale, 2012) and uninteresting (e.g. when R has zero divisors) ways.When we first considered flow-up bases in Section 3.1, we said that geometers typically require the flow-up classpvrestricted to the vertex v to be the product of labels on edges directed out of v. There are examples of flow-up bases for generalized splines for which this condition does not hold (see Handschy et al., 2014, who give an example over the integers). If X is a GKM space then Definition 3.1 (and the GKM conditions) implies the product condition onpvv.In fact one could generalize splines even more, along the lines of Braden–MacPherson's construction of intersection homology (Braden and MacPherson, 2001). Their starting point is a graph with a moduleMvat each vertex. At each edge there is a moduleMuvand mapsφu:Mu→Muvandφv:Mu→Muv. A spline in this context is a collectionp∈∏vMvso that for each edge uvφu(pu)=φv(pv)When eachMvis R, eachMuvisR/α(uv), and each mapφu:Mu→Muvis the standard quotient map, we recover the definition above.Splines over the integers have interesting connections to number theory. In fact the Chinese Remainder theorem can be restated as a question about splines on the path with three vertices whose edge labels are the idealsmZandm′Zshown in Fig. 13. We can ask whether given integers a anda′associated to the vertices in Fig. 13 can be extended to a spline on the entire graph. In other words is there an integer x associated to the middle vertex so that{x≡amodmandx≡a′modm′This is precisely what the Chinese Remainder theorem determines.As in the Chinese Remainder theorem, splines overZare closely related to splines overZ/mZ. We summarize what is currently known about splines overZandZ/mZ.•Splines overZalways form a free module of rank|V(G)|(Gilbert et al., in press). (In other words they have a basis with the same number of elements as vertices in G.) By contrast splines overZ/mZcan have any rank between 1 and|V(G)|depending on the graph (Bowden and Tymoczko, 2015). Splines overZ/mZare not generally free because they are finiteZ-modules; like other finiteZ-modules, they have a natural analogue of a basis.Given an edge-labeled graph(G,α), Bowden–Tymoczko identified the ring of splines overZ/mZusing the structure theorem for finite abelian groups (Bowden and Tymoczko, 2015). Bowden–Philbin–Swift–Tammaro chose a particular m and showed explicitly that the minimal representatives of the basis for splines overZ/mZalso forms a basis for splines on(G,α)overZ(Bowden et al., in preparation).Explicit bases for splines are known for several families of graphs, including trees (using arbitrary rings) (Gilbert et al., in press) and cycles (usingZ) (Handschy et al., 2014). Handschy–Melnick–Reinders gave an explicit formula for the smallest value of each element of their flow-up basis (Handschy et al., 2014). Bowden–Hagen–King–Reinders gave an explicit formula for each entry of each basis element of splines on cycles overZunder the hypothesis that one pair of adjacent edge-labels is relatively prime (Bowden et al., 2015). (The general GKM package implies each pair of adjacent edge-labels is relatively prime.)With a basis, we can try to explicitly describe multiplication tables as in Section 2.2. Even in the case of integers and integers mod m this can be a challenge. Bowden–Hagen–King–Reinders used their basis for splines on some cycles to write an explicit multiplication table (Bowden et al., 2015). Bowden–Philbin–Swift–Tammaro gave an explicit formula for the multiplication table of splines mod m over arbitrary graphs, using a more implicitly defined basis (Bowden et al., in preparation).Much of this work extends to PIDs in general, includingC[x]andR[x]. Some of it even extends toZ[x]in the geometric context even thoughZ[x]is a quintessential example of a ring that is not a PID. Indeed if X is a GKM space for which GKM theory can be used with integer coefficients (like the flag variety), then we can restrict the torus T to various one-dimensional subgroups and get a map from splines overZ[t1,…,tn]toZ[x]. Judicious choice of the one-dimensional subgroup together with the GKM conditions imply that each edge-label is an ideal of the formnxZfor some integer n. The ring of splines in that case is very closely related to the ring of splines over integers obtained by evaluating atx=1as in (Gilbert et al., in press, Theorem 2.12).One of the most interesting aspects of generalized splines is that natural graph operations also give useful information. In this section we will describe ways to remove parts of a graph. This often changes the underlying graph in ways that violate conditions from classical splines or geometry. In a simple case of our first example, removing a vertex together with its incident edges leaves a graph that no longer satisfies the regularity conditions that moment graphs of manifolds satisfy. In the second example, removing an edge typically results in a graph that is not dual to a triangulation.Let us first consider the effects onRG,αof removing a subgraph of G. SupposeG′is a subgraph of G. LetMG/G′be the collection of splines that are zero on all of the vertices ofG′, namelyMG/G′={p∈RG:p(u)=0for allu∈V(G)−V(G′)}Define the restriction mapϕ:RG→RG′that forgets all vertices in G but notG′, namely(pu)u∈V(G)↦(pu)u∈V(G′)ThenMG/G′is the kernel of ϕ. In other wordsMG/G′↪RG→ϕRG′is exact. Moreover the first isomorphism theorem tells usImϕ≅RG′/MG′/GColloquially Imϕ tells us which splines can be extend fromG′to G. WhenG′consists of a single vertex, this corresponds to adding a single triangle to a triangulation.We can also remove edges from the graph G, effectively removing the conditions between two vertices. IfG′is a graph obtained from G by erasing some edges then we get an inclusionRG↪RG′. For instance if G is planar graph, we can choose a vertex as the root and take a spanning subtreeT⊆Gfor which the distance between two vertices in T is the same as in G. The injectionR(G)↪R(T)describesR(G)as a submodule of a free module whose generators are well-understood (Gilbert et al., in press, Theorem 4.1). Refining the way edges are added to T gives a sequence of inclusionsR(G)↪R(Gi)↪⋯↪R(G1)↪R(T)This can constrain the codimension of each inclusion in interesting ways. We know of no good analogue to this operation for splines over triangulations: removing an edge appears to “cut” the plane so that two triangles are no longer adjacent, without moving or removing those triangles.We conclude with another example, an algorithm that uses graph operations like contractions and deletions to produce explicit bases for splines overZ. The algorithm has the following steps:1.If G is a tree then we have an explicit formula for a flow-up basis for its splines (Gilbert et al., in press, Theorem 4.1).Otherwise suppose v is a vertex in G with neighborsN(v). Construct the (multi)graphGv′by erasing v and any incident edges from G and then add all possible edgesuu′foru≠u′withu,u′∈N(v). The edgeuu′is labeled with the idealαuv⊕αu′v.IfGv′has any multiedges replace it with the graphGvconstructed as follows. If the pair of verticesuu′have edges labeledI1,I2, …,Ikthen replace those edges with a single edge labeledI1∩I2∩⋯Ik.Return to Step 1 with the graphGv.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
