@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Eliminating rib shadows in chest radiographic images providing diagnostic assistance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a two-step algorithm for eliminating rib shadows in chest radiographic images.The algorithm delineates the ribs using a novel hybrid self-template approach.It suppresses the delineated ribs using an unsupervised regression model.The rib delineations can improve the performance of CAD systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD),Chest radiography,Medical image analysis,Bone suppression,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A major difficulty with chest radiographic analysis is the invisibility of abnormalities caused by the superimposition of normal anatomical structures, such as ribs, over the main tissue to be examined. Suppressing the ribs with no information loss about the original tissue would therefore be helpful during manual identification or computer-aided detection of nodules on a chest radiographic image. In this study, we introduce a two-step algorithm for eliminating rib shadows in chest radiographic images. The algorithm first delineates the ribs using a novel hybrid self-template approach and then suppresses these delineated ribs using an unsupervised regression model that takes into account the change in proximal thickness (depth) of bone in the vertical axis. The performance of the system is evaluated using a benchmark set of real chest radiographic images. The experimental results determine that proposed method for rib delineation can provide higher accuracy than existing methods. The knowledge of rib delineation can remarkably improve the nodule detection performance of a current computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system. It is also shown that the rib suppression algorithm can increase the nodule visibility by eliminating rib shadows while mostly preserving the nodule intensity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Radiography is considered among the least expensive and least harmful of the conventional imaging modalities. Despite the availability of a wide variety of more complicated imaging techniques, it remains ubiquitous in medical practice even for well-equipped hospitals and radiology departments. It usually serves as a handy screening tool before the decision to undertake more elaborate examinations, such as computed tomography or laboratory analyses for pathology. Detection of lung nodules using chest radiographs is a common example of these studies. Despite its practical use in various areas, the reliable analysis of radiographic images remains a challenge—whether done manually or computationally—because of their low resolution and “noisy” content. In addition to these major difficulties, chest radiographic analysis suffers from the presence of normal anatomical structures (e.g., bones, other overlapping organs), which obscure abnormalities that are buried in normal lung tissue. In a typical scenario, nodules in the main tissue might be blocked from view by shadows of quasi-parallel bones in the ribcage. Therefore, delineation followed by suppression of the ribs on the input image without losing any information regarding the lung tissue underneath the ribs is an important computational challenge in computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems that are applied to chest radiographs.In this study, we addressed the problem of eliminating rib shadows from lung images obtained by chest radiography, which is usually designed as a sub-module of radiographic CAD systems. To this end, we introduce a two-step approach. It first delineates the ribs using a novel integrative approach based on parabola curve fitting from rib seeds obtained via log Gabor filtering and then suppresses the delineated ribs using an unsupervised regression model. The system is completely unsupervised. That is, it does not require a training set of manually delineated ribs or any knowledge-driven rules provided by an expert. The new system is examined visually in a well-known chest radiography set [1]. It has been clearly demonstrated that the ribs can be delineated provided that at least one template can be detected from the original image. The knowledge of rib delineation itself offers an additional feature to current CAD systems, which can improve their nodule detection performance. Using rib suppression thereafter can further assist both manual and computational diagnosis by providing a clear view of main lung tissue.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have introduced a complete framework that takes an unprocessed lung image obtained through chest radiography, reports the pixels of the entire rib regions, and eliminates rib shadows by subtracting an estimated rib effect from the observed intensity.The contributions of the study are threefold. First, a parabola equation extracted from a rib border template is fitted into rib seeds, which are defined as the starting points of the ribs closer to the outermost (right or left) part of the ribcage. The previous methods largely depended on the quantitative and qualitative value of detected rib borders. Most often, the method employed for edge detection failed to cover all of the ribs in the ribcage or reported incorrectly some other curves that resemble a rib boundary. As the present method does not require detection of any border but only its outermost starting point, the detection rate can be substantially increased by using the log Gabor filtering approach. The second contribution is a new region-growing technique that is introduced to extend the rib center to build the entire rib until rib boundaries are reached. The technique allows each individual rib to grow independently from its initial parabola equation. In that sense, the difference between the curvature structures of the upper and lower ribs can be elaborated. The experimental results have shown that the automated system can delineate the ribs as successfully as a manual observation. The novel rib suppression technique that we offer is the third contribution. The technique assumes different rib thicknesses in the vertical direction while preserving it in the horizontal direction as being more relevant to the foundations of ribcage anatomy. A regression model built on this assumption can successfully remove the rib shadows, which finally provides a clear view of lung tissue.It is shown that the knowledge of rib delineations can improve the nodule detection ability of current CAD systems. This can be achieved by integrating an additional feature that represents the estimated information of whether the candidate nodule is obscured by a rib shadow. The suppressed image can also help in reducing the false nodule alerts, which is usually more desirable by radiologists to consider a CAD system as a practical tool in clinical use. It is systematically shown that the visibility of nodules can be increased after rib suppression. Furthermore, the knowledge to be generated by the proposed system, either in the form of delineation or suppression, is anticipated to facilitate the detection of other abnormalities in chest radiographs, which in turn to offer a general diagnostic tool that will assist radiologists.A number of future directions can be drawn to compete with current limitations of the system. For weak suppression problem in lung regions close to chest wall, using a narrower window may usually help. However, we observed that lowering window width resulted with a weaker suppression in general rib area. From a clinical point of view, this is less preferred since the upper and lower rib borders become more apparent, which is the actual reason why rib shadow elimination is needed. Another solution will be using a context-sensitive regression model which is computed with varying parameters for each region. Evaluating computational feasibility of such model is left as a future work. Another limitation of the current system is imposed by our assumption that the images have almost horizontal symmetry. The missing cases in template extraction can be attributed to two reasons. First, rib shadows cannot be observed in original image. In fact, this should not be considered as a problem, since no suppression is needed in this case. Therefore, failing to delineate the ribs has no negative effect in the manual observation of a radiologist. Second reason is the lack of horizontal symmetry in lung area. This leads to a failure in identifying the symmetry of an extracted template only in one lobe. Since the system disregards any rib template found in only one lobe, no further delineation, and therefore suppression, can be pursued. In practical applications, a pre-processing step that can transform the input image as to have a horizontal symmetry will be needed. To increase the nodule detection performance in upper lung regions, detection and suppression of clavicles is also crucial. Although our suppression model can be simply applied for clavicles, their delineation requires a specific model since they cannot fit into a parabolic model that we assumed for the ribs. Integrating this system with a clavicle detection model will be more helpful in practice.