@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational analysis of cartilage implants based on an interpenetrated polymer network for tissue repairing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A 3D computational model to study the behaviour of interpenetrated polymer networks (IPNs) for cartilage repairing is proposed.The model can predict the permeability of the poly(ethyl acrylate) (PEA)–poly(2-hydroxyethyl acrylate) (PHEA) IPNs.The model is able to simulate the internal distribution and quantification of fluid flux of the two phases composite.The model enables us to study the nutrient supply within the different biomaterial regions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cartilage-like hydrogels,Interpenetrated polymer networks,Computational model,FE simulation,Sussman–Bathe model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Interpenetrated polymer networks (IPNs), composed by two independent polymeric networks that spatially interpenetrate, are considered as valuable systems to control permeability and mechanical properties of hydrogels for biomedical applications. Specifically, poly(ethyl acrylate) (PEA)–poly(2-hydroxyethyl acrylate) (PHEA) IPNs have been explored as good hydrogels for mimicking articular cartilage. These lattices are proposed as matrix implants in cartilage damaged areas to avoid the discontinuity in flow uptake preventing its deterioration. The permeability of these implants is a key parameter that influences their success, by affecting oxygen and nutrient transport and removing cellular waste products to healthy cartilage. Experimental try-and-error approaches are mostly used to optimize the composition of such structures. However, computational simulation may offer a more exhaustive tool to test and screen out biomaterials mimicking cartilage, avoiding expensive and time-consuming experimental tests. An accurate and efficient prediction of material's permeability and internal directionality and magnitude of the fluid flow could be highly useful when optimizing biomaterials design processes. Here we present a 3D computational model based on Sussman–Bathe hyperelastic material behaviour. A fluid structure analysis is performed with ADINA software, considering these materials as two phases composites where the solid part is saturated by the fluid. The model is able to simulate the behaviour of three non-biodegradable hydrogel compositions, where percentages of PEA and PHEA are varied. Specifically, the aim of this study is (i) to verify the validity of the Sussman–Bathe material model to simulate the response of the PEA–PHEA biomaterials; (ii) to predict the fluid flux and the permeability of the proposed IPN hydrogels and (iii) to study the material domains where the passage of nutrients and cellular waste products is reduced leading to an inadequate flux distribution in healthy cartilage tissue. The obtained results show how the model predicts the permeability of the PEA–PHEA hydrogels and simulates the internal behaviour of the samples and shows the distribution and quantification of fluid flux.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Articular cartilage defects are a common type of injury in aged population [1]. Most common treatments consist of removing the diseased and undermined cartilage to stop inflammation and pain, including chondrectomy and debridement [2]. In both cases, the empty area is covered with a fibrous self-regenerated tissue with similar structure to healthy tissue but with poor mechanical properties [3]. Fibered matrix implants are explored as a substitution of damaged tissue providing good mechanical properties, mimicking cartilage microstructure [4], avoiding discontinuity in flow uptake with healthy tissue (host tissue) which prevent its deterioration (Fig. 1). Recently, these lattices are also proposed as ex vivo platforms in bioreactors to test scaffolds for cartilage tissue engineering to mimic the host healthy tissue in vivo. They act in vitro as support systems to lodge scaffolds and maintain the correct fluid flow [5].In this sense, the internal structure of the fibered matrix implant is a major biomaterial characteristic for tissue engineering [6,7] that provide structural support for mechanical loads and keep the adequate distribution of stress within the tissue. Such constructs offer a flexible physical environment to allow passage of nutrients and removing cellular waste products contained in the synovial fluid in response to dynamic compression process similar to those observed in physiological tissue conditions [8]. Cells nutrition and by-product exchange are diffusive mediated processes occurring in the cellular surrounding region [9]. Therefore, these events are of special interest in biomedical implants for cartilage as being the only mean of nutrient uptake by chondrocytes, due to the avascular and no neural nature of this tissue [10].The intrinsic permeability coefficient of the implant materials and inner fluid flux analysis are determinant to ensure homogeneous supply of nutrients thorough the system [11]. In this sense, the inner flux analysis provides insight into the adequate nutrient distribution within the healthy tissue [12]. To experimentally control both parameters, numerous manufacturing techniques have been developed, from particulate-leaching techniques, where salt, wax or sugar porogens are used to create the pores or channels [13], to the “rapid prototyping” where the fabrication process is computationally controlled [14]. Most of these methods can rapidly produce fibered matrix implants; however, the critical variables such as porosity, mechanical properties and diffusive parameters are not controlled.The observed shortcomings are partially overcome by the use of interpenetrated polymer networks (IPNs) [15]. IPNs are polymeric systems of two or more independent networks which are spatially interlaced, but do not have covalent bonds between them (Fig. 2). The resulting biomaterial offers not only good mechanical properties and permeability but also high thermo stability and good dielectric properties [16].Despite of the above mentioned advances in mimicking the natural tissue environment, oversimplified biomaterials for cartilage tissue regeneration are still being used [17]; since high experimental costs and consumed manufacturing time make inefficient the optimization process to obtain custom adequate biomaterials to host tissue singularities [18].These observations motivate the development of new computational models to simulate the behaviour of each specific biomaterial avoiding try-and-error experimental assays and also providing additional insights in IPN manufacturing processes [19]. Due to the wide variety of hydrogel compositions and manufacturing procedures [20], experimental assays to characterize their behaviour are costly and time-consuming. In this sense, computational models can simulate their specific behaviour depending on their composition. Whereas hydrogels manufactured through traditional materials as collagen [21], have been widely modelled, computational models to simulate IPNs remain unexplored. Besides, the lack of understanding concerning the flux generated when applying different mechanical forces, prevent their use in new applications related to tissue engineering [22]. Specifically, it is of special relevance, to establish the magnitude and directionality of flux that will be held in each specific hydrogel composition [23]. It should be sufficient to enable nutrient diffusion to cells avoiding their death due to malnutrition and consequently, the matrix degradation [24]. For such materials, the constitutive models have a wide variation in their complexity, from simple linear-elastic models to hyper-elastic continuum models [25,26].In this work, we present a 3D computational model to simulate the behaviour of IPNs based on Sussman–Bathe material model, to analyze the magnitude and direction of the fluid flux to explore the regions of the biomaterial with no nutrient supply and to predict the permeability of the IPNs that mimic cartilage tissue. For this, a fluid structure analysis is performed with ADINA software.For this aim, three compositions of non-biodegradable poly(ethylacrylate) (PEA)–poly(2-hydroxyethyl acrylate) (PHEA) IPNs were characterized to obtain the required model parameters (Young's modulus, aggregate modulus and material specific density) and to validate the computational model (permeability). In these systems, PEA defines a support network contributing to rigidity and mechanical resistance [27], while the second compound, PHEA, provides the diffusion properties to the material due to its hydrophilic nature that enables oxygen uptake [28]. Non-biodegradable and biocompatible nature of these PHEA–PEA IPNs ensures their stability and permanency in damaged areas [29]. Besides IPNs are suturable materials allowing its fixation to a specific zone of the cartilage [30]. Some experimental assays have been performed with similar lattices. These composites have been applied in damage rabbit cartilage and as corneal implants, observing a similar behaviour to host tissue and preventing the progression of damage [31]. For this work, the simulated mixed lattices have been previously characterized experimentally and its contents of PEA and PHEA were optimized to mimic the articular cartilage [32,33].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study presents a 3D model able to predict the permeability, monitor the velocity and direction of internal fluid flux and simulate the deformation of non-biodegradable PEA–PHEA implants for cartilage tissue engineering. The main novelty of this model is the consideration of Sussman–Bathe material model together with visco-elastic effects in a fluid structure analysis to capture the behaviour of IPN hydrogels.Results showed that the proposed computational model is capable of predicting the permeability of the hydrogels and simulating its internal behaviour and geometry changes which helps to determine the optimum parameters needed for hydrogels fabrication. Moreover, the present computational model is the first one which predicts the direction and the magnitude of the flux thorough the IPN PEA–PHEA porous being these parameters essential for cell maintenance and viability.In absence of literature data about IPN implants behaviour, we validate the presented model by comparing experimental permeability reported in [32,33] where the authors synthesize and mechanically characterize the studied PEA–PHEA families with obtained computational permeability for each hydrogel family. As expected, similar permeability values were obtained in both cases. Computational results showed that family 3 (40/60 PEA–79% PHEA) offered a wider range in permeability values than family 1 (60/40 PEA–64% PHEA) and family 2 (50/50 PEA–71% PHEA). Anyhow, the three families predicted and experimental permeabilities are within the cartilage physiological range, consequently, these materials perfectly mimics this tissue resistance offered to the passage of fluid [46]. Family 1 presents an inner region without flux which indicates no nutrient diffusion in this region and therefore, non-continuous passage of nutrients to the host tissue. Similarly, family 2 evidenced the same phenomena, but offering higher flux velocity in the peripheral areas of the implants. Family 3 showed a slight reduction of this critical region. This fact indicates that an addition in PHEA compound is strongly associated to the increment of the porosity and consequently, to higher permeability of the material to fluid flow through it.The inclusion of the visco-elastic effect in the model formulation enabled accurately capturing the hydrogel deformation during the uniaxial compression test.Simulation results showed how significant variations in the IPN networks generate significant changes in the mechanical properties and consequently in the material behaviour. So, in the light of obtained results, family 3 offers loading resistance similar to those observed in experiments in vivo[50,51].Briefly, the presented model is capable of predicting the intrinsic permeability of IPN hydrogel samples when external loads are applied. Furthermore, it enables to capture the behaviour of theses biomaterials quantifying the influence of varying mechanical properties such as ES, K and υ. This, together with the capability of displaying the results into easy interpretable 3D images, present this model as an interesting novel tool for designing, monitoring and controlling the efficacy of such materials as biomedical implants.No conflict of interest.