@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Unsupervised 3D shape segmentation and co-segmentation via deep learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel segmentation and co-segmentation approach for 3D shapes.We introduce deep learning into 3D shape segmentation and co-segmentation.Our method is data-driven but does not need a tedious labeling process.Our algorithm achieves better or comparable performance when compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D shapes,Segmentation,Co-segmentation,Deep learning,High-level features,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automatic segmentation of 3D shapes is a fundamental operation in geometric modeling and shape processing (Wu et al., 2013). It helps shape understanding and is also central to many computer graphics problems, including mesh parameterization, skeleton extraction, resolution modeling, shape retrieval and so on. Most of existing segmentation algorithms partition a single 3D shape depending on a specific kind of signature that is often invariant to a certain transformation group (Veltkamp and Hagedoorn, 2001; Hong and Soatto, 2015).Known signatures include scale-invariant heat kernel signatures (SIHKS) (Bronstein and Kokkinos, 2010), shape diameter function (SDF) (Shapira et al., 2008), Gaussian curvature (GC) (Gal and Cohen-Or, 2006) and so on. To our knowledge, they can be used for shape segmentation purpose. However, shape understanding is a complicated task and thus we can't rely on a single signature to settle the segmentation problem once and for all. This is due to the fact that a signature, represented as a statistics or deterministic function, can only characterize the geometric shapes from a special perspective.Recently, researchers find that simultaneously segmenting a set of 3D shapes within the same class into consistent decompositions, i.e., co-segmentation, is possible to achieve a better segmentation result than the traditional segmentation that is targeted at a single object. Some of these algorithms (Kalogerakis et al., 2010; van Kaick et al., 2011) require labeled training data to learn common segmentation rules. Generally speaking, the supervised algorithms are able to produce a desirable segmentation result if the labeled data set is sufficiently large. However, labeling 3D shapes is pretty time-consuming and tedious. By contrast, the unsupervised methods (Sidi et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2011; Hu et al., 2012; Meng et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2013) can segment 3D shapes automatically, without extra labeling. Generally, it has to be at the cost of segmentation performance.In this paper, we propose an effective unsupervised method for shape segmentation/co-segmentation based on deep learning. In the very beginning, we decompose each 3D shape into primitive patches to generate over-segmentation and compute various shape signatures for the input models. The signatures used in this paper include SIHKS (Bronstein and Kokkinos, 2010), SDF (Shapira et al., 2008) and GC (Gal and Cohen-Or, 2006). However, each separate signature can only characterize part of geometric features. Therefore, in the next stage, we build a deep neural network for unsupervised learning such that high-level features can be extracted from the geometric signatures computed in the first stage. It's noted that this stage doesn't need a labeling operation. With the support of unsupervised deep learning, we can finally segment models guided by the high-level features. Fig. 1shows an example of segmentation and co-segmentation computed by our approach.We evaluate our approach on two open datasets, including the Princeton Segmentation Benchmark (Chen et al., 2009) and the Shape COSEG Dataset (Wang et al., 2012). Extensive experimental results exhibit the superior segmentation/co-segmentation performance of the proposed method over the previous state-of-the-art approaches.Contributions. Our contributions are twofold.•We introduce deep learning into the problem of shape segmentation and co-segmentation such that various shape signatures can be integrated into a high-level feature space. This algorithmic framework is extensible – it supports a variety of shape signatures and hopefully achieves better segmentation results if some new signatures are considered in this framework.Our method is data-driven but does not need a tedious labeling process. The new approach, in its nature, is also adaptive to different databases.The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work on model segmentation and shape descriptors. Section 3 presents the overall segmentation framework followed by detailed construction process of high-level features. The unsupervised deep learning technique is detailed in Section 4. After that, we give the segmentation and co-segmentation algorithm in Section 5. In Section 6, we show extensive experimental results, as well as comparisons with the state of the art. Finally, we give limitations and future work in Section 7 and conclude this paper in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
