@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A beam to 3D model switch in transient dynamic analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Use of a 3D model and a beam model at two different stages of the same computation.For dynamic problems with non-linearities restricted in space and time.The switch reduces considerably the computational cost with preserved accuracy.Two different initialization techniques are investigated.The energy consistency of the switch is demonstrated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transient dynamics,Finite elements,Switch,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Transient structural dynamic analyses often exhibit different phases, which enable one to use an adaptive modeling. Thus, a 3D model is required for a better understanding of local or non-linear effects, whereas a simplified beam model is sufficient for simulating the linear phenomena occurring for a long period of time.This paper proposes a method which enables one to switch from a beam to a 3D model during a transient dynamic analysis, and thus, allows one to reduce the computational cost while preserving a good accuracy.The method is validated through comparisons with a 3D reference solution computed during all the simulation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many transient structural dynamic problems require a 3D model in order to accurately account for local effects, that occur along a small period of time. However, a 3D model for the entire structure used during the whole simulation will result in an unaffordable computational cost even on the best nowadays computational machines and softwares. Since a 3D model is required for a better understanding of local or non-linear effects, whereas a simplified beam model is sufficient for simulating the linear phenomena occurring for a long period of time, an adaptive modeling technique in which a 3D and a beam model are used in different phases of the transient dynamic calculations can reduce the computational cost while preserving a good accuracy. We, therefore, present a method that can reduce dramatically the computational cost, for problems where the 3D non-linearities are restricted in space and time.To solve problems for which non-linearities are restricted in time, one can use a time integration scheme switching technique. In fact, when non-linear phenomena occur, such as contact interactions, small time steps are needed to ensure an accurate modeling of the physical phenomenon. In such cases, an explicit integration method is very adapted to reduce the computational cost. However, for the complementary part of the problem which is linear, an implicit method presents the advantage of unconditional stability, thus making it possible to use larger time steps. An algorithm that enables one to switch automatically between explicit and implicit integration schemes thus significantly reduces the computational cost, see Lo et al. [1] for crash problems, Noels et al. [2,3] for structural dynamics and Noels et al. [4] for a blade/casing interaction simulation.For phenomena that are restricted in space, i.e. to a small part of the computational domain, a wide range of methods has been developed. These approaches can be divided into exact (or direct) methods and iterative ones. In the first group we mention the static condensation techniques and the exact structural reanalysis methods, such as those used in Hirai et al. [5], the volume patch techniques such as Arlequin [6] and the beam to 3D connections or shell to 3D connections, that enable one to account accurately for local 3D phenomena, while the rest of the model is less computationally expensive thanks to the beam or shell elements [7].Dealing with different subdomains with different models can be managed by domain decomposition techniques. The iterative domain decomposition methods can be overlapping or non-overlapping methods. In the first group, one finds that the multi-scale methods with patch, such as the finite element patches [8] and the harmonic patches [9], enable one to have a local zoom on the global domain.Non-overlapping domain decomposition methods can be classed into three main categories [10]: the primal approaches [11], the dual approaches (FETI method, [12]), and the hybrid or mixed approaches such as FETI-DP which is an improved version of the FETI method that mixes dual and primal approaches [13]. FETI also has a multi-scale version such that used in Mobasher Amini et al. [14] for ship structures with structural details. For similar applications we also find the micro–macro approaches [15].Regarding local non-linear phenomena, FETI was enhanced to deal with a large number of subdomains and can take geometric non-linearities into account Farhat et al. [16], and was adapted for contact problems in Avery et al. [17] and Dureisseix and Farhat [18]. In Gendre et al. [19,20], the authors developed an algorithm that enables one to replace the global mesh by a finely meshed local zone, in order to take local non-linear effects into consideration with low computational effort.For problems where non-linearities are restricted both in space and in time, a strategy that allows one to use a beam model and a beam–3D mixed model at different stages of the transient analysis allows one to reduce the computational cost while preserving a good accuracy as illustrated in Fig. 1. In fact, the simulation starts att=t0with a beam model for a linear simulation, and switches att=ts1to a beam–3D mixed model before a non-linear phenomenon takes place. The simulation switches back att=ts2to the beam model for the rest of the simulation that ends at tf, if no more non-linear phenomenon is present.This raises the problem of the switch from one model to another. This paper presents a beam to 3D model switch, as well as a beam to a mixed beam–3D model switch. The 3D to beam model switch is not the subject of this research work.The main purpose of the switch method in this paper is switching from a linear transient dynamic beam problem without large rotations and with linear material behavior to a linear transient dynamic 3D problem. Thus, the idea is to switch from a beam to a 3D model before non-linear or local phenomena are to take place, in order that the 3D model is used for the non-linear part of the simulation. Therefore in the case where non-linearity is due to contact, the switch instant can be easily computed. In fact, when a contact is detected (the contact algorithm returns contact=1), the switch instant is computed byts=t−n×Δt, where t is the contact instant,Δtis the time step value and n is a safety factor (10 is sufficient) that is taken in order to prevent the 3D computations from starting with an initial contact detected. However, this paper is focused on the switch process. Therefore, to demonstrate that the accuracy of the switch method is independent from the switch instant choice, this later is chosen arbitrary in the scope of our study cases.A beam model simulation that started at t=0 is to be switched for a 3D model simulation att=ts. Starting with the 3D model att=tsrequires the collection of the beam model solution at tsand transforming this solution to have a suitable 3D model initialization at the same moment.The fundamental dynamic equation of a beam att=tscan be written as(1)MbU¨b+CbU̇b+KbUb=fb.whereMb,Cb, andKbare, respectively, the mass, damping and stiffness matrices of the beam model.fbis the external loading att=ts,Ub,U̇b, andU¨bdenote, respectively, the beam displacements (including rotations), velocities and accelerations at the same instant.The 3D model att=tscan be described by(2)M3DU¨3D+C3DU̇3D+K3DU3D=f3DwhereM3D,C3D, andK3Dare, respectively, the mass, damping and stiffness matrices of the 3D model.f3Dis the external loading att=tson the 3D model,U3D,U̇3D, andU¨3Ddenote, respectively, the 3D model displacements, velocities and accelerations at the same instant.Suppose that we start with the beam model at t=0 and that we want to switch to the 3D model at the switch moment (t=ts). We have to construct the 3D solutionU3Dfrom the beam solution. This is performed first by decomposing the 3D displacement into a cross-section rigid body displacement corresponding to the classical Timoshenko kinematical assumptionPUb, and a 3D correctionU3Dcwhich accounts for cross-section deformation:(3)U3D=U3Dc+PUbWe therefore need to generatePUband to computeU3Dcin order to construct the 3D model displacement at ts.PUbis obtained through a projector matrix P which transforms the beam displacement vector into a 3D rigid body displacement per beam section. It is noteworthy to say that the 3D mesh and the beam mesh cannot be totally disconnected in order for the switch to be done. To be able to construct the displacement of a node on the 3D mesh, we should have the displacements and rotations of the beam node that has the same position along the beam. In other words, the beam model should be a projection of the 3D mesh on its neutral axis. However, it is not easy to build P because it depends on the relationship between the beam mesh and the 3D mesh, which may change from one cross-section to another. Instead, we will generatePUbas a whole.Let Nijbe a node that belongs to the ith cross-section of the 3D model,PUbijis the displacement of Nijcomputed for a cross-section rigid body displacement. The cross-section to which belongs Nijhas Gion its neutral axis. The ith beam node, which has the same coordinates as Gi, has a displacementUbiand a rotational displacementθbi. We, then, computePUbijas follows:(4)PUbij=Ubi+NijGi∧θbiwhereNijGiis a vector oriented from Nijto Gi.Due to the decomposition of the 3D displacement according to Eq. (3), the 3D model initialization will be performed through the 3D correctionU3Dc. Thus, inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. (2) at (t=ts)gives(5)M3D(U¨3Dc+PU¨b)+C3D(U̇3Dc+PU̇b)+K3D(U3Dc+PUb)=f3DSince we have one equation with three unknowns, the following assumptions are added:(6)U̇3Dc=0U¨3Dc=0They result in a displacement correctionU3Dcthat corresponds to a static computation for the 3D model, att=ts, and that is the solution of the following equation:(7)K3DU3Dc=f3D−M3DPU¨b−C3DPU̇b−K3DPUbThe computations ofPU̇bandPU¨bcan be done in the same way asPUbby deriving Eq. (4) with respect to time, and using the beam solution forU̇bi,U¨bi,θ̇biandθ¨bi.Now that we have in hand the 3D displacements at the switch instant corresponding to Eq. (3) , we can initialize the 3D model att=tsby(8)U3D=U3Dc+PUbU̇3D=PU̇bU¨3D=PU¨bEqs. (6) and (8) are consistent with Eq. (5), and thus allow one to initialize the 3D model without violating its fundamental equation of motion at the switch instant.However, since an integration scheme is used to solve the fundamental dynamic equation, the initialization depends also on this time integration scheme, and that makes the subject of Section 3.In order to solve a dynamic problem, one needs to have in hand the initial displacements and velocities. The initial accelerations are therefore the solution of the fundamental equation of motion solved at the initial instant, in our case the switch instant. However, when this equation is solved numerically via a time integration scheme, the required initial conditions in that case depend on the time integration scheme being used. For an explicit integration scheme, not initializing the initial accelerations will lead the finite element software used (it is the case of most softwares) to consider zero initial accelerations. For an implicit integration scheme, we can correctly compute the initial accelerations that satisfy the fundamental equation of motion at that instant. Therefore, for an explicit integration scheme initializing the accelerations is mandatory to avoid an artifact transient phenomenon that may lead the integration scheme to diverge shortly after switching. However, in the examples shown in this paper, we are using an implicit integration scheme, namely a Newmark integration scheme that does not require initial accelerations since the software, Code_Aster or Abaqus, computes automatically the initial accelerations having in hand the initial displacements and velocities, as indicated in Rixen [21]. Thus in that case, the initialization of the 3D solution att=tsis(9)U3D=U3Dc+PUbU̇3D=PU̇bandU¨3Dsolution of(10)M3DU¨3D=(f3D−C3DU̇3D−K3DU3D)However, it is noteworthy to mention that with this choice only the displacements are different from the cross-section rigid-body assumption at the switch instant. The initial velocities remain those constructed from the beam model, and they are around 5% different from the 3D reference velocities and accelerations for most cases of study shown later in this paper. This difference seems quite small, but is still strong enough for the problems we have solved and may cause an artifact transient phenomenon depicted by high frequency oscillations in the accelerations and velocities values. These high frequency oscillations may lead the solution to diverge. In order to vanish these oscillations, one can insert a numerical damping or change the velocities corrections as detailed in below.A numerical damping in the integration scheme can filter these high frequency oscillations without any other influence on the solution. The HHT integration scheme has been used in this study to filter the numerical oscillations. This numerical damping needs to be maintained on several time steps following the switch in order for the high frequency oscillations to vanish, as shown in the results in the following. However, we propose a more attractive method which can reduce the high frequency oscillations that appear after switching considerably and is detailed in Section 3.2.As Eq. (9) shows, the high frequency oscillations are generated by a poor initialization of the velocities and subsequently of the accelerations (Eq. (10)), since the latter are generated from the beam solution and are not completely adapted to the 3D model. The hypothesis taken in Eq. (9) is too strong and therefore generates high frequency oscillations. However, assuming that the displacement initialization is adapted to the 3D model, then a strategy enabling a better initialization of the velocities (and accelerations if needed for the integration scheme) based on the displacement correction can be built with the integration scheme and thus eliminates the high frequency transient phenomenon that occurs after switching.We, therefore, first check the displacement correction on a static problem to prove its efficiency and then, according to the integration scheme being used, construct velocity and acceleration initializations.The switch for a static problem may be seen as a particular case of the dynamic one. It is investigated here to test if the 3D displacements after switching are close to a reference 3D static solution. The beam fundamental equation for a static problem is(11)KUb=fbThe 3D fundamental equation is(12)K3DU3D=f3DThe 3D displacement can be divided as explained earlier in Eq. (3), and leads to defineU3Dcas the solution of(13)K3DU3Dc=f3D−K3DPUpThis static correctionU3Dcsummed withPUbis compared to a reference solution for the same 3D model mesh, computed by solving Eq. (12). This has been performed on several mesh types, cross-section shapes and boundary conditions, and the difference between the computed displacements and the reference solution has been found to be negligible, indicating that the displacements are well corrected by this switch method.Since a static switch provides an accurate correction of the 3D displacements, then a correction of the velocities and accelerations can be built using three static switch procedures at three consecutive time steps. In fact, the displacement correction proposed in Section 2.2 takes the cross-section deformation into account. But the velocities proposed in Eq. (9) are for a rigid body cross-section assumption. Since we are using a Newmark integration scheme, there is no need to initialize the accelerations but we need to improve the velocities initialization. This can be achieved if the static switch is applied on three consecutive time steps, the switch instant ts, the preceding stepts−1and the following onets+1. Then based on the three successive displacements, one can inspire from the finite difference method a better initialization of the velocities as follows:(14)U̇3D=12×ΔT([PUb+U3Dc]ts+1−[PUb+U3Dc]ts−1)This velocity initialization combined with the displacement initialization will lead the Newmark integration scheme to compute the initial accelerations at tsas the solution of Eq. (10).This initialization technique proved to be simple and very efficient in the application examples shown in this paper and on several others. It is completely consistent with the Newmark integration scheme, and therefore, is proposed as a proper beam to the 3D model switching technique in our research work.Note that the triple static switch procedure does not require a numerical damping. Therefore, all the following switch examples solved by a triple static switch method are not damped.Most of our cases of study are solved with a Newmark integration scheme. However, if one wishes to use an explicit integration scheme, and as discussed earlier in this paper, initializing the accelerations is mandatory. For the central difference integration scheme, the finite difference method leads to the following initial accelerations:(15)U¨3D=1ΔT2([PUb+U3Dc]ts+1−2×[PUb+U3Dc]ts+[PUb+U3Dc]ts−1)This acceleration initialization proved to work on several cases of study not shown in this research work.To validate the concept of the switch for transient dynamic applications, we compare the 3D solution after switching with a 3D reference solution obtained by performing the same computation on the whole simulation period. Another way to check the validity of the switch method on transient dynamic problems is to check whether the switch removes or inserts parasite energy in the system at the switch instant, which can lead to non-physical simulations. Such solution precision analyses are widely used in the literature such as in Noels et al. [4,3,22], where this analysis technique served to demonstrate the stability and consistency of implicit and explicit time integration schemes switch method.If we have a mechanical system subjected to an external force F, with a mass M, and a stiffness K, and if the displacements at a given instant t are denoted by U and the velocities at the same instant byU̇, the kinetic energy can then be written as(16)Wc=12U̇TMU̇The strain energy reads(17)Wd=12UTKUThe work of the external forces Wfis computed by(18)Wf=FTUWe denote Wdissas the work of dissipative forces (friction, damping, etc.). The kinetic energy theorem gives(19)ddtWc=ddtWf+ddt(Wdiss−Wd)In our cases of study, the dissipative forces are negligible, then(20)Wc+Wd=Wf+cstwhere cst is a constant that depends on the problem being solved.We distinguish three main cases:•F=0: the total energyWt=Wc+Wdis a constant.F is a constant: the total energy is a time dependent function (butWc+Wd−Wfis a constant).F evolves in time (which is the case of all the application examples of this paper): the total energy, is a time dependent function.To illustrate Eq. (20), let us consider a spring–mass system example. A mass M is hold by a spring having a stiffness k and subjected to an external force F. The motion occurs along the x-axis. The displacement solution is(21)x=Acos(ωt)+Bsin(ωt)+Fkwhereω=k/M. The corresponding kinetic energy is(22)Wc=12Mẋ2=12k(A2sin2(ωt)+B2cos2(ωt)−ABsin(2ωt))Therefore, the kinetic energy involves only the angular frequency2ω, while the strain energy involves both ω and2ω. In fact:(23)Wd=12kx2=12k(A2cos2(ωt)+B2sin2(ωt))+F2k2+2ABsin(ωt)cos(ωt)+2AFkcos(ωt)+2BFksin(ωt)Therefore, the strain and kinetic energy do not have the same angular frequency.If F=0,Wc+Wd=12k(A2+B2)=cte.IfF=cst≠0:(24)Wc+Wd=12k(A2+B2)+12(F2k+2AFcos(ωt)+2BFsin(ωt))=cte+WfIf F=cst,Wt=Wc+Wd=Wf+cst.In this paper, the energy consistency of the switch is verified if the energy (is it the kinetic or strain energy) value of the 3D solution after switching is close to its corresponding value for the 3D reference solution. This can prove that the switch does not remove or insert energy in the 3D solution after switching. A comparison will be set between the evolution of the kinetic, strain and total energy of the beam model, the 3D reference model and the 3D switch model to prove that the switch method is energetically sound.In this section, we present a simple numerical example that illustrates the efficiency of the beam to 3D model switch for dynamic cases.In fact, the method has been validated on more complex cases, for different cross-section shapes, loadings and boundary conditions. In the case considered here, the beam model is a Timoshenko beam model, with a rectangular cross-section, having the following dimensions: width 0.012m, height 0.01m and a length of 0.1m. The beam is made with a steel material with densityρ=7800kg/m3, Young׳s modulusE=2.1×1011N/m2and Poisson׳s coefficient ν=0.3. One side of the beam is fixed and the other one is subjected to a transverse load equal tof(t)=100×t3×e−1.1tat its surface center. Fig. 2illustrates the 3D model. The 3D model is quadratically meshed with approximately 1000 nodes. The switch instant ists=1.5s, at which the beam simulation is switched to the 3D model, with the same boundary conditions and loading. The 3D solution after switching is compared to a reference solution, which is a 3D solution obtained on the same 3D model for a simulation that starts at t=0 and last three seconds.The switch from the beam model to the 3D model is performed first using the approach described in Section 2.2 (static correction with numerical damping) and second with the initialization built from the 3D displacements computed at three different time steps (see Section 3.2.2).We compare the displacements, velocities and accelerations of node P where the load is exerted, that belongs to the 3D model as shown in Fig. 2, and the corresponding point that belongs to the beam model.Fig. 3shows the displacement results. First we can see a difference between the beam solution and the 3D reference solution. This difference is very small, but still noticeable if we make a zoom. Immediately after switching, the 3D solution turns out to be very accurate and is very close to the reference one. Both switch methods exhibit practically the same precision regarding the displacements.However, as shown in Fig. 4, which represents a velocity comparison, or Fig. 5, which represents an acceleration comparison, immediately after switching, high frequency oscillations with large amplitude occur in the case where there is only the static correction. If a numerical damping is used to filter out these oscillations, then they will be present only several time steps after switching. For a HHT integration scheme withα=0.25, in our case 35 time steps (0.05s) were sufficient for the 3D solution to converge to the reference one. If a triple static switch procedure is performed, the velocities do not present any oscillations; however, very small oscillations occur on the accelerations and vanish very shortly after switching, see Fig. 5bThe results show that both methods work, but the triple static switch appears to be more accurate while easy to implement. The beam to 3D model switch accelerates the dynamic simulation of a 3D model while preserving a good accuracy.Energy analysis confirms the efficiency of the switch. In fact, the switch does not remove or insert parasite energy in the solutionFig. 6sets a comparison between the kinetic and strain energies of the beam model, the 3D reference model and the 3D switch model. Is it the triple static switch or the simple switch stabilized by numerical damping, the same strain energy curve is obtained. However, if the simple switch is performed and is stabilized with numerical damping, oscillations are observed on the kinetic energy curve on several time steps following the switch instant before it converges to its stable value. A small difference exists between the strain energy of the 3D reference model and that of the beam model. That is due to modeling differences, such as the difference in the shape functions, between the beam and the 3D models. After switching, there remains a small difference between the 3D model strain energy and the 3D reference model strain energy, but it appears that the switch does not cause a disturbance on the value of the strain.This same conclusion is also obtained on the kinetic energy once the latter is stable. The triple static switch procedure is a more elegant switching technique that does not need numerical damping and does not lead to any energy perturbation even on the few time steps following the switch instant.However, in many industrial cases, the 3D model is required for a small interval of time, but also for a small area. It is therefore more appropriate to switch from a beam model to a mixed beam–3D model. Then, the 3D zone is limited to the zone where local phenomena are to take place as shown in Fig. 7.This raises the question of the beam to 3D connection and makes the subject of Section 6.As previously mentioned in the introduction, when local phenomena are restricted in space and time, a beam to a beam–3D mixed model switch enables one to preserve a good modeling accuracy while decreasing the computational cost. In the following, a beam to 3D connection, available in Code_Aster (see [23]), is presented and will be used in this research work. This beam to 3D connection satisfies the consistency of the beam and 3D displacements (kinematic stability), as well as a suitable effort transmission from the beam to the 3D (static stability) that does not generate parasite strains and stresses in the connection area.This beam to 3D connection is a non-overlapping one. The connection occurs between a beam node P and a 3D cross-section S of area A at the gravity center G of S.The 3D displacementsU3Dis the sum of a rigid-body cross-section displacementU3Dband a cross-section deformation vectorUs. The beam displacement and rotation vectors at point P are denoted, respectively,Ubandθb. The kinematic connection condition between P and arbitrary node M that belongs to section S readsU3Db=Ub+θb∧GM.The kinematic stability of the connection is fulfilled if the orthogonality of vectorsU3DbandUsis satisfied. This ensures that the 3D cross-section has no influence on the displacement of the beam nodes. This can be expressed by the following equations:(25)Ub=1A∫sU3DdS(26)θb=I−1(∫sGM∧U3DdS)In order to avoid artifact strains on the connection interface between the 3D model and the beam model, a suitable transmission of the loading between the beam and the 3D model is necessary. It can be achieved if the projection of section S stresses on node P results in beam loading and is expressed by(27)∫sσ·n·U3DdS=FpUb+TpθbwhereFpis a loading vector on node P andTpis a torque vector on node P that can be deduced from Eq. (27) by solving an optimization problem:(28)Fp=∫sσ·ndS(29)Tp=∫sGM∧σ·ndSThe following section presents a beam to a mixed beam–3D model switch in transient dynamic analysis.In this example, we take a beam with a circular cross-section of radius 0.005m and a 0.25m length, simply supported from both sides, and that has the following material properties:ρ=7800kg/m3, Poisson׳s coefficient ν=0.3 and Young׳s modulusE=2.1×1011Pa. At 0.12m from one side it is subjected to a load of the formf(t)=−100×sin(ω×t), where ω=6.4rad/s, for a 3s long simulation starting at t=0s. An implicit integration scheme is used with 2000 time steps. The switch instant is fixed at t=2s. For a better presentation of the results, the displacements, velocities and accelerations are presented in the following illustrations in the intervalt∈[1,3]s.The displacement, velocities and accelerations are registered with respect to time at a node DNas illustrated in Fig. 8. The latter shows the dimensions of the model in question. The same physical model is modeled by a beam model, a whole 3D model and a model that combines beam and 3D elements. The reference solution is the one computed using the 3D reference model. The beam to mixed beam–3D model switch is performed using the two initialization methods discussed earlier, namely a numerical damping method (HHT integration scheme) withα=0.25and a three static switch procedure. The displacements, velocities and accelerations of the beam–3D mixed model after switching are compared with the beam model solution, the mixed beam–3D model solution and a 3D model reference solution, three of them for the same loading, starting at t=0s and lasting 3s.If a numerical damping is used to stabilize the solution after switching, a transient stage is initiated and can be seen on the accelerations, see Fig. 10a, while being less noticeable on the velocities, see Fig. 9a and absent on the displacements, see Fig. 9b.By contrast, if a triple static switch procedure is performed, no transient stage is observed, see Figs. 9 and 10b. It is noteworthy to say that a difference exists between the displacements of the 3D reference model, the beam one and the beam–3D mixed model as shown in Fig. 9a. The beam–3D mixed model is closer to the beam solution, since the 3D zone is one-fifth the length of the beam–3D mixed model. This conclusion is the same for the velocities and accelerations as shown in Figs. 9b and 10.Both switching techniques prove to be efficient. The triple static switch is more elegant while easy to implement.We now check the energy consistency of the switch for this application example. Fig. 11shows the sum of the kinetic and strain energy for the beam model, the mixed beam–3D model computed along the whole simulation time and the mixed beam–3D switch model. We avoid to present the energy curves corresponding to the 3D reference model since they do not provide essential clues for the analysis of the energy consistence of the switch.A small difference is observed between the energy curve of the beam model and that of the mixed beam–3D model. This difference is due to modeling differences (shape functions differences, etc.). After switching, the mixed beam–3D model energy curve joins that of the reference mixed beam–3D model. The same conclusion drawn from the previous application example, in which no beam to 3D connection is used, is once more obtained: the switch does not lead to any perturbation in the energy values. The kinetic energy is presented in Fig. 12in the time intervalt∈[1,3]s, and a zoom on the kinetic energy around the switch instant is presented on the right hand side of the this same figure. Analyzing the kinetic energy curves confirms the energy consistency of the switch.In this example, at the switch instant the velocity is near its maximum as it can be seen in Fig. 9b, while the displacements and accelerations are low as shown in Figs. 9a and 10, respectively. It is interesting to perform a switch at a different instant to have a different initial configuration such asts=1.75s, at which the velocities are low, while the displacements and accelerations are high. This can illustrate the efficiency of the switch and prove that the switch instant can be a random in the simulation interval. Since the triple static switch is elegant and easy to implement, we present, thereafter, the results obtained only by this method forts=1.75s.Fig. 13shows the acceleration results according to the x-axis at point DN. The same accuracy is obtained on the displacements and velocities results.Fig. 14shows the kinetic and strain energy sum. No energy perturbation is detected. This is also the case if we check the strain and kinetic energy curves separately. It is obvious that we have the same efficiency for the switch performed atts=2.4sandts=1.75s.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed a numerical method that enables one to switch from a beam to a 3D model, or from a beam to a mixed beam–3D model, when a 3D description is required only on a small part of space and time domains. This technique enables one to save computational time while preserving a good accuracy.Two switching techniques were proposed. One uses a numerical damping to filter possible artifact oscillations in accelerations and velocities, and the second, the triple static switch, is more elegant, do not need numerical damping and do not cause artifact oscillations.The switch proved to work on dynamic and static cases. The 3D switch solution is practically the same as the 3D reference one.The energy consistency of the switch has been demonstrated. No energy is removed or inserted by the switch.In this paper and as also presented in Tannous et al. [24], the switch method is developed for transient dynamic analyses problems without an overall rotation. However, the main motivation behind the switch concept proposed in the Ph.D. thesis of Tannous [25], and presented in Tannous et al. [26], is its applications to turbine accidents involving rotor–stator contact interactions. The switch method will be extended, in future publications, for application to the slowing down of unbalanced turbine rotors with local interactions and frictions.