@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A successive perturbation-based multiscale stochastic analysis method for composite materials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose the successive perturbation approach for the multiscale stochastic problems.The method can be applied to both nonlinear and non-smooth responses.Accuracy of the proposed method is investigated compared with the MC simulation.The cost for the analysis can be reduced by employing the method.The method enables to estimate the probabilistic properties of the maximum stress.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic stress analysis,Composite material,Multiscale problem,Successive perturbation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a successive perturbation-based method for multiscale stochastic analysis of heterogeneous materials such as composite materials. Microscopic random variations sometimes have a significant influence on homogenized material properties and microscopic stress fields. Therefore, multiscale stochastic problems should be analyzed to evaluate the reliability of composite structures. Further, in order to assess the result of numerical analysis of a composite structure, this type of uncertainty propagation should be taken into account. For this purpose, the successive perturbation based approach is proposed.As a numerical example, the stochastic homogenization and multiscale stochastic stress analysis problem of composite materials are solved considering microscopic random variations. From the numerical results, the proposed approach gives a more accurate estimation than the conventional perturbation approach. Also, our proposed method works well for both smooth nonlinear response functions and non-smooth response functions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Estimating the influence of microscopic random variations of heterogeneous materials such as composite materials on a homogenized material property is called as the stochastic homogenization problem. Kaminski et al. [1] and Sakata et al. [2] reported stochastic homogenization analysis with the Monte-Carlo simulation. For single-scale stochastic problems, the stochastic finite element method [3] and the spectral stochastic finite element method (SSFEM) [4] have been proposed, and they have been extended to the multiscale stochastic analysis for heterogeneous materials such as composites in recent. For example, the perturbation-based approach for elastic [5–7] and thermal problems [8–10] and SSFEM based multiscale stochastic analysis [11] have been reported. This research topic is noticed recently, and other approaches have been also reported for stochastic homogenization analysis [12–14].The stochastic homogenization problem is important for reliability evaluation of composite structures, especially in cases where a priori random variation or a posteriori effects such as aging and mechanical and chemical influences in a manufacturing process should be taken into account. In addition, from the viewpoint of assessment using computer simulation-based analysis, this type of uncertainty propagation through the different scales should be considered in the validation and verification of the numerical simulation.The randomness of a microscopic field in a heterogeneous material, a key feature of this paper, influences the structural response to be evaluated. Because a heterogeneous advanced material has a complex microstructure, multiscale analysis methods that analyze the homogenized material property and multiscale stress field are usually employed. Similarly, influence of the microscopic uncertainty on the property of homogenized materials and the macroscopic and microscopic stress field should be analyzed with a multiscale analysis framework.In general cases, the Monte-Carlo method gives good estimation of the probabilistic response with less assumption, but a computational cost will be expensive. Thus, a more accurate and efficient stochastic homogenization methodology is needed. Kaminski [15] and Sakata et al. [7,10] reported numerical results by employing a higher order perturbation-based method; however, it has been reported that higher order perturbation does not always improve estimation accuracy. Approximation-based stochastic homogenization methodologies have been proposed to solve this problem by Sakata et al. [16] and Kaminski [17]. These approximate stochastic homogenization methods effectively improve accuracy and computational efficiency for the analysis, but problems still exist. For example, determination of the approximation parameters and applicability of those methods to problems having many random variations need to be explored. Thus, the series expansion-based approach needs to be improved. Some related topics can be found in literature [18].In this paper, the perturbation-based technique is improved for more accurate multiscale stochastic analysis. A higher order perturbation does not always improve estimation accuracy, and it is difficult to determine an appropriate approximation order for acceptable estimation without referring to an exact solution of the probabilistic property obtained from experimental results or Monte-Carlo simulation; therefore, a lower order approximation is preferable in some cases. Also, a general perturbation method with using derivatives at single expansion point or a smooth function approximation will not be applicable to a non-smooth stochastic response such as the maximum microscopic stress against a microscopic random variation. Consequently, a successive perturbation-based multiscale analysis method is proposed in this paper.In the following sections, at first, an outline of the stochastic homogenization problem and the multiscale stochastic stress analysis methodology is introduced in Section 2. Next, details of the proposed method are given in Section 3. The proposed method is applied to the stochastic homogenization problem on thermoelastic properties and multiscale stress analysis of composite materials, and its validity and effectiveness and the numerical results obtained are discussed in Sections 4, 5, and 6. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 7.Multiscale analysis is important in the design of composite structures because composite materials possess complex microstructures that exert complex influences on macroscopic properties and the microscopic stress fields of composite materials. In general, a structure is divided into two or more scales: one is a macroscopic structure, and the other is a microscopic structure comprising two or more component materials. The equivalent material property that reflects the features of the microscopic structure, such as the material properties of the geometry of the component materials, is used in mechanical analysis at the macroscale, and therefore multiscale stress analysis involves the procedures of homogenization, macroscopic stress analysis, and localization. An outline of deterministic multiscale elastic analysis is illustrated inFig. 1(a).In addition, the influence of microscopic randomness on macroscopic response and microscopic stress fields has been analyzed. This type of analysis is an important issue in solid mechanics, especially in the case of heterogeneous materials. In such cases, propagation of uncertainty or randomness through the different scales must be investigated with stochastic homogenization or multiscale stochastic stress analysis, which investigates the stochastic response caused from a random variation in a different scale, especially in microscale. An outline of multiscale stochastic analysis is illustrated in Fig. 1(b). In this paper, the multiscale stochastic problem is analyzed.In general, there are two types of microscopic random variations; one is the uniformly distributed random variation, which is observed in material properties of component materials in different production lots, the other is non-uniform random variation, which can be observed in a random media. Both cases should be considered in reliability evaluation of composite structures, and the former case is considered in this paper.From a general formulation of homogenization theory [19], a homogenized macroscopic elastic tensorEHcan be computed as(1)EH=1|Y|∫YE(I−∂χ∂y)dY,whereEis an elastic tensor of the microstructure,|Y|is the volume of a unit cell, andIis a unit tensor.χis a characteristic displacement, which can be obtained as a solution of the following characteristic equation:(2)∫Y∂∂yE∂χ∂ydY=∫Y∂∂yEdYIf a microscopic quantity such as an elastic property of a component material includes a random variation, the homogenized elastic tensor can be expressed as a stochastic response for the microscopic random variable as follows:(3)EH⁎=1|Y|∫YE⁎(I−∂χ⁎∂y)dYwhere the superscript “⁎” indicates a random variable. In addition, the characteristic equation considering the randomness can be rewritten as(4)∫Y∂∂yE⁎∂χ⁎∂ydY=∫Y∂∂yE⁎dYThe probabilistic characteristics as the expectation or variance of the homogenized elastic tensor can be expressed as(5)Exp[EH⁎]=∫−∞∞EHf(EH)dEH(6)Var[EH⁎]=∫−∞∞(EH−Exp[EH⁎])2f(EH)dEHwhereExp[EH⁎]andVar[EH⁎]are the expectation and variance of the homogenized elastic tensor, andfEHis the probabilistic density function of the homogenized elastic tensor.If the stochastic homogenized elastic tensor can be expressed with a series expansion-based approximation, e.g.,(7)EH⁎≈∑iEHiφi,then the probabilistic characteristic can be estimated with an approximation form as(8)E[EH⁎]=∫−∞∞f(EH)∑iEHiφidEH(9)VarEH⁎=∫−∞∞fEH∑iEHiφi−ExpEH⁎2dEHwhereφiis an arbitrary basis function for the approximation of the stochastic homogenized elastic tensor, andEHiis a coefficient for each term of the basis function.If the random variation of a microscopic quantity, for example, Young׳s modulus of a component materialE⁎, can be expressed with its expected value and a normalized random variableβasE⁎=E0(1+β), and it is assumed that the basis function can be expressed by the power series as(10)φi=βi,then, the approximated form of the homogenized elastic tensor can be written as(11)EH⁎≈∑iEHiβiwhereEHiis called the ith order perturbation term or derivative.From the perturbation-based stochastic homogenization theory, the perturbation term of the homogenized elastic tensor is computed at relatively lower computational costs.For instance, when the microscopic elastic tensor and the characteristic displacement vector are expressed by the asymptotic expansion with respect to the random variableβ, the observed value of the homogenized elastic tensor can be approximately expressed as(12)EH⁎≈1|Y|∫Y(E0+E1β+E2β2+⋯){I−∂∂y(χ0+χ1β+χ2β2+⋯)}dYwhere the superscript “i” indicates the ith order perturbation term. In order to obtain the perturbation terms of the characteristic displacement, the following simultaneous equation is solved(13)KY0χ0=FY0(KY1χ0+KY0χ1)=FY1(KY2χ0+KY1χ1+KY0χ2)=FY2⋮}whereKYandFYare the microscopic stiffness matrix and the load vector for the characteristic equation, respectively.By solving the simultaneous equation (13), the first and second order perturbation terms of the homogenized elastic tensor for a random variation of elastic properties can be computed as(14)EH1=1|Y|∫YE1(I−Bχ0)dY−1|Y|∫YE0Bχ1dYEH2=1|Y|∫YE2(I−Bχ0)dY−1|Y|∫YE1Bχ1dY−1|Y|∫YE0Bχ2dY}whereBis the strain–displacement matrix.The perturbation term of the microscopic stress can be computed in the same fashion. For example, the first order perturbation term of the microscopic stress is obtained from the following equation:(15)σ1=E1(I−χ0)εmacro0+E0{(I−Bχ0)εmacro1−Bχ1εmacro0}Using the perturbation-based approach, and assuming the normalized random variableβdistributed according to the Gaussian distribution, the expectation and variance can be estimated using the following equations:(16)E[EH⁎]≈∫−∞∞f(EH)(EH0+EH1β+EH2β2+⋯)dEH≈∫−∞∞f(β)(EH0+EH1β+EH2β2+⋯)dβ≈EH0∫−∞∞f(β)dβ+EH1∫−∞∞f(β)βdβ+EH2∫−∞∞f(β)β2dβ+⋯≈EH0+EH2Var[β]+⋯(17)Var[EH⁎]≈∫−∞∞f(EH)(EH0+EH1β+EH2β2+⋯−E[EH⁎])2dEH≈∫−∞∞f(β)(EH0+EH1β+EH2β2+⋯−EH0−EH2Var[β]−⋯)2dβ≈((EH1)2−2(EH2)2Var[β])∫−∞∞f(β)β2dβ+2EH1EH2∫−∞∞f(β)β3dβ+(EH2)2∫−∞∞f(β)β4dβ+(EH2)2(Var[β])2∫−∞∞f(β)dβ+⋯≈(EH1)2Var[β]+2EH1EH2E3[β]+(EH2)2{E4[β]−(Var[β])2}+⋯whereEn[β]shows the nth probabilistic moment of the random variableβ. From these equations, one can recognize that the perturbation-based approach enables the estimation of a probabilistic characteristic of the homogenized elastic tensor with computation of each perturbation term of the homogenized elastic tensor.A higher order term in Eq. (11) may be used for the analysis, but it will not always improve the accuracy when using a higher order perturbation in the stochastic homogenization problem. In addition, an analytical form of the higher order perturbation term should be prepared for each different condition. Further, this approximation will not be employed for a non-smooth function. From these reasons, a more general response function approach is employed for the analysis.In the perturbation-based approach, the stochastic homogenized elastic tensor can be approximated as(18)EH⁎=EH(β)≈EH0+EH1β+EH2β2+⋯+EHnβnAs described above, a higher order perturbation does not always improve accuracy, and even when a higher order basis function does improve the accuracy of the approximation, determining how many terms should be used for the approximation is still difficult. Also, this approach will not effective for a non-smooth function.Consequently, in this paper, the successive perturbation approach is adopted to express the stochastic homogenized elastic tensor.The observed homogenized elastic property can be simply represented with a piecewise linear form as(19)EH⁎=EH(β)≈EH0i+EH1iβ(pi≤β≤pi+1)whereEH0iandEH1iare the zeroth and first order perturbation terms for the ith interval, namely,(20)EH0i=EH0|β=pi,EH1i=EH1|β=piWith this form, only the first order perturbation term is used for approximation, although multi-point expansion is needed. Computation of the perturbation terms at the multi-expansion points involves additional computational cost, but additional analysis of the higher order perturbation terms or knowledge on a parametric or non-parametric approximation based on a response function technique such as polynomial-based approximation or Kriging is not required. This is one of advantages of the successive perturbation approach.Fig. 2 shows an example of the stochastic homogenized elastic property and its approximations with the perturbation techniques. In the figure, a schematic view of the first and second order approximations and the successive perturbation-based piecewise linear approximation are illustrated.With each term of the piecewise linear approximations of the homogenized elastic tensor obtained, the probabilistic properties are estimated as follows:(21)E[EH⁎]≈∫p1p2(E1H0+E1H1β)f(β)dβ+∫p2p3(E2H0+E2H1β)f(β)dβ+⋯=∑i{EiH0∫Pif(β)dβ+EiH1∫Piβf(β)dβ}(22)Var[EH⁎]≈∫p1p2(E1H0+E1H1β−Exp[EH⁎])2f(β)dβ+∫p2p3(E1H0+E1H1β−Exp[EH⁎])2f(β)dβ+⋯=∑i{(EiH0−Exp[EH⁎])2∫Pif(β)dβ+2EH1(EiH0−Exp[EH⁎])i∫Piβf(β)dβ+(EH1)i2∫Piβ2f(β)dβ}wherePi=[pi,pi+1],p0≪μα,pn+1≫μα. The subscript “i” indicates the ith expansion point.In this paper, the following Gaussian distribution of the normalized microscopic random variable is assumed:(23)f(β)=12πsexp{−(β−μβ)22s2}In this case, the integrals in Eqs. (21) and (22) can be expressed as(24)∫Pif(β)dβ=π2s(Erf[pi+12s]−Erf[pi2s]),μβ=0(25)∫Piβf(β)dβ=−s2{exp(−pi+122s2)−exp(−pi22s2)}(26)∫Piβ2fβdβ=12exppi2+pi+122s2s2×〈2exppi+122s2pi−2exppi22s2pi+1+2πsErfpi+12s−Erfpi2s〉whereErf[]is the error function, which is the integral of the Gauss function. SinceErf[]cannot be precisely expressed with a set of elementary functions, its function value must be computed using a numerical procedure or an approximation.The classical approximation forms [20] of the function value ofErf[]can be expressed, and in this paper, the following, Ooura׳s optimized approximation, is adopted:(27)Erf[x]≈G(x)+xexp(−x2)∑iai(x2+bi)whereaiandbiare the coefficients of the approximation andE(x)is(28)G(x)={21+exp(Ax);x<B0;x≥BwhereAandBare the approximation parameters. Details of the values of the coefficients and parameters can be found in [21].This approach can be easily applied to a multiscale stochastic stress analysis, namely, the perturbation terms of the microscopic stresses, for example, obtained from Eq. (15), instead of the perturbation terms of the homogenized elastic tensor in Eqs. (21) and (22).Sakata et al. reported on stochastic homogenization analysis of the equivalent thermoelastic properties of a unidirectional fiber reinforced composite material [10]. The report confirmed that the microscopic random variations of the thermoelastic properties of each component material exert complex influences on the equivalent thermoelastic properties of the composite material. It showed the importance of the stochastic homogenization analysis, and discussed the applicability of the perturbation-based stochastic homogenization method. This means that the first order perturbation-based approach can give an acceptable estimation for stochastic homogenization analysis of the equivalent thermal expansion coefficient for microscopic random variations of each material property of component materials and volume fraction of fiber, except for Poisson׳s ratio variation of resin.On the other hand, the report concluded that a higher order perturbation does not always improve the estimation accuracy, and the estimation accuracy of Poisson׳s ratio variation of resin should be improved.From this background, as an example of application of the successive perturbation-based stochastic homogenization method to a nonlinear smooth response, we consider a stochastic homogenization problem on the thermoelastic properties of a unidirectional fiber reinforced composite material. A unit cell of a periodically arranged microstructure of the composite material is considered as a finite element model of a microstructure for a unidirectional fiber reinforced composite material.Fig. 3 illustrates an example of a finite element model of the microstructure. For this material, Young׳s modulus, Poisson׳s ratio, and the thermal expansion coefficient of fiber and matrix(Ef,Em,νf,νm,αf,αm)are considered as microscopic random variables. The expected values of the elastic properties for fiber and matrix are listed inTable 1. The properties of fiber and matrix employed correspond to E-glass and Epoxy resin.As an example, the relative errors in CV estimation of the homogenized thermoelastic properties of the unidirectional fiber reinforced composite material forνmvariation using the first, second, and third order perturbation-based stochastic homogenization method are investigated. The volume fraction of fiber is 0.5 and the CV of the microscopic random variables is 0.05.Fig. 4 shows the estimation error between the Monte-Carlo simulation and the perturbation-based method in the estimated CV ofEx1H,Gx1x2H,νx2x3H, andαx3H. In this figure, it can be seen that the second order perturbation does not improve the accuracy ofCV[Gx1x2H]estimation. Furthermore, when the third order perturbation-based approach is used, the accuracy of all estimations shown in the figure becomes worse. In particular, the relative errors in the estimation ofαx3HandEx1Hbecome approximately 80% and 20%, respectively—more than twice and quadruple that of the first order perturbation-based approach. This result shows that a higher perturbation does not always improve the estimation accuracy in stochastic homogenization analysis on the equivalent elastic and thermoelastic properties considering theνmvariation. A more detailed discussion of these results can be found in literature [10].The estimated CV ofαHx3, in particular, includes a large error. To investigate the reason for this result, an approximated response function ofαHx3for the normalized random variable of the Poisson׳s ratio of resin is illustrated inFig. 5. In this figure, it can be seen that a higher order perturbation may improve the accuracy aroundβ=0; however, the approximation accuracy becomes worse over a wider range. This inaccuracy causes a larger estimation error when a higher order perturbation method is used.We here apply our proposed successive perturbation-based approach to this problem. In this case, the number of expansion points is nine. The numerical result of the successive perturbation-based stochastic homogenization analysis is illustrated inFig. 6. Fig. 6(a) shows the results of CV estimation of the equivalent elastic properties, and Fig. 6(b) shows the results of CV estimation of the equivalent thermal expansion coefficients. “Super” in the legend signifies the result obtained from the successive perturbation-based stochastic homogenization method. This figure confirms that the estimation error is effectively reduced in every case. In particular, the estimation errors of the CVs of bothEHxandαHzare less than 1%. This result demonstrates the efficacy of our proposed approach for stochastic homogenization of composite materials.Since the computational cost for both of the expectation and first order perturbation term is almost same as that for computation of expectation, the total computational cost for this analysis is very cheaper than that for the Monte-Carlo simulation. In case of using Intel Core i7 2.93GHz CPU, the CPU time for this analysis with the successive perturbation method is 85s, while that for the Monte-Carlo simulation (10,000 trials) is about 83,500s. The CPU time for one computation of the perturbation terms at one expansion point is 9.0s, while that for standard homogenization analysis for one trial is 8.4s. From this result, computational efficiency of the proposed approach is confirmed.In this section, a multiscale stochastic stress analysis of a particle reinforced composite material is performed with the proposed successive perturbation-based method. Since a probabilistic response of the maximum microscopic stress in this problem is non-smoothly changed against a microscopic random variation, applicability of the proposed method to a non-smooth response is investigated. The multiscale stochastic stress analysis of a particle-reinforced composite material [22] and microscopic failure probability analysis of a fiber reinforced composite material [23] have both been attempted. As reported in the literatures, microscopic random variations of the elastic property of each component material cause random variations in the microscopic stress field, and thus, for reliability assessment of composite structures, the influence of microscopic randomness on the microscopic stress field has to be investigated.The applicability of the conventional perturbation-based approach has already been investigated for some problem settings, and the conclusion reached is that the lower order perturbation method is usable but accuracy should be improved in some cases. We here introduce the result of multiscale stochastic stress analysis of a particle-reinforced composite material under uniaxial tensile load as an example.A schematic view of the particle-reinforced composite material is depicted inFig. 7. As reported in [22], the CV of the microscopic stress depends on factors such as the type of microscopic random variation and the loading condition, including loading direction and other parameters.Fig. 8 gives an example of the CVs of the microscopic stress and relative estimation error for the first order perturbation method. Fig. 8(a) shows the CV of the maximum microscopic stresses for Poisson׳s ratio variation of resin, and Fig. 8(b) shows the estimation error between the first order perturbation-based multiscale stochastic stress analysis method and the Monte-Carlo simulation. In the figure, superscripts “P” and “R” indicate the stresses observed in particle and resin, respectively. “constant disp” and “constant load” in the legend signify the results of application of constant enforced displacement and constant load in thex3direction in Fig. 7. In this case, the volume fraction of particle is 0.5, and the CV of the microscopic quantity is 0.05.In Fig. 8(a), it can be seen that a large CV is observed in several stress components, and that the CV of the stresses depends on the macroscopic condition. This fact demonstrates the importance of such a multiscale stochastic stress analysis.Fig. 8(b) further shows that the perturbation method is applicable but some CV estimations of the stresses include an approximate error of 16%. This inaccuracy needs to be improved by employing appropriate techniques; however, another problem arises when any attempt is made to apply the perturbation-based technique to evaluation of the probabilistic property of the microscopic stresses.In some cases, the maximum stress may be observed at different locations according to the realization of the microscopic random variable. However, the conventional perturbation method computes the perturbation terms of the microscopic stresses at the element at which the stress is at a maximum when the microscopic random variable takes an expected value. Consequently, it will be difficult to apply the conventional perturbation technique for CV estimation of the maximum stress.As an example, the CV of the maximum microscopic stress of the particle-reinforced composite material for the Poisson׳s ratio variation of resin is illustrated inFig. 9. Fig. 9(a) shows the CVs of the maximum microscopic stress, and Fig. 9(b) shows the relative estimation error for the case where the first order perturbation method is employed.As shown in Fig. 9, in this case, the CV of the maximumσPy1in the particle is larger than the CV of theσPy1illustrated in Fig. 8, and the estimation error with the first order perturbation method is very large, approximately 68%. From this result, the multiscale stochastic stress analysis problem for estimating the CV of the maximumσPy1for a microscopic random variation of Poisson׳s ratio of resin is considered. In this case, the maximum stress in the particle along the transverse direction changes non-smoothly according to the variation of the Poisson׳s ratio.Fig. 10 shows an example of the maximum stressσPy1for each Poisson׳s ratio of resin. As shown in the figure, the maximum stress decreases around the expected value of the random variable; however, for larger Poisson׳s ratios, the maximum stress tends to increase. The reason for this result is that the element having the maximum stress value changes whenβis greater than 0.035, and it is not possible to estimate this result from the perturbation analysis on one element having the maximum stress in the expected value of the random variable. We believe that the non-smoothness of the response surface causes difficulty applying the conventional (first or higher order) perturbation to CV estimation of the maximum stresses.The estimation error in the results with application of the successive perturbation method to this problem is illustrated inFig. 11. In this case, the number of expansion points is nine. The figure shows that the estimation error is reduced to 15%, and confirms that the proposed successive perturbation method can effectively improve the accuracy of multiscale stochastic stress analysis for a non-smooth response function such as CV estimation of the maximum stress.The computational cost for the multiscale stochastic stress analysis can be also reduced by employing the proposed approach. In this case, the computational time for this analysis with the successive perturbation method is 136.5s, while that for the Monte-Carlo simulation (10,000 trials) is about 115,000s. The CPU time for one computation of the perturbation terms at one expansion point is 13.9s, while that for standard homogenization analysis for one trial is 11.3s. From this result, computational efficiency of the proposed approach for the multiscale stochastic stress analysis is also confirmed.As explained in the previous section, if a response function is non-smooth or strongly nonlinear, a conventional single-point perturbation approach may not accurately approximate the response function. On the other hand, the successive perturbation method computes the perturbation terms at several expansion points and, therefore, the response of the target function will be traced more accurately than one-point approximation.However, in using the successive perturbation approach, one of the problems that exist is determination of the number and location of the expansion points. This affects the accuracy and computational cost of the proposed approach. In general, regular grids may be selected as a first choice, with the number used determined empirically according to restricted computational costs and required accuracy.From this point of view, the relationships between the number of expansion points and estimated CVs are investigated. We use as an example the relationship between the equivalent thermal expansion coefficient of the unidirectional fiber reinforced composite material and the maximum microscopic stressσPy1in the particle-reinforced composite material for Poisson׳s ratio variation of resin (which were illustrated as examples of the application of the successive perturbation-based multiscale stochastic analysis methods in the previous sections).Fig. 12(a) shows the relationship between the estimated CV of the equivalent thermal expansion coefficients and the number of expansion points, and Fig. 12(b) shows the relationship between the estimated CV of the maximum microscopic stresses in particle and the number of expansion points. In this case, it is assumed that the expansion points are regularly arranged.In Fig. 12(a), the estimated CVs of the equivalent thermal expansion coefficients converge as the number of expansion points increases. In this case, a larger number of expansion points results in better estimation, and therefore it can be considered that the number of expansion points can be determined with acceptable computational cost for a designer.Conversely, in the case of the CV estimation of the maximum microscopic stresses, some of them do not converge for any number of expansion points. This means that a method by which an appropriate number of expansion points and their locations can be determined is needed.For this problem, an adaptive successive perturbation approach, an extended version of the successive perturbation approach, can be applicable.As shown in Eqs. (21) and (22), the interval of the expansion points can be determined irregularly and, in this paper, a simple adaptive approach for determination of the expansion points is proposed. A summary of the proposed algorithm is given below. The concept underlying this adaptive successive perturbation approach is illustrated inFig. 13.(1)Compute the perturbation term of the microscopic stresses for the expectation of the microscopic random variable at the element, which has the maximum stresses (ith finite element in Fig. 13).Construct surrogate models to estimate the stresses at all finite elements with the perturbation terms for the expectation.From the set of surrogate models, find the element which stress is larger than the stress at the ith element. (jth finite element in Fig. 13). The surrogate of the stress at the jth element constructed with the perturbation term for the expectation is called as “1st approximation” in Fig. 13.Search for the intersection point of the surrogate of theσiand the 1st approximation.Compute the perturbation term and construct the second approximation forβat the intersection point.Investigate the intersection point of the surrogate of theσiand second approximations, and Iterate steps 4–6, and update the intersection point until converged.After convergence, search a larger stress, estimated with the surrogate using the perturbation term of another element, and iterate steps 3–7 until no element that has a larger stress is found. Outline of this approach has been introduced in the conference proceedings [24].The numerical result of applying the proposed adaptive successive perturbation method is illustrated inFig. 14. The figure shows the relationship between the estimated CV of the maximum microscopic stressσPy1and the iteration steps. It shows that the estimated CV is improved according to the iteration step and, finally, the estimation error is reduced to 3% after four iterations. In this case, only two response functions are crossed; therefore, it should be noted that the final estimation of the CV can be obtained using only two linear functions constructed at two expansion points.In order to confirm that this improvement is achieved by accurate approximation of the response function, the approximate response function of the maximum microscopic stressσPy1for each observed value ofνmobtained from the proposed adaptive successive perturbation method is illustrated inFig. 15. The figure confirms that the well suited approximate response function can be obtained by the proposed approach, and that it effectively works to improve accuracy of the CV estimation. This result highlights the potential of the proposed successive perturbation-based approach for improving accuracy of the multiscale stochastic analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
