@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The designs and applications of a scanning interface with electrical signal detection on the scalp for the severely disabled

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A scanning interface with electrical signal detection of the head is designed.A algorithm filters noise and reduces misrecognition of the system.The traditional scanning keyboard is modified.The typing time could be reduced.It can obtain more reliable results as 95% success rate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Blink control,Scanning human–machine interface,Assistive device,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study discussed a computer-aided program development that meets the requirements of people with physical disabilities. A number of control modes, such as electrode signal recorded on the scalp and blink control, were combined with the scanning human–machine interface to improve the external input/output device. Moreover, a novel and precise algorithm, which filters noise and reduces misrecognition of the system, was proposed. A convenient assistive device can assist people with physical disabilities to meet their requirements for independent living and communication with the outside.The traditional scanning keyboard is changed, and only the phonetic notations are typed instead of characters, thus the time of tone and function selection could be saved, and the typing time could be also reduced. Barrier-free computer assistive devices and interface for people with physical disabilities in typing or speech could allow them to use a scanning keyboard to select phonetic symbols instead of Chinese characters to express their thoughts. The human–machine interface controls can obtain more reliable results as 99.8% connection success rate and 95% typing success rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
People with physical disabilities with some neurological disorders may lose their ability to control the voluntary movement of four limbs, resulting in debilitating disability. These neurological conditions include damage to the brainstem or cervical spinal cord at a high level, diseases of the basal ganglia or cerebellum, motor neuron diseases, and certain neuropathies or myopathies [1]. Human–machine interfaces (HMI) have been extensively studied in people who, due to pathology, have no voluntary control of their upper limbs or have no limbs at all [2]. Much research work has been devoted in the past twenty years to developing assistive technology (AT) devices that aim to offer people suffering from motor disabilities of various origins associated to disorders of verbal communication, facilitating the possibility of communicating with persons in their entourage and having some control over their environment [3].To take advantage of an electrical biosignal in augmentative and alternative communication tasks, the user may express intention in three different ways: eye movements (EOG), muscle (EMG), and cerebral activity (EEG) [4]. Therefore, methods using image processing or physiological signals for detecting human eye movement and blinks have been proposed [5–7], and these methods have been applied to the research and development of various computer interfaces for the physically and mentally disabled. The former is referred to as the eye movement based control method, and is also called the “eye-tracking system” or the “eye mouse” [8–14].Lin et al. [15] proposed an eye-tracking system with a video CCD camera and a frame grabber to analyze a series of images taken of the human pupil when gazing at a screen. In the design, the computer will produce speech according to the location of where the eyes are gazing. Usakli and Gurkan [16] designed an electrooculography (EOG) based system using a virtual interface to notify, in writing, the needs of people with disabilities. Considering bio-potential measurement pitfalls, the EOG-based system allows users to achieve environmental control with only eye movements.A scanning keyboard is proposed in this study. The method of the row-column scanning software and the use of single-switch and double-switch modes to access computers are highly practical [17]. With an on-screen scanning keyboard, text can be entered with a simple single binary input signal [18]. This is usually operated by highlighting rows-column of the keyboard in turn. The keys on this row are then highlighted in turn until a particular key is selected by the user [19].The human–computer interface with row–column scanning software and artificial voice is for people of severe physical and visual disabilities. Although various kinds of assistive tools have been developed over the years, with many of these products tested by people with disabilities, some remain unpopular. For example, the eye-tracking system must be adjusted before use, and this process of adjusting is too difficult for either healthy people or people with disabilities, and the cost remains very high.A scanning keyboard with the concept of “blink control” is proposed as the real-time variations of pseudo EMG signals exceed the determined threshold; thus, the function of a scanning keyboard can be triggered. Typing by blink control and row/column scanning options of the scanning keyboard are convenient, and typing time is shortened by adopting an intelligent character selection function. Compared with traditional eye-tracking devices and eye-controlling systems, this blink control system is small, light, portable, and easily installed [20]. It can be used to help people to concentrate, while learning with an alerting voice if their inattention is detected by EMG signal changes [21,22]. A concentration evaluation of reading behaviors with electrical signal detection on the scalp was presented [23]. The electrode signal is extracted by brain–computer-interface (BCI) to monitor the user's degree of concentration.An eye-electrical signal HMI is designed for a care system, where the sensors receive singles from eye blinking and move selected values to the corresponding HMI control systems of care choices boxes. Users that are unable to express themselves, can show what they need through the HMI mode of expression, thus, caregivers can provide better care.The HMI must have sufficient “Available degree”, including five dimensions for users: learning, efficiency, memory, errors, and satisfaction. It should be easy to learn, very easy to use, and easy to control the working progress or data processing conditions, to ensure users are always motivated to use this system, and to improve the efficiency, quality, and pleasure of use, in order that users can fully interact appropriately with the software and hardware.Shneiderman provided interactive designers with the Eight Golden Rules. 1. Strive for consistency. 2. Cater to universal usability. 3. Offer informative feedback. 4. Design dialogs to yield closure. 5. Prevent errors. 6. Permit easy reversal of actions. 7. Support internal locus of control. 8. Reduce short-term memory load [24].In this study, the electrode signal recorded equipment, which is especially designed to read electrode signals from the blink of an eye, where the investigations and discussion focus on the design of the scalp electrode signal controlled human–machine interface provided for users with physical disability. The traditional scanning keyboard is also modified to reduce the typing time.Signal filtering of eye blink control is very important for a more reliable system [25]. Cao [26] proposed a method for calculating the minimum embedded dimension. In d-dimensional space, each phase point vector is: X(i)={x(i), x(i+τ), ...., x(i+(d−1)τ)}, where d is the embedded dimension and τ is the time delay.The nearest neighboring point within each distance is XNN(i), the distance is Rd(i), then:(1)Rd2(i)=X(i)−XNN(i)2=∑j=1d{x[i+(j−1)τ]−xNN[i+(j−1)τ]}2As d is increased by 1, the change in the distance between two neighboring points is:(2)Rd+12(i)−Rd2(i)1/2=x(i+τd)−xNN(i+τd)If the distance between two neighboring points does not vary with dimension d, i.e. Rd+1(i)=Rd(i), the neighboring points have valid NN correspondence. If Rd+1(i) is much larger than Rd(i), meaning two nonadjacent points among Gaussian chaotic attractors are projected to low-dimensional orbits, becoming two neighboring points, thus, the neighbors are useless. Here(3)a1(i,d)=x(i+τd)−xNN(i+τd)Rd(i)A pair of points are called true neighbors when any two points which stay close in the d-dimensional reconstructed space will be still close in the (d+1)-dimensional reconstructed space. Otherwise, they are called false neighbors. Let the neighboring point threshold be Rt. If a1(i, d)>Rt, the false neighboring point threshold Rtof xNN(i) can be within {10, 50}. Under normal condition, different time series data may have different threshold values. But these imply that it is very difficult and even impossible to give an appropriate and reasonable threshold value. To solve this problem, Eq. (3) is substituted in Rd(i):(4)a1(i,d)=x(i+τd)−xNN(i+τd)Xd(i)−XdNN(i)(5)a2(i,d)=xd+1−xNN(i)Xd(i)−XdNN(i)where Xd(i) and xNN(i) are the ith reconstructed vector and its neighboring point, respectively, in d-dimensional space. i=1, 2,…,N−dτ. Xd+1(i) andxd+1NN(i)are the ith reconstructed vector and its closest point, respectively, in d+1-dimensional space, defined as:(6)E(d)=1N−dτ∑i−1N−dτa2(i,d)E1(d)=E(d+1)E(d)If the time series is determined, the electrical activity recorded on the scalp E1(d) will cease to change when d is greater than a certain value d0. If the time series is a random signal, the E1(d) increases gradually; however, it is difficult to judge a finite length sequence in practical application. The random sequence data have no correlation, i.e. no predictability. In the case of the signal “conscious blink”, the correlation among deterministic sequence data depends on the change in embedded dimension d.The scalp electrode signal characteristic is measured by calculating the entropy value. In 1991, Pincus [27] proposed approximate entropy to measure sequence complexity and count variance rules. For shorter points, a time series with noise has its value of application, as the theory of approximate entropy is to completely reconstruct the attractor. The attractor means there is one or more hidden rules in the system. Approximate entropy uses effective statistics to distinguish various processes according to the distribution of probabilities.The main characteristics of approximate entropy are described, as follows:1.The relatively stable values can be reckoned only by comparing shorter data.Better noise immunity.Apply the re-confirmed random signals.Advantageous to analysis of physiological signals [28].Input parameters m and r are fixed in the entire computational process of entropy, where m is the comparison sequence length, and r is the effective tolerance. N points are given <x(n)>=x(1), x(2)…x(N), m and r parameters are fixed, one is the limit value, and the other is the estimated value of N points. The algorithm is described, as follows:1.Sequence <x(n)>=x(1), x(2)…x(N), there are N data, m is the sample selected for comparison, r is a threshold.Composed m vector.Compare the number of repeated X(i) vector signals within the difference range of there value.We can obtain ApEn(m, r, N) from the process of derivation, where parameters r and m are different, and the result is different. When m=2, the selection of the r value can be:r=(0.1∼0.25)SDxwhere SDxis the standard deviation.When the electrical signal on the scalp successfully read, as shown in Fig. 1, its waveform amplitude changes drastically during “conscious blink”, and is much larger or smaller than in an ordinary relaxed state (including unconscious blink). Therefore, the standard reference value TL, TU can be set, when the EMG waveform amplitude is greater than TLor smaller than TU, the objective function is triggered, and a deliberate blink implements blink control. For the scanning keyboard, this study proposed a novel and precise algorithm, able to filter noise and reduce system misrecognition.Significant signal amplitude resulted from a conscious blink does not occur alone in general cases, but pairwise positive large values and negative large values occur in succession, as shown in Fig. 2, or continuous positive large values and continuous negative large values occur in pairs. Although the time interval is very short, the system will determine the cases that exceed the threshold twice and cause system misrecognition.In order to solve this problem, the reference amplitude value, as resulted from the blink, is set as Ti, and considering this value may be positive or negative, the absolute value |Ti| is taken. The previous two EMG amplitude values captured by the system are Ti−1 and Ti−2, and the absolute values |Ti−1| and |Ti−2| are taken. The function trigger threshold is set as T, and is defined as the absolute value of upper and lower thresholds TU≈|TL|≈T. When the user blinks consciously, meaning whether or not to select words and trigger the word selection function, is determined according to the following equation:(7)(|Ti|≥TU)∩[(|Ti−1|)∩(Ti−2)]<TUblinktotriggerotherwisenottriggerThe signal amplitude resulted from each blink shall be compared with the previous two amplitudes, thus, aforesaid errors can be effectively prevented by using this algorithm.Humans often blink unconsciously. In the design of the blink controller in this study, the first blink scanning frame stagnates in the scanned frame; the stagnation period is 1s. It is determined till the second blink occurs within this second. The signal processing is as above, let the signal amplitude value resulted from the blink be Ti, the absolute value |Ti| is taken, and the time is set as an S trigger function:(8)∩(|Ti|≥TU)∩[(|Ti−1|)∩(Ti−2)]<TU(|Ti+1|≥TU)∩[(|Ti−1|)∩(Ti−2)<TUStriggerotherwisenottrigerTo provide more accurate identification that eliminates involuntary blinking noise while reading with stagnation time, the user will not be turning around by involuntary blinking.The human–machine interface is integrated with PLC (Programmable Logic Controller) in order to control the ambient environment for people with physical disabilities, as shown in Fig. 3. As required by users, this study developed highly alert call items, such as a call bell, which can be carried by care givers. Thus, even if the users cannot move, they can use the scanning keyboard to operate the human–machine interface of the computer by measuring the scalp electrode signal characteristic, as shown in Fig. 4. The caregivers can know the people with physical disabilities’ current conditions, and users can independently express their needs [29]. The threshold T of conscious blink could be determined precisely and automatically through the novel algorithm.This system allows the users to input Chinese characters with a scanning keyboard. Chinese input methods fall into one of two categories: phonetic-based or shape-based. Here phonetic-based method is adopted. An intelligent phonetic symbol selection system is embedded in this program (Fig. 5). The Chinese phonetic system contains consonants, vowels, and intermediate signs (Table 1). The scanning keyboard is composed of 14×4, 46 grids, and each grid corresponds to a phonetic symbol or function key. To enable each grid of scanning keyboard to simulate the function of regular keyboard, each virtual key of scanning keyboard is linked with a key of regular keyboard through virtual key code.In the scanning keyboard, each blink controls only one operation, while the other operations are controlled automatically by system at the same time. Therefore, the proposed keyboard is designed for automatic row and column scanning, and the users only need to select the desired phonetic symbols through conscious blinks. The phonetic symbols and function keys on the designed keyboard are divided into five large blocks; each large block contains medium blocks, and medium blocks contain small blocks. The large blocks are scanned automatically. When a large block is selected by the user through conscious blinks, the medium blocks are scanned, and then the small blocks are scanned. Hence, the phonetic symbols are generated, and complete words and sentences can be typed by repeating the above process [20].When the program is executed, the medium block in the human–machine interface jumps from left to right ofline, which is composed of the first line, to theline composed of. When a line is selected, the small block jitters from the top to bottom of the line. It automatically returns to the first line when the user selects a phonetic notation. The user's thoughts can be expressed by phonetic notations by repeating the aforesaid actions.For example, the phonetic notation of happy is. When the medium block of the human–machine interface jitters toline, press the button switch, and it jitters from the top to bottom ofline. Press the button switch when it jitters to phonetic notation, and the phonetic notationappears in the text file. If a wrong block is selected in the previous approaches, the user should stop typing for two scanning cycles, and the scan chunk will return to scan the blocks of upper level automatically. While a wrong phonetic symbol is selected, the user needs to select the backspace key to delete the wrong symbol [20]. But in the design of this study, the user only uses phonetic symbols to express without selecting words, namely, there is no need to type a complete paragraph thus communication can be accelerated. It is observed in the experimental results that, when the scanning keyboard is operated by blinking or button switch, there are at least two phonetic symbols for typing one character (Fig. 6). Typing a paragraph or an article consumes a long period of time, including numerous blinks and pressing button switches; therefore, the traditional scanning keyboard is changed, and only phonetic notations are typed instead of characters.Because this study would not have a large range of users with different characteristics, the lack of controls on the participant population might be seen as difficult problems for some controlled, empirical studies. Here ten people with physical disabilities were tested after 1h training. The average time spent on entering a single phonetic symbol was 20.3s, the time of tone and function selection could be saved, and typing time could be reduced by 52% (Table 2).The wireless call bell is connected to PLC, which is connected to the computer, as shown in Fig. 7. The PLC with environment control can help those with physical disabilities to be more independent in living, and allow their caregivers to understand their thoughts. Such remote call bell is easy to install, with input/output points stickers at the back of the remote button. A user can operate the remote call bell with the blink control function in an operating range reach over 100m. Table 2 shows the representative comparison between the proposed system and two former researches. The connection success rate is an important key performance indicator (KPI) for evaluating the integrating stability of the total system. Typing success rate is the percentage of success among a number of typing attempts. Afterwards, the human–machine interface controls the sound of the wireless call bell, with a connection success rate as high as 99.8%, and when combined with the scalp electrode signal characteristic measurement control, the typing success rate is as high as 95%.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study provided a human–machine interface that uses blink control in order that users can communicate their needs by different control modes. The users can independently use a computer to express their emotions or simply control their environment. The computer enables users to obtain fresh information and to communicate with different things, while it enables caregivers to further understand the people with physical disabilities’ needs, thus, communicating better with users. When nursing personnel and users mutually understand each other's thoughts, the nursing personnel can provide better care. The care system thus becomes more complete and more efficient.