@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Incompressible flow strategies for ice creep

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modelling of ice creep with low order elements.Use of volumetric strain rate and pressure enhancement strategies for low order finite elements.Application of the method of successive approximation.Stable matrix-free algorithm for solving steady-state flow problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Creep flow,Successive approximation,Dynamic relaxation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objectives of this paper are to examine the use of volumetric strain rate and pressure enhancement strategies for low order finite elements, and to present a stable matrix-free algorithm for solving steady-state flow problems. Algorithms based on the method of successive approximation and low order finite elements are examined for determining the steady-state flow field of a boundary-valued problem consisting of an incompressible material. It is shown that both volumetric strain rate and pressure enhancement are required to mitigate pathological locking and nonphysical pressure variations. Care must however be taken when introducing pressure enhancement, which helps mitigate the pressure from drifting, as the stress field is perturbed from equilibrium. An algorithm based on dynamic relaxation and radial return stress calculations is presented for matrix free calculations dealing with stress-dependent creep.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are many problems in geotechnics, including glacier flow, landslides and debris flows, that involve slope creep, cf. [1]. Analysis of ice mechanics problems is of interest to mining companies because considerable economic resources in terms of mineral deposits are at the margins or under ice sheets. Estimates of ice flow towards a pit are required to assess operational efforts and mine economics [2]. Colbeck [3] in 1973, for example, carried out a flow analysis of ice into a proposed open-pit, iron ore mine at the edge of the Greenland ice sheet. The objective of the study was to establish the most favorable profile for the ice sheet next to the mine to minimize the annual amount of ice that would have to be removed. Owing to global warming and its effect on climate change and the retreat of ice, interest in resource and economic development near or at the fringes of ice sheets has increased.The flow of ice is often treated as a viscous, nonlinear, incompressible fluid that obeys Stoke׳s flow equation [4–6]. Such problems can be challenging from a numerical point of view, particularly when using low order finite elements, which are attractive when dealing with a large number of unknowns together with iterative solvers. The objectives of this paper are to examine the use of volumetric strain rate(ε̇v)and pressure (p) enhancement strategies for low order finite elements, and to present a stable, matrix-free algorithm for solving steady-state flow problems based on combining the method of successive approximation with dynamic relaxation.We begin by defining the class of the problem that is of interest and briefly discuss the solution of Stoke׳s flow equation. Thereafter the proposed procedure is presented, including enhancement techniques that are required to suppress pathological locking and nonphysical pressure variations that are common when using low-order elements. An example is presented to highlight some of the issues and to show that care must be taken when implementing enhancement techniques. The literature in this area is vast, thus only that most relevant is cited.We are interested in solving for the steady-state, two-dimensional flow conditions in a large ice mass as represented by the schematic of Fig. 1. To determine the stress and velocity fields, it is necessary to consider the relation between strain rate and velocity, the relation between stress and strain rate, the momentum balance and mass balance, as well the boundary conditions. It will be assumed that the ice is incompressible and that the ‘elastic’ strains are negligible for steady-state creep when compared to the creep strains, which is why ice can be treated as a very viscous fluid.Kinematics: The velocityv=u̇of the ice at a location is defined by position vectorx=xie→iwhere xiare the coordinates ande→irepresent the orthogonal basis vectors in three-dimensional space. Repeated indices imply summation. The superposed dot indicates a derivative with respect to time t, in this case the derivative of displacementu.Stress: Adopting Voigt notation for second order tensors with bold symbols denoting vectors or matrices, stressσ=〈σ11σ22σ33σ12σ23σ31〉Tcan be decomposed into its pressure p and deviatoricScomponents according to(1)σ=−pm+Sin whichm=〈111000〉T. Tensile stresses are taken as positive, with positive pressure implying compression.Strain and strain rate: Given that we are interested in steady-state solutions, no distinction is made here between strain rateε̇and rate of deformation, although strictly speaking the two are not the same; see, e.g., [7]. Engineering strainε=〈ε11ε22ε33γ12γ23γ31〉Tis determined from the displacement gradients viaε=Luwith the strain rate given byε̇=Lvin which the linear operator L is defined according to(2)LT=[∂∂x100∂∂x20∂∂x30∂∂x20∂∂x1∂∂x3000∂∂x30∂∂x2∂∂x1]with the superscript T implying transposition. For two-dimensional flow problems, the out-of-plane strain rate components are zero and are therefore not required.With regard to discrete motion, the displacement at time tnis given byunwith the change in displacement defined asΔu=Δtvn+1such thatun+1=un+Δuattn+1in which the superscript n is a step counter and symbolΔdenotes increment.Constitutive relation: Restricting ourselves to incompressible, two-dimensional flow with pressure insensitive, isotropic material behaviour, the relation between deviatoric stress and strain rate takes the form(3)S=Dd[ε̇−13mmTε̇]with(4)Dd=μ[200020001]in which μ is the viscosity andS=〈S11S22S12〉T. The out-of-plane deviatoric stress is given byS33=−(S11+S22)→0for two-dimensional flow. For incompressible problems the volumetric strain ratemTε̇vanishes; thus the deviatoric strain rate is the same as the total strain rate. For nonlinear flow it is convenient to use Glen׳s [8] power lawε̇e=Aσerto define the viscosity as(5)μ=13σeε̇e→μ=13Aσe1−rwhereσe=32STSandε̇e=23ε̇dTε̇dare Dorn׳s definitions for the equivalent stress and equivalent strain rate, respectively, with the subscript d implying deviator strain, and r and A being material properties that depend on temperature, cf. [9,10].Conservation equations: Keeping in mind that we are treating the solid as a very viscous fluid, let us begin by writing the momentum balance:(6)ρv̇=LTσ+b→0whereσis the Cauchy stress tensor, ρ is the mass density, andgis the gravitational acceleration vector. All variables are a function of positionxand time t. Eq. (6) is assumed to correspond to a spatial description. Although the acceleration term has been maintained, it vanishes for very slow creep rates. Since we are dealing with creeping flow, there is no need to include the advection term for acceleration.The second balance equation is a statement of mass balance:(7)ṗ=−KmTε̇→0in which K is a ’bulk modulus’ that is often expressed in terms of the material׳s wave speed cp, i.e.,K=ρcp2. Changes in pressure are naturally related to changes in volumetric strain. For quasi-static equilibrium conditions the pressure rate also vanishes. Bothṗandv̇have been retained in the relations as they are required in the transient relaxation schemes. To develop a unique solution for a particular boundary-valued problem, we require boundary conditions. For a free surface the tractions are zero,nTσ=0, as are the velocities,v=0, if the boundary is fully fixed. The matrix n contains the normal to a surface. At a divide we have mixed conditions where both shear traction and normal velocity are zero along the boundary.Owing to the similarity between the equations for a very viscous fluid and those of a creeping solid, both balance equations also apply for creeping solids that undergo small changes in geometry; in the latter case it is understood that the derivatives are with respect to the initial configuration, and Eq. (7) appears as part of the constitutive equation.The principle of virtual velocities [7] together with a constraint equation may be used to convert Eq. (6) and (7) to integral forms that are suitable to develop the finite element matrices, see, e.g., [11]. Given volume V, we have(8)∫VδvTρv̇dV=∫Vδε̇TσdV+∫VδvTbdV+∫StδvTtdSand(9)∫VδpṗdV=−∫VδpmTε̇dVwheretis the prescribed traction on boundary St, and the symbol δ represents a virtual quantity. These equations can be shown to correspond to a variational principle for incompressible creeping flow [12]. It is important to recognize that the specification of pressure on a boundary enters through the traction term and cannot be specified as an essential (fixed) condition.The finite element approximation is now introduced in whichv(x)=Nvv^implyingε̇=Bv^andp=Npp^whereNvandNpare interpolation matrices andB=LNvwithv^andp^containing the nodal velocities and pressures, respectively. Using these definitions, the discretized system, equations have the following structure:(10)[M00Mp]{v^̇p^̇}={F0}−[AGGT0]{v^p^}The structures of the matrices on the right- and left-hand sides are well known and can be found in cf. [11,13]. Of significance for purposes of the presentation here is the observation that the coefficient matrix on the right is not positive definite, which can be problematic if suitable combination of shape functions is not chosen for the velocity and pressure interpolations. Hughes [13] provides an excellent discussion in Chapter 4 of his textbook on the subject. Referring to Eq. (7), pressure should be interpolated one order less than velocity (or displacement). From a mathematics point of view the coefficient matrix becomes singular if pressure and velocity have the same order of interpolation; a solution is not possible by simple inversion of the coefficient matrix for steady state conditions. The non-solvability is due to the presence of pressure modes such thatGp^=0[14], which implies that the pressure field is non-unique.The Babuska–Brezzi (or inf-sup) condition can be used to ensure that an element does not lock and that the resulting system of equations is non-singular [15]. It is important to recognize that it provides a sufficient but not necessary condition. As the inf-sup condition is often difficult to establish analytically, numerical tests have been developed [16]. A summary of experiences with the inf-sup condition is provided by Bathe [17]. In the authors’ experience, the element that appears to work the best has quadratic variation in velocity and is linear in pressure with pressure being continuous between elements. This element does not lock and the coefficient matrix can be inverted, i.e., a unique steady-state solution can be obtained directly without the need to introduce stabilizing terms or special posteriori filter techniques that remove undesirable pressure modes. While this element works well for free surface problems, it must be recognized that the incompressibility constraint is satisfied in a weighted residual sense, not locally.In the early years considerable effort was directed at developing higher order elements, which tend to have better convergence properties as the grid density is refined and can better deal with avoiding pathological locking and spurious pressure modes. Within the finite element, fluid mechanics community this philosophy eventually changed with the community borrowing concepts used in control volume formulations that were based on lower order elements and equal order interpolation for velocity and pressure. It is argued that equal order interpolation is justified when inertial effects dominate, cf. [18]. Furthermore, low order velocity–pressure (v–p) formulations are favored as they preserve local mass conservation and have simple and uniform data structures [19]. Within a more modern context, the use of low order elements is attractive for material point method analyses, which involve continuous forward and reverse mapping of state variables between the material points and the computational mesh, cf. [20]. The success to implementing the low order v–p elements involves relaxing the incompressibility constraint condition by introducing stabilization and post-processing procedures to remove the spurious pressure modes.For low order elements, there are two challenges to overcome: pathological locking phenomenon and the spurious pressure modes. Considerable research has been carried out to develop solution stabilization techniques for (near) incompressible problems in which pressure and velocity (displacement) have equal order interpolation, see, e.g., [21]. Schneider et al. [18] are among the first to demonstrate that equal order interpolation is possible for the solution of steady-state incompressible flows by implementing iterative techniques that involve a ‘velocity correction’ method, also referred to as the fractional step method. For a broad review of the various formulations the reader is referred to references [11,22].In essence, the velocity correction procedure involves using transient relaxation whereby the steady-state, incompressible solution is sought via artificial time-stepping allowing for ‘elastic’ compressibility. Referring to Eq. (6), the momentum balance is split into a deviatoric and a spherical component. In its simplest form, an estimate for the updated velocity is first obtained by solving for an intermediate velocityv⁎considering only the deviatoric stresses via an explicit forward step. The pressure is then updated through the mass balance equation taking into account the intermediate velocity and the pressure gradient, which helps control nonphysical pressure fluctuations. The correction to the intermediate velocity is achieved through the change in velocity by the pressure gradient. This procedure introduces algorithmic compressibility to suppress locking and spurious pressure variations. A tricky aspect of the fractional step method is the treatment of “flux” boundary conditions that develop in the mass balance equation as a consequence of integration by parts, cf. [23].When dealing with classical, low order displacement (or velocity) elements, the number of constraints is equal to the number of elements, which tends to be much greater than the number of nodes. A simple technique to relax the effect of the incompressibility constraint is to reduce the number of constraints. This can be achieved by replacing the constraints on the elements with constraints associated with the nodes. Bonet and Burton [24] describe a penalty formulation involving a form of pressure smoothening that can be easily implemented in explicit dynamic codes. The procedure is based on defining nodal volumes and determining nodal pressures using these volumes. Bochev et al. [19] propose a stable variational principle that involves pressure smoothening.Within the context of incompressible elastoplasticity, Detournay and Dzik [25] describe a nodal mixed discretization approach in which the volumetric strain rate is enhanced by using a weighted averaging procedure that takes into account the element volumetric strain rates surrounding each node. Compressibility enters through the elasticity. For the node-based smoothened finite element methods to be effective, a sufficient number of smoothening domains are required, together with sufficient mesh fineness. Nguyen-Xuan and Liu [26] however demonstrate that such methods may not be fully lock-free in the limit as Poisson׳s ratio approaches half. They propose using edge-based smoothening together with a cubic bubble function to soften the overlying stiff triangular elements. Mitigating procedures based on linear interpolation with bubble functions are, however, not suited for explicit dynamic applications [24]. Sun et al. [27] provide an assumed deformation gradient formulation for poro-mechanical problems to mitigate the locking associated with incompressibility. It is also shown that spurious pore pressure modes can be filtered out via a penalty formulation.The approach taken in this paper follows that of reference [25] in which the enhanced volumetric strain rate algorithmically softens the incompressibility constraint. As will be shown, pressure smoothening is required to control nonphysical pressure fluctuations. The approach is rooted more in the physics rather than in the mathematics. Rigorous mathematical expositions, in which the inf-sup condition is addressed, can be found in references [19,27], with Dvorkin [14] interpreting the inf-sup condition from an engineering perspective.Taking into account the similarity between Stoke׳s flow equations and those of incompressible elasticity, Nithiarasu [23] proposed a matrix free fractional step method for solid mechanics problems that parallels the algorithms for incompressible flow. The opposite can be done using the method of successive approximation that allows us to model viscous fluid flow by a creeping solid׳s formulation. This method involves ‘organizing the computations so that the bothersome nonlinear terms are not treated as unknowns but as known quantities determinable from previous iteration’ [28]. Their method is essentially an application of initial strain (initial stiffness) solution procedures common in plasticity and viscoplasticity. Emery [1], as well as others, adopted this scheme in the 60s and 70s to study slope creep.We begin by writing the principle of virtual displacement [7](11)∫VδεTσdV+∫VδuTbdV∫StδuTtdS=0which is the same as Eq. (8) after replacing velocity with displacement, and recognizing that the surface and volume integrations correspond to the initial configuration. Defining the nodal displacement incrementΔu^=u^n+1−u^nsuch thatΔε=BΔu^with the stress incrementΔσ=σn+1−σnbeing related to the total strain and creep strain increments via(12)Δσ=De[Δε−(Δtε̇c)n]we are in a position to write(13)KΔu^=Rn+∫VBTDe(Δtε̇c)ndVwhereK=∫VBTDeBdVis the stiffness matrix andRn=F−∫VBTσndVis the unbalanced force withDebeing the constitutive matrix for elasticity and F represents the external load vector, assuming that it is constant. For plane strain conditions it is necessary to include the effect of the out-of-plane stress and strain increment inDeas the sum of the out-of-plane elastic strain and creep strain is zero, i.e.,ε33=0. The superscript ‘c’ has been included as the total strain increment and the creep strain increment are not equal, except in the limit when the influence of the elastic strain components becomes negligible. The creep strain rateε̇ccan be determined using Perzyna׳s [29] theory for viscoplasticity. Assuming an associative flow rule together with σeas the potential function yields Eqs. (3)–(5), albeit in an alternative form.Since we are dealing with an explicit time marching scheme, a time step limit [30] must be estimated using(14)Δt=ασeε̇ec4(1+ν)3rEwhereα<1is a factor introduced to improve the stability of the algorithm, E is the elastic modulus and ν represents Poisson׳s ratio, with r being the power in the creep law. The time stepΔtis related to the time marching stability requirement for stress relaxation [31]. It has direct influence on how the algorithm iterates to a steady-state solution. Implicit in the use of Eq. (14) is that the element that has the smallest time increment is the largest permissible time step for time marching.When implementing the method of successive approximation with low order elements there are three factors to consider:•There is nothing in the algorithm to suppress locking and nonphysical pressure variations. Although not really discussed in the literature, it is necessary to introduce a stopping criterion before parasitic behavior develops. While various criteria may be useful for linear creep, the identification of steady state conditions is not as clear for nonlinear creep [32].If we examine Eq. (13), we observe thatRn→0when the body is in equilibrium. This implies that the displacements are entirely due to the creep term, which is independent of pressure. As a result the pressure can drift.The form of the algorithm requires matrix operations for each step. To make the algorithm more efficient in terms of storage and ‘time stepping’, a matrix-free algorithm is desirable.To mitigate suppress locking, the nodal mixed discretization procedure proposed by Detournay and Dzik [25] was found to work well. An important premise is that the deviatoric strain changes must be independent of the strain enhancement. Thus volumetric strain enhancement (also referred to asε̇v-enhancement or smoothening) is applied whenever stress is to be updated. After determining the displacement increments, the volumetric strain incrementΔεveis evaluated in each element. Using a least squares matrix scheme, the nodal volumetric strain incrementsΔεvnodeare then determined via(15)∫VNTNdVΔεvnode=∫VNTΔεvedVin which the superscripts node and e denote nodal and elemental values, respectively. The matrix on the left-hand side is replaced by the ‘lumped mass’ equivalent for numerical efficiency. Thereafter the average element volumetric strain incrementΔϵ^veis determined from the nodal volumetric strain increments to give an enhanced strain via(16)Δε→Δε−m3Δεve+m3Δϵ^veThe net effect is that the strain changes in an element depend not only on the displacement increments of the nodes attached to the element but also on the surrounding nodes, which softens the incompressibility constraint associated with creep and helps suppress locking.It was found earlier in this study that the volumetric strain enhancement could not eliminate pressure drift. To help suppress drifting, an additional means of anchoring the pressure to a physically acceptable levels is required. This can be accomplished by introducing a little compressibility to creep flow [20] or by implementing a modified form of the average nodal pressure stabilization proposed by Bonet and Burton [24]. This paper proposes adopting the latter.Unlike the treatment of creep using a fluid model, pressure is not a nodal degree of freedom when implementing the initial strain algorithm. When implementing p-smoothening, nodal pressures are calculated using the algorithm forε̇v-enhancement after stresses are updated in each element. By definition, pressure is given by−mTσ/3. The nodal pressures are then used to determine average element pressuresp^. Given that p is the element pressure obtained from the stresses, the pressure adjustment for each element is carried out according to(17)p→(1−βp)p+βpp^where βpshould be as small as possible. Based on numerical experimentation, values of the range 0.005–0.01 were found to work well. The adjusted pressure is then added to the deviatoric stress for each element. The basic premise is that the deviatoric stress should not be influenced by smoothening. Alternatively, the pressure adjustmentβp(p^−p)can be added to the total normal stress components.It is believed that the drifting of pressure is related to using a finite number of decimal places in the calculations. The rationale behind pressure smoothening is to introduce minor non-random adjustments to the stress field that prevent the unbalanced force from becoming exactly zero. These perturbations, which do not satisfy equilibrium, are however systematically related to the calculated pressures in a least squares sense. In addition to determining changes due to creep, Eq. (13) also calculates small “elastic” corrections that stabilize the pressure field. As will be shown, if βpis large, errors are introduced to the velocity field such that the values become unrealistic. The idea of introducing a small error into a calculation to stabilize a solution is not new; for example, reduced integration is often used when forming stiffness matrices for near compressible materials [11], or for stabilizing time-stepping schemes [33].A matrix-free algorithm can be developed by using dynamic relaxation (DR). This section presents a brief overview of the DR algorithm that has been implemented. Further information is given in [34].Dynamic relaxation solves the momentum equation(18)MΔv^Δt=F−∫VBTσndV→Rnwhere M is the lumped mass matrix,Δv^corresponds to the change in nodal velocity and the other terms are the same as defined previously. As before, the vectorRnrepresents the unbalanced force that vanishes when quasi-static equilibrium is achieved. The velocity is updated using the forward differencev^n+1=v^n+Δv^with the displacement increment defined via a backward difference asΔu^=v^n+1Δt, which in turn is used to update strains and stresses. Given that creep dissipates energy, there is no need to include artificial damping. Nevertheless to improve convergence, local damping can be added such that each term of the unbalanced force vector Rinis replaced byRin−βd|Rin|v^i/|v^i|, with i denoting degree of freedom and|·|implying absolute value. An efficient solution scheme is achieved withβd≈0.70–0.75, cf. [35].Since we are interested in the steady-state solution, the objective is to scale the mass of each element by adjusting the density to ensure that the time step for stability is approximately the same for each element. Using the maximum permissible time step calculated from Eq. (14), the density of an element is estimated using the Courant–Friedrich–Lewy (CFL) conditionΔt=h/cpin which h is a characteristic length within the element, for example the shortest (height) of a triangle, and cpis the speed of the elastic compression wave:(19)ρ=Ec(Δtκh)2with Ecbeing the constrained modulus for a compression wave andκ<1is a factor that is introduced to ensure stability and minimize or avoid extreme oscillatory convergence to the steady-state solution. It is important to recognize that the time in the analysis is artificial and is used in place of a step counter to track convergence to the steady state solution. The stress update algorithm is presented in the section that follows.The computational efficiency and numerical robustness can be further improved by introducing a radial return strategy on the constitutive law level. The algorithm mimics an initial stress procedure with regard to book-keeping of stress updates, cf. [31]. Rather than dealing with Eq. (12), the invariant form is preferred, where(20){ΔpΔσe}=[K003G]{Δεv−Δεe−Δεec}in whichΔεvandΔεedenote volumetric strain and equivalent strain increments, respectively, and K is the bulk modulus with G being the shear modulus. As creep flow is incompressible, the pressure does not need to be updated with respect to creep strains. The equivalent stress is updated as follows:(21)σe=σe⁎−3GΔεecin whichσe⁎=(σeo+Δσe)is the predictor stress at this time step, where the subscript o denotes the stress value at the beginning of the time step and the superscript c implies the creep increment. Recognizing thatΔεec=Δtε̇ec, Eq. (21) can be rearranged as(22)F=σe−σe⁎+3GΔtAσer=0which leads to a root-finding exercise using the Newton–Raphson method.(23)(σe)m+1=(σe)m−Fm(dFdσe)m(24)F′=dFdσe=3GΔtArσer−1+1⇒3GΔtArεeċσe+1where m is the iteration counter. It should be noted that if σebecomes 0,F′=1. Thus the algorithm remains stable regardless of the time step. Once the converged value of σeis found, the stresses are updated such that(25)σ=−pm+σeσe⁎S⁎whereS⁎corresponds toσe⁎, and σeis the converged value for Eq. (23).We consider the creep of a symmetrical ice mass, where only half of the plane strain section is analysed taking advantage of symmetry along the boundary on the left-hand side. The geometry of the double slope and kinematic boundary conditions is shown in Fig. 2, as well as the mesh patterns that are used to test the various algorithms when modeling a fully incompressible domain. Full fixity is enforced along the base with rollers along the left boundary to take into account the location of a divide (line of symmetry) and the surface is traction free.As shown in reference [20], pathological locking and nonphysical pressure develop when adopting low order elements for this problem, which are attributed to the change in the base slope at x=200m. In that particular study, volumetric strain rate (ε̇v) enhancement is used together with some compressibility in the creep flow field to attain realistic solutions. Most comparisons in this paper are based on the simulation results from the course grid (C), which has 48 elements (35 nodes) and mesh pattern P-A, because the parasitic behaviour is easier to recognize due to larger fluctuations in the nonphysical pressure and the mesh locks more readily. Simulations were performed using a 6-noded v–p fluid model, 3-noded and 6-noded creep models, and the 3-noded matrix-free model based on dynamic relaxation (DR). It should be noted that the meshes that were adopted for the 6-noded element are based on 4 constant strain triangular elements having the same number of nodes as one linear strain element and the P-A pattern. The velocity and pressure histories that follow correspond to node 25 and the element that is attached to node 1, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2.Simulations results for intermediate (I) and fine (F) structured meshes that have 192 and 768 elements, respectively, were also considered. Earlier analyses had shown that the results from the intermediate and fine meshes (fineness being doubled and quadrupled in horizontal and vertical directions) were similar to those obtained when using the coarse element mesh. Results for convergence are presented for analyses that were carried out with unstructured (P-E) meshes containing 110, 281, 1235 and 3592 elements. Only the intermediate mesh, which was created with Persson׳s algorithm [36], is shown for the unstructured grid in Fig. 2.The standard material properties for the slope are as follows: unit weightγ=10kNm−3elastic modulus E=1000MPa and Poisson׳s ratioν=0.3. For the linear analyses where it is assumed that the viscosity is constant A=0.001 and r=1; for nonlinear flowε̇e=0.0327σe1.65a−1 (per annum) with the units for equivalent stress σebeing bars. Although ice creep is nonlinear, we begin with a linear creep law to focus on how well the analysis algorithms perform. The A parameter for the nonlinear analyses was selected by matching the horizontal velocity at crest of the slope with that determined from the linear simulations. The value for power r is taken from [4]. Representative results are presented to demonstrate the influence of nonlinear flow rule on the predictions and ability of the matrix free algorithm to converge to the same results that are obtained using the initial strain procedure. It should be emphasized that time for these simulations acts as a “pseudo” counter.Creep was simulated for 0.05years (18.25days), starting from an initial state of stress that corresponds to the elastic solution. Unless indicated otherwise for the presentation of the results, the following standard parameters apply when using the low order elements:α=0.01,βp=0.01,κ=2/3. For dynamic relaxation, the time step is controlled by the stability considerations for creep. Local damping was included withβd=0.7. A switchβv=1is introduced to imply that volumetric strain increment enhancement is active, otherwise it is inactive. No enhancements are required for the simulations with the 6-noded elements. Based on the predictions of the 6-noded v–p fluid model, the reference velocities at the crest of the slope (node 25) are(v1,v2)=(6.0,−2.7)ma−1and the reference pressure near node 1 at the bottom of the divide is 445kPa for linear flow conditions, with(v1,v2)=(6.0,−3.3)ma−1at node 25 for the nonlinear flow. The pressure near node 1 for the nonlinear case was found to be similar to that obtained when using the linear flow rule.Given an estimate of the critical time step for creep, the parameter α is a reduction factor that is introduced to improve the temporal predictions, or in our case how the solution procedure converges to steady state. To determine the steady-state conditions, the value of the time-step reduction factor should not be important. Nevertheless a series of simulations were performed using the 6-noded creep model, which suffers neither from locking nor from nonphysical pressure variations, to examine the influence of this factor on convergence to the flow solution. Fig. 3tracks the convergence of pressure and horizonal (vertical) velocities (meters per annum). Based on pressure history, steady-state flow develops within 2–4 days (.0055–0.011 years), with pressure level being “unique” for all time steps. On the other hand, the velocity at the crest of the slope, although converging quickly to a value, is influenced by the time step. It is observed that the α factor should be 0.01 or less for the double slope problem to attain predictions that are consistent with the v–p solution; although reasonable predictions are obtained for the α factor equal to 0.1. The need to adopt time steps less than critical to achieve good predictions is not uncommon. It should be noted that the critical time step is independent of stress for the linear creep law.The second series of creep analyses address the effect ofε̇v-enhancement, as well as the p-smoothening, when using the 3-noded creep model. The main findings are reflected in the results shown in Fig. 4. Once again, steady-state is attained fairly quickly, regardless of the combination of enhancement factors. From the pressure prediction plot, it is demonstrated that full pressure enhancement(βp=1)has a negative influence on the prediction of pressure. The magnitude of the steady-state value is unrealistically low and it turns out that no enhancement yields a better prediction, at least for pressure. By scrutinizing the velocities, it is observed that they steadily decrease when no enhancement is introduced and that theε̇v-enhancement reduces locking but does not fully eliminate it. These findings are consistent with the trends reported in reference [20] and the findings in reference [32].By including a small amount of p-enhancement the prediction of both the pressure and the velocities at the respective observation points is seen to be reasonable. The development of nonphysical pressure variations is illustrated in Fig. 5, which presents the reference pressure predictions (βv=1 and βp=0.01), as well as the elements in which the relative error in the pressure exceeds 50 percent of the reference. The element pressures when using both smoothening procedures range from 20 (top) to 440kPa (bottom) at the divide, with the pressure ranges for results without smoothening and onlyε̇v-smoothening being −680 to 930 and −270 to 660kPa, respectively. In the latter two cases, the pressure predictions are definitely outside expected range. It is demonstrated that theε̇v-enhancement cannot eliminate the pressure fluctuations and drifting. The dynamic relaxation simulations predicted steady-state solutions that are similar to those obtained by the initial strain creep algorithm, i.e., Eq. (13).The variations in horizontal and vertical surface velocities for quasi-static equilibrium (t=0.05days) corresponding to linear flow are presented in Fig. 6for the various models, including those predicted by 6-noded v–p formulation. All 3-noded element solutions were obtained using the standard enhancement parameters (βv=1, βp=0.01) with α=0.01. The velocity predictions from the 3- and 6-noded element models are shown to be by and large the same.Up to this point only the results for grid pattern P-A have been presented. Fig. 7summarizes all surface velocity results from the dynamic relaxation simulations for patterns P-B to P-D, including mesh densities C, I and F for the structured meshes, as well as for the intermediate (I) mesh density of the unstructured mesh P-E. In summary, the predictions for all intermediate and fines meshes are visually the same and those corresponding to the coarse meshes may be classified as being similar. In terms of the error in the rate of energy dissipation corresponding to steady-state conditions, the order of error is estimated asO(h1.92), withR2=1, where the dimensionless length ish=N−1/2with N being the number of elements [26]. This result is based on the dynamic relaxation analyses that were completed using unstructured meshes with 110, 281 and 1235 3-noded elements and assuming that the solution with 3592 elements provides the ‘exact’ solution. This result is in good agreement to an expected value ofO(h2). The corresponding error for the v–p fluid element isO(h3.14). It is lower than the expectedO(h4), which could be due to using an approximation for the “exact” value of energy dissipation. The error analysis for the v–p fluid element was performed with structured grids having 12, 48, 192 and 768 elements.Post-processing can often effectively filter the non-physical pressure variations. For this reason the element pressures in Fig. 5 are presented in terms of the element values. Fig. 8provides the post-processed pressure and maximum shear stress (radius of Mohr׳s circle) variations predicted by the dynamic relaxation algorithm, adopting the linear flow model with the standard parameters. As we can observe when comparing the two figures, post-processing hides the actual variations. The arrows show the direction of increasing pressure and shear. Similar stress variations were predicted for other discretizations when using both enhancements. Pressure varies approximately linearly with depth in the upper part of the ice mass with shear stresses being much lower. The shear is maximum along the base slightly downstream from where the slope becomes steeper. The stress predictions when using other mesh patterns were found to be similar and as the mesh density was increased the influence of mesh pattern on the stress distribution became increasingly insignificant, as might be expected.Simulations using the coarse mesh were performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the various enhancement strategies on the predictions when adopting the nonlinear flow law. Fig. 9summarizes the convergence trends for velocity and pressure when using the 3-noded initial strain procedure, as well as the DR simulation where both pressure volumetric strain increment smoothening are adopted. Noteworthy are the observations: to obtain a steady-state pressure both enhancements are required; combined pressure and volumetric strain increment smoothening mitigate locking; and the matrix-free dynamic relaxation and initial strain algorithms provide the same predictions. It is demonstrated that the velocities initially undergo a cyclical history when using dynamic relaxation before stabilizing to a steady-state solution. Local damping could not fully eliminate the oscillations. Such oscillations are also present when using, for example, the fractional step method, cf. [32].With regard to surface velocities, both initial strain and dynamic relaxation procedures are seen to provide the same results as demonstrated in Fig. 10for the standard enhancement parameters (βv=1,βp=0.01). This figure also shows that no smoothening leads to a stiffer behavior, which is reflected by the smaller velocities near x=200m. Had the simulation been carried out for a longer time, the locking effect would have been more pronounced, cf. [20]. The predicted pressure variations were found to be similar to those for the linear law.The impetus for developing the method of successive approximation scheme presented in this paper to solve incompressible flow problems arose from having had limited success when implementing the fractional step method for nonlinear flow, cf. [32]. When only volumetric strain rate smoothening was used for the successive approximation scheme, it was quickly recognized that it was necessary to stop the analysis at an appropriate time to suppress the drifting of pressure (and locking). Initially various stopping criteria were investigated. While there was some success with stopping criteria for problems with linear creep, the time to attain quasi-static equilibrium was found to be not well defined and the stopping criteria were not successful.The recommended strategy to mitigate both locking and nonphysical (or contaminated) pressure distributions is to implement full volumetric strain enhancement withβv=1to suppress locking and to include pressure smoothening to eliminate the drifting of pressure, which also has an influence on the velocity field. Care must however be taken when introducing pressure enhancement as the stress field is perturbed from equilibrium. In other words, the value of βp, which varies between 0 and 1, should be as small as possible. No attempt was made to find optimum values for βpand α, the latter controlling how well the creep relaxation process itself is modeled. Nevertheless, based on the experience gained from this study, the combination ofβp=0.01andα=0.01was found to work well for both linear and nonlinear flows. These values were obtained by first identifying a reasonable value for α, which depends on the creep law, and then determining an appropriate value for βpsuch thatβp<0.1.The dynamic relaxation scheme was introduced as a matrix free algorithm. The parametersβd=0.7andκ=2/3are tied to convergence properties of dynamic relaxation and not to the enhancement schemes for locking and pressure. Typical values appear in the literature, cf. [35,20].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
