@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mixed-dimensional finite element coupling for structural multi-scale simulation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new mixed-dimensional coupling method is proposed for multi-scale simulation of a structure.The principle of virtual work is used to derive force and displacement constraint equations.A numerical method with commercial FE codes is developed to figure out the constraint equations.The proposed method is applied to a number of test cases to verify its accuracy and robustness.The proposed method can handle coupling problems more accurately than the existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite elements,Mixed-dimensional coupling,Multi-scale simulation,Constraint equations,Linear and nonlinear analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi-scale finite element (FE) modeling and analysis of engineering structures have become very necessary in order to provide both global and local structural information for a comprehensive assessment of structural safety. The multi-scale FE modeling needs FE coupling methods to combine mixed-dimensional finite elements, such as beam-to-shell and plate-to-solid, in a single structural model. This paper presents a new mixed-dimensional FE coupling method that can achieve both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium at the interface between the different element types. The principle of virtual work is first used to derive both linear force and displacement constraint equations for the interface. A numerical method compatible with commercial FE codes is developed to figure out the linear constraint equations which satisfy both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium conditions at the interface. The proposed coupling method is then extended to nonlinear mixed-dimensional FE coupling problems. Finally, the proposed coupling method is applied to a number of test cases including linear beam-to-plate, beam-to-shell and beam-to-solid interface problems, a linear frame structure, and a beam-to-shell buckling problem. The obtained results are also compared with those from the existing methods. It reveals that the proposed coupling method can handle both linear and nonlinear mixed-dimensional FE coupling problems more accurately than the existing methods and that it can be applied to a structure satisfactorily for multi-scale simulation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Finite element (FE) modeling and analysis of an engineering structure nowadays are a common practice to understand structural behavior and assess structural safety. The FE modeling using small-scale elements can usually improve the accuracy of numerical simulation of a structure but it can also lead to a huge computation cost or a difficulty to run. The FE modeling using relatively large-scale elements may capture global structural behavior but it may not be able to detect local structural feature. The multi-scale FE simulation can provide a better solution in this aspect [1–4]. By taking a frame structure shown inFig. 1 as an example, the local joints are simulated with shell elements of small scale while the other components in the frame are simulated with beam elements of large scale. Such a multi-scale simulation can capture not only the global structural behavior in terms of displacement and acceleration but also the local joint behavior in terms of stress and strain without a huge computation cost.Since different types of elements (beam, plate, shell, and solid) have different number of degrees-of-freedom (DOFs), the multi-scale FE simulation needs a rational FE coupling method to combine mixed-dimensional finite elements at their interfaces into a single structural model. The challenging issue in the multi-scale FE modeling is therefore how to guarantee the rationality of the coupling method so that it can achieve both displacement continuity and stress equilibrium in the region around the interface between the different types of elements.Broadly speaking, there are two major coupling methods currently available: volume coupling and surface coupling [5]. Volume coupling refers to a region in which different models co-exist and it is usually realized using the Arlequin method [6]. The Arlequin method is best suited for coupling different physical models such as continuum particles [7,8] among others. In surfacing coupling, there is no overlapping of different models and different models can be coupled using one of the following methods: (a) Lagrange multiplier method; (b) penalty method; (c) transition element method; and (d) multipoint constraint (MPC) method. Both the Lagrange multiplier method and the penalty method have their own disadvantages: in the former it is the introduction of extra unknowns and in the latter it is the choice of the penalty parameter. Transition elements employing either reduced or full integration can be used for shell–solid transition [9–12], beam–solid transition [13,14], and beam–shell transition [15,16]. Unfortunately, the transition elements have not been widely adopted because of its limitations. Transition elements can only be used to a one-to-one coupling of elements, and different element transitions require different formulations which make it difficult and impractical for a commercial FE code.The MPC method is an attractive coupling method for coupling mixed-dimensional elements by using constraint equations for nodal displacements at the interface. The MPC method can be used for static and dynamic analysis of linear or nonlinear structures [17–22]. This method is easy to access in a few commercial FE codes. For instance, the RBE3 MPC method provided in ANSYS code [20] can automatically establish constraint equations for coupling the different types of elements. There are mainly two types of the MPC method: the rigid interface method and the deformable interface method. The rigid interface method uses rigid beams to connect nodes of different types of elements, such as CERIG in ANSYS and MPC-BEAM in ABAQUS [20,21]. The rigid interface method, however, yields stress disturbance at the interface because the interface is defined as a rigid interface. The deformable interface method uses a concept of force distribution at the interface, such as RBE3 in ANSYS and the distributing coupling method in ABAQUS. The deformable interface method allows the interface deformation with stress distributions at the interface. RBE3 in ANSYS allows the motion of the master node equal to the average of the slave nodes in which only translational DOFs of the slave nodes involves in the constraint equations. The force and moment are distributed to the slave nodes by weighting factors and the distance from the center of slave nodes times weighting factors, respectively. The distributing coupling method in ABAQUS constrains the motions of the coupling nodes to the motion of a reference node in an average sense. Forces and moments at the reference node are distributed either as a coupling node-force only or as a coupling node-force and moment. Both RBE3 and distributing coupling methods have the sense of force and moment distribution by means of weighting factors but the accuracy of stress distribution at the interface resulting from force and moment distribution by means of weighting factors is questionable. On the other hand, another deformable MPC method was proposed based on the direct assumption of stress distribution at the interface and the equal work done by the stresses and forces at the interface [18]. As for the scheme of implementing the MPC method into the finite element software, there are three common types: penalty scheme; Lagrange multiplier scheme and elimination scheme [23–25]. The penalty scheme only enforces the MPC method in an approximate manner: the choice of penalty coefficient is a dilemma and it can be neither small nor large. The Lagrange multiplier scheme increases the number of DOFs in the system and destroys the banded and positive definite nature of the stiffness matrix. The elimination scheme enforces the MPC method by eliminating dependent DOFs. It needs more matrix operations and destroys the symmetry and bandwidth of the original stiffness matrix, and the choice of independent DOFs is non-unique. Although the deformable MPC method seems more rational and effective, inaccurate constraint equations due to inappropriate stress distribution assumptions may result in stress disturbance at the interface.This paper presents a new deformable MPC coupling method that can achieve both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium at the interface between the different element types. The principle of virtual work is first used to derive both linear force and displacement constraint equations for the interface. A numerical method compatible with commercial FE codes is developed to figure out the linear constraint equations which satisfy both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium conditions at the interface. The proposed coupling method is then extended to nonlinear mixed-dimensional FE coupling problems. Compared with the McCune׳s method, the proposed method drops the assumption that beam/plate/shell theory governs the stress distribution at the interface between elements. To validate the proposed coupling method, a number of finite element test cases are finally examined. These cases include linear beam-to-plate, beam-to-shell and beam-to-solid connections for linear mixed-dimensional FE coupling, a linear frame structure for structural multi-scale simulation, and a beam-to-shell buckling problem for nonlinear mixed-dimensional FE coupling. The computation results are also compared with those from the existing methods to demonstrate accuracy and robustness of the new algorithm. While the method proposed in this paper is suitable for the mixed-dimensional FE coupling of beam and plate, beam and shell, and beam and solid in either linear or nonlinear multi-scale simulation of frame structures, there is a possibility of extending the proposed method to the mixed-dimensional FE coupling of shell and solid, plate and solid, and other, but it needs further study.For static linear structural analysis, the interface coupling for elements of different DOFs can be established using linear constraint equations. An example of interface coupling for a two-dimensional beam and plate connection, as shown inFig. 2, is used to illustrate how the constraint equations can achieve both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium at the interface. The mixed-dimensional FE model of the beam and plate connection is shown inFig. 3, in which plane beam elements are used to model the beam and plane stress elements of 8-nodes are used to model the plate.According to the deformable MPC coupling method, the displacement constraint equations for coupling the beam and the plate at the interface can be expressed as(1)c(uB,uP)=uB−CuP=0whereCis the coefficient matrix of the displacement constraint equation. For the finite element model of the beam and plate connection shown in Fig. 3, the beam node has three DOFs{uBvBθB}while each node of the plane stress element has two DOFs{uPivPi}. The termCuPin Eq. (1) can be seen as the generalized displacements of the plate, matching with the beam displacementsuBat the interface and obtained by weighting the coefficient matrixCover the plate displacement vectoruPat the interface. The displacement constraint equation indicates that the displacements of the beam node shall be consistent with the generalized displacements of the plate at the interface.The variation of the displacement constraint equation can be expressed as(2)δc(uB,uP)=δuB−CδuP=0in whichδuBandδuPare the virtual displacement vectors at the interface of beam and plate, respectively. Eq. (2) is the constraint equation of virtual displacement at the interface of beam and plate.For any arbitrary interface coupling, the sum of virtual work done by the corresponding forces at the interface of the two types of elements shall be zero.(3)δWP+δWB=0whereδWPandδWBare the virtual works done by the nodal forces at the interface of plate and beam, respectively.The virtual works done by the node forces at the interface of plate and beam are respectively(4)δWP=∫A(σxδuP+τxyδvP)dA=∑j=1Nelement∫Aj(σxNjδuPj+τxyNjδvPj)dA=δuPTFPδWB=δuBP+δvBQ+δθBM=δuBTFBwhereσxandτxyare the normal stress and shear stress, respectively;δuPandδvPare the continuum virtual displacements in the x- and y-direction, respectively;Njis the shape function of the element;δuPjandδvPjare the nodal virtual displacements;Nelementis the number of elements at the interface;FPandFBare the nodal forces at the interface of plate and beam, respectively. It can be seen that the continuum virtual displacements{δuPδvP}are given by the product of the nodal virtual displacements and the shape functions as{NjδuPjNjδvPj}in the finite element model. In the second expression,P,QandMare the axial force, shear force and moment on the beam node at the interface, respectively.By substituting Eq. (4) into Eq. (3), we have the following equation:(5)δuPTFP+δuBTFB=0From Eq. (2), we haveδuB=CδuP. Eq. (6) then becomes(6)δuPTFP+δuPTCTFB=0Eq. (6) holds for any arbitrary virtual displacements and thus gives(7)FP=−CTFBIt is interesting to see that the coefficient matrixCTof the force constraint equation is the transpose of the coefficient matrixCof the displacement constraint equation. The coefficient matrixCTof the force constraint equation can be regarded as a distribution matrix to distribute the forces or moment at the node of the beam to the nodes of the plate at the interface. The satisfaction of both Eqs. (1) and (7) can achieve both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium at the interface between the different element types. Furthermore, Eq. (7) indicates that the distribution coefficients in the force distribution matrix are the corresponding nodal forces of the plate at the interface under unit force or moment. Hence, the coefficient matrix of the force constraint equation actually refers to the nodal forces along the cross-section of the plate under unit force or moment. Based on this principle, a new numerical method compatible with commercial FE codes is developed to figure out the coefficient matrix of the force constraint equation. Once it is obtained, the coefficient matrix of the displacement constraint equation can be easily found, and both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium conditions at the interface are satisfied.The nodal forces which are used for the coefficient matrix of the force constraint equation must be compatible with the nodes of the plate at the interface under unit force or moment. To this end, a substructure is extracted directly from the FE model of the plate at the interface, as shown inFig. 4, so that the substructure has the same mesh and element type with the plate at the interface. The extraction of the substructure from the FE model and the corresponding stiffness matrix can be easily implemented in commercial FE codes. To calculate the nodal forces of the plate at the interface with high accuracy, the substructure is used to assemble a nodal force model. The nodal force model is formed by repeating the substructure with the same mesh and element type, as shown inFig. 5. The nodal force model shall be long enough to avoid end effects but overlength is not necessary. In this study, the length of the substructure is taken about five times the height of cross section of a member. Then, the iteration process will guarantee the accuracy of the coefficient matrix of the constraint equation without end effects. The nodal forces can then be extracted from the nodes at the middle section of the nodal force model (i.e. the interface of the beam and plate in the multi-scale model) to avoid the influence of boundary conditions.To apply the unit force or moment to the two ends of the nodal force model, a loading node is established at the center of the two end sections, as shown in Fig. 5. Initially, the rigid connections are used to connect the loading node and all the nodes at the corresponding end section. The rigid connection is a type of MPC which defines a rigid area at the section of plate. It is deduced from the displacement relationship of arbitrary two points on a rigid body. To calculate the displacement response of the nodal force model, the unit force or moment is assigned at one of the two loading nodes, and the other loading node on the other end is clamped.After the nodal displacements of the nodal force model are computed, the nodal displacement vector at the middle section can be extracted, and the nodal force vector of the same substructure at the interface can be expressed as(8)fSE=KSEuSEwherefSEis the nodal force vector of the substructure at the middle section,KSEanduSEare the stiffness matrix and nodal displacement vector of the substructure, respectively. After the nodal force vector is found, the corresponding coefficients in the coefficient matrix of the force constraint equation can be found by using Eq. (8). By applying the axial force, shear force or bending moment to the loading node one after another, the coefficient matrix of the force constraint equation can be found for the interface of the beam and plate concerned. To enhance the accuracy of the coefficient matrix for the force constraint equation, iteration is applied. The obtained coefficient matrix is used to update the connection between the loading node and the nodes on the end section. The new nodal force vector and then the new coefficient matrix are calculated. Iteration for the coefficient matrix continues until the coefficients meet a certain convergent requirement. The flow chart of the iteration for coefficient matrix of constraint equation is shown inFig. 6.It shall be pointed out that although the proposed method for establishing constraint equations is illustrated using the beam-to-plate connection, this method is also applicable to the connection of beam-to-shell, beam-to-solid and others in principle. Moreover, it is also convenient to be applied to more than two members of arbitrary cross section at a structural joint using more than two interfaces. In this case, the constraint equation can be established for each interface in its local coordinate system (CS) using the way described above. The constraint equations established in the local CS shall then be transformed to the global CS for the solution of the entire structure.The above method for construction of constraint equations is for linear mixed-dimensional FE coupling. In this section, the proposed method is extended to nonlinear interface coupling, including both geometrical and material nonlinearity. An example of beam-to-shell coupling of an L-shape member with large deformation, as shown inFig. 7, is used to illustrate how to construct nonlinear constraint equations for nonlinear interface coupling. In consideration that the interface moves during the nonlinear solution process, the nonlinear displacement and force constraint equations are first developed in a local interface coordinate system (CS) at the interface. The constraint equations are then transformed to a global CS for solution. As a result, the constraint equations in the global CS always change during the nonlinear solution process. Furthermore, the matrix coefficients of the constraint equations in the local CS may also change due to material and geometrical nonlinearity during the nonlinear solution process. Therefore, the nonlinear constraint equations for the interface are caused by the material and geometrical nonlinearity and the transformation of coordinates from a local CS to a global CS.The transformation of the coordinate systems is illustrated in Fig. 7 for interface coupling of the L shape member which is modeled as beam elements and shell elements.Aiandaiare the local coordinate systems of the interface at the initial and current configurations, andeiis the global coordinate system. The three coordinate systems have the following relationship:(9)Ai=R0ei(10)ai=Rtei=RdR0eiwhereR0andRtare the transformation matrixes from the global coordinate system to the initial and current local coordinate system, respectively; andRdis the transformation matrix from the initial local coordinate system to the current local coordinate system.The local coordinate systemAiandaican be calculated from the initial and current positions of 3 nodes at the interface. The transformation matrixesR0andRtcan be computed usingAiandai, respectively. The transformation matrixRdis then determined by(11)Rd=RtR0TFor the beam-to-shell coupling, it is also convenient to calculate the transformation matrixRdby the rotation angle of the interface by means of the Rodrigues׳ rotation formula [26]. The rotation angle of the interface can be defined by the average rotation of shell nodes at the interface.The relationship between the coefficient matrices of the nonlinear force and displacement constraint equations for the interface is derived in this section. The nonlinearity of the coefficient matrix of the constraint equation is due to the change of stiffness at the interface caused by materials and geometrical nonlinearity. The coefficient matrix of the nonlinear displacement constraint equation changes according to the displacement at the interface of the shell. The nonlinear displacement constraint equation for the interface coupling of beam-to-shell can be written as(12)cNL(uB,uS)=uB−CNL(uS)uS=0in whichuBanduSare the nodal displacement at the interface of beam and shell, respectively; andCNL(uS)is the coefficient (weighting) matrix varying withuS.The variation of the nonlinear displacement constraint equation in the current configuration is(13)δcNL(uB,uS)=δuB−D(uS)δuS=0whereD(uS)=∂cNL(uB,uS)/∂uSis the coefficient matrix of the linearized form of the displacement constraint equation expressed by Eq. (12) used at each increment.In consideration of the principle of virtual work applied to the interface of beam-to-shell coupling, one can obtainδWS+δWB=0. By substitutingδuB=D(uS)δuS, one can achieve the following force constraint equation:(14)FS=−DT(uS)FBwhereFSandFBare the nodal forces at the interface of shell and beam, respectively.It is interesting to see that the force distribution (coefficient) matrixDT(uS)is the transpose of the displacement coefficient matrixD(uS)of the displacement constraint equation. Therefore, once the force distribution matrix can be determined using the force nodal model in consideration of nonlinearity, the displacement coefficient matrix can be constructed from the force distribution matrix.The force distribution matrix in the local coordinate system is calculated using the method proposed in Section 3 in which the stiffness matrix at the interface of shell is extracted during the nonlinear iteration process. The force distribution matrix in the global coordinate system can be determined through coordinate transformation. The coefficient matrix of the displacement constraint equation in its initial and current configuration in the global coordinate system can then be given by(15)D0=Ti1C0Ti2TDt=Tt1CtTt2TwhereD0andDtare the coefficient matrix of the displacement constraint equation in its initial and current configuration, respectively, in the global coordinate system;C0andCtare the coefficient matrix in its initial and current local coordinate systems, respectively;Ti1,Ti2,Tt1, andTt2are the coordinate transform matrix computing fromR0andRn, respectively. For instance, if the matrixC0is of6×ndimensions,Ti1andTi2are then formed with dimensions of6×6andn×n, respectively, in terms ofR0.(16)Ti1=[R000R0]Ti2=[R0000⋱000R0]AfterDtis determined for the interface at a given step of the nonlinear solution process, the displacement constraint equation for the interface in the global coordinate system can then be written as(17)ΔUB−DtΔUS=0whereΔUBandΔUSare the displacement increments at the interface of beam and shell, respectively.The step-by-step algorithm for constructing the nonlinear constraint equation and calculating the mixed-dimensional FE results is given as follows:(1)Extract the stiffness matrix at the interface and establish the nodal force model; calculate the coefficient matrixC0for the constraint equation in the initial configuration in the local sectional coordinate system.Use the first part of Eq. (15) to calculate the coefficient matrixD0for the constraint equation in the initial configuration in the global coordinate system.Use the constraint equation in the initial configuration to calculate the response of the system.Extract the stiffness matrix at the interface in the current configuration and establish the nodal force model; calculate the coefficient matrixCtfor the constraint equation in the current configuration in the local sectional coordinate system.Use the second part of Eq. (15) to calculate the coefficient matrixDtof the constraint equation in the current configuration in the global coordinate system.Use the updated constraint equation for coupling the mixed-dimensional FE interface to calculate the response of the system.Check the convergence in terms of the calculated response.If the response meets the requirement of convergence, output the response; otherwise go to step (4) for further iteration until the convergence criterion is satisfied.The computation of the coefficient matrixCtin the local coordinate system may need huge computation time. However, if the stiffness of the shell at the interface in the local coordinate system changes very small during nonlinear solution process, the coefficients of the displacement constraint equation in the current configuration can be obtained directly by the coordinate transform from its initial configuration.(18)Dt=Td1D0Rd2TwhereTd1andTd2are the transformation matrix generated byRdof a dimension of6×6andn×n, respectively, if the matrixD0is of6×ndimensions. The requirement of using Eq. (18) is that the change of stiffness at the interface shall be small. This requires that material nonlinearity does not occur at the coupling interface. Hence, Eq. (18) is only suitable for the interface without material nonlinearity. Nevertheless, material nonlinearity is allowed to occur in the region away from the interface.By combining the nonlinear constraint equations with the nonlinear FE model of the structure, one can use the Newton iteration process to find the solution of the structure with nonlinear constraint equations. However, while the linear constraint equation can be easily implemented using the command CE in the ANSYS code [20] and the command EQUATION in the ABAQUS commercial code, only the ABAQUS provides a user subroutine MPC [27] for nonlinear constraint equation. In this paper, the multi-scale simulation of a linear structure with linear mixed-dimensional coupling is implemented in ANSYS, and that of a nonlinear structure with nonlinear constraint equations is implemented in ABAQUS. For the nonlinear analysis, the derived coefficients of the constraint equation are updated in user subroutine MPC.This section will examine a number of finite element cases using the proposed coupling method, and the results will be compared with those obtained from the existing methods to validate the proposed coupling method. These cases include linear beam-to-plate, beam-to-shell and beam-to-solid coupling problems, a linear frame structure for linear structural multi-scale simulation, and a beam-to-shell buckling problem for nonlinear mixed-dimensional FE coupling.A cantilever of a solid rectangular cross-section, as shown inFig. 8, is first investigated. It is clamped on the left end and subjected to a concentrated force on the right. The length of the cantilever is 320mm and its cross section is 40mm high and 8mm wide. An isotropic linear elastic material was employed withE=2×105N/mm2and v=0.3. The multi-scale FE model of the cantilever is established using the ANSYS code, in which the middle part of 100mm long is modeled using elements of plane 82 and other parts of the cantilever is modeled using elements of beam 3 (seeFig. 9). The proposed method is used to calculate the coefficient matrix of the displacement constraint equation, and the results are listed inTable 1 for the left interface. In Table 1, node 2 is the beam node at the left interface. CE1, CE2 and CE3 denote the coefficients corresponding to the displacements of the beam node at the interface in the x-direction and y-direction as well as the rotation around the z-axis. For comparison, the coefficients of the displacement constraint equation provided in reference [18] (the McCune method) for the concerned beam-to-plate coupling problem are also listed in Table 1.The results listed in Table 1 show that the coefficients of the displacement constraint equation obtained from the two methods are very close for CE1 and CE3. However, there are small differences in the coefficients of CE2, which refer to transverse displacements. It is noted that the assumed stress distribution in the plate in the McCune method is based on the beam theory, while the nodal force distribution used in the proposed method is determined numerically from the FE node force model which is consistent with the plate. The proposed method can thus give more accurate results in shear stress distribution in the plate at the interface than the McCune method. Let us consider the concentrated force F of 12,000N acting at the right end of the cantilever. In principle, the shear stress distribution at the interface of the plate shall be very close to that at any internal cross section of the plate. Internal nodal shear forces calculated by the two methods are listed inTable 2 for the left interface and an internal section of the plate model. For the proposed method, the nodal shear forces at the interface are consistent with the nodal shear forces at the internal section. For the McCune method, there is a small difference between the nodal shear forces at the interface and the nodal shear forces at the internal section. The shear stress contours of the plate model are shown inFig. 10 for the proposed method andFig. 11 for the McCune method. It can be seen that there is no significant shear stress disturbance at the interfaces no matter which method is used. The maximum shear stresses from the proposed method and the McCune method are 58.59 and 58.60N/mm2, respectively. The maximum shear stresses from the two methods are very close to each other for this cantilever with a solid rectangular section.A cantilever of a box cross-section, as shown inFig. 12, is used as a numerical example for detailed calculation and discussion of the linear beam-to-shell coupling problem. The cantilever is clamped at the right end and subjected to a concentrated load at the left end. The cantilever is of 100cm long with its box cross section dimensions as shown in Fig. 12. An isotropic linear elastic material was employed withE=2×105N/mm2and v=0.3. The multi-scale finite element model of the cantilever is generated and shown inFig. 13 by using shell element 181 in ANSYS for the middle part of the cantilever and beam element 188 for other parts of the cantilever. For comparison purpose, the cantilever is also entirely modeled by shell elements, which can be taken as one for the exact solution. Furthermore, the McCune method and the RBE3 method in ANSYS are also considered for comparison. The McCune method needs to assume stress distribution over the box cross-section. In the McCune method, the stress distribution in a box cross-section of the cantilever under either an axial force or a bending moment is obtained using the beam theory. However, the stresses generated by a shear force and a torsion in the box cross-section are complicated. The method presented in the book of Pilkey [28] is used to calculate the stresses generated by a shear force and a torsion over the box cross section of the cantilever when the McCune method is used.The stresses of the cantilever are calculated for a concentrated force acting at the left end of the cantilever as shown in Fig. 12. The resulting Von Mises stress contour is displayed inFigs. 14–17 for each of the four methods. It can be seen that shear stress distribution is complicated in the cantilever of a box cross-section, especially around the corner of the cross-section. From the Von Mises stress contours obtained by the RBE 3 method, the stress concentration phenomena appear. However, no stress disturbance occurs when using the McCune method and the proposed method compared with the results obtained from the pure shell model.Table 3 lists the maximum Von Mises stress and the maximum shear stress obtained from the four methods as well as the relative error by taking the exact solution as a reference. The results from the proposed method are almost the same as the results from the pure shell model. The relative errors in terms of the maximum Von Mises stress and the maximum shear stress are only 0.000% and 0.007%, respectively. The maximum Von Mises stress from the McCune method is also compatible with the exact solution with a relative error of 0.473% only. However, the maximum shear stress from the McCune method is not very accurate with a relative error of 3.842%. This is because the assumed stress distributions are used in the McCune׳s method to generate displacement constraint equations. The relative errors of the maximum Von Mises stress and the maximum shear stress from the RBE3 method are 7.972% and 49.245%, respectively. This indicates that the stress results from the RBE3 method are not accurate for this particular case.The stresses of the cantilever with the same multi-scale model as discussed above are also calculated for the cantilever under the action of a torsion of 10kNcm at the left end using the four different methods. The torsion-induced Von Mises stress contours are plotted inFigs. 18–21. It can be seen that the stress results obtained from the proposed method have no stress disturbance and they are almost the same as the results from the pure shell model. The stress results from the RBE3 method have stress concentrations. The stress results from the McCune method have a slight stress disturbance. The maximum Von Mises stress from the proposed method, the McCune method and the RBE3 method are 128.966, 132.184 and 236.746N/cm2, respectively. The maximum Von Mises stress from the pure shell model is 128.967N/cm2. This shows that the stress results from the proposed method have the best accuracy for beam-to-shell couplings among the three methods.The effect of mesh refinement on the accuracy of the computational results is investigated in this section. The shell part of the FE model of the box section member under torsion is refined with double meshes than the previous ones. The torsion-induced Von Mises stress contours are calculated and plotted inFigs. 22–25. The maximum Von Mises stress obtained from the proposed method, McCune method, RBE3 method and pure shell model are 128.692, 133.295, 267.253 and 128.692MPa, respectively. The stress obtained from the proposed method is equal to the stress obtained from the pure shell model, which indicates that the proposed method can obtain more accurate stress than other methods even if the size of meshes is increased. Furthermore, the stress obtained from the proposed method for the two mesh schemes is almost the same, indicating the convergence of the results using the previous mesh scheme.The cantilever shown in Fig. 12 is now used to examine the beam-to-solid coupling problem. The multi-scale model of the cantilever is built by replacing the shell part of the multi-scale model shown in Fig. 13 by the solid part using element solid 45. The proposed method, the McCune method and the RBE3 method all are used to calculate the deflections and stresses of the cantilever. For comparison, the cantilever is also modeled with pure solid elements, and the solutions from the pure solid model are used as exact solutions for reference. An isotropic linear elastic material are employed withE=2×105N/mm2and v=0.3.A concentrated force is applied in the y-direction on the left end of the cantilever. The deflections and stresses are calculated using the five methods/models. The Von Mises stress contours of the solid part of the multi-scale model of the cantilever are shown inFigs. 26–29. It can be seen that stress results from both the proposed method and the McCune method have no stress disturbance, but the stress results from the RBE3 method have serious stress disturbance. The comparisons are also made for the deflection at the left end of the cantilever and the maximum Von Mises stress among different methods/models. The results from the pure solid model are used as the exact solution for a reference to calculate the relative errors from other methods/models. These comparative results are listed inTable 4. For the cantilever of a box cross-section, the deflection results from the proposed method and the McCune method have the same accuracy with a relative error of 0.345%. Since the multi-scale model is built with beam and solid elements, the errors of deflection from the proposed method and the McCune method are mainly produced by the beam part of the model. For the maximum Von Mises stress, the relative errors of the proposed method and the McCune method are 0.000% and 0.580%, respectively. This shows that proposed method has the most accurate stress result. The deflection at the left end of the cantilever calculated from RBE3 method is also good with a relative error of 0.805%. However, the stress results from RBE3 are not accurate with serious stress disturbance.Fig. 30 shows a frame structure constructed by one beam and two columns of I cross-section. The beam is strengthened with linearly increasing height towards the connection between the beam and column. An isotropic linear elastic material was employed withE=2.1×1011N/m2andv=0.3. There is a uniform load P=10kN/m acting perpendicularly on the beam. The frame structure is modeled with the pure shell model and the multi-scale model as shown in Fig. 1. For the interface connection, the proposed method and the RBE3 method are used to achieve the beam-to-shell coupling. The frame structure is also modeled with the pure beam element for additional comparison.The mid-span deflection of the beam is calculated using different methods and listed inTable 5. The results from the pure shell model are used as the exact solution for a reference to calculate relative errors. The relative errors of the deflection at the mid span of the beam calculated by the proposed method, the McCune method and the RBE3 method are 0.81%, 0.81% and 4.19%, respectively, which indicates that the proposed method has a good accuracy for deflection results.The Von Mises stress contours of the connection part of the frame structure obtained from different methods are shown inFigs. 31–34. It can be seen that the Von Mises stress contour obtained by the proposed method is almost the same as that obtained from the pure shell model. The stress results from the RBE3 method, however, show serious stress disturbance at the interface between the beam and column. The maximum Von Mises stress from the proposed method, the McCune method, the RBE3 method and the pure shell model are 85.1, 85.1, 154 and 84.8MPa, respectively. The maximum Von Mises stress at the interface of the horizontal beam from the proposed method, the McCune method, the RBE3 method and the pure shell model are 14.4, 14.2, 123 and 14.3MPa, respectively. The proposed method has a better accuracy in both deflection and stress results and can be used for multi-scale simulation of structures.Fig. 35 shows a column of a box cross section. It is modeled by beam element B31 in ABAQUS for the upper part of the column and by shell element S4R for the bottom part. An isotropic linear elastic material is first employed withE=2.1×105N/mm2andv=0.3. When the linear elastic material reaches a yield stress of 170.0MPa, the material becomes nonlinear and it is assumed to satisfy the Ramberg–Osgood relation between stress and strain, i.e.ε=σ/E+(σ/K)n, where the reference stress value K is 0.510GPa and the work-hardening exponent n is 4.76. Nonlinear buckling analysis is implemented by means of multi-scale model with beam–shell coupling at the interface, the pure beam model, and the pure shell model, respectively. The axial loading point is 5mm from the center of section in the x-direction. The displacement of the loading point is increased until the column is deformed to a certain level at which the loading point moves downward for 50mm in the z-direction. The initial and deformed shapes of the column are shown inFig. 36 for a reference.Fig. 37 displays the load–displacement curve at the loading point in the z-direction. The peak loads are 2138.1, 2137.6, 2139.5 and 2139.3N obtained by the proposed method, the distributing coupling method, the pure shell model and the pure beam model, respectively. It can be seen that all the predicted peak loads are similar. At a displacement of 0.05m, the loads on the column are 350.8, 350.7, 350.6 and 362.1N obtained by the proposed method, the distributing coupling method, the pure shell model and the pure beam model, respectively. The loading results from the multi-scale model using the two coupling methods are very close to the results from the pure shell model. However, the loading result from the beam model is slightly larger than that from the pure shell model. This is because the shell element model can reflect the stiffness change of the column. By taking a segment of 0.006m long in the z-direction at the interface to compare stress results from different methods, its Von Mises stress contours are shown inFigs. 38–40. The maximum Von Mises stress and shear stress from each method are listed inTable 6. The maximum Von Mises stresses are 170.2, 182.8 and 170.2MPa from the proposed method, the distributing coupling method and the pure shell model respectively. It can be seen that the buckling loads from the proposed method and the distributing coupling method have a slight difference. However, the stress results at the interface from the proposed method are the same as that from the pure shell model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new deformable MPC coupling method has been proposed in this paper in terms of both displacement and force constraint equations. A numerical method compatible with commercial FE codes has been developed to figure out the linear and nonlinear constraint equations which satisfy both displacement compatibility and stress equilibrium conditions at the interface. To validate the proposed coupling method, a number of finite element test cases have been examined. These cases include linear beam-to-plate, beam-to-shell and beam-to-solid connections, a linear frame structure, and a beam-to-shell buckling problem. The results from the proposed method have also been compared with those from the existing methods. The comparative results reveal that the proposed coupling method can handle both linear and nonlinear mixed-dimensional FE coupling problems more accurately than the existing methods. In particular, the proposed methods always yield more accurate stress results and stress distribution at the interface. The proposed method can also be applied to a structure satisfactorily for multi-scale simulation.