@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative breast lesion classification based on multichannel distributions in shear-wave imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system based on the quantified color distributions in shear wave elastography (SWE) was developed.The combination of the proposed CAD system using SWE features and BI-RADS assessment would provide a promising diagnostic suggestion.Spatial correlation was combined with the kPa-weighted color information as a feature to reduce the influence of noises far from tumor.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast cancer,Shear-wave elastography,Computer-aided diagnosis,Histogram moment,Vector quantification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectivesA computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system based on the quantified color distributions in shear-wave elastography (SWE) was developed to evaluate the malignancies of breast tumors.MethodsFor 57 benign and 31 malignant tumors, 18 SWE features were extracted from regions of interest (ROI), including the tumor and peritumoral areas. In the ROI, a histogram in each color channel was described using moments such as the mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis. Moreover, three color channels were combined as a vector to evaluate tissue elasticity. The SWE features were then combined in a logistic regression classifier for breast tumor classification.ResultsThe performance of the CAD system achieved an accuracy of 81%. Combining the CAD system with a BI-RADS assessment obtained an Az improvement from 0.77 to 0.89 (p-value <0.05).ConclusionsThe combination of the proposed CAD system based on SWE features and the BI-RADS assessment would provide a promising diagnostic suggestion.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast lesion characteristics identified with B-mode ultrasound (US) are interpreted to distinguish between benign and malignant lesions in a clinical examination [1]. The description criteria and categories are defined in the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) lexicon, which was developed by the American College of Radiology [2]. These descriptors, which are quantified in various computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems [3–10] to evaluate tumor malignancy, can be classified as morphology and texture characteristics. Recently, elasticity assessment was added as an associated feature of breast US in the fifth edition of BI-RADS [2]. Breast cancers such as scirrhous carcinoma and invasive cancers tend to be stiffer than many benign tumors [11,12]. On clinical examination, elastography as an imaging modality provides additional elasticity information by a cine loop or a single image [13,14]. Tissue elasticity information can be estimated based on the tissue displacements under a manual or automatic force [15]. According to the elasticity modulus, tissue elasticity is mapped to pixel values in the color elastographic images for display.Shear-wave elastography (SWE) is an emerging technique that automatically emits the radiation force to estimate elasticity with less operator dependence than conventional elastography, which is based on manual compression [15]. Additionally, an observer can evaluate tissue stiffness via only one SWE image rather than a complete image cine loop as in conventional elastography. The SWE image provides tissue elasticity as the velocity of shear waves propagating in tissue and displays the corresponding kilopascals (kPas) on a color map. Using the elasticity information in the map, radiologists can re-evaluate the malignancies of tumors to reduce unnecessary biopsies [16–18]. However, the qualitative assessment of SWE images through visual observation is user dependent. To provide an objective evaluation, a quantitative analysis for interpreting elastography images would be helpful. Additionally, manually calculating the kPa value of each pixel is time consuming because the number of pixels in a region of interest (ROI) is usually greater than ten thousand (ex: 100×100). In this study, an automated method was proposed to analyze the color patterns in SWE images using individual colors or a combination of color channels. The quantified elasticity information was then used in a CAD system for breast tumor classification. Finally, the performance of a combined CAD system and BI-RADS assessment was evaluated. Using the quantified elasticity features, tumor malignancy could be better evaluated in a more efficient way for clinical use.Our institution review board approved this study, and informed consent was obtained from all patients. From November 2012 to December 2013, 81 patients had undergone elastography examinations. Three of them had two tumors, and two had three tumors. By core needle biopsy or fine-needle aspiration cytology, the 88 biopsy-proven cases were classified into 57 benign and 31 malignant tumors. Patients with benign tumors ranged in age from 26 to 77 years (mean=50±11). The pathology types were 25 fibrocystic changes, 22 fibroadenomas, and 10 papillomas. The measured sizes were 1.42±1.20cm. For malignant tumors, patients ranged in age from 30 to 76 years (mean=54±13). They exhibited 27 invasive ductal carcinomas (IDC), 1 invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC), and 3 ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), with measured sizes of 1.51±0.76cm. Radiologists who were blinded to the pathology report classified the tumors into BI-RADS assessment categories by B-mode findings. There were 2 (2%) tumors in BI-RADS 2 (benign), 17 (19%) in BI-RADS 3 (probably benign), 52 (59%) in BI-RADS 4 (suspicious abnormality), and 17 (19%) in BI-RADS 5 (highly suggestive of malignancy).Both B-mode and elastography images were acquired using the Aixplorer ultrasound system (SuperSonic Image, Les Jardins de la Duranne, Aix en Provence, France) with a 5–14MHz linear broadband transducer (SL15-4). During acquisition, the B-mode image was displayed first to show the anatomical information surrounding the target tumor. A ROI was centered on the target tumor and included tissues around the peritumoral areas to generate an SWE image. The elasticity information is described using Young's modulus, defined as E=σ/ɛ where ɛ is the deformation of the tissue under the applied compression σ. For all cases, the default maximum kPa was 180 (7.7m/s) in the color display, which is mapped from the value of the elasticity modulus.The acquired SWE images were color maps that conveyed elasticity information about the tissues. In this study, we proposed extracting a series of quantitative SWE features from the color maps to evaluate tumor elasticity automatically. SWE features included histogram distributions in individual and multiple color channels of the color map. Spatial correlation was also considered to generate more accurate elasticity features.Fig. 1(a) and (b) show shear-wave elastographic images for benign and malignant breast tumors. The elasticities of various tissues are shown in different colors. Tissues inside or around the benign tumor in Fig. 1(a) are soft and are shown in colors in the blue range. By separating the colors in the image into red (R), green (G), and blue (B) channels, the value distributions of different channels are distinct. As shown in the histograms in Fig. 1(a), the R and G histograms are left-biased, and the B histogram is center-weighted. In contrast, tissues around the malignant tumor in Fig. 1(b) are shown in various colors, with more well-distributed histograms in the R, G, and B channels. Consequently, we can compare the differences between histograms to reveal the color composition, which is the key characteristic to distinguish between benign and malignant tumors in elastography.By regarding the color distribution in an SWE image as a probability distribution, the color image histogram can be characterized by its moments [19]. Moments [20,21] are specific quantitative measures of the shape. In the experiment, the 24-bit depth color was decomposed into 8-bit R, G, and B channels. The first-, second-, third-, and fourth-order central moments of the histograms in each channel were calculated to indicate the histogram shape (i.e., mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis).(1)Meanc=1N∑i=1NPci(2)Variancec=1N∑i=1N(Pci−Meanc)2(3)Skewnessc=1N∑i=1N(Pci−Meanc)3(4)Kurtosisc=1N∑i=1N(Pci−Meanc)4where c is the color channel of R, G or B. Piis the pixel value. Mean is the center location of a distribution calculated by adding up all pixel values and dividing the sum by the number of pixels. Variance is a measure of spread about the mean. Skewness indicates whether the histogram is a symmetric distribution or skewed to one side (left or right side). Kurtosis is a single-peaked histogram with heavy weight in the tails relative to the normal distribution.A total of 12 single-channel features, including four moments of each of three channels, were calculated: Rmean, Gmean, Bmean, Rvar, Gvar, Bvar, Rskew, Gskew, Bskew, Rkur, Gkur, and Bkur.The elasticity levels are shown in different colors in an SWE image. From soft to hard, the colors are continuously encoded from blue to red. The middle color transitions include blue to green, green to yellow, and yellow to red. To emphasize the existence of hard tissues, such as those indicated by yellow and red, vector quantization [22,23] was used to reduce the continuous color levels into these four relevant colors for elasticity presentation. The R, G, and B channels of a pixel were joined as a color vector. Based on the vector distances between a color and the four main colors, the image pixels were classified into four clusters. Euclidean distance was used as the similarity metric in the quantization using the following formula:(5)EDPMi=(PR−MiR)2+(PG−MiG)2+(PB−MiB)2where EDPMiis the vector difference between a pixel color P and one of the main colors Mi={blue, green, yellow, red} in the R, G, and B channels. Each pixel is reassigned a new color according to the nearest color. Fig. 2shows the quantized color maps of Fig. 1. The numbers of the four-color clusters were divided by the total number of pixels to estimate their ratios in an image: Bdensity, Gdensity, Ydensity, and Rdensity. A weighted ColorAvg was also calculated by taking the original kPa value into consideration. The definition is:(6)ColorAvg=BNum×36+GNum×72+YNum×108+RNum×144BNum+GNum+YNum+RNumwhere Num is the number of each color after vector quantization.In addition to the color information, spatial correlation was observed to have an influence on elasticity estimation. In some cases, the areas close to the skin were displayed in stiffness colors relative to the peritumoral areas, as shown in Fig. 3(a). This phenomenon can be regarded as noise because the areas were far from the target tumor. Spatial correlation was thus combined with the kPa-weighted color information to correct for the possible influence automatically. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the spatial weights from the ROI middle to the border are defined as an intensity decreasing function. This feature is defined as following:(7)SpatialAvg=∑PPij(kPa)×((HMid+WMid)−(||Pi−WMid||+||Pj−HMid||))∑P((HMid+WMid)−(||Pi−WMid||+||Pj−HMid||))where Pij(kPa) is the kPa value of a pixel with i and j as the coordinates; HMid and WMid are the half values of the ROI height and width, respectively; Piis the coordinate value of a pixel in horizontal; and Pjis the coordinate value of a pixel in vertical.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A CAD system based on the quantitative SWE features was developed in this study to distinguish malignant from benign breast tumors. Combining the CAD system with a BI-RADS assessment achieved an improved Az=0.89 (p-value <0.05) which would provide promising diagnostics in clinical use.The authors declare that they have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence their work.