@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sketch-based human motion retrieval via selected 2D geometric posture descriptor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed a rich 2D pose feature called 2D Geometric Posture Descriptor (2GPD).The 2GPD is effective to the changeable hand-drawn sketch.A semi-supervised feature selection algorithm based on Laplacian-Score is used to simplify our features.We proposed an efficient sketched-based human motion retrieval framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Motion retrieval,Sketch-based,Feature selection,Computer animation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sketch-based human motion retrieval is a hot topic in computer animation in recent years. In this paper, we present a novel sketch-based human motion retrieval method via selected 2-dimensional (2D) Geometric Posture Descriptor (2GPD). Specially, we firstly propose a rich 2D pose feature call 2D Geometric Posture Descriptor (2GPD), which is effective in encoding the 2D posture similarity by exploiting the geometric relationships among different human body parts. Since the original 2GPD is of high dimension and redundant, a semi-supervised feature selection algorithm derived from Laplacian Score is then adopted to select the most discriminative feature component of 2GPD as feature representation, and we call it as selected 2GPD. Finally, a posture-by-posture motion retrieval algorithm is used to retrieve a motion sequence by sketching several key postures. Experimental results on CMU human motion database demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last few years, motion capture technique has been widely used in various applications, such as featured films, computer games and virtual reality [1–4]. However, the process of human motion capture is very time consuming and expensive [5]. So, it is important to reuse the pre-captured human motion in database. To this end, the first and important step is to retrieve similar human motion sequences from motion database.To retrieve a desired motion sequence from a large-scale human motion database, the user usually has to describe the character of the human motion clips to be retrieved. There are several ways to achieve this goal. The simplest way is using textual description like key-words: “kicking” and “fighting” or a more detailed sentence like “a kick of the left foot followed by a punch” [6]. The textual description is intuitive and efficient, while it requires a lot of manual work for annotating all of the motion sequences in database. To overcome this shortcoming, the content-based human motion retrieval has attracted much attention, which retrieves the motion clips via submitting a similar and short motion clip [5,7,8] as query. However, sometimes it is hard to acquire the appropriate motion clips as query. For example, if we want to retrieve a back flip and a handstand walk, it is a little difficult for the user to perform such actions. Although Numaguchi et al. [9] proposed to use a puppet interface to generate the query motion clip, such a puppet consists with several sensors and potentiometers, which is not easy to obtain for a general user.Inspired by traditional 2D animation wherein the experienced animator sketches several key character postures, which are then used as the seeds to generate a new motion, the sketch-based human motion retrieval becomes popular in computer animation in recent years [10–13]. Different from the other kind of input, using a 2D sketch brings in the following benefits: intuitiveness, fast posture definition, quick production of sample and first-pass animated scenes [14]. In light of this, we also utilize the sketch interface to retrieve human motion from database in this paper.As we known, there are many factors which may affect the motion retrieval performance including motion representation, matching algorithm, indexing structure and so on. Motion representation is a the core-stone in constructing an efficient motion retrieval system. It is also the bridge to connect the 2D sketch and the 3D human motion. Traditional geometric features such as joints location and joint–joint direction are effective to character 3D human posture but not for the hand-drawn sketch. The hand-drawn sketch is usually changeable because different user has diverse sketch style and the body proportion is hard to be unified for the same posture. Thus, we has to find a proper feature to represent both 2D sketch and 3D posture.In this paper, we propose a 2D Geometric Posture Descriptor (2GPD) including four kinds of geometric features. Similar geometric feature has been applied in graphics and computer vision [15], while here we propose a new rich posture feature set to exploit the geometric properties and relationships between different human body parts. 2GPD emphasizes the relational body part configuration, which is consistent with human perception.Taken the flexibility of human-drawn sketch into account, the features involved distance metric are normalized with respect to the human body height and all of the features are discretized into several intervals. To ensure the retrieval efficiency, the feature dimension should not be too high. In our work, the total feature dimension of 2GPD is 738 while not all of them are useful and discriminative to describe a 2D posture. Therefore, we design a semi-supervised feature selection algorithm derived from Laplacian Score algorithm to select a compact and discriminative feature subsect from the original 2GPD.The remainder part of this paper is organized as follows. We first review some related work in Section 2. Then, a detailed description of 2DGP and our proposed semi-supervised feature selection algorithm are introduced in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Section 5 presents the retrieval framework and algorithm. Finally, we give the experimental results and conclusions in Sections 6 and 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
