@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PCA-based polling strategy in machine learning framework for coronary artery disease risk assessment in intravascular ultrasound: A link between carotid and coronary grayscale plaque morphology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Coronary artery disease risk assessment in intravascular ultrasound.A link between carotid and coronary grayscale plaque morphology.Principal component analysis (PCA) for dominant feature selection.Classification accuracy of 98.43% and reliability index of 97.32%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coronary artery,IVUS,Carotid IMT,Machine learning,PCA,Risk assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectivePercutaneous coronary interventional procedures need advance planning prior to stenting or an endarterectomy. Cardiologists use intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) for screening, risk assessment and stratification of coronary artery disease (CAD). We hypothesize that plaque components are vulnerable to rupture due to plaque progression. Currently, there are no standard grayscale IVUS tools for risk assessment of plaque rupture. This paper presents a novel strategy for risk stratification based on plaque morphology embedded with principal component analysis (PCA) for plaque feature dimensionality reduction and dominant feature selection technique. The risk assessment utilizes 56 grayscale coronary features in a machine learning framework while linking information from carotid and coronary plaque burdens due to their common genetic makeup.MethodThis system consists of a machine learning paradigm which uses a support vector machine (SVM) combined with PCA for optimal and dominant coronary artery morphological feature extraction. Carotid artery proven intima-media thickness (cIMT) biomarker is adapted as a gold standard during the training phase of the machine learning system. For the performance evaluation, K-fold cross validation protocol is adapted with 20 trials per fold. For choosing the dominant features out of the 56 grayscale features, a polling strategy of PCA is adapted where the original value of the features is unaltered. Different protocols are designed for establishing the stability and reliability criteria of the coronary risk assessment system (cRAS).ResultsUsing the PCA-based machine learning paradigm and cross-validation protocol, a classification accuracy of 98.43% (AUC 0.98) with K=10 folds using an SVM radial basis function (RBF) kernel was achieved. A reliability index of 97.32% and machine learning stability criteria of 5% were met for the cRAS.ConclusionsThis is the first Computer aided design (CADx) system of its kind that is able to demonstrate the ability of coronary risk assessment and stratification while demonstrating a successful design of the machine learning system based on our assumptions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The major cause of morbidity in the world is due to cardiovascular disease (CVD). In 2012 alone, CVDs caused 17.5 million deaths worldwide, out of which, 7.4 million deaths were due to coronary arterial disease and 6.7 million were due to stroke or cerebrovascular disease [1]. A higher occurrence of CVD in the young and middle-aged population is observed in the south-east Asia region. About 35% of all such deaths are between the age group of 35–64 years and are estimated to happen in India [2] between the years of 2000 and 2030.CVD includes coronary artery disease and cerebrovascular disease. These diseases occur due to atherosclerosis – a progressive and slow process of narrowing the artery, interrupting the flow of blood from the heart or to the brain. In severe cases, plaque deposits inside a vessel of the coronary artery and later ruptures causing myocardial infarction Fig. 1a (left).The current-state-of-art methods for screening the severity of this disease is: computed tomography (CT), ultrasound (US), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Due to radiation, CT may compromise the patients’ safety, but it is often used because it computes a calcium score in the coronary artery. Even though MRI was earlier not suited to show benefits for soft tissue characterization [3,4], but now has started to be beneficial, but still lacks the concept of real time scanning. On the other hand, IVUS, though invasive, provides real time data, is less time consuming, and is less expensive [5,6]. Though, IVUS is preferred over CT, because of CT radiation risk, both screening tools lack the ability to stratify risk based on plaque characteristics. This paper utilizes the novel idea of coronary artery risk stratification and assessment using the concept of the genetic makeup of the plaque in the coronary and carotid arteries (Fig. 1a (left, right)).Honda et al. [7] and de Graaf et al. [8] recently pointed out the need for patients’ risk of severity prior to interventional procedures. This severity risk was linked to plaque morphology. Several authors have proposed that plaque in the coronary artery consists of several components such as: fibrous, fibrolipidic, calcified and calcified-necrotic, using modalities like CT, OCT, IVUS and elastography [9–15]. We thus hypothesize that different components offer different risk factors and when combined as a whole using the grayscale wall region image can be used for tissue characterization. We can thus leverage to study the morphological characteristics of these lesions and adapt a machine learning paradigm to predict the risk of severity of CAD leading to myocardial infarction. This paper explores the novel concept of morphological characteristics utilizing the coronary vessel wall region that possesses these plaque components.It has been recently shown by many researchers that there exists a relationship between plaque burdens in the carotid and coronary arteries. Here we will discuss some of the key studies which correlate cIMT with risk stratification in cardiovascular events. It has also been a biomarker for cerebrovascular events (CVEs) [16–19]. The relationships between coronary artery disease, cIMT and myocardial infarction have been demonstrated in previous studies. Ziembicka et al. [20] showed that there is a 94% chance of having coronary artery disease when cIMT>1.15mm. Ogata et al. [21] showed that maximum cIMT was highly correlated to left main coronary artery disease. Recently, Elias-Smale et al. [22] showed that cIMT>1.26mm can lead to myocardial infarction. Kao et al. [23] had shown that the cIMT>0.80mm (p<0.01) lead to cardiovascular events. Our team lead by Ikeda et al. [24] showed that cIMT>0.9mm had a significant higher SYNTAX score, a risk indicator for coronary artery disease. The association between cIMT and coronary calcium volume has been recently shown by Suri's team [25,26]. Another study by the same group has also shown the correlation between automated cIMT that includes bulb plaque and SYNTAX score was found to be 0.467 (p<0.0001), compared to 0.391 (p<0.0001) between sonographer's cIMT reading and SYNTAX score [27]. Thus, there is a clear relationship between cIMT and coronary artery disease severity. Based on the above analysis, we hypothesize that cIMT can be adapted for developing a link between the coronary plaque burden leading to coronary artery disease or carotid artery disease leading to stroke. Ahead, we will show how to use the cIMT from carotid artery (as ground truth labels) along with grayscale morphology of coronary artery for CAD risk assessment.Ultrasound ability for real time tissue characterization has recently surfaced for stroke application by Suri's team [28–32]. This stroke risk assessment tool (AtheroRisk™, AtheroPoint™, Roseville, CA, USA) was adapted for the risk of vulnerability to plaque rupture. The AtheroRisk™ tool adapted a machine learning paradigm, which consisted of an offline (training-phase) and online (testing-phase) systems. The morphology-based tissue characterization was performed either on the grayscale cut-section images representing the plaque or the intima-media thickness wall region representing the total plaque area. The training-phase requires the ground truth and this consisted of binary label such as: either asymptomatic or symptomatic or a binary label which can be derived from the cIMT information measured by the sonographer. The training-phase used grayscale features and the ground truth labels to yield the offline training coefficients which were then used to transform the online grayscale features test set to predict the new risk labels. Such learning methods adapt a gold standard whose a priori information was known, such as which plaques were at high risk or low risk. A similar concept of characterization of plaque for classification of plaques into symptomatic and asymptomatic was developed by Suri's team (under the class of Atheromatic™ systems (AtheroPoint™, Roseville, CA, USA). This spirit is being extended to coronary artery disease application in this study for tissue characterization of the coronary artery wall region.Our system uses coronary grayscale morphology for risk prediction of CAD severity using a machine learning paradigm. Since the numbers of grayscale coronary morphologic features are large, we use dominant feature selection using principal component analysis (PCA) using polling-based method. SVM is adapted for training and testing the machine learning algorithm. The stroke biomarker cIMT is adapted as ground truth for training the machine learning system which is then used for risk prediction of CAD. The cIMT biomarker threshold of 0.9mm is used as a risk label for high/low risk CAD. A cross-validation approach is used for evaluating the efficiency of the machine learning infrastructure. Experiments are performed to study the effect of the data size on the classification accuracy and the role of PCA-based cutoff for feature selection during risk prediction. The overall system is novel and being used for the first time for risk prediction in CAD using PCA-based methods.The layout of the paper is as follows: Section 2 presents the demographics and data acquisition. Section 3 describes the novel methodology of the proposed system for tissue characterization and risk stratification. Two experimental protocols are presented in section 4. The results are presented in section 5 that shows the optimization of SVM kernel type, dominant feature selection with change in PCA cutoffs and effect of data size on machine learning accuracy. The reliability, stability and feature retaining power are presented in performance evaluation section 6. A discussion on the results of proposed system is presented in section 7 and finally we conclude in section 8.Nineteen patients were taken from a single-center study [33] between July 2009 and December 2010, with stable angina pectoris who underwent percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) using iMap (Boston Scientific®, Marlborough, MA) IVUS examination. Among 19 patients, 17 were men and 2 were women with mean age of 66 years (range 36–81 years). Ten patients had a calcified location on the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD), five on right coronary artery (RCA), three on left circumflex coronary artery (LCX) and one on left main coronary artery (LMT). Ten patients had proximal lesion location, five had at middle and four have at distal location. The mean total Cholesterol, LDL Cholesterol, and HDL Cholesterol was 165mg/dL, 91mg/dL, and 52mg/dL, respectively and mean hemoglobin was 5.81g/dL. Out of 19 patients, five were smokers. The data sets were approved by Institution Review Board and Ethics Committee and consent from patients were also taken before the study. A combination dose of clopidogrel (75mg/d) and aspirin (100mg/d) were given to the patients, prior to performing coronary intervention procedure. Intravenous unfractionated heparin was also given to these patients prior to the procedure. This would obtain a partial thromboplast in time of less than 250s.Carotid ultrasonography examinations were performed for the same 19 patients with a scanner (Aplio XV, Aplio XG, Xario, Toshiba, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a 7.5MHz linear array transducer. All scans were performed by the same experienced sonographer (with 15 years of experience). Subjects were examined in the supine position with the head tilted backwards. After the carotid arteries were located using transverse scans, the probe was rotated 90° to obtain and acquire a longitudinal image of the anterior and posterior walls. The high-resolution images were acquired according to recommendations by the American Society of Echocardiography Carotid Intima-Media Thickness (cIMT) Task Force. Sonographer-based cIMT was recorded. The mean pixel resolution of the carotid database was 0.05±0.01mm/pixel. On the basis of stoke-risk biomarker (cIMT>0.9mm), 11 patients were considered as high risk while 8 were considered low risk for this retrospective study.We used a 40-MHz IVUS catheter (Atlantis SR Pro; Boston Scientific) for data acquisition. For coronary image cross sectional view acquisition, automated pullback of the catheter, at speed of 0.5mm per second was adapted. IRB had approved the protocol and patient consent was also taken before the study. DICOM format was adapted for image acquisition. DICOM is the proprietary header and the images are 16 bit a pixel. Once the images are converted into AVI movies the resolution of the image are 8 bit a pixel. This compromises the resolution of 16 bits a pixel to 8 bits per pixel. So the image is not as sharp as the original DICOM image. Recently, Kim et. al. [34] has shown the effect of post processing on the quality degradation of ultrasound IVUS images. Currently the study of this paper is focused on the development of new design for the risk assessment of coronary artery diseases using machine learning paradigm. Therefore the current paper doesn’t analyze the effect of quality degradation of image on tissue characterization and machine learning.Data preparation is very important for risk assessment which is based on two hypothesis and the link between coronary artery disease and carotid artery disease (see Fig. 1b). The coronary risk assessment system (cRAS) is a local system which requires coronary vessel wall region and corresponding coronary risk labels. The coronary risk labels are initiated from the carotid artery based on the cIMT risk biomarker which is derived from second hypothesis. The cRAS system requires the vessel wall region (ring images) of coronary artery which is derived from the coronary video using global shape extraction system. This global shape extraction system uses a feedback system (ImgTracer™, AtheroPoint™, Roseville, CA, USA) for deriving the coronary vessel wall ring images using the expert's knowledge. Prior to the shape extraction of the coronary wall, the system undergoes the data preparation as discussed in the next section.Our source of the data size comes from 19 patients. Each patient consists on an average of 2500 frames. Since the head and tail frames of the coronary artery movie did not contain clinical information on plaque morphology, we eliminated on an average 200 frames from the head and tail end of the movie leading to 2100 frames. Further, from our observations, the changes in plaque morphology were only observed after a certain interval, we thus took empirically every 10th frame in the coronary artery frame for data size preparation. Thus, on an average, the data size per patient was 210 frames. This resulted in a full data size 4004 frames derived from 19 patients. Note that the data size is not 19 subjects, but approximately 4004 frames as one population pool consisting of 2117 high risk frames and 1887 low risk frames derived from 11 high risk patients and 8 low risk patients respectively. Representative examples of low and high risk patients are shown in Figs. 2 and 3. Note that the data size for machine learning is not 19 subjects but collected frames of 4004 frames which are then used for cross-validation during the performance evaluation.The tracing protocol consists of the following: IVUS produces a cross-sectional view of the coronary artery. The ImgTracer™ system (courtesy of AtheroPoint™, Roseville, CA, USA) is used for ROI selection and global shape extraction. This vessel wall region is the region between the lumen intima (LI) interface (also called as internal elastic lamina (IEL)) and media-adventitia (MA) interface (also called as external elastic lamina (EEL)). A typical slice of the IVUS frame is shown in Fig. 4(a). As seen in this IVUS frame, the catheter is shown to be dark black in color in the center of the image along with the white calibration marks (shown in orthogonal directions running from east to west and north to south). Typically these marks are 57 pixels apart and represent 1 mm, so called resolution factor (57 pixels/mm). This is standard calibration factor and typically IVUS machines have the calibration factor in this range). The white edge represented in the center of the image is the edges of the catheter. Around the catheter is the blood region (representing low intensity or dark region). Surrounding the blood is the circular coronary wall (higher contrast region). Ideally, this wall is one mm thick starting from IEL (inner interface) to EEL (outer interface). At the IEL and EEL interfaces, the gradient changes are high. The region between the IEL and EEL is the media wall. The outermost wall region is the adventitia region. Since the adventitia region is very bright compared to media wall region, this change in gradient from media to adventitia is a dark band, hence can be easily spotted. Thus, the EEL (or MA) is typically traced first either in clock-wise or anti-clock wise directions. The inner wall (or IEL) is challenging and is harder to delineate. There are two key points which helps locate the IEL gradients. One, typically, this IEL gradient is about one mm from the EEL gradient, and second, the IEL gradient changes from blood (represented by low intensity) to media wall (brighter intensity compared to the blood). Using these two guiding points, one is able to identify the IEL interface. Once spotted, the tracing can follow the clock-wise or counter clock-wise direction by clicking points on the image. During the tracing along the circular pattern, the eye is sometimes kept ahead of the point you are clicking which allows generating the interface correctly and one needs an expert tracer or an experienced imaging who has been trained in IVUS imaging. An example of our tracing protocol is also discussed our recent publication [1]. The tracing protocol leads us to the region of interest (ROI) formation or vessel wall region extraction. The wall region extracted is shown in Fig. 4 (b).As previously stated in our first hypothesis that components which offer risk in the vessel region are: fibrous, fibrolipidic, calcified and calcified-necrotic of coronary artery. These collectively are the morphological characteristics in the vessel region whose grayscale characteristics need to be computed. These components are represented and segregated by the texture components of the plaque, so called tissue characterization of the vessel wall region. Thus, we clearly need a feature extraction block in our machine learning paradigm. The second most important block comes from our second hypothesis which represents the gold standard and biomarker for cardiovascular diseases, i.e., carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT). Thus we used carotid disease cIMT biomaker for training the machine learning protocol, represented as ground truth. Since the features are large, and dominant and optimal features were necessary to be estimated, we adapted PCA-based polling strategy for feature selection. Thus our risk prediction system must have a feature extraction block, feature selection block and the gold standard for training the machine learning classifier.Fig. 5shows the machine learning system utilizing the above two hypothesis. This consists of two parts: left part consists of training phase and right side consists of testing phase. Both phases use the feature exaction which computes 56 novel features based on various linear and non-linear feature combinations. Both phases utilize the power of novel PCA-based feature selection which selects the dominant features. The training phase uses second hypothesis, where the coronary risk labels are used based on cIMT biomarker for generating the training-based risk coefficients. Thus the ground truth block uses these risk labels for offline machine learning process during training phase. It is these model parameters which are then used for transformation of the online features computed on test coronary images. Example of training phase coronary input images are shown in Figs. 6 and 7which represents two classes: low risk and high risk features. K-fold cross-validation protocol is adapted for evaluating the performance [35]. In this experiment we fixed the fold value (i.e., K=10). Since the features are not linearly separable, we used nonlinear kernel functions, namely Linear, Radial basis function (RBF), Polynomial order 1, 2 and 3 [36] during the SVM-based classification in training and testing phases. This section is has the following parts: Section 3.1.1 is devoted to grayscale feature extraction which in turn has several sub-sections for extraction of grayscale features and Section 3.1.2 discussed the SVM-based classification.Feature extraction is the heart of the morphological characterization. The feature extraction process computes the a class of seven different feature sets which consists of a total of 56 novel features as shown below:Feature Set 1: Gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM): GLCM is a powerful statistical tool for texture feature extraction analysis. GLCM matrix indicates the joint probability of occurrence of gray-level between the neighbor pixel with a given spatial relationship in a defined observation region [37]. Let Igbe a given grayscale image, having pixels with different gray level intensities (0, 1, …, Gi−1). The co-occurrence matrix is calculated on two parameters: the distance between the pixel pairs measured in number of pixels, and the orientation between the pixel pair. Pixel pair can be specified in four directions (0°, 45°, 90°, 135°). Here Pdf(x, y) is a joint probability function of pixel pair, one having intensity x and another having intensity y, shown in Table 1.Feature Set 2: Intensity histogram: Intensity histogram [37] measures the characteristic of an image such as brightness and contrast. In intensity histogram, following measurements are computed: mean, energy, variance, entropy, skewness and kurtosis. Mean measures the brightness of an image. Variance measures the contrast of an image. Skew measures the allocation of gray level in an image. The skew is directly propositional to energy. Entropy is the converse of skew and energy measurement. Let Liis the total number of intensity levels in an image and p(x) defines the number of pixel intensities of value x. On the whole, 6 grayscale features are extracted as shown in Table 2.Feature Set 3: Gray level run length matrix (GLRLM): In GLRLM, the gray intensity of the pixel is measured from the reference pixel in a specific direction. The set of pixels having same gray levels in a specific direction is defined as run length [37]. In this grayscale texture feature, S(x,y) defines the set of pixels of successive runs of length y at reference gray level x. Total 13 features were extracted as shown in Table 3. Here, Ngrdefines the number of gray levels and LRdefines the maximum run length.Feature Set 4: Invariant moment: Invariant moment features were introduced by Hu [38]. In invariant moment [37], the raw moments Rmaband the central moments Cmabwere utilized for the feature extraction. Here, invariant moment is invariant under translation, change in scale, and rotation. Therefore this represents the images regardless of its localization, size and rotation. Total seven features were computed shown in Table 4.Feature Set 5: Neighborhood gray tone difference matrix (NGTDM): The texture features [39] are defined by NGTDM. Essentially, it is a column matrix M(x) wherein each xth value is the magnitude of the difference between the mean of the pixels in the neighborhood and the pixel under assessment. Busyness, contrast, complexity, coarseness and texture length are the five texture features that are derived from the NGTDM. Coarseness describes the variation in pixel from its neighborhood. Larger the Coarseness values, smaller the gray level differences between the pixel under observation and mean pixel in the neighborhood in the region. Busyness defines the rapid change in gray levels between the pixel under examination and its neighborhood. The Small values show the uniformity in intensity in the area under examination. Very high information content shows that texture is complex. If the gray level difference is easily visible that means contrasts are high. We have extracted above texture features as shown in Table 5.Feature Set 6: Statistical feature matrix (SFM): The values of the statistical properties of pixel pairs [39] at various locations were stored in SFM matrix. The CF is the normalization factor considered to be 100 for coarseness computation. mSdepicts the displacement vectors, dSSshows the dissimilarity matrix, Con3 expresses the contrast of pixel pair and nSdefines the number of elements in the set mS. The mean is denoted by mdand the lowest value of mdis denoted by mdv. The fractal dimensions in x and y directions are denoted by dSF(x) and dSF(y). Table 6shows the four texture features that we have extracted.Feature Set 7: Gray level difference statistics (GLDS): The GLDS algorithm measures the absolute difference between the pairs of the gray levels [39]. Here PGLDis the probability density of an image represented by IGLD(x,y) and nGLDis the dimension vector, representing the number of gray levels. In GLDS, we have extracted 4 texture feature, shown in Table 7.Feature reduction technique using principal component analysis: Principal component analysis (PCA) with polling contribution based feature extraction technique [40] is applied to optimize the extracted features. Feature selection is necessary to select those extracted features which are more significant and which describe the best tissue characteristic of the vessel wall region of coronary artery disease. A total of 56 features were extracted in feature extraction stage for each image, but all extracted feature may not be dominant in nature to describe the best tissue characteristics. Therefore optimization was done in order to eliminate the redundancy within the extracted features. Furthermore, the features which have higher significance were fed to the classifier after applying PCA.In this section we describe the binary class-based classifier using support vector machine (SVM). It determines the maximum hyper-plane between the two classes using the combination of the extracted features and pre-established ground truth. It is customary to determine the hyper-plane so that the distance from it to the nearest data points on both sides (support vector) is maximized. In this work, the extracted features are not linearly separable so we extend SVM with a kernel function [36] on the dataset to make them linearly separable. For this, we have used five kernel functions namely: linear, RBF, and polynomial order 1, 2, 3. Moreover, we also used K-fold cross validation [35] to reduce variability. Here we have taken 10 fold cross validation with 20 trails (T) per fold.As discussed in the introduction section regarding the role of the two hypotheses, we here present the two experimental protocols based on that foundation. The two major hypotheses were: (i) risk associated with the components of the coronary artery vessel wall and (ii) ability of carotid IMT to characterize the cardiovascular risk. Our protocol design demonstrates the machine learning paradigm for risk assessment using the combination of (a) grayscale PCA-based dominant features of the coronary artery wall and (b) the gold standard subclinical risk biomarker – the carotid IMT during the learning-phase that generates the offline coefficients. The testing-phase utilizes the PCA-based dominant feature extraction which is then transformed by the offline coefficients. Protocol one consists of selection of best kernel based on classification accuracy during the PCA-based feature selection given the fixed data size. Protocol two consists of effect of data size on classification accuracy based on PCA-based feature selection and its optimization. Both these protocols require that the dominant features to be selected using PCA-based strategy. Since PCA finds the dominant features at different cutoffs without altering the extracted feature values, we thus use these extracted features prior to running the cross-validation system. Here, we choose the cutoff range from 0.90 to 0.99 and adapt the PCA-based polling strategy for best feature combination. Later in the performance evaluation section, we will show (a) ROC curve of the system; (b) what features are retained as the cutoff increases, so called “feature retaining power” of the CADx system and (c) stability analysis for ensuring the stability of the machine learning system.Experiment Protocol 1: Selection of best kernel function based an PCA-based feature optimization with fixed data size (N).In this experiment we fixed the data size (N) for different PCA-based cutoffs (R) from 0.90 to 0.99 in a step size of 0.01 and run this experiment to calculate all parameters. The goal is to find the best SVM-based kernel choice. This was estimated by computing the classification accuracies at different PCA cutoffs. For this, 4.004 IVUS coronary artery images of both low risk and high risk patients were taken from 19 patients. This data size consists of 2117 high risk patient frames and 1887 low risk patient frames. Moreover, after applying PCA, dominant features were fed to the offline SVM classifier with pre-established ground truth risk label for training. These offline model parameters are then applied to the online test coronary ring images to predict the risk labels on test images. Based on the results of testing, we find the best kernel design among all kernels.Experiment Protocol 2: PCA-based system optimization with varying data size (N) with five kernel functions.The objective of this experiment is to study the effect on the cRAS performance with varying data sizes from 150 to 1500 in the increment of 150. There is no special requirement in choosing the data set from the giving population of 1500. We choose 150 frames randomly starting from a fixed data set of 150. These 150 random frames are then added to the ongoing pool. Thus the data set consists of 150, 300, 450, …, 1500 image frames. Furthermore, for each data size, dominant features were selected by using PCA, with cutoffs ranging from 0.90 to 0.99 with step size of 0.01. The dataset of different data sizes were fed to the classifier for the offline training with pre-established ground truth to generate parameter model. Online classifier utilized the generated parameter model and online test coronary ring images for prediction of coronary risk. For performance measure, we calculated the classification accuracy of the cRAS for each data size at all cutoffs. Thus, we computed the mean accuracy of each data size for all PCA cutoffs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
