@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient passive planar micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars for continuous mixing of human blood

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The SAR structures result in the reduction of the diffusion distance of two fluids.The mixing strength is increased when one stream is injected into the other.Fluids flow faster in SAR mixer for rapid mixing and mixing efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Micromixer,Passive mixing,Splitting and recombination,Computational fluid dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a passive planar micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars is proposed to operate in the laminar flow regime for high mixing efficiency. With a splitting and recombination (SAR) concept, the diffusion distance of the fluids in a micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars was decreased. Thus, space usage for micromixer of an automatic sample collection system is also minimized. Numerical simulation was conducted to evaluate the performance of proposed micromixer by solving the governing Navier–Stokes equation and convection–diffusion equation. With software (COMSOL 4.3) for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) we simulated the mixing of fluids in a micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars and basic T-type mixer in a laminar flow regime. The efficiency of the proposed micromixer is shown in numerical results and is verified by measurement results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For self-sampling or collection of blood by health personal related to point-of-care diagnostics in health rooms, it may often be necessary to perform automatic and painless collection of blood samples. The most important operation that needs to be done when handling whole blood is to be able to combine automatic sample collection with optimal mixing of anticoagulation liquid and weak fixatives. In particular before doing any transport of a sample or point-of-care nucleic acid diagnostics, it is very important to fix the gene expression at the time of collection. An automatic sample collection module with a painless microneedle array in combination with a micromixer is proposed for the blood collection in typical nurse or health rooms.In general, micromixers can be classified into active micromixer and passive micromixer. In the mixing process, active micromixers require external disturbance effects such as pressure, temperature, electrohydrodynamics, dielectrophoretics, electrokinetics, etc. Hence, the structures of active micromixers are often complicated. In contrast to active micromixer, a passive type requires no external energy. The normal mixing process within a passive micromixer is slow and entirely dependent upon molecular diffusion [1–3]. The mixing of the passive microfluidic mixer is based on several main principles: (a) laminar flow, which is used in the T-mixer [3,4]; (b) chaotic mixing by eddy formation [5]; (c) splitting and combination [6]. Previous studies of micromixer [6–9] show that fast and homogenous mixing can be achieved in the micromixer with SAR concept by increasing the contact interface of fluids. But some of them are complicated and require complex microfabrication processes because of their three dimensional micro structure [1].In this paper, a simple and low cost SAR micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars was proposed. The SAR structures of the flow channels result in the split of the main stream at the beginning of the micropillars and the reduction of the diffusion distance of two fluids. Besides, the mixing strength is increased at the end of the micropillars with the impingement effects when one stream is injected into the other. The efficiency of the micromixer was examined by theoretical methods including Finite Element Method. Simulation results are presented with the laminar flow regime, in which a low Reynolds number is applied, 0.048≤Re≤2.381. For the experimental characterization of the mixing performance, SAR micromixer was fabricated by using replica molding method. Because of simple structures with two-dimensional ellipse-like micropillars, our proposed SAR micromixer does not require the complex microfabrication process. Hence, the cost of making our proposed SAR micromixer is lower than other micromixers with complicated three dimensional micro structures. Furthermore, we compare the experimental mixing performance of the designed channels to the simulated results.The term ellipse-like micropillar is an element having the shape of an ellipse. As shown in Fig. 1, a contour of the micropillar was described as the composition of two half ellipses with the left major axis semidiameter a1, right major axis semidiameter a2, and minor axis semidiameter b. It should be noted that the high velocity region along the two sides of the contour was larger when the length of the left half axis a1 is not equal to that of the right half axis a2, that is a1<a2. The optimized values of the profile parameters are a1:a2:b=5:6:4 [10,11].Due to the demand for fast and homogenous mixing, the splitting and recombination concept is considered in blood mixer design. There are three steps in splitting and recombination process, flow splitting, flow recombination and flow rearrangement [2]. When the main flow reaches the ellipse-like micropillar, the flow is then split into two separated flows on the smaller channels. For an incompressible fluid, equation of continuity (mass conservation of fluid) is defined as [12](1)A1u1=A2u2Since the cross-section area A2 is less than the cross-section area A1 (see Fig. 1), the local velocity u2 will be larger than velocity u1. This phenomenon together with the high velocity region of ellipse-like micropillar will create high velocity at the right end of the micropillar's contour. At the outlet end of the micropillar, two separated flows in small channels are recombined with high velocity. The contact interface of fluids is increased throughout each mixing unit so that the mixing effect is enhanced.SAR micromixer ellipse-like micropillars for blood mixing includes 3 inlet channels (blood sample, anticoagulant solution, Pretect™ solution (NorChip, Klokkarstua, Norway)), one outlet channel, and some mixing units. The geometry of SAR micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars is shown in Fig. 2.Whole blood undergoes coagulation few seconds after it has left the in vivo condition [13]. Therefore, the whole blood has to undergo immediate mixing with the right concentration of EDTA (Trysin–EDTA-solution, Sigma–Aldrich Co. LLC) after it has left the body. In addition the whole blood has to be mixed with a weak fixative (PreTect™, Klokkarstua, Norway) that is ideal for long term conservation of DNA, protein and RNA at room temperature [14]. The degradation process of the RNA starts just a few seconds after the blood has left the host organism [15]. Therefore, it is very important to secure optimal mixing between both the PreTect™ medium and the Heparin (EDTA solution). In this way optimal amplification and detection will follow optimal sample preparation and RNA/DNA/protein purification/extraction.The geometric size and configuration of SAR micromixer with ellipse-like micropillar is shown in Fig. 3. The micromixer consists of three inlets and one outlet, with a mixing unit length 450μm. The simulated SAR micromixer with 10 ellipse-like micropillars has a total length 10mm. The depth of micromixer is 500μm. The outer walls of mixing units are defined by B-spline curves.In this study, computational fluid dynamics software, COMSOL 4.3, was used to solve the governing equations. The governing equations, such as Navier–Stokes equation, continuity equation, and species diffusion–convection equation can generally be described by Eqs. (2)–(4), respectively.(2)∂u∂t+u⋅∇u=−1ρ∇p+v∇2u(3)∇⋅u=0(4)∂c∂t+(u⋅∇)c=D∇2cwhere u denotes the velocity, ρ the density of the fluid, p the pressure, and v the kinematic viscosity of the fluid. c and D are concentration and diffusion constant of the species, respectively.The variables for the mixing studies are the flow rate corresponding to the characteristic dimensionless number Re (Reynolds number) and number of mixing units in SAR micromixer. The Reynolds number is defined as(5)Re=uLcvwhere Re represents the ratio between momentum and viscous friction, Lcindicates the characteristic length of the flow. Lcis a ratio of four times of cross-sectional area to wetted perimeter. According to geometry dimension of our SAR micromixer, Lcis 285μm.The Reynolds number is the factor to determine the flow regime. The flow is considered to be turbulent flow when the Reynolds number is greater than 4000. For a Reynolds number falling below 2300, the flow is considered as laminar flow. In the macro scale, a Reynolds number of greater than 4000 can be easily achieved. In microdevice, the Reynolds number rarely exceeds 2000 [3]. Hence, the mixing in microchannel is based on molecular diffusion.It is essential to consider another characteristic dimensionless number Pe (Peclet number), in order to investigate the efficiency of the SAR micromixer. Peclet number is defined as(6)Pe=uLcDwhere Pe represents the ratio between the mass transport due to convection and diffusion. From Eq. (5) and (6), relation between Pe and Re can be derived as(7)PeRe=vD=μρDwhere μ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid.For comparison purposes, water was used as the carrier fluid, so that the dynamic viscosity, density, and the diffusion coefficient of fluid at room temperature (25°C) are 0.001kgs/m, 1000kg/m3, and 10−9m2s−1, respectively. Hence, the relation between Pe and Re can be estimated for water as Pe=1000 Re. The transverse diffusion time can be estimated by the following equation:(8)t=Lc2DTherefore, the characteristic mixing length of micromixer to obtain the complete mixing is(9)L=ut=uLc2D=PeLcEq. (9) indicates that the higher is the Peclet number, the more difficult will be to achieve a complete mixing. Therefore, in the laminar flow regime (Re value is lower than 2300), the higher Re value makes the mixing less efficient.To evaluate homogeneity of the fluid, the variance of the concentration is considered in the simulation.(10)σ2=1N∑i=1N(ci*−c*¯)2where N is the total number of sampling points,ci*andc*¯are normalized concentration and expected normalized concentration, respectively.In the evaluation process of variance of the concentration, characteristic dimensionless parameter z′/Pe should be included.(11)z′Pe=zLcDuLc=z/uLc2/D=tflowtdiffusionwhere z is the path length of fluid from the entrance, z′ is a ratio of path length to the characteristic length of the flow. Thus the parameter z′/Pe is a ratio of the time for flow in the axial direction to the time for diffusion in the transverse direction.The variance of the concentration can be normalized again by mean concentration and taken square root to evaluating the mixing index:(12)γ=1N∑i=1Nci*−c*¯c*¯2The mixing index γ presents perfect mixing with value 0 and no mixing with the value 1. Mixing efficiency of the micromixer can be calculated by the formula as follows:(13)η=1−γ=1−1N∑i=1Nci*−c*¯c*¯2Mixing efficiency ranges from 0.00 (0% mixing) to 1 (100% mixing, full mixed). The efficiency between around 80% and 100% is acceptable for mixing process application.Multiphysics simulation software (COMSOL 4.3) was used to examine the mixing performance of the basic T-mixer and SAR micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars. During simulation, the incompressible steady flow condition was assumed. The physical properties of water were applied and the diffusion coefficient of the water-ink mixture is 3.23×10−10m2s−1[16]. No-slip condition is applied to the boundary on the wall. The fixed velocity was set to three inlets. The fixed pressure (p=0) was set to the outlet of the micromixer. The normalized molar concentration of the species was set 1 for inlet 1, 0 for inlet 2 and inlet 3. To investigate the mixing process, simulations were performed at ten flow rates as listed in Table 1.The microchannel was formed by casting the elastomer on an SU-8 resist mold. Initially, a bare silicon wafer was cleaned and dehydrated on a hotplate at 200°C for 10min (Fig. 4a). Negative photoresist SU-8 2150 (MicroChem Corp., MA, USA) was coated on a silicon wafer with a thickness of about 500μm (Fig. 4b). The resist must be soft baked in two steps. In a first step, the temperature of the resist layer should be increased from room temperature to 65°C at a rate of 2°C/min. The resist is heated at 65°C for 10min. In the second step, the temperature is increased to 95°C at a rate of 2°C/min. The resist is maintained at 95°C for 2h. Afterwards, the power of the hotplate can be simply switched off in order to cool slowly the wafer to room temperature. The wafer with SU-8 thin film is hardly contacted with a photomask in mask aligner Karl Suss and the resist is exposed to UV (Fig. 4c). The dose of UV is 600mJ/cm2. Following the exposure step, the resist must be heated again. The post exposure baking process also includes 2 baking steps. The resist is baked on a 65°C hotplate for 5min and on a 95°C hotplate for 30min. This second heating step is intended to accelerate the polymerization of the SU-8 layer. The unexposed SU-8 was removed away in MicroChem's SU-8 developer (MicroChem Corp., MA, USA).Before casting polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Sylgard 184, Dow Corning, USA) onto the SU-8 resist mold, the patterned wafer was passivated with tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl trichlorosilane to prevent PDMS sticking (Fig. 4d). This step is very important to facilitate easier mold release. Once the mold was completed, PDMS was mixed at a 10:1 ratio of elastomer base to curing agent. The polymer mixture was stirred until mixture is “milky” due to air bubbles. The PDMS was degassed to remove air bubbles, and poured over the SU-8 mold to achieve a 1mm thickness (Fig. 4e). The PDMS was degassed again and cured at 65°C for 3h on a leveled oven. The PDMS was cut and peeled off from the SU-8 mold with a tweezers. Both PDMS and glass substrate were treated with O2 plasma (Fig. 4f), and placed on a hotplate at 65°C for 2h to complete the bonding process (Fig. 4g).A test loop for the SAR micromixer was set up with all the components connected by flexible fine tubing, as shown in Fig. 5.The sample fluid was driven by a digital syringe pump, in which the flow rate could be precisely controlled. During testing, the red food dye (Idun Industri AS, Norway) and water were pushed into the inlet A and the inlet B, C of the micromixer by the syringe pump, respectively. The specific flow rate of each inlet is shown in Table 2.The homogeneous sample was released from port D, and contained in a plastic test tube. Afterwards, the sample was transferred into 96-well microplate for conducting an absorbance experiment. A multidetection BioTek (Synergy 2, USA) was used to determine the absorbance spectrum of a sample solution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A splitting and recombination micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars has been proposed and investigated. The numerical results obtained from the software agree with the measurement results. Numerical results show that micromixer with ellipse-like micropillars have a well mixing status when its mixing efficiency is higher than 80% as Re≤1. This micromixer improved the performance of previous micromixer (T-mixer) at a low Reynolds number. Moreover, this kind of micromixers may be ideal for a user friendly, rapid and optimal collection and mixing related sample preparation of whole blood or any other complex human or biological fluids used for point-of-care or point-of-need diagnostic applications and technologies.