@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
pSnakes: A new radial active contour model and its application in the segmentation of the left ventricle from echocardiographic images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To propose a new method, called pSnakes, applied and evaluated in the segmentation of the left ventricle from echocardiographic images.To make a comparative study of methods based on active contour methods.To apply the Hilbert transform to calculate the external energy of the proposed pSnakes method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Radial active contour methods,pSnakes,Echocardiogram image segmentation,Hilbertian energy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Active contours are image segmentation methods that minimize the total energy of the contour to be segmented. Among the active contour methods, the radial methods have lower computational complexity and can be applied in real time. This work aims to present a new radial active contour technique, called pSnakes, using the 1D Hilbert transform as external energy. The pSnakes method is based on the fact that the beams in ultrasound equipment diverge from a single point of the probe, thus enabling the use of polar coordinates in the segmentation. The control points or nodes of the active contour are obtained in pairs and are called twin nodes. The internal energies as well as the external one, Hilbertian energy, are redefined. The results showed that pSnakes can be used in image segmentation of short-axis echocardiogram images and that they were effective in image segmentation of the left ventricle. The echo-cardiologist's golden standard showed that the pSnakes was the best method when compared with other methods. The main contributions of this work are the use of pSnakes and Hilbertian energy, as the external energy, in image segmentation. The Hilbertian energy is calculated by the 1D Hilbert transform. Compared with traditional methods, the pSnakes method is more suitable for ultrasound images because it is not affected by variations in image contrast, such as noise. The experimental results obtained by the left ventricle segmentation of echocardiographic images demonstrated the advantages of the proposed model. The results presented in this paper are justified due to an improved performance of the Hilbert energy in the presence of speckle noise.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Heart diseases are one of the leading causes of death in the world. According to United Nations (UN) data, cardiovascular diseases are increasing in both developed and developing countries due to the changes in the way people eat and live. In the United States 317 per 100,000 inhabitants died of heart related diseases in 2002. The highest index was registered in Ukraine, where 1032.4 per 100,000 people died in the same year. The same index in Ethiopia, for example, was 148.1 inhabitants [35].In Brazil the index per 100,000 people was 224.8 in 2014. According to SUS (Sistema Único de Saúde) the national Brazilian Health System there were 548,138 hospitalizations of men and 563,916 of women in 2009 in Brazil for cardiovascular disease. As for deaths, there were over 300,000 deaths due to circulatory system problems. Given the cost of hospitalization and the number of deaths, medical diagnosis and treatment are important measures to reverse this morbid condition as well as reducing the costs.Echocardiography has an important role in this context, consisting of a reliable tool to evaluate the cardiovascular health of patients, promoting early diagnosis. However, ventricle segmentation is a difficult task due to the relatively poor quality (speckle noise) and discontinuous edges of the echocardiographic images [26]. Thus, the use of digital image processing and image segmentation techniques can contribute to provide a more precise quantitative evaluation of left ventricular volumes, contributing to more accurate diagnoses. For example, Kang et al. [21] provided an overview of cardiac segmentation techniques, with useful advice and references from clinical applications, imaging modalities, and the validation methods used for cardiac segmentation. Petitjean and Dacher [29] proposed an original categorization for cardiac segmentation methods with a special emphasis on what level of external information is required (weak or strong) and how it is used to constrain segmentation.Many cardiac left ventricle (LV) segmentation methods have been studied to calculate blood volume, myocardial volume, and ejection fraction using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These methods can be categorized as follows: traditional segmentation, graph-based segmentation, Active Shape Models (ASMs), and level-set algorithms.Among these techniques are the active contour methods (ACM), also known as snakes, which were introduced by Kass et al. [22] to solve problems of edge detection on real images. The ACMs are based on variational methods, which aim to minimize a function that represents the energy of a curve.Active contour methods present limitations, for example: the initial contour must be initialized close to the edge of the object of interest in order to avoid any incorrect convergence and also this method has difficulties to move the curve along objects that have concave regions due to horizontal force vectors pointing in opposite directions and canceling each other out, and thus preventing their evolution [36,37].The Gradient Vector Flow (GVF) active contour methods overcome some restrictions in relation to the previously mentioned ACMs, but have limitations such as a higher computational cost of the gradient vector diffusion calculations for parameter dependent vector fields.Therefore due to these limitations other approaches have been proposed. One of these approaches is called radial active contours, which is a relatively new concept. Radial active contours were developed in order to decrease the computational complexity of the active contour methods and consequently be used for real-time applications [18]. The energy calculation and its minimization are performed in one dimension (1D) (polar coordinates), thus making them faster.The motivation to develop new active contour methods is related to the lack of a tool capable of solving all kinds of analyzes due to the peculiarities of each type of image. Thus, the main aim of this work is to make a comparative study of methods based on the active contour methods, such as traditional snakes, GVF snakes, radial snakes with derivative, radial snakes with Hilbert energy, and, also to propose a method called pSnakes. These methods were applied and evaluated for the segmentation of the left ventricle in echocardiographic images.This work is organized into five sections. Section 2 is a review of left-ventricle segmentation and the active contour methods, in particular the traditional ACM, the GVF active contour methods, radial snakes and pSnakes. The proposed approach is presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents the Results and Discussions. Finally, the Conclusions, highlighting the main contributions of this work, are shown in Section 5.There are many difficulties to analyze and identify the edges of the left ventricle (LV) in echocardiographic images due to factors such as noise and discontinuous edges. Consequently, the automatic identification of LV boundaries using computational methods has been the focus of attention of many researchers in order to help cardiologists in heart disease diagnosis. These methods have been used to calculate blood volume, myocardial volume, and ejection fraction. The techniques used can be categorized as follows: traditional segmentation, graph-based segmentation, Active Shape Model (ASM), and level-set algorithms.A popular group of statistical models are Active Appearance Models (AAMs) [11]. AAMs show two features of the datasets, shape and texture. The model is created from a training set. These models were first presented by Mitchell et al. [25] and Stegmann et al. [32,33] and they were developed and tested only on a single cardiac phase, rather than on the entire cardiac cycle. Additional studies combined the AAMs with Active Shape Models (ASM) to introduce a hybrid model [24,41,42].Several techniques have used image based segmentation methods, including thresholding, described in Ref. [19], and/or dynamic programming (DP) [40]. These methods apply specific features of the images such as texture, shape, area and they require manual user intervention.Other techniques have been developed for the segmentation of the LV in short axis views, e.g., wavelet-based enhancement [17] or gradient value methods [12], which include the papillary muscles within the myocardium.Active contours [22] or snakes have often been used for the processing of medical images. A review of these approaches and their medical application is given in Ref. [23]. [10] introduced the Active Shape Model (ASM), described in the previous paragraph, similar to the snake model of Ref. [22] but employed global shape constraints for locating structures in medical images.The contributions regarding ventricle segmentation using deformable models have mainly dealt with the design of the external force term. Region-based terms, which are based on a measure of region homogeneity, were introduced by Paragios [28]. But these models are initiated using gradients and thus sensitive to noise.A segmentation algorithm for short-axis must comply with several requirements: First, it should be able to process, and overcome the problem of small structures, e.g., the papillary muscles. Second, a large dataset is required to validate the proposed segmentation algorithm. Third, a gold-standard, based on manual tracing of the LV boundaries, should be constructed in order to test the performance of the algorithm. Fourth, the proposed algorithm should not be sensitive to noise, in order to reduce error rates. At present, there is no segmentation method that complies with all 4 of these requirements. However here we present a method that attempts to comply with these requirements.Active contours allow segmentation of images by edge detection. This method is applied successfully to problems of image processing and Computer Vision, such as edge detection and object tracking, among others. There is no perfect solution for all cases, because of the uniqueness of each problem characterized by specific images. Snakes were innovated to solve problems where edge detection by gradient was not successful due to low contrast contours, the presence of noise, among other reasons.The active contours method consists of drawing a curve, starting near or inside the object of interest. This line is deformed by forces that move until the edges of the object are defined. This edge approach is performed through successive minimization iterations of a previously specified energy.The traditional active contour method, also called snakes, is a framework for delineating the outline of an object from an image. The goal is to minimize a function representing the snake energy. The curve evolves so that its energy decreases with each new interaction. The snake model is the 2D parameterization of a geometric curve [27], defined as(1)[0,1]→ℝ2s→c(s)=(x(s),y(s)).The model is called deformable because it is described by one energy function E(s) [9], which is expressed as(2)ℝ2⟶E(s)ℝc→∫[0,1]{e1|c′(s)|2+e2|c″(s)|2+e3Eext[c(s)]}ds,where the apostrophe represents the derivation, e1, e2 and e3 are real constants and Eextis the energy term associated with external forces.The energy of a snake depends on its shape and its location. It usually breaks down into two energies: the internal energy and the external energy [31].The first energy E1=∫e1|c′(s)|2ds is linked to the elasticity. This means that it expresses the characteristic for each point of the snake to move away from its neighbors. The minimization favors the search for points, when c′(s) is small. This means that these points tend to approach each other and the snake contracts.The second energy, E2=∫e2|c″(s)|2ds is the bending energy or snake curvature. The energy is minimal when c″(s)=0, i.e., when c(s)=ks (k is constant), that is, when it is a line. Thus, favoring the coefficient e2 during the minimization, it forces the snake to lose its curvature.The external energy allows the snake to shape itself around the edges of objects. It is the energy that compensates the other energies and thus prevents the snake from contracting in on itself, without perceiving the image contours. In general, external energy is calculated using the square of the image gradient at a point (x, y) of the snake, i.e.,(3)Eext(x,y)=−|∇[I(x,y)]|2,and also,(4)Eext(x,y)=−|∇[Gσ×I(x,y)]|2,where ▿ is the gradient operator, Gσis a Gaussian filter centered at the point (x, y) with a variance σ2 and I is the image to be segmented.The balloon ACM [8] adds a force, called the pressure force to the traditional ACM, simulating a behavior similar to a balloon, causing the curve to expand (inflate) or retract (deflate) depending on the position of the contour initialization, and thus defining the direction of this force. The pressure force causes the ACM balloon to pass isolated noise points and low contrast (soft) edges and to stop at high-contrast edges (protruding). This pressure force is obtained by the equation(5)F→balloon=(F→int+F→extP)+F→pressure,where the external potential force isF→extP=F→extb=−γ∇Eextiwith i=1, 2, 3 or 4. Thus, the balloon snake has the same internal forces which are present in the traditional ACM and this extra force called the pressure force.According to the above, theF→extbballoon force follows the equation,(6)F→extb=−k∇Eext||∇E||ext,where k is the weight associated to its normalization. Thus, the pressing forceF→pressureis given by(7)F→pressure=k1n→(s)and(8)Eballoon=||F→pressure||,wheren→(s)is the vector normal to the curve at the point c(s) and k1 is the amplitude and direction of the force, indicating inflation, if positive, or deflation, if negative. k1 also influences the velocity of evolution (deformation) of the balloon snake [13]. Thus, Eq. (5) can be rewritten as(9)F→balloon=F→int−k∇Eext∇Eext+kn→(s).where k and k1 are of the same order, smaller than a pixel. The value of k should be a little larger than k1 to finish the inflation or deflation of the balloon snake on the edge of the object of interest.Based on the above definitions, the total energy of the balloon snake is given by(10)Ebtotal=αEcont+βEcurv+δEballoon+γEext,where α, β, γ and δ are real constants.Whenever a new energy value(Ebtotal)is calculated, a new position is determined for the snake. In this case, the problem becomes an optimization of a numerical function with several variables [5].The optimal displacement is calculated for each vertex viof the snake, however this depends on its position and the positions of its neighbors vi−2, vi−1, vi+1 and vi+2. This can be applied for all points of the snake, taking each one in turn and deciding which position the snake reaches to attain the minimum energy [3]. The complexity of the algorithm is much greater when a large number of locations are chosen for the snake.A balloon snake has superior characteristics to a traditional snake. However, there are limitations that are subject to external energy and pressure forces [13]. Some limitations of the balloon snake are: failure to capture the contours with discontinuities; inadequate identification of concave regions as this ACM uses the same external energy as the traditional snake [38]. The magnitude of the balloon force is difficult to set considering the stop criteria. It is less reliable when the contour is pulled near an edge with discontinuity [34].The traditional ACMs cannot be applied to the segmentation of any kind of image due to problems such as inappropriate runtime, requirements for automatic selection of the initial contour, non-convergence in images with low sharpness, borders with few definitions or without edges, and multiple images to be segmented at the same time. Thus, other approaches have been applied and evaluated in the literature.Due to the limitations of the traditional and balloon snakes, particularly in their lack of ability to capture edges, the Gradient Vector Flow (GVF) snake was developed. The GVF snake is formed by a vector fieldVGVF(x,y)=[uGVF(x,y),vGVF(x,y)]calculated by fusion of the gradient vectors, which are defined as the edge maps of a binary image or gray levels. This vector field replaces the potential external force, which defines the equilibrium condition of the equation:VGVF(x,y)=uGVF(x,y),vGVF(x,y). Rewriting this equation produces(11)vt(s,t)=α[v″(s,t)]−β[v‴(s,t)]+VGVF(s,t),where s can be replaced by (x, y) and VGVF(x, y) is defined in such a way that it minimizes the energy(12)EGVF=∬[μ(uGVFx2+uGVFy2+vGVFx2+vGVFy2)+|∇fGVF|2|VGVF−∇fGVF|2]dxdy,where fGVFis the map derived from the edge image; uGVFx, uGVFy, vGVFx, vGVFyare the first partial derivatives of uGVFand vGVFin relation to x and y, respectively, and μ is a regularization parameter.The regularization parameter μ, in Eq. (12), controls the relationship between the first and the second term of the integral; this relationship can reduce the influence of noise. When the value of ∇fGVFis small, the energy is predominant in the first term, resulting in a field with little variation. On the other hand, when ∇fGVFpresents a high value, the second term dominates the integral and is minimized considering ∇fGVF=VGVF. This condition produces the desired effect of keeping VGVFsimilar to the gradient of the edge maps, where this value is high, but forcing the field to vary little in homogeneous regions.One of the most well known and relevant radial snakes is known as Active Rays [16,15]. The technique is applied to trace the outline of objects in real time. The idea is to define a point of origin inside the boundary and find points that characterize it, searching along rays that diverge from a central source m. For this, active contour equations are adapted. The contour c(s) shall be defined as(13)[0,1]→ℝ2s→c(s)=Cm(θ(s),r(s)),where c(s) is the active contour and Cm(s) is the contour defined from the origin m, in polar coordinates (θ, r). The internal energy from the contour is calculated by(14)Ei(cm(θ))=α(θ)ddθr(θ)2+β(θ)d2dθ2r(θ)2where α(θ) and β(θ) are real constants to the determined angle. The first equation term is the definition of the energy continuity and the second term, the curvature energy for the Active Rays. The above equation may be calculated along the beam. Then, the calculations are made only in one dimension.Another relevant work is known as optimal radial active contours [6] that use dynamic programming to search for contour energy optimization and are mainly used for object tracking. The definition for total contour energy E is given by(15)E(rm(θ))=∫02π{Ei[rm(θ)]+Ee[rm(θ)]}dθ,where rm(θ) is the distance from the origin m, considering a given angle θ; Eiis internal energy and Eethe external. The external energy Eefrom the active contour is the gradient function from the image to be segmented(16)Ee[rm(θ)]=αeg−ddrρm(θ,r)2=αe⋅g{−[ρm(θ,r+1)−ρm(θ,r)]2},where the r and θ are polar coordinates from one control point (the node itself) of the active contour; g is a nonlinear monotonically increasing function and ρmis the Active Ray. Internal energy is the sum of the continuity and curvature energies. The continuity energyEicontin the ith node from the active contour is calculated by the expression(17)Eicont(rm(θ))=αi|rm(θi)−rm(θi−1)|2,where αiis a real constant.The curvature energyEicurvis given by the equation(18)Eicurv(rm(θ))=βi|{[rm(θi)−rm(θi−1)]−[(rm(θi−1)−rm(θi−2))]}|2,where βiis a real constant.The Hilbert transformfˆ(t)is a real function f(t) defined by Johansson [20] and Cizek [7] as(19)fˆ(t)=1πP∫−∞∞f(τ)t−τdτ,where P denotes the main value of Cauchy, since there is a singularity in the integral for t=τ. Another way to represent the Hilbert transform is through integral convolution as(20)fˆ(t)=1πt×f(t).The function 1/πt Fourier transform is given byF(1/πt)=−j⋅sgn(ω), and the signal function is given by(21)sgn(ω)=+1seω>0;0,seω=0and−1seω<0.In this way, based on the above data, the Hilbert transform is normally implemented through the application of the inversed Fourier transform on the result of the multiplication of −j·sgn(ω) by the Fourier transform of f(t), in other words,(22)fˆ(t)=F−1(−j⋅sgn(ω)F(ω)).One important characteristic of the Hilbert transform is its capacity to detect edges well, even in signals with noise.The pSnakes radial active contours method [1] makes use of polar coordinates (r, θ) where r is the radius and θ is the angle that represents the image pixels in the ultrasound mode. The origin of the reference axis is located at the point of divergence from the ultrasound beams, i.e., at the point where the ultrasonic probe is located.Systems based on the pSnakes method might be embedded in the ultrasound equipment itself, filtering and segmenting the image elements. In the case of echocardiography, the segmentation of the left ventricle is the object of interest, since its measurement readings, in real time, provide important information for the doctor's diagnosis. This new method might also be applied to images with Cartesian coordinates, and ultrasound images using a linear probe. Besides ultrasonic images, other images such as those from sonar and radar, which are also naturally represented in polar coordinates, can be segmented using the pSnakes method.The size of an input digital image such as Ir,θ, in polar coordinates, in a matrix form, is represented by the quantity of lines R and columns T, data which define the resolution of the image R×T. The lines correspond to the angles of the ultrasonic beams and the columns to the rays, i.e., radial distances. Thus, the input image is denoted as a matrix Ir,θ.The active contours, pSnakes, is a radial active contour method which can be used to segment objects from digital images, and is defined by(23)[0,1]→ℝ2s→c(s)=[(r1(s),θ(s));(r2(s),θ(s))],where (r1, θ) and (r2, θ) are polar coordinates of the control points (node) of the polar active contour (pSnake). It should be pointed out that r1, r2⊂[0, rmax]θ(s)⊂[θmin, θmax], where rmax is the ray with the greatest range of the ultrasonic beams; θmin and θmax are the limit of the angles for the radial coordinates and the limit of the deflection angles of the beam. However, in this definition, only two points (r1, θ) and (r2, θ) are considered. This implies that each angular coordinate θ has two nodes in the positions r1 and r2, denominated twin nodes. Dual radial snakes is a special case when θmin=0 and θmax=2π. An illustration showing the main geometric differences among snakes, radial snakes, pSnakes and dual radial snakes are presented in Fig. 1.The pSnakes method uses a system of polar coordinates, defined in Fig. 2, which are used in the location of the control points (node or spline s), where r (radius) is the distance from a control point to the referred point O, while θ refers to the angle between the horizontal axis (θ≥0) and the segment formed by the node and the point O. The pSnakes method is demonstrated in a flowchart (Fig. 3). Initially the image to be segmented is acquired. The image may have been converted from Cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates, may be a synthetic image or the image may have been obtained directly from the echocardiograph in polar coordinates. From this input image the initial contour is defined manually or automatically. Then, external and internal energies are calculated. Next, new nodes are added and deleted according to the predetermined criteria. The total energy from the present contour, made up of the internal and external energy, is calculated. After this calculation, new positions for the nodes along the edges are sought to minimize the total energy of the contour using specific optimization algorithms. If a stopping criterion is reached, the method comes to the end of its application. Otherwise, a new iteration is carried out. A number of iterations or the total acceptable minimum energy are commonly used as stop criteria.The dynamic of the active contour methods, in general, including the radial ones, such as pSnakes is based on the minimization of the total energy, which is composed of the internal and external energies.Energy is the main descriptive characteristic of the snake and the internal energies depend on the shape and the location of the active contour points and, in general, are related to the curvature and contour continuity.The polar curvature energy Ecurvr,θis calculated by Ref. [20](24)Ecurvr,θ=[(rθ−rθ+1)−(rθ+1−rθ+2)]2,where rθis the radial position of one given node along the beam with angle θ, rθ+1 is the radial position of another coordinate adjacent node θ+1 and rθ+2 is the radial position for the following node of θ+2. Therefore, when the contour tends to a straight line, this energy tends to zero. In addition, when there is one node with a radial distance greater than its neighbor (left or right), the curvature energy value tends to increase in this region.The polar continuity energy Econtr,θis calculated by Ref. [20](25)Econtr,θ=(rθ−rθ+1)2Eqs. (24) and (25) are similar to the Eqs. (17) and (18), defined by Chen et al. [20], respectively. The difference is in the origins of the polar coordinates, for example the origin of the radial snakes point of polar axis is in the region to be targeted, whereas in the pSnakes this point is usually outside the region. Eq. (24) is based on the second derivative of the ray in relation to the angle θ. In Eq. (25), the continuity energy is calculated based on the difference from the node radial coordinate rθand its neighbor on the right, rθ+1. These equations are chosen as the definitions of internal energies as they are used in the literature.First the 1D Hilbert transform must be applied along the radial beams, which are the image rays represented in polar coordinates, after which it should be normalized and its absolute value can then be used as the external energy. Thus, the external energy in radial active contours is given by(26)Eext(r,θ)=|fˆ(r)|,that might be normalized by the expression(27)Eextn(r,θ)=1−|fˆ(r)|max(|fˆ(r)|),or ri∈[0, rmax], where rmax is the greatest ray reached by the beam in which the external energy is being calculated andfˆis the Hilbert transform.On the assumption that the divergence point of the beam in radial snakes is within the edges of the image to be segmented, the Hilbert transform tends to hit negative values close to the rise edge and positive values after the fall edge. Therefore, the following expression may be used, rejecting the values in the region which are outside the object contour:(28)Eexrn(r,θ)1−|fˆ(r)|max(||fˆ(r1)||),sefˆ(r)<0and0,sefˆ(r1)≥0.The module (or the absolute value) of the normalized Hilbert transform from the pixels intensity along the beams is denominated as the Hilbertian field or Hilbertian energy and is used as external energy in the radial snake in this work. Thus, the external Hilbertian energy is simply defined as the module (or the absolute value) of the normalized Hilbert transform applied along the beam signal, that is, along the ray.One typical case of Hilbertian energy behavior is illustrated in Fig. 4. The valley shown in Fig. 4(b) corresponds to the object edge shown in Fig. 4(a). According to Fig. 4, the field intensity increases to the left of the mentioned valley, serving as guide to search for the minimum snake energy, corresponding to the desired segmentation. It means that there is a border expansion along the radius. Thus, on using Eq. (27) or (28) to calculate the external energy, it can be seen that a node (control point) of the radial snake, under the effect of this energy, tends to approach the edges of the object.The external Hilbertian energy of pSnakes is defined as the absolute value of the normalized Hilbert transform applied along the signal beam, i.e., along the ray, according to Eq. (27).The total energy from the pSnakes is given by(29)pEtotalr,θ=αEcurvr,θ+βEcontr,θ+γEexrr,θ,where α, β and γ are real constants and Eextis the Hilbertian external energy.This section presents the tests performed to assess the performance of the pSnakes in comparison to traditional snakes with balloon (STB), GVF, radial snakes with derivative without mean filtering (SRDSFM), radial snakes with derivative with mean filtering (SRDCFM), and radial snakes with Hilbert energy (SRH). The ACMs are assessed using measures of error, and computational cost in the segmentation of echocardiogram images and compared to the gold standard obtained by a medical expert. The tests were conducted using a computer with an Intel Core i5 processor, 3GB memory and Windows 7 system. The simulations were carried out using MATLAB, version 7.6 2008a.The programs used in the evaluation of traditional and GVF snakes were obtained at the site of the authors [39]. The remaining programs were implemented as part of this work. The test images were obtained from the Clinical Prontocárdio (Prontocárdio Clinic) (Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil) using a GE echocardiograph, model Vivid 7 Pro belonging to the Clinic. A total of 17 echocardiogram tests were used, making a total of 34 images, considering end-diastole and end-systole images. An echo-cardiographer (ECO1) recorded the 17 examinations synchronized by electrocardiogram (ECG) in the position of the short axis of the left ventricular (LV).For the calculation of error measurement, the results of ECO1 were used as the gold standard. Thus, for each echocardiographic image, the LV is segmented using the methods and variations mentioned, and the segmentation errors were quantified by RMS (radial maximum error), RMSE (root mean square) and ADPV (average deviation of pixel values). Also the influence of startup, performed manually, was taken into account for the results obtained. Thus, the initial contour is obtained at four levels of edge distance, starting from the initial contours used in the earlier step, but inside the LV cavity. These levels are: (i) close to the edge, (ii) 30%, (iii) 50% and, finally, (iv) 70% nearer the center of the initial contour used in the previous phase, as shown in Fig. 5.The difference measures obtained between the reference (gold standard) image and segmented image defined if the segmentation is in an acceptable tolerance range. Some difference measures used are based on the distance between pixels, position, shape, extracted features from objects such as area and perimeter, among others. In this work the measures of distance between pixels were used. For the calculation of error two contours are considered: (i) the contours of the reference image crand (ii) the contour of the segmented image cs, as shown in Fig. 6. From a point Pi, located in the center of the object N equally spaced fibeams that cross both contours are drawn. Each fibeam crosses the contour crat the point criand also crosses the contour csat the point csi. The distance diis computed as the difference between criand csiin the radial direction. The measures used in this work are: radial maximum error, average of pixel values, and mean squared error.For the radial maximum error measures the maximum distance error between crand cs, given by Davatzikos and Prince [14] is considered to be(30)RMS=max(di),i∈[1,N]An illustration error measure that reflects on the RMS short axis echocardiograph image is shown in Fig. 7.ADPV is calculated as the average distance between crand cs, defined by Barrett et al. [4] and Pope et al. [30] as(31)ADPV=∑i=1NdiNAn illustration of error measures that correspond to ADPV in short axis echocardiographic images is shown in Fig. 8.The RMSE is defined as the difference between the distances of crand csgiven by Adam et al. [2](32)RMSE=1N∑i=1Ndi2NAn illustration of error measures that reflect the RMSE short axis echocardiographic images is presented in Fig. 9.These measures are used to obtain the results of comparative analysis of segmentation between the traditional balloon, GVF, radial with derivative, radial with Hilbert energy ACMs and pSnakes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
