@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer-aided gastrointestinal hemorrhage detection in wireless capsule endoscopy videos

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An automated GI hemorrhage detection scheme from WCE images is proposed..Features from the NGLCM of the spectrum of the frames and SVM are employed.We introduce difference average- a new feature that operates on NGLCM.Validity of the method is confirmed by statistical and graphical analyses.The performance of the proposed scheme, compared to the existing ones is promising.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE),Bleeding detection,Support vector machine,Normalized Gray Level Co-Occurrence Matrix,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveWireless Capsule Endoscopy (WCE) can image the portions of the human gastrointestinal tract that were previously unreachable for conventional endoscopy examinations. A major drawback of this technology is that a large volume of data are to be analyzed in order to detect a disease which can be time-consuming and burdensome for the clinicians. Consequently, there is a dire need of computer-aided disease detection schemes to assist the clinicians. In this paper, we propose a real-time, computationally efficient and effective computerized bleeding detection technique applicable for WCE technology.MethodsThe development of our proposed technique is based on the observation that characteristic patterns appear in the frequency spectrum of the WCE frames due to the presence of bleeding region. Discovering these discriminating patterns, we develop a texture-feature-descriptor-based-algorithm that operates on the Normalized Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrix (NGLCM) of the magnitude spectrum of the images. A new local texture descriptor called difference average that operates on NGLCM is also proposed. We also perform statistical validation of the proposed scheme.ResultsThe proposed algorithm was evaluated using a publicly available WCE database. The training set consisted of 600 bleeding and 600 non-bleeding frames. This set was used to train the SVM classifier. On the other hand, 860 bleeding and 860 non-bleeding images were selected from the rest of the extracted images to form the test set. The accuracy, sensitivity and specificity obtained from our method are 99.19%, 99.41% and 98.95% respectively which are significantly higher than state-of-the-art methods. In addition, the low computational cost of our method makes it suitable for real-time implementation.ConclusionThis work proposes a bleeding detection algorithm that employs textural features from the magnitude spectrum of the WCE images. Experimental outcomes backed by statistical validations prove that the proposed algorithm is superior to the existing ones in terms of accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and computational cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The classical endoscopic procedure has enabled clinicians to investigate the human gastro-intestinal (GI) tract. Despite being efficacious for the upper (duodenum, stomach and food pipe) and lower part (colon and terminal ileum) of the GI tract, the traditional endoscopy miserably fails to examine the small intestine. The human small intestine is about 8m long and conventional endoscopy such as Colonoscopy or Esophagogastroduodenoscopy cannot image it satisfactorily. To overcome the limitations of traditional endoscopy, Iddan et al. [1] pioneered the invention of wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE). The WCE system consists of a pill-shaped capsule. The capsule has a built-in video camera, video signal transmitter, light-emitting diode and a battery. It is swallowed by the patient and is propelled forward by peristalsis of human GI tract. It records images as it moves forward along the GI tract and transmits them at the same time using radio frequency. It transmits over the course of about 8h until its battery runs out. Due to its promising performance for the visualization of human GI tract, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved it in 2001 [2].Manual classification of bleeding and non-bleeding endoscopic video frames has a number of limitations. The power supply of the capsule has limitations which result in low resolution (576×576) of endoscopic video frames. The video frame rate is also low (2 frames/second). Besides, about 60,000 images have to be inspected per examination. It takes an experienced clinician about 2h which may not be pragmatic in most clinical scenarios. Since the evaluation process is time-consuming and a large volume of images have to be inspected, bleeding detection becomes more subject to human error. So a computer-aided detection (CAD) of bleeding frames can make this monumental task easy for clinicians.Given Imaging Ltd. [3] designed a software called Suspected Blood Indicator (SBI) for automatic detection of bleeding frames. But SBI demonstrates poor sensitivity and specificity and often fails to detect any kind of bleeding other than that of the small intestine [4]. The software designed by Given Imaging Ltd. allows the physician to view two consecutive frames at the same time. But due to low frame rate, two consecutive frames may not contain the area of interest. Consequently, the clinician has to toggle between images making the evaluation process even more onerous and time-consuming. All the aforementioned problems of manual screening can be eliminated by the use of CAD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
