@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stenosis map for volume visualization of constricted tubular structures: Application to coronary artery stenosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new 3D spatial field for visualizing constricted tubular structures is proposed.Constrictions are quantified by new measures using the localized structure analysis.A new transfer function maps the degree of constriction to color and opacity.Our method provides intuitive adjustment of the visual appearance of constrictions.Our method can be applied to various constrictions with relevant parameters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Volume rendering,Transfer function,Tubular structure,Constriction,Coronary artery stenosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although direct volume rendering (DVR) has become a commodity, effective rendering of interesting features is still a challenge. In one of active DVR application fields, the medicine, radiologists have used DVR for the diagnosis of lesions or diseases that should be visualized distinguishably from other surrounding anatomical structures. One of most frequent and important radiologic tasks is the detection of lesions, usually constrictions, in complex tubular structures. In this paper, we propose a 3D spatial field for the effective visualization of constricted tubular structures, called as a stenosis map which stores the degree of constriction at each voxel. Constrictions within tubular structures are quantified by using newly proposed measures (i.e. line similarity measure and constriction measure) based on the localized structure analysis, and classified with a proposed transfer function mapping the degree of constriction to color and opacity. We show the application results of our method to the visualization of coronary artery stenoses. We present performance evaluations using twenty eight clinical datasets, demonstrating high accuracy and efficacy of our proposed method. The ability of our method to saliently visualize the constrictions within tubular structures and interactively adjust the visual appearance of the constrictions proves to deliver a substantial aid in radiologic practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Direct volume rendering (DVR) visualizes 3D volumetric data using a transfer function which maps voxel values to colors and opacities. One of the main challenges of DVR is the rendering of interested features with sufficient saliency so that they are visually distinguished from other structures [1,2]. As a solution to this challenge, first- (e.g. gradient) and second-order derivatives (e.g. curvature) of the volume data have been used to improve data classification [3–6]. Spatial characteristics (e.g. textural properties and size) around a voxel have also been proposed [2,7].Among its various applied fields, DVR has been most widely used in medicine, especially in radiology. In medical applications, DVR is used for the generation of cognitive three-dimensional image from overwhelming 3D volumetric data from modern scanners (e.g. CT, MRI, and 3D tomosynthesis). Under the time pressure of clinical situation requiring prompt and important clinical decision, radiologists want 3D renderings wherein lesions of their interest are visualized distinguishably from other anatomical structures.Of diverse diagnostic tasks in radiology, the detection of constricted regions in complex tubular structures (e.g. coronary artery stenosis in coronary artery, intra-thoracic airway constriction, carotid artery stenosis, and intestinal obstruction) is one of most frequent and important diagnostic tasks. However, the aforementioned first- and second-order derivatives or spatial characteristics are not so successful to classify constrictions within tubular structures. In this paper, we propose a new spatial field that can deliver a new dimension for salient visualization of constrictions within tubular structures, called as a stenosis map.In diagnosing various diseases regarding constricted tubular structures in radiologic diagnoses, early detection of coronary artery disease (CAD) is very important because it is known to be the most common cause of death in the world [8]. Traditionally, invasive coronary artery (ICA) has been considered as gold standard for assessing CAD. However, ICA is an invasive technique and did not provide the information of the plaque because it is just luminogram. Recently, coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) has been widely adopted to non-invasively diagnose CAD with high diagnostic accuracy. In particular, CCTA has been reported to be useful for rapid detection of CAD in patients with acute chest pain in an emergency situation [9,10]. However, the interpretation of CCTA requires substantial clinical expertise and experience [11]: it could take about several hours for a physician without experience of cardiac imaging to detect stenosis manually in a CCTA dataset, which may be unacceptable in the emergency situation [12]. Therefore, an imaging system that visualizes the constricted regions (i.e. stenosis) saliently can be a very helpful volume navigation tool in the CAD diagnostic procedure.In this paper, we propose a 3D spatial field for effective classification of constricted tubular structures, called as a stenosis map. For ease of explanation, we describe the proposed approach with an exemplary application to coronary artery stenoses; but, this approach can be directly applied to other constricted tubular structures only with relevant parameter exploration. First, we detect tubular structures by using a newly proposed similarity measure to line (i.e. line similarity). And then we quantify constrictions within the previously detected tubular structures by using a newly proposed constriction measure. As a result, we obtain a spatial field of stenosis map, of which each voxel has a scalar value of its corresponding degree of constriction. Finally, the stenosis map is used in data classification in a way that the degree of constriction in the stenosis map is mapped to color and opacity. Such stenosis-based classification enables easy and intuitive adjustment of the visual appearance of constrictions within tubular structures.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we review previous researches. Section 3 introduces the analysis of localized structure, which is used to generate the stenosis map. The proposed method for the stenosis map computation and the stenosis-based classification and its implementation are described in Sections 4, 5, and 6, respectively. Section 7 presents experimental results using clinical datasets, followed by conclusion in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
