@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An approach to plan and evaluate the location of radiotherapy services and its application in the New South Wales, Australia

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposes a methodology for location planning of radiotherapy treatment services.The methodology is based on cancer incidence and road network-based accessibility measures.Applied to the current radiotherapy treatment centres in New South Wales state of Australia.Current and future regional radiotherapy demand are estimated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Radiotherapy services,Cancer,Location planning,Accessibility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an integrated modelling approach for location planning of radiotherapy treatment services based on cancer incidence and road network-based accessibility. Previous research efforts have established travel distance/time barriers as a key factor affecting access to cancer treatment services, as well as epidemiological studies have shown that cancer incidence rates vary with population demography. Our study is built on the evidence that the travel distances to treatment centres and demographic profiles of the accessible regions greatly influence the uptake of cancer radiotherapy (RT) services. An integrated service planning approach that combines spatially-explicit cancer incidence projections, and the placement of new RT services based on road network based accessibility measures have never been attempted. This research presents a novel approach for the location planning of RT services, and demonstrates its viability by modelling cancer incidence rates for different age–sex groups in New South Wales, Australia based on observed cancer incidence trends; and estimations of the road network-based access to current NSW treatment centres. Using three indices (General Efficiency, Service Availability and Equity), we show how the best location for a new RT centre may be chosen when there are multiple competing locations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer control is a health priority. Cancer is estimated to be the leading cause of burden of disease in Australia in 2010, accounting for 19% of the total burden, and has a major impact on the Australian community, since one in three men and one in four women in Australia will be diagnosed with cancer by the age of 75. By age 85, the risk increases to one in two for men and one in three for women [1]. The proportion of elderly people in the population will steadily increase over the next decades due to increased life expectancy [2] and the ‘baby boomers’ ageing population is entering the high incidence period, thereby increasing the number of cancer cases.Beyond demographic influences, other factors like socio-economic status and ethnicity have also an effect on cancer incidence [2] along with geographical variations in the rate of treatment and survival from cancer [3,4]. As the number and diversity of cancer cases increase, the pressure on specialised treatment services will increase, calling for better planning and allocation of healthcare resources, particularly at the regional level.Radiotherapy (RT) is an essential cancer therapy whether aimed at cure or palliation. The Collaboration for Cancer Outcomes Research and Evaluation (CCORE) literature-based findings were used by the Radiation Oncology Reform Implementation Committee (RORIC) to estimate that 52.3% of all diagnosed cancer cases in Australia would benefit from radiotherapy at some point after diagnosis. The Australian state health department uses this estimate for planning their RT services ([5,6,50]). Radiotherapy is considered to be most cost effective than surgery and chemotherapy, when all costs across the life cycle are considered [7]. According to the RANZCR, radiotherapy provides similar benefit with lower costs for cancer patient treatment for cures. RT generally costs about 6% of each health dollar spent fighting cancer, but it is a vital part of curing about 40% of all cured cancers. As radiation therapy is provided as an outpatient treatment service, the overall treatment costs are less than other treatments. In terms of effectiveness, an Australian study stated that external-beam radiation therapy is at least as effective as modern Australian surgical techniques [8]. It states that men with localised prostate cancer (≈30.0% of all new cancers in men) who are treated with external-beam radiation therapy have a cure rate of 95.5% for intermediate-risk prostate cancer and 91.3% for high-risk prostate cancer. Also, for breast cancer (≈28% of all new cancers in women) treatment studies conducted in Canada and Denmark, have shown a 9–10% improvement in overall survival at 10 years for patients that received radiotherapy compared with patients who did not receive radiotherapy [9,10]. Like these there are other studies which show better outcomes and cost-effectiveness for RT treatments for different types of cancer and their stages.However, measured access to RT services has established that utilisation rates are well below this optimal number [11–14] clearly demonstrating the existence of barriers to access existing RT services. Currently, only 38% of cancer sufferers receive radiotherapy during their disease journey [2,15,16] indicating that ∼14% of cancer sufferers, miss the benefit from RT services that may improved cancer control and appropriate evidence-based management [2,15]. Since the proximity of RT facilities to home has been identified as a major factor enhancing accessibility to and utilisation of RT services [11,16], it is likely that remote and rural patients are facing limited accessibility to radiotherapy on the basis of inadequate transportation and lengthy travel. A literature review has highlighted travel as a perceived barrier to cancer treatment [17]. Several national and international studies supported the relation between travel distance from radiotherapy centres and uptake rates [18–21]; [49]; [22]; [23–25]). Although the configuration of centralised networks may be driven by resource efficiency savings, it has reflecting clinical need in rural and remote areas will appear less resource efficient [26].Various studies have examined the effect of geographical accessibility, based on travel times/distances as proxy to travel effort, on uptake of RT based cancer treatment. For example, Madelaine et al. [27] reported lower treatment rates for rural lung cancer patients in France. Punglia et al. [28] found that increasing distance to the nearest radiotherapy centre was associated with a decreasing likelihood of receiving post-mastectomy radiation therapy. Greenberg et al. [29] asserted that lung cancer patients living at greater straight line distance from a specialist cancer centre, in rural USA, were significantly more likely to undergo surgery but were less likely to receive radiotherapy or chemotherapy than closer patients. Athas et al. [14] also found that breast cancer patients living further than 75 miles from a radiotherapy services centre were significantly less likely to receive radiotherapy than those living closer. It is possible that the detriment of transportation may be even more pronounced in patients who are faced with weeks of daily outpatient treatment, as is common for radiation therapy. Some recent studies have reported the location assessment for public healthcare facilities in US. Batta et al. [30] has used p-maxian model considering dispersion, population, and equity for obtaining the optimal locations of public facilities. Another study by Burkey et al. [31] has used location-based comparisons based on efficiency and equity to compare healthcare services in four US states. Our paper will use some of these indices (general efficiency, service availability and distance-based equity) to evaluate the potential RT service locations.Recently, Gabriel et al. [32] presented the results from the data linkage study for radiotherapy utilisation rates in NSW and Australian Capital Territory (ACT) for years 2004–2006. They concluded that the radiotherapy utilisation rates decreased with increasing distance from patient's residence to the nearest RT facility (p<0.0001). The study quantified RT rates ranging from 27% for patient living within 50km of RT facility to 19% for patients living more than 400km from the nearest RT facility. Recently, various studies (Shukla et al. [33,34]; Tyagi et al. [35]) have only focussed on within organisation (or hospital) level process improvements but have not considered patient accessibility measures for improvements.The planning of efficient and accessible RT services for cancer care at regional level requires estimates of current and future cancer demand based on the spatial distribution and evolution of various socio-demographic groups, spatial accessibility based on transport network and probabilities of re-treatment. In this study, we will develop a modelling tool which can be systematically used for planning of radiotherapy services.After detailing the data and methods used in the modelling effort, we will demonstrate how we have applied these modelling methods to plan and evaluate RT services in NSW.The proposed approach for modelling and predicting the future cancer incidences and their accessibility to existing RT centres in the state is visualised in Fig. 1, and involves datasets such as Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) cancer incidence data, Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) population projection dataset, 1km Australian population grid dataset, road network dataset, and data about the existing radiotherapy (RT) centres.The AIHW cancer incidence dataset [36] provides the information about age group and sex specific cancer rates for all and specific cancer types in Australia. The major source of this data comes from the Australian Cancer Database (ACD) which contains records of all the primary, malignant cancers (except basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas of the skin) diagnosed in Australia since 1982. The data from ACD is generally used to report national cancer statistics such as incidence, trends, projections, survival, and prevalence. The ACD data is compiled from the data provided by the state and territory cancer registries through Australasian Association of Cancer Registries (AACR). The age-specific rates (ASR) for cancer in males and females, in past years, are used to model and predict the cancer incidences in the state.The population projection data prepared by the ABS to permit the Australian Government Department of Social Services to plan and evaluate aged care. These projections are based on the past trends (over a decade) of fertility, mortality, and migration trends, using the cohort-component method, where the base population is projected into the future year annually by estimating the effect of births, deaths and migration within each age–sex group according to the specified fertility, mortality and migration assumptions. This datasets contains the age group by sex population numbers for each Statistical Local Area. SLA is an Australian Standard Geographical Classification (ASGC) defined area that covers a Local Government Area (LGA) or part thereof. The median population of SLAs is about 21,000. The population projections cover the period from 2012 to 2026, using the 2011 ABS census year as a base. More information about this dataset is present elsewhere [37].Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) has released a 1km population grid covering the entire country based on the Census data collected in 2011. This dataset represents the finest resolution digital population data available at the national scale According to ABS, this dataset has key advantages of (a) greater spatial accuracy in both urban and rural areas, and (b) the ability to efficiently integrate with other spatial datasets such environmental data. This dataset is used in travel distance modelling to calculate the population coverage.The road network dataset was downloaded from the most up-to-date OpenStreetMap (OSM) database, using Quantum GIS software [38]. OpenStreetMap is a crowd-sourced initiative to collect and map roads, trails, and points of interest, with an ultimate aim of building a geographic database that contains every single feature on the planet [39]. OSM data was selected for this study as it is a readily available and open data source with sufficient positional accuracy [40].The data about the existing RT treatment facilities is accessed from Department of Health, Australia. DoH [41] provides publically available information about radiation therapy services including accommodation and travel schemes, facility locations and treatment options. The facility locations for RT centres were used for estimating the RT treatment accessible regions for future cancer incidences.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
