@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiscale finite element analysis of elastic wave scattering from localized defects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A multiscale FE method is used to study the interaction of elastic waves and defects.The method allows to model small defects without requiring overly refined meshes.Multiscale elements model irregular defects without compromising the grid׳s quality.Libraries of damaged multiscale elements simplify the execution of parametric studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element method,Multiscale analysis,Elastic wave scattering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates the use of a multiscale finite element approach to study the interaction between elastic waves and localized defects. The analysis of wave–defect interaction is of fundamental importance for the development of ultrasonic non-destructive testing and SHM applications. The method considered herein, known as Geometric Multiscale FEM, formulates multi-node elements which can model small geometrical features without resorting to excessive mesh refinements and without compromising the quality of the discretization in the uniform portion of the domain. The possibility of formulating libraries of damaged multiscale elements makes the method particularly appealing for conducting extensive parametric studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Among different approaches used for the monitoring of structural integrity, waves-based methods have shown great potentials for their capability to scan relatively wide portions of a structure and for being sensitive to a variety of damage types [1–4]. Typical defects encountered in structural components include cracks and corrosion in metallic materials, and porosity, delaminations, matrix and/or fiber cracking in composites. The development of effective elastic waves-based inspection techniques that not only detect damage but also provide some quantitative measure of its severity relies on numerical simulations which investigate the interaction between propagating waves and defects of different type, orientation and size [3]. Specifically, numerical simulations of wave propagation play a key role for the development of novel damage detection algorithms and are useful to support the interpretation of experimental measurements [5–7]. A concise yet meaningful understanding of these phenomena is often obtained by means of scattering diagrams illustrating the directivity of the wavefield scattered by defects [8–10]. Such simulations are computationally intensive, not only due to the scale difference between the global and local features, but also because scattering information requires several parametric studies for defects of different size and orientation. Consequently, significant effort related to model preparation and re-meshing is often required [6].In order to alleviate the computational cost of numerical simulations, mostly based on finite element (FE) or finite difference (FD) methods, various techniques have been developed and applied to study specific aspects of wave-damage interaction [11–13]. For example, global-local methods are based on the idea of coupling analytical solutions and FE models to compute the far-wavefield scattered by a localized defect. Applications of global-local techniques to the problem of wave scattering from cracks and inclusions in plates can be found in the early works by Koshiba et al. [14], Karim et al. [15], and Al-Nassar et al. [16]. Also, Moulin et al. [17] proposed a coupled finite element-normal modes expansion method for the analysis of Lamb waves generated by integrated transducers in composite plates. The use of analytical solutions in conjunction with a discretization approach also constitutes the basis of the Strip Element Method developed by Liu and Achenbach [18] and applied by various authors to elastic waves scattering problems [19,20]. Similar developments that employ the boundary integral equation method (BIEM) and the boundary element method (BEM) have also been proposed by Galan and Abascal in [21], and Rose et al. [22–24]. These approaches allow to investigate very effectively the problem of wave scattering from arbitrary imperfections but are often limited by the scarcity of analytical expressions for complex structural/scatterer configurations.Other methods of solution to wave-damage interactions include purely numerical approaches aimed at minimizing the number of degrees of freedom (DOFs) explicitly retained in the model. For example, a Bridging Scale Method (BSM) [25] is used in [26,27] to couple a coarse mesh with an overlapping fine scale mesh defined only over a limited portion of the domain near the scatterer. The onset of spurious waves at the interface between the two non-matching grids is avoided by proper bridging conditions which, however, are difficult to implement and significantly limit the performance of the method. Another approach based on non-reflecting boundary conditions has been proposed in [8,9] to characterize the scattering matrix of general defects. This approach is highly optimized for scattering calculations but unfortunately it lacks the flexibility required for general analysis purposes.In this paper, we propose an alternative technique to model local heterogeneities based on the geometric multiscale finite element method (GMsFEM), recently developed by the authors [28]. The GMsFEM formulates multiscale elements (MSEs) which can be exploited to model heterogeneities with arbitrarily complex shapes without resorting to local mesh refinements and without inducing distortions of the FE discretization in the vicinity of irregular defects. This is achieved by providing MSEs with multiscale shape functions and elemental mass and stiffness matrices that are computed through a numerical procedure performed during the pre-processing stage of the simulation. The MSEs are then assembled along with conventional finite elements, typically quadrilaterals and hexahedral elements, as part of the global FE model. Interestingly, the GMsFEM framework can be exploited to define libraries of multiscale elements with embedded defects which can significantly reduce the effort related to model preparation and re-meshing required by parametric scattering analyses conducted with the conventional FEM.This paper is divided into five sections including the present introduction. Section 2 provides a brief overview of the major issues related to FE modeling of irregular defects, and illustrates how the GMsFEM can be exploited to facilitate wave propagation analyses. In Section 3 an illustrative example of wave-damage interactions shows the capabilities of the proposed GMsFEM approach and validated its results. Section 4 illustrates how the GMsFEM can facilitate the calculation of the scattering coefficients of Lamb waves from a three-dimensional plate featuring different damage configurations. Finally, concluding remarks and future perspectives are summarized in Section 5.When FE or FD techniques are employed for wave propagation simulations, the size of the numerical grid is generally chosen to spatially resolve the propagation of the waves with the shortest wavelengths [15,29], as well as the global geometric features of the object being modeled. When simulating the interaction of propagating waves with small defects, an additional constraint on the grid size is imposed by the necessity to accurately model the small scale features of the damaged area [6]. A model that satisfies all of these requirements can grow very rapidly in size as the characteristic length of the defect decreases. Consequently, the necessity to simultaneously resolve both the global and the damage scales poses outstanding numerical challenges to the current methods of analysis. Significant end-user intervention is also related to model preparation and re-meshing when conducting several parametric studies for defects of different size and orientations (Fig. 1).In the proposed numerical scheme, the presence of localized heterogeneous regions in an otherwise uniform domain is discretized using a limited number of multiscale finite elements (MSEs). Each MSE features an arbitrary number of nodes which are used to resolve geometrical features or material discontinuities without inducing localized mesh refinements and distortions. The nodal displacements of a MSE are interpolated within the element׳s domain by means of an auxiliary fine scale mesh [28]. This is illustrated schematically in Fig. 2which shows the detail of a GMsFEM discretization in the vicinity of two defects each discretized by means of a MSE. Fig. 2 also illustrates the auxiliary fine scale triangulation used within the MSEs to numerically compute their multiscale shape functions. The DOFs associated with such local mesh are denoted as fine scale DOFsu. A subset ofuis retained at the coarse scale level and represents the coarse scale DOFsd∈uof the multiscale element that are assembled at the structural level. Of note is that the fine scale mesh, and the associated local DOFs, is not retained as part of the macroscopic simulation, but it is only used to compute the MSE׳s multiscale shape functions as described in [28]. For completeness, the method for computing the MSE׳s shape functions is summarized below.The interpolation functions of each MSE are obtained through a numerical solution at the local level, and are subsequently used for the formulation of the MSE׳s mass and stiffness matrices [28]. The vector of fine scale DOFsuis partitioned in terms of the coarse scale DOFsdpreviously defined, and a subset of local DOFsqthat are not explicitly retained at the macroscopic level. This relation can be generally expressed as(1)u=[d,q]T∈Rnu×1whered∈Rnd×1andq∈Rnq×1, with ndand nqrespectively denoting the number of coarse scale DOFs and the number of discarded fine scale DOFs so thatnu=nd+nq. The interpolation matrix of a multiscale element (N) is defined as the operator that maps the DOFs retained at the coarse scale (d) onto the space of the fine scale DOFs (u). This relation can be generally expressed as(2)u=Nd=[IndΓ]dwhereInd∈Rnd×ndis the identity matrix, whileΓ∈Rnq×ndis a mapping operator that projects the coarse scale solution onto the DOFsq(i.e.q=Γd). As described in [28], the derivation of matrixΓrelies on the numerical solution of an equilibrium problem performed at the local level, whereby the MSE is discretized through a fine scale mesh subjected to proper compatibility conditions along the boundaries shared with conventional finite elements (i.e. quadrilaterals, hexahedral, etc.). This condition is imposed by requiring that the local DOFs undergo a linear variation along the MSE edges (Fig. 3), and can be generally described by the following multipoint constraint:(3)C=Bdd+Bqq=0whereBdandBqare matrices of known coefficients [28]. The main steps for the calculation of the multiscale shape functions and MSE matrices are summarized in Table 1.As shown in Fig. 4, each column ofN=[n1,…ni,…nnd], computed as in Table 1, can be interpreted as the fine scale displacement field obtained by imposing unit values at each of the coarse scale DOFs while all others are set to zero.The resulting multiscale elemental matricesK(e)andM(e)are assembled as part of the final sparse system of equations that is solved only in terms of the coarse-scale unknownsd. The local informationqassociated with each MSE is recovered in the post-processing stage by projecting the coarse-scale solution onto the fine-scale mesh (i.e.q=Γd). Interestingly, in time-domain simulations, the multiscale interpolation functions are computed only once before starting the time integration loop, and the resulting local matrices (K(e)andM(e)) are stored into memory. This feature is particularly appealing when performing analyses involving several types of damage, or for parametric studies of defects with different size and orientation. In these cases, the GMsFEM can be used to generate libraries of MSEs embedding standard flaw configurations which are assembled on-demand as part of the global FE model. This concept, schematically shown in Fig. 5, allows for different defect configurations to be analyzed without re-meshing the entire domain, which is often an extremely time consuming operation [6]. The effectiveness of this approach is intrinsically related to the number of elements included in the library. However, most of the damage types observed in common structural components (beams, plates, etc.) are often described in terms of a limited number of archetypes, such as circular holes, cracks, notches and slits, which can be modeled by a correspondingly modest library of multiscale elements. Furthermore, the proposed modeling approach allows for non-traditional and customized damage types to be considered in the analysis.To illustrate the method, we first study the problem of wave propagation in a square domain made of aluminum (E=71GPa, ρ=2700kg/m3, ν=0.3) featuring side length L=100mm, and a circular defect at the center. Three defect׳s diameters, d1=0.2mm, d2=1.0mm, and d3=2.0mm, are separately considered in this study. The multiscale nature of this problem is related to the difference between the characteristic length scales of the structure and the size of the hole (see Fig. 6). The computational domain is discretized with a regular grid of 40×40 linear quadrilateral elements (plane stress) which is the coarsest mesh that properly captures the global wave motion at the excitation frequency of 100kHz. The circular inclusions are modeled by means of one multiscale element as shown in Fig. 7. Each MSE is characterized by four exterior nodes that coincide with the nodes of the adjacent quadrilateral grid, and a variable number of nodes along the circular rim of the defect. Fig. 7 also shows the fine scale triangular mesh that is used inside each MSE to numerically compute the corresponding shape functions as described in the previous section.For comparison, a corresponding FE solution is computed using a mesh of linear quadrilateral elements. This grid is divided into an exterior part of regular, undistorted, elements (Fig. 8a) having the same size of the elements used in the GMsFEM model, and a central refinement region (Fig. 8b–d) where the mesh size is gradually reduced to capture the defect׳s shape. The generation of a smooth transition tailored around the hole is an extremely time consuming operation which is not required with the GMsFEM approach. Furthermore, a refined mesh clearly increases the size of the FE models, which nevertheless in this case feature only a slightly higher number of DOFs than the corresponding GMsFEM discretization.In this example, as well as in all the following simulations, the response of various systems is evaluated by integrating the dynamic equations of motion with an implicit time marching scheme of the Newmark family [30].Numerical results are obtained when the system is excited by a concentrated nodal load in the lower portion of the domain (see Fig. 6) with a time variation corresponding to a 1-cycle tone burst centered at a frequency of 100kHz. A first comparison between the FEM and GMsFEM solutions is shown in Fig. 10 which illustrates the magnitude of displacements recorded at selected angular positions (defined in Fig. 9) along the rim of the three defects shown in Fig. 7. Results indicate an excellent agreement between the two solutions for the entire simulation time, and show how the proposed GMsFEM correctly captures the wavefield near the considered scatterers. For clarity, only a limited set of results is explicitly shown in Fig. 10, but a similar agreement is observed along the entire angular range. A similar comparison is proposed in Fig. 11showing the evolution of the total mechanical energy evaluated within the refinement region of the FE model (see Fig. 8) as(4)E(t)=T+U=12ḋTMḋ+12dTKd.Results illustrated for defects withd1=0.2mmandd3=2.0mmshow the excellent agreement between the GMsFEM and FEM solutions over the entire simulation time. SinceE(t)represents an integral quantity computed over multiple elements, the agreement between the FEM and GMsFEM results also testifies the proper enforcement of displacement compatibility between the MSE and the adjacent mesh.Fig. 12shows similar results computed for the defect withd2=1.0mm. In this case the mechanical energy is computed only with the GMsFEM by changing the size of the fine scale mesh used to compute the MSE׳s shape functions. For instance, three discretizations, featuring 82, 320, and 1266 triangular elements, are considered. As shown in Fig. 12, little difference is observed between results obtained with different local meshes, indicating the modest sensitivity of the solution with respect to the number of local elements, as already noted in [28].Finally, the similarity between FEM and GMsFEM results is qualitatively shown in Fig. 13in terms of snapshots of the deformation field near the defects. For visualization purposes, the displacement field within each multiscale element is projected onto the corresponding fine scale (triangular) mesh.In this section, the GMsFEM is exploited to study the scattering patterns of three-dimensional (3D) defects in a thin plate. A three-dimensional discretization of the plate is used to represent the propagation of all the fundamental antisymmetric (A0), shear-horizontal (SH0), and symmetric (S0) Lamb waves that are not satisfactory approximated by means of two-dimensional plane-stress or plane-strain models. Furthermore a 3D model allows to represent part-depth defects and to investigate mode conversions occurring when either S0, or A0 incident waves are considered.The present study focuses on the analysis of part-depth elliptic defects in order to highlight the effects of different damage parameters on the wave scattering patterns generated by the flaw. Such information is essential for the development of reliable detection algorithms based, for example, on adaptive imaging techniques [31]. Analysis are conducted on a 3mm thick square aluminum plate hosting a defect located at its center. The defect partially extends through the plate׳s thickness, as shown in Fig. 14. The defect is surrounded by a circular array ofNt=50transducers uniformly distributed along a circumference of radiusri=24mm(i=1...Nt) (Fig. 14). Each transducer records the time history of the displacement that is then used to generate a directivity map of the scattered wavefield as a function of the angular position θi[6].In this example we generate incident S0 waves which are particularly attractive for long range propagation SHM applications due to their relatively high group velocity and low dispersion. The non-dispersive properties of S0 waves tend to be more pronounced at low frequencies. However, increasing the frequency of excitation typically increases the sensitivity to defects [32], with an upper limit given by the A1 cut-off frequency of about 1.6MHzmm. For such reasons a compromise is in general required when choosing the frequency of excitation. In this work, the plate is excited by a 5-cycle tone burst signal with center frequency of 600kHzmm. At this frequency, the fundamental Lamb modes are characterized by wavelengthsλA0=10.0mm,λSH0=15.9mm, andλS0=26.8mm, while the considered defects size ranges between 0.1mm and 1.5mm. The analysis of such small imperfections is of extreme importance to understand the structural behavior at the onset of damage but at the same time represents a critical modeling scenario since the element size is dictated by the small geometrical features of the defect rather than shortest wavelength considerations.The adopted three-dimensional finite element model is illustrated in Fig. 15. The proposed multiscale method allows using a relatively coarse numerical grid capable of capturing the global wave motion in the homogeneous portion of the domain, while the presence of defects is modeled by means of one 3D multiscale element at the center of the domain. Specifically, the computational domain is discretized by means of 130×130×5 linear hexahedral elements (HEXA) in order to largely satisfy the following condition:(5)λmin>7max{Δx}where λminrepresents the shortest wavelength within the bandwidth of the signals, andmax{Δx}is the largest element dimensions of the model. This criterion has been proposed by several authors [33,34], and also confirmed by our experience, to be effective for ensuring accurate prediction of the dispersion properties. Also, the number of elements through the thickness of the plate ensures an aspect ratio (defined as the ratio between the largest (max{Δx}) and smallest (min{Δx}) element sides)AR≡max{Δx}/,min{Δx}=1.67that allows capturing the dispersion properties of the plate as suggested by Ce [35]. Multiscale elements are used in the central portion of the domain to model the presence of the defect. As shown in Fig. 16, each multiscale element extends through the entire thickness of the plate. Also, Fig. 16 shows that within each MSE a tetrahedral fine-scale mesh is adopted to easily model the plate׳s surface while exactly satisfying displacement compatibility over the side faces adjacent to the neighboring HEXA elements (see Fig. 16b).A series of 25 absorbing layers [36] (see Fig. 15), with two elements per layer, are used along the external edges of the FE mesh to dampen the incoming and reflected waves. Within each layer a stiffness-proportional damping model is employed with damping values gradually increasing from the center to the outer regions of the model. The total number of damping layers and the maximum damping coefficient (βmax=4.0×10−7) are chosen by a trial and error approach in order to reduce the amplitude of reflected waves of at least one order of magnitude with respect to the amplitude of the incoming signal.Incident S0 waves are generated by exciting the plate using an 8-node point-like source (Fig. 14) which uniformly excites all the nodes through the thickness of the plate. The effectiveness of this approach is verified by comparing the 3D Fourier Transform (FT) of the displacements recorded over one surface of a uniform plate (without damage), with the prediction computed by the Semi Analytical Finite Element Method (SAFE) [37]. Details on the signal processing techniques adopted for the calculation of the 3D FT can be found in [38,39]. The excellent overlap between the contour lines and the semi-analytical predictions of the S0 mode is observed in Fig. 17which illustrates how the adopted excitation strategy is effectively capable of selecting the desired wave mode. Also, the directional effect shown in Fig. 17 confirms the proper tuning of the damping layers which tend to attenuate more the wavefield closer to the excitation point.An initial study compares scattering results obtained with the proposed multiscale strategy with fully meshed FE solutions. GMsFEM calculations are conducted for incident S0 waves and nine circular through-thickness defects with different radii ranging from 3.3% to 30% of the plate׳s thickness, while only three configurations are selected for the FE comparison. This choice is mostly dictated by the significant amount of modeling and simulation effort required by each FE model. A concise representation of results is presented in Fig. 18showing the maximum value of the scattering coefficients as a function of the defect radius. Due to symmetry with respect to the plate mid-surface of both excitation and damage, components of the A0 mode are not expected in the scattered filed. The same figure also shows the close agreement between GMsFEM results and the selected FEM solutions. Also, Fig. 19proposes a similar comparison over the entire angular range in order to illustrate how such agreement is not limited to the maximum value of each scattering coefficient, but is also observed for every spatial direction.After the model validation described in the previous paragraph, GMsFEM is exploited to characterize the scattering patterns generated by the interaction between an incident S0 wave at 200kHz and elliptic defects of different size, orientation and depth. Specifically elliptic holes with major radii Ra=[0.3, 0.6, 0.9, 1.2, 1.5]mm are considered while the minor radius Rb=0.1 mm is held constant in order to limit to a reasonable range the parameter space of analysis. In addition, the ellipse orientation with respect to the direction of incoming waves is varied such that θe=[0°, 30°, 60°, 90°], while the following depths (relative to the plate thickness h) are consideredδ/h=[1/5,2/5,3/5,4/5]. Details of the fine-scale mesh used to model the considered configurations are shown in Fig. 20.Results presented in Figs. 21–23show the variation of the scattering diagrams with respect to the defect orientation θe. For each diagram it is assumed that incident waves propagate from “right” to “left” along the 0–180° direction. For the sake of clarity, only a single damage configuration featuring Ra=0.9mm, andδ/h=1/5is displayed. Results shown in Figs. 21 and 23 reveal that both S0 and A0 waves tend to be scattered along directions almost perpendicular to the major axis of the defect with extreme values occurring forθe=0°andθe=90°in which waves are scattered at 90° and 0°, respectively. The incident S0 mode is in fact characterized by very little shearing components so that the scattering behavior is mostly affected by the reflection of the incident wave from the major axis of the defect. This interpretation is further corroborated by noting that the amplitude of the three scattering coefficients tend to gradually increase as the orientation angle θeapproaches 90° that is when a larger portion of the damage length is exposed to the direction of the incident signal. Polar diagrams of the scattered shear wave (SH0) are shown in Fig. 22. An interesting behavior is revealed in Fig. 22a illustrating that defects elongated along the direction of the incoming signal tend to reflect shear waves “backwards” that is along the direction of incidence. This is fundamentally different from what was observed for holes with a more circular shape, which tend to scatter shear waves in the transverse direction with maxima occurring “forward” that is opposite to the direction of the incident wave as shown, for example, in Fig. 19c and d. When the considered defect is oriented at an angle θethe classical four-lobed shape, typical of circular holes, is restored, as shown in Fig. 22b–d.The scattering diagrams for different values of Raand fixed depth (δ/h=2/5) are illustrated in Fig. 24. The defect׳s radii are expressed in terms of the incident wavelength (λS0=26.8mm) to provide insights on the effects of the excitation frequency on directivity. As expected, the magnitude of the scattering plots reduces as the wavelength increases with respect to the characteristic length of the defect. This implies that a higher excitation frequency is required to maintain the same sensitivity to smaller defects. Results also indicate that the shape of the scattering plots is slightly affected by the size to wavelength ratio. Such a change is also partially related to the different eccentricity of the ellipse since, in this study, its minor axisRb=0.1mmis held constant while Rachanges.A combined representation of the effects of the defect׳s depth (δ), and size (Ra) on the scattering coefficients is shown in Fig. 25. Since such parameters do not significantly affect directionality, only the maximum amplitude of each coefficient is shown in a surface representation as a function of δ and Ra. This analysis confirms the physical intuition such that the magnitude of the scattered wavefield increases for increasing values of the hole radius and depth that constitute a measure of the “severity” of damage. Specifically, results shown in Fig. 25a and c indicate how the magnitude of S0 and A0 waves increases more rapidly for increasing values of Rawhenδ/h>60%that is when the defect is deep relative to the plate thickness. A similar behavior is observed in Fig. 25b showing that maximum scattering of SH0 waves occurs both for high values ofRa/h>30%andδ/h>60%. The same trend is observed for other orientation angles θe(not shown for clarity) confirming that the defect orientation θeprimarily affects the directions of the scattered wavefield but has a minor influence on its magnitude.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the GMsFEM is used to investigate the interaction between elastic waves and defects of different nature. A first illustrative example shows how the proposed method allows to model small defects without requiring overly refined or ah hoc meshes by simply exploiting the modeling flexibility offered by the proposed multi-node elements. Multiscale elements׳ ability to guarantee compatible solutions with adjacent elements also allows incorporating irregular defects without compromising the quality of the numerical grid surrounding the damaged area. Comparison with analogous FE solutions of transient simulations shows excellent agreement of results for defects of different size, all modeled by means of one single MSE. Successive analyses characterize the wavefield scattered by small defects in otherwise homogeneous metallic plates. Three-dimensional simulations are exploited to investigate the behavior of plates with both in-plane and through-thickness defects. Emphasis is given on the interaction between incident S0 waves with defects much smaller than the incoming wavelength. Such cases, often characterized by defects approaching the length scale of the underlying discretization, provide a suitable scenario for the application of the proposed multiscale strategy. Multiscale elements allow in fact for the correct geometrical representation of damage without over-stiffening the model since the characteristic wavelengths of deformation are larger than the spatial scale of the discretization. One of the advantages observed in the application of GMsFEM to damage modeling is related to the reduction of the number of nodes explicitly retained in the model. The proposed method also allows for systematically modeling complex geometries without requiring a complete re-meshing of the entire computational domain. This aspect is definitely a major advantage of GMsFEM especially when several parametric analyses need to be carried out.