@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhancing classification accuracy utilizing globules and dots features in digital dermoscopy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dark dots and globules may occur in benign and malignant skin lesions and contain significant diagnostic value.A methodology for detecting/segmenting dark dots and globules from dermoscopy images is proposed, based on inverse non-linear diffusion.A set of dot/globule related features is proposed.The proposed algorithm is applied to a number of images with skin lesions with known histo-pathology.The new features can enhance the performance of classification algorithms that discriminate between malignant and benign skin lesions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dermoscopy images,Skin lesions,Dark dot segmentation,Globule segmentation,Image classification,Melanoma detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The interest in image dermoscopy has been significantly increased recently and skin lesion images are nowadays routinely acquired for a number of skin disorders. An important finding in the assessment of a skin lesion severity is the existence of dark dots and globules, which are hard to locate and count using existing image software tools. In this work we present a novel methodology for detecting/segmenting and count dark dots and globules from dermoscopy images. Segmentation is performed using a multi-resolution approach based on inverse non-linear diffusion. Subsequently, a number of features are extracted from the segmented dots/globules and their diagnostic value in automatic classification of dermoscopy images of skin lesions into melanoma and non-malignant nevus is evaluated. The proposed algorithm is applied to a number of images with skin lesions with known histo-pathology. Results show that the proposed algorithm is very effective in automatically segmenting dark dots and globules. Furthermore, it was found that the features extracted from the segmented dots/globules can enhance the performance of classification algorithms that discriminate between malignant and benign skin lesions, when they are combined with other region-based descriptors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dermoscopy or dermatoscopy is the examination of skin lesions or disorders through the use of the dermatoscope, a medical instrument capable of magnifying the examined area of the skin. This technique can reveal many coloring and structural details of the skin lesion, which would be impossible to observe with a naked eye. Advanced computer based systems can be used to capture an image, then analyze it by checking its morphological and color characteristics and extract measurable features. Such features could feed an expert system for providing an evaluation about the malignancy of the lesion [1,2,28,29]. Methodologies and rules of the classic dermoscopy, which are used for the visual evaluation of a skin lesion, can be applied in computer based dermoscopy. More specifically, in the conventional procedure, the following diagnostic methods are mainly used: (i) ABCD rule [3,27], (ii) Menzies rule [4], (iii) 7-point checklist [5,6] and (iv) Pattern and Texture Analysis [1]. For instance the ABCD rule investigates the asymmetry (A), border (B), color (C), and differential structures (D) such as Pigment Network and Streaks of the lesion and defines the basis for a diagnosis by a dermatologist. According to surveys [1,2] on computer based skin image analysis systems, it is clear that the emphasis has been on assessment of lesion size, shape, color, and texture of lesions. Differential structures, especially dots and globules seem to have been neglected by the computer vision community, although they are considered essential for manual lesion categorization.Dots and globules are sharply circumscribed, usually round or oval, variously sized black, brown or gray structures. Dots are small structures, while globules have some area. These patterns correlate to aggregations of pigmented melanocytes, within the epidermis, the dermo-epidermal junction, or the papillary dermis. The size and shape of dots/globules reflect the extent and form of the accumulation of these pigmented structures, whereas their color depends on the level of these pigmented aggregates within the epidermis and the superficial dermis. Pigmented structures are black in the cornified layer, brown at the dermo-epidermal junction and gray-blue in the papillary dermis.Dots and globules may occur in benign and malignant melanocytic proliferations. In melanocytic nevi regular dots/globules may be observed in the center but also throughout the lesion. They are regular in size and shape, and are quite evenly distributed. In melanomas, irregular dots/globules, however, occur predominantly at the periphery and vary in size and shape, and, moreover, are unevenly distributed.In this work, we concentrate in the detection/segmentation of globules and dots (dark circular structures) utilizing advanced image processing techniques. We also evaluate their potential usefulness and diagnostic value, in assisting automatic characterization of dermoscopy images into melanoma and non-malignant lesions. More specifically at a first stage we propose a novel algorithm for the segmentation of globules and dots in dermoscopy images, based on non-linear inverse diffusion, which has been efficiently applied to several image processing problems [7–9]. Diffusion-based image processing is a member of a wider class of image processing techniques based on partial differential equations (PDEs). For instance, in [10] an approach using PDEs for image impainting is described. A few reported works also describe the application of diffusion in the processing of dermoscopy images, such as lesion segmentation [11,12] and hair removal [12,13]. At a second stage we propose a number of features based on the segmented dots/globules and investigate their value in computer based dermoscopy image assessment utilizing them solely or in conjunction with the classical features described above. In the rest of the paper we will use the terms globules and dots interchangeably for both dots and globules, since the methodology for their detection is the same and the only characteristic that differentiates them is their size. The paper structure is as follows: In Section 2 we describe the technical details of proposed methodology for dots segmentation and features extraction. Section 3 presents the experimental results and Section 4 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
