@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ERP in agriculture: Lessons learned from the Dutch horticulture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Assesses the applicability of ERP systems in the agri-food domain.Analyses drivers and barriers for ERP adoption in the Dutch horticultural sector.Organizational fit is a crucial challenge for successful ERP adoption in agri-food.62% of the respondents positive about match business processes and implemented ERP.Proper management of the orientation, selection and implementation is essential.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Enterprise resource planning,Enterprise integration,Adoption,ICT,Farm management information systems,Food and agribusiness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Farming nowadays is a complex managerial task that imposes stringent requirements on farm management information systems. In other sectors, Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are widely implemented to meet such requirements. This paper assesses the applicability of ERP systems in the agri-food domain by investigating the experiences of agri-food companies that already have implemented an ERP system. More specifically, the research has analyzed the drivers and barriers for adoption of ERP in the Dutch horticultural sector. The results show that the alignment of ERP with the specific characteristics and requirements of a company is a crucial challenge in order to capitalize the benefits of ERP. The study also shows that it is possible to deal with this challenge. The majority of the respondents (62%) is positive about of the match of the specific ERP solution with the company’s business processes during implementation. Most of these respondents have implemented a system that includes a sector-specific layer around a standard ERP solution. Moreover, it is concluded that a proper management of the orientation, selection and implementation processes is of crucial importance for a successful adoption.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The industrialization of agriculture has expanded a lot in the previous decades. Farms are developing towards high-tech factories that are characterized by large scale production and intensive use of technology. Farms should not only be very efficient, but also have to meet high quality and environmental standards and should adapt flexibly to changing market conditions. In this complex and turbulent business environment, it is of great importance to keep business processes in control. This imposes high requirements on the managerial tasks in agri-food business and consequently on the supporting information systems, particularly regarding flexibility, integration and incorporation of intelligence for advanced decision making (Sørensen et al., 2010; Wolfert et al., 2010). It is widely argued that the current information systems in the agri-food sector do not sufficiently meet these requirements (Sørensen et al., 2010; Teye et al., 2012; Lehmann et al., 2012; Kruize et al., 2013; Verdouw et al., 2013). In other sectors, Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are widely implemented to mitigate for this. An ERP system is a standardized software package that combines functionality of multiple business functions into one integrated system (Davenport, 2000; Kumar and Hillegersberg, 2000). ERP helps to overcome fragmentation between organizational units (functional silos) and systems (island automation). As a result, ERP could potentially be an effective solution approach also for the agri-food sector.Hence, this paper assesses the applicability of ERP systems in the agri-food sector by investigating the experiences of companies that already have implemented an ERP system in this sector. More specifically, the research aims to identify drivers and barriers for the adoption of ERP systems in the Dutch horticultural sector. This sector is chosen because of its expected front-running position concerning ERP adoption within the Dutch agri-food cluster. The trend towards complex managerial tasks and scale-enlargement is already in an advanced phase in Dutch horticulture (Berkhout et al., 2014). Production processes are highly industrialized and companies have developed into big international organizations. As a result, ERP systems are increasingly used in Dutch horticulture.The paper is structured as follows. It first describes the research methodology and it provides some background of ERP and its application in agriculture. Next, it introduces the framework for analysis that is used to identify barriers and drivers in the adoption of ERP. The paper subsequently presents the results of the investigation of existing ERP implementations in the Dutch horticulture. Finally, it concludes with summarizing the main findings and discussing the main contributions to literature and practical implications.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The main contribution of this paper is that it has introduced the perspective of ERP to farm management literature. To the best of our knowledge, it is a first attempt to combine ERP and farm management information systems (FMIS) research, which currently are two different worlds that hardly cooperate. Furthermore, a specific contribution to the ERP literature is that the paper provides an integrated analysis of the success and failure factors from an innovation perspective, including also orientation and selection. A majority of existing ERP literature focusses on the implementation phase.The integration of ERP and FMIS research can result in many promising research opportunities. On the one hand, FMIS research can gain a lot from the impressive amount of available ERP research. For example: there is much literature available about the success and failure factors of ERP implementations that could be applied to FMISs. On the other hand, ERP research can also gain from the agri-food domain since this sector imposes challenging requirements on ERP systems. An example of agri-food research, which might be inspiring for ERP research in general, is the study of Kaloxylos et al. (2012) on future internet based FMISs. It addresses the development of web-based, open and componentized farm management systems, based on major trends such as the Internet of Services and the Internet of Things. These ‘farm ERP systems’ represent sector-specific functionalities by loosely coupled services and applications (‘Apps’) that collaborate through an Internet platform with basic functionalities such as authorization and middleware. Users do not need to buy and install a massive ERP system, but the required functionality is delivered as a set of distributed web services and that can be configured and executed when needed (Verdouw et al., 2014b). These developments are expected to result in sector-specific and flexible ERP solutions that are affordable also for small farmers and that overcome several barriers that were identified in this paper. This should be further investigated however.This paper studied cases in the Dutch horticulture. We expect that the results are applicable to other agricultural sectors, including arable- and livestock farming. Also these sectors are already highly industrialized and the company size is growing fast. However, further research is needed to provide evidence for this assumption.Finally, the present research has focused on the perceived characteristics of ERP. A study of the match between the (i) real characteristics of the ERP solution and (ii) organizational characteristics and business processes, including the type of production, was beyond the scope of this research. It is expected that it is crucial to get insight into the actual compatibility as soon as possible in the adoption process. A promising approach to achieve this, is to compare ERP functionalities into detail with the needs and characteristics of the adopting company with the help of reference information models (Rosemann, 2000; Verdouw et al., 2010b). Such an approach would help farmers to select ERP systems with the best organizational fit. It would also encourage ERP vendors to develop sector-specific solutions with a high compatibility.