@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Surface inpainting with sparsity constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A surface inpainting framework based on representations in the transformed domain.Sparsity as a prior to estimate reconstruction coefficients.Laplacian eigenvectors are utilized for constructing reconstruction dictionary.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surface inpainting,Sparse representation,Hole filling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we devise a new algorithm for completing surface with missing geometry and topology founded upon the theory and techniques of sparse signal recovery. The key intuition is that any meaningful 3D shape, represented as a discrete mesh, almost certainly possesses a low-dimensional intrinsic structure, which can be expressed as a sparse representation in some transformed domains. Instead of estimating the missing geometry directly, our novel method is to find this low-dimensional representation which describes the entire original shape. More specifically, we find that, for many shapes, the vertex coordinate function can be well approximated by a very sparse coefficient representation with respect to the dictionary comprising its Laplacian eigenfunctions, and it is then possible to recover this sparse representation from partial measurements of the original shape. Taking advantage of the sparsity cue, we advocate a novel variational approach for surface inpainting, integrating data fidelity constraints on the shape domain with coefficient sparsity constraints on the transformed domain. Because of the powerful properties of Laplacian eigenbasis, the inpainting results of our method tend to be smooth and globally coherent with the remaining shape. We demonstrate the performance of our new method via various examples in geometry restoration, shape repair, and hole filling.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In principle, surface inpainting refers to the completion or recovery of missing shape geometry based on the shape information that is currently available. The most prominent application of surface inpainting is mesh repair. Due to factors such as occlusions, low reflectance, and quality limitations of scanning equipments, 3D models generated from range scanners often contain holes that need to be filled; sometimes the source model itself has missing pieces and requires digital repair to attain a complete model. Another common application of surface inpainting is to remove geometric features because of shape editing needs. This is achieved by replacing the unwanted shape regions with inpainting patches.From the statistical point of view, surface inpainting can be viewed as an estimation problem which infers the missing geometry from the observable shape, and the inpainting result is determined by the statistical model we have adopted. Generally speaking, there is no universally acceptable “correct” estimation; selecting the best inpainting is usually subjective or dependent on the requirement of downstream applications.Most existing surface inpainting methods tackle the problem only in the mesh domain. These methods typically employ some geometric constraints as heuristics to ensure that the obtained inpainting patch is visually pleasing and blends naturally with its neighboring geometry. The primary issue of geometry-constrained inpainting is that these methods only utilize the shape information in the vicinity of missing regions rather than consider the model in question in its entirety.Our new surface inpainting method documented in this paper is inspired by the theory of sparse signal recovery and compressed sensing. The intuition is that for a meaningful 3D model, even though its global geometry is a high-dimensional signal, it most likely has a low-dimensional intrinsic structure. That is to say, the high-dimensional shape signal actually lives in a low-dimensional subspace, which can be captured by a sparse coefficient representation in some transformed (e.g., Fourier) domains. In another word, the coordinate function of a shape with N vertices can be decomposed as or well approximated by the linear combination ofk≪Nbasis signals. According to the compressed sensing theory, the sparse coefficient representation can be recovered from partial measurements as long as the signal is sufficiently sparse and the sensing matrix satisfies certain properties (Candes et al., 2006).The critical idea of our new inpainting algorithm is to estimate the spectral coefficient representation of the shape geometry from partial observations by imposing sparsity constraints on the reconstructed coefficients, exploiting the fact that most 3D models are highly compressible with respect to their Laplacian eigenfunctions (Karni and Gotsman, 2000). To the best of our knowledge, the utility of Laplacian eigenbasis towards the shape inpainting application has not yet been explored in the past. The estimation problem can be formulated with a data term strongly emphasizing fidelity to the observations and a penalty term constraining sparsity of the representation. Thus, the surface inpainting could be transformed to a sparse signal recovery problem and can be solved by eitherl0orl1optimization techniques. Such effort represents our first attempt towards technical innovation.The primary advantage of our method is that the inpainting takes into account the information of all the remaining shape instead of only the vicinity of missing regions. Rather than directly estimating the missing geometry, we actually estimate the reconstruction coefficients of the whole original shape. Since the mesh Laplacian basis functions are smooth and have global support, the reconstructed inpainting shape is naturally smooth and globally coherent with a simple intrinsic structure.The main contributions of this work are:•We introduce a new surface inpainting framework based on representations in the transformed domain and sparsity constraints on reconstruction coefficients. This framework can make use of the information of the whole remaining shape and inpainting results tend to be simple and globally coherent.We study the sparsity of 3D shapes with respect to their Laplacian eigenbases and show their effectiveness in surface inpainting.We demonstrate the high performance of our inpainting method with several examples in hole filling and mesh editing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
