@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A composite mixed finite element model for plane structural problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The model is particularly simple and easy to implement. Nevertheless the element proves to be accurate and robust in the analysis of both elastic and plastic problems.The choice of the displacement and stress interpolations produces an isostatic element which keeps out zero-energy modes.The element is locking free.The assumed piece-wise constant description of the stress field allows the discontinuities inherent in the plastic solution.The numerical experiments, which refer to the analysis of elastic problems and plastic collapse states, show that the element furnishes stable results for both regular and irregular meshes, also with marked distortions.The element can be extended, saving the relevant features, to the context of three dimensional analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mixed finite element,Plane structural problems,Elastic and plastic collapse analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper proposes a mixed finite element model and experiments its capability in the analysis of elastic and plastic collapse plane problems. The model is easy to formulate and implement because it is based on simple assumptions for the unknown fields. A composite triangular mesh is assumed over the domain. Within each triangular element the displacement field is described by a quadratic interpolation, while the stress field is represented by a piece-wise constant description by introducing a subdivision of the element into three triangular regions. The elastic solution is constructed through the stationarity condition of the mixed Hellinger–Reissner functional. The plastic collapse analysis is formulated as a mathematical programming problem and is accomplished by an Interior Point algorithm which furnishes both the collapse multiplier and the collapse mechanism. A series of numerical experiments shows that the proposed model performs well in elastic problems and achieves the favorite context in plastic analysis, where it takes advantage of the absence of volumetric locking and the piecewise constant interpolation of the stress field within the element.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The improvement in the accuracy and reliability of finite element models for structural analysis has been often pursued by using strategies based on complicated interpolations for the unknown fields or special procedures to filter undesired effects. These approaches usually lead to complex formulations which limit the efficiency of the proposed models. Therefore it is interesting to develop an essential model which is able to work well in a wide context of structural problems.Some features appear particularly desirable for a finite element procedure. The algorithm should be efficient, that is it should give accurate solutions, in both displacement and stress components, with a moderate computational cost. The numerical process should be robust, that is it should be applicable to a large spectrum of data, without any significant deterioration in the numerical solution. Robustness is required, particularly in analyzing structural problems with constraints on the possible strains, such as plane strain problems and in the case of incompressibility which concerns the elastic behavior of rubber-like materials and the broad field of elastic–plastic analysis of structures when the plastic behavior is controlled by the deviatory part of the stress tensor.Standard compatible finite elements are usually unable to ensure the features described above. The accuracy between the displacements and stresses is unbalanced and often they suffer from locking phenomena related to the choice of interpolations which are inadequate to describe internally constrained strains [1,2].Several models have been proposed as alternatives to displacement based elements in the context of linear elasticity. Assumed stress formulations, starting from the pioneering work by Pian [3], have been developed by several authors [4,6]. A strain-based approach has been used in the three-field mixed formulation in terms of displacements [7] and in the derivation of the ANDES elements by Felippa [8] where the deviatoric part of the strain is interpolated over the element and the mean strain is linked to a constant stress assumption.In the analysis of elastic–plastic problems the finite element model should ensure even greater accuracy in determining the stress field and should be able to give efficient descriptions of discontinuous fields. The presence of discontinuities make many standard models, which furnish results which are poor in localizing the plastic regions and sensitive to the mesh pattern, of little use. The use of compatible elements with a point-wise enforcement of the plastic admissibility conditions in a series of Gauss points is still a popular approach nowadays [9]. More recently, several mixed or generalized mixed formulations have been developed. A mixed approach, including internal variables for defining the constitutive laws, has been proposed as a remedy against locking [10]. The global formulation of the principle of maximum plastic dissipation has been exploited to construct complementary mixed finite element formulations for elastoplasticity [11]. By formulating the optimality conditions of the elastoplastic problem in a weak form, a class of three field elements has been proposed in [12,13]. A family of mixed elements have been proposed in [14] where linear stress/quadratic displacement interpolations have been used in conjunction with different choices in collocating stress parameters and integration points.Smoothing techniques have been developed to improve the performances of finite element approximations. In this category we find the Edge-Smoothed and Node-Smoothed finite element model which assume an average strain in a conflicting region associated to each edge, or a node, of a background mesh [15,16]. The Edge-Smoothed model, which is not explicitly presented as a mixed model, is similar to the imbricate finite element proposed in [17]. Smoothed elements have also been used in plasticity problems [18,19].This paper proposes a mixed finite element model which uses the assumption of an average stress field in the fashion of smoothed elements, while also following the idea underlying the construction of composite elements [20]. The model is very easy to formulate and implement because it is based on simple assumptions for the displacement and stress fields, without any burden deriving from the management of a background mesh. The proposed mixed element has been designed with the aim of describing solutions which can include the effects of discontinuous plastic strains. As the numerical results show, the model performs well in elasticity problems and achieves the favorite framework in plastic analysis where it takes advantage of the absence of volumetric locking and a finer grid for describing the plastic solution within the element. Then the proposed element is suitable for engineering applications in plastic range where rather fine meshes are required to describe complex data and constitutive discontinuities.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the assumed interpolations for the displacement and stress fields, reporting the closed form expression of the discrete compatibility/equilibrium operator which can be employed in elastic and plastic collapse analysis. In Section 3 the model is framed within the linear elastic analysis through the Hellinger Reissner mixed principle. Section 4 describes the use of the proposed finite element in plastic collapse analysis. Numerical results, relative to a series of benchmarks in elasticity and in limit analysis, are presented in Section 5.With reference to two-dimensional problems, a composite triangular mesh is assumed over the domain lying in the(x,y)plane. Within each triangular element the displacement field is described by a continuous interpolation expressed in terms of parameters located on its boundary, while the stress field is represented by a discontinuous description obtained by introducing a subdivision of the element into three triangular regions (see Fig. 1).A suitable description of the relevant quantities of the discrete model can be obtained by using a triangular area co-ordinate system. The triangular co-ordinates(r,s,t)are related to the Cartesian ones(x,y)by the co-ordinate transformation [22](1)[rst]=12A[a1b1c1a2b2c2a3b3c3][1xy]where A is the element area and the coefficients of the transformation matrix are defined as(2)ai=xjyk−xkyj,bi=yj−yk,ci=yk−xjfollowing the permutation rule:(3)i=123→,j=231→,k=312→.The integrals of the products between polynomial terms can be evaluated in closed form through the analytical result(4)∫ArαsβtγdA=α!β!γ!(α+β+γ+2)!2A.The finite element model is constructed by assuming independent interpolations to approximate the displacement and the stress fields. It will be denoted with the acronymMT6/3, which means Mixed Triangle with 6 displacement nodes and 3 stress regions.The displacement is interpolated using the element displacement vector(5)ueT=[u1,…,u6,v1,…,v6]which collects the twelve displacement components of the six nodes which are located, as shown in Fig. 2, at the vertices of the triangular element and at the mid points of its edges.The displacement vector functionu[r,s,t]={u,v}Tis related toueby the interpolation(6)u=Φue,Φ=[ϕ00ϕ]where the matrixϕcollects the quadratic shape functionsϕ=[2(2r−1)r,2(2s−1)s,2(2t−1)t,4rs,4st,4tr]The stress interpolation is assumed to be piece-wise constant over the element, allowing discontinuities within it. In particular, the stress components are taken as constant over each triangular region individuated by the element edges and the centroid (see Fig. 2).For the plane stress case, the element vector of the stress parameters(7)βe=[σxx1,σxx2,σxx3,σyy1,σyy2,σyy3,σxy1,σxy2,σxy3]Tis introduced to ordinate the stress components of the vectorσi=[σxxi,σyyi,σxyi]Tassociated to each region Aiof the element.The element equilibrium operator is obtained by the exact integration of the element contribution to the internal work(8)∫AσTεdA=∑i=13∫Ai(σi)TεdA=βeTDeueassuming over each region the linear deformation fieldεderived through the compatibility equations from the assumed displacements(9)ε=Du,DT=[∂∂x0∂∂y0∂∂y∂∂x]The evaluation of the integral contribution is carried out analytically by using the exact formula (4) over each region and using the cyclic rule (3) to consider the vertices of the triangular regions. The equilibrium operator can be expressed in the form(10)DeT=154[B0C0CB]where the matrixBis defined as(11)B=[7b1−5b17b17b27b2−5b25b1+5b2−7b1−7b2−7b1−7b216b1+16b216b1+4b216b2+4b1−16b1−12b2−16b1−4b1+12b2−12b1−16b2−4b2+12b1−16b2]and the matrixChas the same structure asB, but contains the coefficients ciinstead of bi(see Eq. (2)).For the plane strain case, the σzzcomponents are added to the stress vector and the element compatibility operator is modified by adding null rows in order to ensure that the components εzzare zero.The proposed finite element model is based on simple descriptions of the displacement and stress fields. As the expression (11) shows, the resulting discrete operator has a compact form and the computer implementation of the model is very light.Some remarks on the assumed stress interpolation can be made. The piecewise constant approximation of the stress components gives some appreciable advantages. A solution equilibrated for zero volume loads is simply described, whereas higher order interpolations are typically used in conjunction with equilibrium conditions which reduce the number of independent parameters. In addition, this choice avoids any co-ordinate transformation which could introduce noise related to the mesh distortion. The discontinuous interpolation for the stress field is particularly appreciable in the plastic analysis where a finer grid, able to localize discontinuities in the plastic strains, is desirable. Regarding the mixed nature of the assumed interpolations, we note that the piecewise constant interpolation corresponds to an average linear form which is one-order lower than the displacement interpolation. TheMT6/3element presents a balanced number of displacement and stress parameters. Indeed the number of the stress parameters equals the number of the displacement parameters minus the number of the components of the rigid body motion. This desired feature prevents a redundant description of the stress field which could introduce zero-energy modes with spurious oscillations in the numerical solution. This feature is usually achieved by following particular strategies. A wide class of isostatic mixed formulations can be obtained by adding some incompatible modesuλwhich give rise to auxiliary weighted equilibrium equations [5]. This filtering operation furnishes coefficients of the stress description which may depend on the geometry of the element and are usually expressed by very complicated formulas. In these cases often an approximate integration is carried out by using only the constant part of the Jacobian of the isoparametric map [6]. It is worth noting that this filtering effect, enforced through the orthogonality condition(12)∫AσTDuλdA=0,which tends to exclude the energy contributions associated with the redundant variables from the analysis, can fail for generic geometries.The proposed mixed finite element has some affinities with models which are known as smoothed finite elements. Edge-based Smoothed (ES-FEM) [16], Node-based Smoothed (NS-FEM) [15] and Edge-based Imbricate (EI-FEM) [17] finite elements belong to this category. As described in [21], Smoothed FEM models can be placed in the context of mixed models derived by the Hellinger–Reissner principle. These models work with background meshes and smoothing overlapping domains on which strains defined by average compatibility operators are assumed. The piece-wise assumption for the strains is near to the assumed stress interpolation of the present element. In addition, the mid side node of the quadratic displacement interpolation used in the present element plays an inter-element connection role similar to the overlapping domain of the ES-FEM and EI-FEM elements. The ES-FEM and the under-integrated EI-FEM are substantially equivalent and produce numerical results exhibiting locking pathologies [16,17] like the displacement based formulations. As numerical results show, the proposedMT6/3element is locking free.We refer to a plane body occupying the domainΩ, with boundaryΓ, and subjected to the body forcesband the tractions t.The linear elastic solution can be found through the stationarity condition of the mixed Hellinger–Reissner functional(13)ΠHR[σ,u]=−12∫ΩσTE−1σdΩ+∫ΩσTDudΩ−∫ΩbTudΩ−∫ΓtTudΓwhereEis the elastic matrix, expressed in terms of the Young modulus E and the Poisson ratio ν.The discrete element contribution to the HR functional can be written in the form(14)Πe[βe,ue]=−12βeTFeβe+βeTDeue−ueTpewhereDeis the element compatibility operator which is defined in Section 2 by Eqs. (10) and (11),peis the element load vector, furnished by the integration of the external load components weighted with the shape functions of the displacement interpolations, andFeis the element compliance operator which is obtained by introducing the assumed stress interpolation into the following energy equivalence:(15)βeTFeβe=∫AσTE−1σdA=∑i=13∫Ai(σi)TE−1σidABy assembling the element contributions in the global matrices, through the element incidence operators for displacementsue=Tuqand stressesβe=Tββ, the sum of the element contributions (14) furnishes the global matrices(16)Q=∑eTβDeTu,F=∑eTβTE−1Tβand the discrete form of the HR stationarity condition can be written as(17)ΠHR[β,q]=−12βTFβ+βTQq−qTp=stationarywhereβis the global stress parameter vector andqis the global displacement vector. The stationarity condition furnishes the mixed system of equations(18)[−FQQT0][βq]=[0p]By condensing the vectorβin terms of the vectorq, a displacement formulation of the above system can be expressed in the form(19)Kq=pwhere the like-stiffness matrixKis defined as(20)K=QTF−1QIt is worth noting that the constant interpolation of the stress components allows a direct evaluation of the matrixF−1, hence a quick construction of the stiffness matrix can be made.We refer to the analysis of a body subjected to volume forcesband tractions t, both increasing with the same load multiplier λ. The material is assumed to be elastic–perfectly plastic, therefore the stress field is constrained to satisfy plastic admissibility inequalities which are independent of the plastic strain. The limit analysis aims to identify the plastic collapse state, characterized by the collapse multiplier λcand the associated plastic mechanism. A way to solve this problem is represented by the step-by-step analysis which furnishes the entire structural response through the solution of a sequence of incremental elasto-plastic problems [23]. The collapse multiplier λcis evaluated as the limit value for the equilibrium path.The limit analysis theorems offer an alternative way which is directly addressed to compute the lower and upper approximations of the collapse limit multiplier. The approximation furnished by the statical characterization of the collapse load, giving a safe estimate, is more attractive from an engineering point of view. In this case the collapse multiplier is individuated as a solution of the nonlinear mathematical programming problem(21)maximizeλsubjecttoQTβ−λp=0f[β]≤0where the equality constraints are represented by the equilibrium equations, described through the global equilibrium operatorQTand the load vectorpcollecting the body forces and tractions (see Eqs. (13) and (14)). The plastic admissibility inequalities are expressed through the vectorf, which collects the local restrictions imposed by the assumed yield condition over the stress stateσiof the Nrregions of the domain(22)fi[σi]≤0,i=1…NrWithin the numerical methods for the analysis of nonlinear mathematical programming problems, the Interior Point strategy represents an established approach [24,25]. Specialized implementations of these algorithms in plastic problems can be found in [26,27]. This method also furnishes the solution of the dual problem, namely the Lagrange multipliers of the functional(23)L=λ+q̇T(QTβ−λp)−μ̇Tfwhich are represented by the mechanism vectorq̇and the vector of the plastic multipliersμ̇.The dual problem can be written in the form(24)maximizeμ̇Tσy≡∫Ωγ̇σydΩsubjecttoQq̇−μ̇T∂f∂β=01−q̇Tp=0μ̇≥0which is derived by imposing the stationarity conditions of the Lagrange functional (23) with respect toβand λ, variables of the primal problem (21), and by using the Euler theorem(25)fi[σi]=(σi)T∂fi∂σi−σyi,i=1…Nrto express the yield conditions on each of the stress regions where the yield stressσyiis assigned.Since our objective is to test the performances of the proposed element, a standard numerical tool has been chosen to solve the programming problem. In this way the comparison results are unaffected by our implementation details and tolerances, so the proposed element is tested in a standard and well consolidated environment without special modifications. In order to obtain a high level of accuracy, the MOSEK [28] toolbox for MATLAB [29] has been selected. This algorithm has proved to be highly robust and efficient in independent benchmark tests and, without any tuning of its default settings, to be able to solve very large problems with remarkable speed [30].The performance of the proposed mixed finite element model in evaluating elastic solutions and plastic collapse states has been tested by the numerical experiments reported in the following subsections. After a patch test and a check on the sensitivity to the mesh distortion, some results obtained from eigenvalue analysis are presented. A series of test problems showing the performances of theMT6/3element follows.The results from the elastic analysis have been obtained taking E=1.0 and ν=0.3, unless noted otherwise. The plastic collapse states have been analyzed by using Mises yielding criterion and taking a unitary yield stress.In order to check the ability of the element to reproduce constant stress fields exactly the patch test depicted in Fig. 3has been used. The numerical results have been computed for equilibrated constant boundary tractions, shown in Fig. 3, and for linear boundary displacement distributions, using both plane stress and plane strain assumptions. It has been observed that the numerical solution at all the internal points fits exactly, to machine precision, the closed form elastic solution.The sensitivity of the proposed element to mesh distortion has been tested by the elastic plane stress analysis of a square plate subjected to a parabolic traction and to a linear flexural loading (see Fig. 4). The mesh distortion parameters, which are the same proposed in [31], are reported in Table 1and Fig. 5shows the resulting meshes. Fig. 6contains the numerical results obtained in the elastic analysis of the traction and flexure problems. For the considered sets of parameters, the percent errors relative to the exact value [32] of some displacement components show a very small sensitivity to the mesh pattern, also for marked distortions.The results from an analysis of the eigenvalues of the stiffness matrix (20) for a single finite element in plane strain condition are reported in Table 2, where the cases of an isosceles right triangle (1×1) and a stretched right triangle (10×1) are considered. We note the absence of zero-energy modes besides the rigid body motion and no anomaly induced by the marked distortion.A square made up of a patch of four elements has been analyzed in plane strain condition to check the robustness against volumetric locking [33]. In particular the behavior of the eigenvalue corresponding to the volumetric change free mode depicted in Fig. 7has been investigated when the Poisson ratio approaches the incompressibility limit. Table 3shows the stability of the computed value of this eigenvalue up to a value of ν which differs from 0.5 of 10−10.The behavior of the proposed element in almost incompressible situations has been tested by considering a Stokes flow problem which is analogous to isotropic incompressible elasticity. The driven cavity flow has been chosen as benchmark [40] and a plane strain analysis has been performed using a regular mesh with ten elements per edge of the square cavity. The boundary conditions are zero velocities prescribed at all the edges except at the top edge where the tangential velocity is equal to one. The boundary conditions and the deformed mesh are shown in Fig. 8. The pressure along the horizontal median is shown in Fig. 9for the mesh (10×10) and a mesh having 20 elements per edge (20×20). The results of theMT6/3element are compared with the solutions furnished by the Edge Smoothed FEM softened with bubble functions denotedbES−T3[33], and that obtained by using the 8-node biquadratic, hybrid with linear pressure finite elementCPE8Hof Abaqus.The following results refer to the elastic analysis of the well investigated Cook׳s membrane, reported in Fig. 10. The convergence of the numerical solution has been tested by using three meshes obtained by successive refinements of the coarse mesh (mesh 1), having four elements for each side. The analysis was carried out using both regular meshes (r.m.) and same-size irregular meshes (i.m.) constructed without the transfinite setting of the mesh generator GMSH [35].In Table 4the tip vertical displacement vAcomputed with the proposedMT6/3model for plane stress condition is shown together with the results furnished by the triangular six-node displacement model (T6) and the Edge-Smoothed element (E−S). Fig. 11reports, in the case of plane strain andν=0.4999999, the comparison of the tip displacement furnished by theMT6/3model with the results reported in [33]. The element exhibits a very good agreement with the reference solution obtained by [34] with a highly refined mesh. Plots of Figs. 12 and 13report the elastic distribution of some stress components for the regular meshes mesh 1 and mesh 3. These plots show how the assumed piecewise constant interpolation of the stress field approaches continuous distributions with the mesh refinement.Table 5reports a comparison of the computed values of the plastic collapse multiplier and the number of iterations spent on each analysis. The reference result [12] was obtained using a mesh having 1024 elements and 2178 dofs while the finest mesh used in the present analysis has 512 triangular elements and 2112 dofs. The numerical values are also compared with the value furnished in [37] where a very refined mesh was used. In particular these reference results have been obtained by using 8704 three-node triangular elements and 122,176 dofs when a uniform meshing is used and 5506 three-node triangular elements and 77,252 dofs for the adaptive meshing.The plots in Fig. 14show the distribution of the plastic multiplierμ̇obtained by using the Mises criterion, for the coarse and the finest regular mesh. The plastic mechanism furnished by the mesh 3 is close to the result obtained with a much more refined mesh by [38].The square plate with a central circular hole, subjected to a constant traction, is often used as stress concentration test. The meshes are generated by splitting the right side and the top side into n parts and the remaining sides into 2n parts. The grids mesh1, mesh2 and mesh3 refer to n=3, 6, 12, respectively. Fig. 15shows the coarse mesh, in the regular and irregular versions. The elastic problems have been analyzed in plane strain conditions, considering the cases of compressible and nearly incompressible (ν=0.4999999) materials.Table 6reports the elastic displacement components at the ends of the hole compared with the results furnished by the T6 andE−Selements. Table 7refers to the case of nearly incompressible material and contains both the results obtained with regular and irregular meshes. The reference result is the highly refined and locking free numerical solution obtained by using 10,201 Node Smoothed elements and a 20,000 triangle background mesh [16]. Fig. 16shows the color map of the pressure distribution furnished by the finest mesh in plane strain condition, comparing the cases of compressible and incompressible materials (Table 8).The numerical values of the collapse multipliers, computed in plane stress condition and by using the Mises criterion, are compared in Table 9for the three meshes. It is worth noting that the accurate reference results [12,39] were computed with 4802 dofs, 2304 elements and 9216 admissibility constraints while the finest mesh of the present analysis has 4704 dofs, 1152 elements and uses 3456 constraints. The exact collapse value has been computed with the analytical formula [19](26)λct=(1−RL)σyFig. 17shows the distributions of the plastic multiplier computed by using the coarse and the finest mesh.The proposed finite element model has been used to simulate the Mises plastic collapse behavior of a double-notched tensile specimen subjected to uniform traction. In order to test the influence of the mesh around the slit tip on the numerical results, two series of meshes have been used: a uniformly spaced mesh and a mesh which is progressively refined around the slit tip. Fig. 18shows the analyzed quarter of the symmetrical structure and the coarse versions of the uniform and the progressively spaced mesh.The results of the plastic collapse analysis are reported, for both regular and progressively spaced meshes, in Tables 10 and 11and compared with the reference result [41] which was computed with a very fine mesh, using approximately 170,000 stress parameters and almost the same number of displacement variables, and is also in accordance with the result by [26]. Fig. 19reports the convergence behavior of the collapse load expressed as a function of the number of admissibility conditions, compared with the results furnished by [38], denotedCS−FEM1.The distributions of the plastic multiplier in Fig. 20show the convergence to the collapse mechanism and the capability of the proposed finite element of localizing the plastic strain with a resolution finer than the element size.The paper proposes a triangular mixed finite element model for the analysis of structural plane problems. The main features of the model are its simplicity and easy implementation within existing computational tools. Nevertheless the element proves to be accurate and robust in elastic analysis and fully capitalizes its features in the analysis of plastic problems. The efficiency of the model derives from the balanced choice of the interpolations used to describe the displacements and stress fields which keeps out spurious energy modes. In particular, the piece-wise constant description of the stress field allows the discontinuities inherent in the plastic solution.The numerical experimentation of the model, which was carried out on a wide set of problems and data, shows the performance of the model. It is worth noting that the model proves able to furnish very accurate results by employing moderately fine meshes and this is of great interest in technical applications.The experiments also demonstrate the robustness of the proposed finite element. The element is looking-free. The numerical results are stable for both regular and irregular meshes and do not degenerate when marked distortions are present.In the analysis of plastic collapse states the accurate results achieved in the evaluation of the collapse multiplier and in the description of the collapse mechanism demonstrate that the element is able to approximate well the discontinuous fields generated by the plastic behavior. The good performances in both elastic and plastic analysis encourage the employment of the model in shakedown analysis.Some potential developments could be based on the experience of the proposed mixed finite element model. The same balanced choice of displacement and stress parameters could be ensured by extending the idea of the present model to the context of three dimensional finite elements, where triangular elements and stress regions become tetrahedra and same order interpolations can preserve the isostatic character of the element. Indeed the difference between the 30 displacement parameters, located at the vertices of the tetrahedron and at the center of each edge, and the 24 stress parameters, associated to the 4 solid stress regions, matches the 6 rigid motion degrees of freedom of the 3D finite element.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
