@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A unit cell based three-phase approach for the mechanical characterization of quasi-brittle cementitious composites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Successfully developed and implemented the three-phase unit cell approach for the mechanical characterization of cementitious composites.Captured the non-linear deformation behavior in good correlation with experiments.Established the effectiveness of the three-phase unit cell approach in capturing the non-linearity of the materials considered without sacrificing the simplicity of the unit cell model.Different parametric studies were also conducted to identify the influence of certain phase characteristics of the unit cell for the materials considered.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mesoscale modeling,Unit cell approach,Numerical investigation,Interfacial transition zone,Compressive mechanical response,Material non-linearity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A simple two-dimensional Unit cell (UC) with three different mesoscopic phases may be geometrically modeled as a combination of two concentric circles or squares embedded in a square. In this paper, a two-dimensional three-phase UC with a similar design is developed and utilized for modeling the full deformation and failure response of cement based quasi-brittle cementitious composites under compression. It was identified from the numerical investigation that the three-phase design greatly improved the prediction capability of the UC in suitably capturing the material nonlinearity observed experimentally.There are mainly three types of material models seen in the literature, namely macro, meso and micro models as defined by Wittmann [1]. Macroscopic models are used to model the mechanical response of the material, where it is sufficient to assume that the structure of the material is homogeneous. In mesoscopic models, the focus is on the different phases of the material constituting its mesostructure. Modeling of different phases helps us to identify the details of failure in the material and to relate the failure mechanisms to the macroscopic mechanical response. Whereas in microscopic approach, the microstructure of the material is analyzed at the level of molecular interactions of the constituent elements and these interaction details are used to predict the mechanical properties of the material.For the purpose of characterizing the mechanical response of cementitious composites with several mesoscopic phases as in the case of Plain Concrete (PC), the macroscopic response may be predicted from the independent deformation and fracture properties of its mesoscopic phases. This will help in identifying the influence of the properties of the independent phases in the overall constitutive behavior of the material. In the specific case of cement based materials that are considered in the present paper, such as PC, Glass Fiber Reinforced Cement Composite (GFRC), Polymer Fiber Reinforced Cement Composite (PFRC) and Mixed Fiber Reinforced Cement Composite (MFRC), it may be observed that the mesostructure consists of a plain or a fiber reinforced matrix phase based on cement, an aggregate phase, and an Interfacial Transition Zone (ITZ) phase between the other two phases. In similar cases, most researchers follow a common approach of modeling each and every phase present in the material to exactly replicate the mesostructure, thereby making a highly resource sensitive and complex numerical model.A better and effective alternate approach is to visualize a simple model, using the concept of Representative Volume Element (RVE) introduced in Hill [2]. In this approach, the visualization of a repeating unit of the material mesostructure is an initial step in minimizing the complexity of the meso-model. The UC concept employed in the present study is more attractive due to its simple definition that it may be of any size when compared to that of a known RVE, and may not contain sufficient number of inclusions similar to that which is physically present in the material mesostructure. It is conceptually a representation of the total volume fractions of some of the distinct phases in the material mesostructure. In the initial design of the UC, Pettermann and Suresh [3], Gupta and Venkatesh [4], and Ghouse et al. [5] assumed the presence of only two distinct phases in their UC models. In their two-phase UC model for normal strength concrete, Ghouse et al. [5] considered only the matrix phase and the aggregate phase. Here the first phase represents the total volume fraction of a continuum that has the overall properties of all the constituents of the mesostructure taken together, excluding the coarse aggregate phase. The second phase represents the total volume fraction of coarse aggregates present in the concrete mix. Hassan et al. [6] observed that this simple UC was not sufficient to capture the full mechanical behavior of the material, while dealing with the two-phase UC approach for the mechanical characterization of PFRC. In this paper, the deficiencies identified in the two-phase UC approach are addressed by defining another UC with a three-phase concept consisting of matrix, aggregate and ITZ phases.Sluis [7] reported that the effectiveness of prediction of a UC is dependent on its size and the type of boundary conditions that are applied on its boundaries. Researchers like Huet [8], Amieur et al. [9], Ostoja-Starzewski [10] and Pecullan et al. [11] also have investigated the convergence of prediction results with respect to the increasing UC size and the type of boundary conditions assigned. There are mainly three types of Boundary Conditions (BC) that are used in connection with the UC approach namely (a) Static (b) Dynamic and (c) Periodic Boundary Conditions (PBC). While the static BC enforces a uniform displacement on the boundaries of the UC, the dynamic BC enforces a constant stress [12]. The PBC is a type of BC applied on the parallel edges of the UC so that deformation can occur without affecting the parallelism of the edges to prevent any discontinuities in the material macro-structure as illustrated by Pettermann and Suresh [3].To understand the PBC, consider the domain ΩUCdefined by the UC boundary shown in Fig. 1where PBC defined by Eq. (1) is applied between its vertical edges Γijand Γkl:(1)y(sij)−ri=y(skl)−rlwhereriis the position vector of the node i andrlis the position vector of the node l with respect to which the boundary is tracked,y(sij)is the position vector of the point A on the boundaryi−jat a distancesijfrom node i andy(skl)is that of pointA′on boundaryk−lat a distancesklfrom node l. Typically,sij=sklfor the implementation of PBC.Terada et al. [13] considered constant stress, uniform displacement and PBC as boundary conditions in their UC investigations to report that when the case of PBC was considered, a relatively smaller UC was found to be sufficient to predict the apparent elastic properties effectively, for a general heterogeneous material with no geometrical periodicity. This in other words states that a UC of a relatively smaller size would meet the requirements of an RVE of the material when it is assigned with PBC. Miehe and Koch [14], Gupta and Venkatesh [15], and Ghouse et al. [5] also reported the implementation of PBC in their respective UCs. Hassan et al. [6] considered different sizes of two-phase UCs assigned with PBC to determine the minimum required size for modeling the full deformation and failure response of the material and identified that the UC size considered by Ghouse et al. [5] was not sufficient enough to model the full deformation and failure response of the material in comparison with experimental observations.The presence of ITZ phase in cement-based composites is one of the factors that affect the overall mechanical behavior of the material in addition to the contribution from the presence of other phases mentioned previously. Initially, Farran [16] reported the presence of ITZ phase in the form of a transition aureole. A number of reports can be seen in the literature regarding the properties of this phase being observed as weaker than that of the matrix and as exhibiting a gradient in the properties throughout its thickness. Hadley [17] used a Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) technique to describe the ITZ as consisting of a duplex film formed between the aggregate surface and that of the hardened cement paste. The thickness of ITZ was defined by Grandet and Ollivier [18] using an X-ray diffraction technique. Scrivener et al. [19] conducted experiments on real concrete specimens using Backscattered Electron Microscopy (BEM) and computerized image processing to study the microstructure of the ITZ. He concluded that the thickness of ITZ might vary from 30 to 50μm. Using a nano indentation based technique called Raman Micro Spectroscopy (RMS), Machovic et al. [20] identified that the ITZ phase present between polyethylene fiber and cement matrix has a thickness of 40μm and its mechanical properties varied across its thickness, based on the variation in the concentration of its constituents namely Calcium Silicate Hydrate (CSH) and Calcium Hydroxide (CH). He also identified that its elastic modulus was in the range of 5–10GPa in the first 5–10μm near to the fiber surface and as he moved away from the fiber, the elastic property increased to a value same as that of the matrix. Bentz et al. [21] reported that the composition of cement paste is highly porous in nature with lesser percentage of CSH gel and higher concentration of CH in it. Hashin and Monteiro [22] reported an inverse method to determine the ITZ properties between the aggregate and cement paste, from a three-phase composite model based on experimental investigations. He estimated the average thickness of ITZ as 25μm and its elastic modulus as 50% of that of the bulk cement paste.Nilsen and Monteiro [23] suggested that materials like cement composites may be numerically modeled with sufficient details by considering the presence of a third ITZ phase. We can see several lattice or continuum based models in the literature that consider ITZ as a separate phase. Neubauer et al. [24] reported a three-phase mathematical model for modeling the elastic properties of mortar in which the ITZ was modeled as a separate phase with constant properties, without considering the gradient seen throughout its thickness. The thickness of the phase was taken as 20μm and elastic modulus was taken as 30–50% of that of the matrix. Arslan et al. [25] reported a lattice based model in which he considered ITZ as a linearly elastic phase with perfectly brittle behavior, post-peak. Lilliu and Van [26] reported a 3D lattice model in which the ITZ phase was assigned a tensile strength of 25% of that of the matrix. Ghouse et al. [5] analyzed different variations of a two-phase UC designed for modeling the deformation and failure of normal strength concrete in tension as well as compression and concluded that the UC approach could predict the compressive strength of the material in reasonable limits. However, the results from the two-phase model did not predict any non-linearity in the pre- and post-peak regimes and the experimental correlation of the predicted results was not good. They then considered the presence of a third phase in the UC with ITZ properties and reported that the presence of ITZ layer did not improve the prediction of pre-peak non-linearity in the stress–strain response.Subsequent to the review of the above-mentioned observations in the literature, the two-phase UC used in Hassan et al. [6] was redefined in this study with a third ITZ phase in addition to the previously considered matrix and aggregate phases. Constituents of the matrix phase in this case did not include the volume fractions of the coarse aggregate and the ITZ, which were further considered as two separate additional phases embedded in the matrix phase. The ITZ phase in this concept is also a continuum that represents the overall properties of all the defects present in the material, based on the observation that these micro/meso level defects would significantly affect the fracture characteristics of the material at macroscopic level.The three-phase UC was then subjected to compression analysis for varying aggregate volume fractions to predict the compressive strength of all the materials considered and further details of which are discussed in Section 4.1. Various parametric studies that were conducted on this UC, to identify the contribution of the third phase in the overall macroscopic constitutive behavior of the material considered, include the effects of variation of its thickness (Section 4.3), tensile strength (Section 4.4) and fracture energy (Section 4.5). The predicted results were then compared with selected experimental observations to identify the prediction effectiveness and accuracy of the UC, so that the UC may still be considered as an RVE of the material, even when it does not satisfy some of the essential requirements in the conventional definition.It was already discussed in Section 1 that a UC is a simplified form of the RVE that repeats in a three dimensional space of the material mesostructure. So the foremost step in modeling the mechanical response using UC approach is the identification and preparation of a suitable UC design valid for the material under consideration. Then, the mechanical response of the constituent phases considered in the UC is to be assigned to the model. The UC should then be assigned with the necessary boundary conditions such as the PBC to ensure the periodicity in deformation and avoid any discontinuities in the material macro structure. Application of PBC may also help in minimizing the size of the UC that can predict the effective properties irrespective of its boundary conditions. This may be carried out using the preprocessing module of a suitable Finite Element Method (FEM) solver package, identified for solving the boundary value problem defined by the UC in the next step. Finally, after completing the analysis, the required nodal displacements and reactions can be extracted from the output database to plot the predicted constitutive behavior of the material, using a suitable post-processing module. The authors had developed a script based automated implementation procedure for completely automating these essential steps involved in the two-phase UC approach and the details were reported in [27]. The two-phase script was then adapted for the three-phase UC implementation discussed in this paper.There are four different representative cement based composites viz. PC, GFRC, PFRC and MFRC that were considered for the present study. In these materials, when observed from a mesoscopic viewpoint, there can be a minimum of three different phases present in their mesostructure. Among them, the contributions of matrix, aggregate and ITZ phases are significant in determining the macroscopic constitutive behavior of the materials under consideration. The ITZ phase is conceptualized as a continuum with the overall properties of the matrix-aggregate interface and that of the material defects. So, in the three-phase UC design, the three distinct phases can be geometrically modeled in the form of a round shaped aggregate volume fraction surrounded by a round thin ITZ volume fraction and these two phases are embedded in a square shaped matrix. Fig. 2illustrates the geometrical representation of the three-phase UC considered in this study.It can be observed that there is no direct contact between the aggregate and matrix volume fractions in a three-phase UC, because of the presence of the thin ITZ layer in between. In order to constrain the link between the aggregate and the ITZ, the relative motion between the outer and inner surfaces of the aggregate and the ITZ phases need to be respectively arrested. Similarly, to constrain the relative motion between the ITZ and the matrix volume fractions, the outer and inner surfaces of the ITZ and the matrix volume fractions are to be respectively arrested. This necessitates that the automated implementation procedure mentioned in Section 2 need to be compulsorily adapted by incorporating the above-mentioned requirements.Four different types of matrices are considered in this paper, corresponding to the materials under consideration. The matrices differ according to the type of fiber reinforcement included in the mix design. Details of the constituents of the matrix phases considered can be referred from Table 1in which the presence of Cement Paste, Glass Fiber (GF), Polypropylene Fiber (PF), Steel Fiber (SF), Coarse Aggregate (CA) etc. are indicated. The deformation and fracture properties given in Table 2for each matrix are different owing to the influence of the mix proportions and the type of fiber reinforcement present in each material, in which E is Young׳s Modulus, ν is Poisson׳s Ratio, σTis Tensile Strength and Gfis Fracture Energy.The matrix phase was modeled in such a way that each finite element assigned to this phase follows a linear elastic behavior until it satisfies the Rankine Failure Criterion used for detecting the initiation of failure. As per this criterion, failure is initiated if(2)σ1≥σftorσ2≥σftorσ3≥σft(3)σ1≤σfcorσ2≤σfcorσ3≤σfcwhere σ1, σ2 and σ3 are principal stresses in mutually perpendicular directions, σfcis the compressive strength and σftis the tensile strength of the material. This is a failure criterion based on maximum tensile stress and the element on attaining the maximum, is degraded in its stress retention characteristics based on a predefined softening curve, a typical example of which is shown in Fig. 3.CEB FIP model code 1990 [29] suggests that the softening behavior can be estimated using Eq. (4), which is a modified form of the single line approximation of the stress separation curve suggested by Hillerborg et al. [30], wherew1=2Gf/ftm−0.15wc, wc=βfGf/ftm, ftmis the direct tensile strength of the matrix in MPa, σctis cracked tensile stress in MPa, w1 is the crack opening, wcis the crack opening forσct=0and βfis the coefficient depends on maximum aggregate size whose value is 8:(4)σct={ftm(1−0.85ww1)for0.15ftm≤σct≤ftm0.15ftm(wc−wwc−w1)for0≤σct≤0.15ftmFor the present study, the bilinear softening curve was estimated using the experimentally determined Fracture Energy of the matrices taken from Pavan Kumar [28], by maintaining the area under the stress separation curve as constant for each matrix considered. When the model follows an element level linear behavior in the pre-peak regime, the predicted overall macroscopic response is supposed to follow the non-linear behavior of the material due to the combined effects of a group of elements experiencing different stress states at any particular point of time in the pre-peak zone. In the post-peak regime, the element level softening model is supposed to capture the non-linear response of the material.The aggregate phase is assumed to be the strongest phase in the material that undergoes only linear deformation. The chances of this phase experiencing its failure stress prior to that of the matrix phase is very less and a failure detection and initiation criteria was not incorporated into the aggregate phase of the UC model.The third ITZ phase is the weakest phase in the material and its properties are directly related to that of the associated matrix phase. It may be recollected here that Scrivener and Pratt [31] reported a thickness of 30–50μm for the matrix-aggregate interface while Bentz et al. [21] reported the presence of material defects in the form of porosity in it, when compared to the matrix phase. So in the present UC model, a combination of the properties of the matrix-aggregate interface and other material defects present in the matrix is assigned to the ITZ phase. As a starting point, in consistence with the reports of Lilliu and Van [26], Scrivener et al. [19], and Machovic et al. [20], etc., a thickness of 50μm is assumed for the ITZ, its elastic modulus is taken as 50% and its tensile strength is taken as 25% respectively of that of the matrix. A suitable parametric study that will reveal the influence of varying the properties of ITZ on the macroscopic behavior of the material was also planned. Though Arslan et al. [25] considered ITZ as a perfectly brittle phase in their model, since this phase may be considered as a degraded matrix phase, its deformation and failure behaviors were modeled similar to that of the matrix phase by incorporating Rankine failure criterion and a suitable softening behavior, in the present study.It is required that a set of BC be assigned on the UC so that it can be analyzed using a suitable FEM solver. The bottom edge of the UC needs to be arrested for displacement in vertical direction before applying downward displacements on its top edge, for simulating the required displacement-controlled compressive mechanical loading. For ensuring the periodicity of deformation of the UC edges and since it is essential for determining the effective properties of the material as discussed in Section 1, PBC need to be applied on the vertical and parallel edges of the UC. For simulating the interconnection between any two of the three-phases considered in the UC, the surface nodes linking the interconnected phases can be arrested to prevent any relative motion between them. This can be achieved by defining one of the phase surfaces as a master surface and the other one as a slave to tie the later to the former.After completing the necessary preprocessing jobs in addition to those discussed Section 3.1 and 3.2, the discretized UC model needs to be submitted for analysis using the selected FEM solver. The four node plain strain elements can be used to discretize the domain, since the out of plain strains can be neglected in the required uni-axial compression response of the UC. The downward load is applied on the UC by assigning controlled displacements on the top edge of the UC while maintaining the bottom edge arrested for any vertical displacement. Once the maximum required displacement is determined for the material under consideration, it is distributed into specified number of loading steps and applied gradually over a period to emulate displacement controlled compression loading. All of these tasks can be automated using the implementation procedure developed for the two-phase approach after adapting it for the three-phase UC approach.In Section 3.1.3, it was already discussed that there are a certain number of input parameters necessary for the modeling of three-phase UC that may influence the predicted overall mechanical behavior of the material. Aggregate phase volume fraction of the UC is the most important among them that was seen to be influencing the compressive strength and thereby the elastic modulus of the UC. Thickness of the ITZ is another major parameter that is reported to be influencing the overall mechanical behavior of the material. Fracture characteristics of the ITZ such as Tensile Strength and Fracture Energy of the ITZ are also expected to influence the predicted deformation and failure behavior of the material.Therefore in this section, different parametric studies conducted on the three-phase UC to identify the relative contribution of each parameter on the overall mechanical response of the UC are discussed. The UC was first analyzed to determine the variation of predicted compressive strength with respect to that of the aggregate volume fraction and the UC size. Then the volume fraction of the ITZ phase in the UC was varied to determine the influence of its thickness on the compressive strength of the UC. A study was then conducted to determine the influence of the tensile strength of the ITZ phase on the stress-strain response of the UC. A similar study was conducted by varying the fracture energy of the ITZ phase as well.In this study, the UCs modeled for PC, MFRC, GFRC and PFRC were considered to identify the influence of volume fraction of aggregates in each material on predicted compressive strength. For this, the UCs were modeled with different parametric choices as shown in Table 3where E represents Young׳s Modulus, TS indicates the Tensile Strength and Gfindicates the Fracture Energy. UC sizes and aggregate volume fractions were chosen in such a way that the range of parametric choices represent the various specimen sizes recommended in experimental practices. Volume fraction of ITZ was calculated with respect to that of Aggregate while E, TS and Gfwere calculated based on that of the Matrix. ITZ parameters were chosen based on the assumptions taken in various reports available in the literature. ITZ volume fraction of 0.1% corresponds to a thickness of few microns that falls in the range of experimentally observed values and an ITZ Gfpercentage of 1% was chosen to ease an almost sudden failure of the ITZ elements after reaching the failure stress.Figs. 4–7represent the combined graphs which clearly show the variation in predicted compressive strength for PC, MFRC, GFRC and PFRC UCs respectively, for all the aggregate volume fractions and sizes considered. These graphs give an idea about the spread in the predicted compressive strength at a particular aggregate volume fraction for increasing UC size. Both the magnitude and spread of the predicted compressive strength decrease with increasing UC size and aggregate volume fraction, for all the materials.From the graphs shown in Figs. 4–7, it can be inferred that a minimum UC size is required for the convergence of the predicted results. As can be seen from the percentage difference curves shown in Figs. 8–11, if a minimum size of 200mm is taken for the UC as mentioned in Table 4, all the curves are within a percentage difference of 10% with respect to the higher size considered. Based on this result, UCs with a minimum size of 200mm will be considered for all the future studies. Only MFRC UCs will be considered as a representative for the rest of the studies conducted, based on the availability of experimental results, to identify the influence of ITZ parameters on the overall behavior of the UC.Through this study it was intended that the influence of variation in the thickness of ITZ phase on the predicted constitutive behavior of the UC can be identified. For this purpose, the volume fraction of the ITZ was varied from 0.1% to 0.4% with an increment of 0.1%, while all other parametric choices were kept constant as shown in Table 5. The choice of 0.1–0.4% volume fraction will cover the full range of experimentally observed thickness of the ITZ and the other choices match with the assumptions taken in various reported studies. An MFRC UC with an aggregate volume fraction of 38% and size of 200mm was chosen as recommended in Table 4, and it is expected that this UC will suitably capture the common trend exhibited by all the materials under consideration. Fig. 12shows the results of this study which shows the variation of stress-strain response with respect to the ITZ volume fraction. As the volume fraction of the ITZ increases, the material is predicted to fail at lower stresses and strains. There is a considerable decrease in the strain corresponding to zero stress, with increasing ITZ volume fraction.The purpose of this study was to identify the influence of ITZ tensile strength on the predicted compressive stress-strain response of the UC. While maintaining a size of 200mm, an aggregate volume fraction of 38% and an ITZ volume fraction of 0.1% on the MFRC UC, the tensile strength of the ITZ phase was varied from 05% to 95% of that of the matrix phase, as shown in Table 6. This variation in the tensile strength covers a range of choices reported in various studies available in the literature. Fig. 13represents the predicted constitutive behavior of the UC which shows an increasing trend in the compressive strength of the material with increasing tensile strength of the ITZ. Post-peak behavior of the material is also seen to be influenced by the above-mentioned variation and as the tensile strength of the ITZ increases, strain corresponding to zero stress increases.Fracture energy is identified as the area under the stress separation curve shown hatched in Fig. 3, which plays a vital role in determining the non-linear part of the material response in compression. While varying the fracture energy of the ITZ phase, the intention was to identify its influence in the overall stress-strain behavior of the material considered. The ITZ tensile strength was maintained at 25% of that of the matrix phase as shown in Table 7. The ITZ Gfwas then varied through 05%, 45%, 55%, 65% and 95% of that of the matrix, for the analysis. This range of variation is an assumption taken in the absence of reliable reports in the literature and is based on the fact that the ITZ phase may be regarded as a degraded portion of the matrix phase. Fig. 14reports the results of this study that shows the variation in the stress-strain behavior of the material with respect to the increase in the fracture energy of the ITZ phase in the UC. There is a visible change in the post-peak behavior, as the fracture energy increases, the failure of the material gets slightly delayed and strain at zero stress increases.Figs. 15–18show the stress-strain response of PC, GFRC, PFRC and MFRC respectively for all the aggregate volume fractions considered. These results correspond to that predicted by the UC of 200mm size. All the UCs are showing a decreasing trend in the predicted compressive strength of the respective material, with increasing aggregate volume fraction. As the compressive strength decreases, the elastic modulus also decreases accordingly. This trend is in consistence with the recommendations of CEB-FIB model code [29] as well. There is also an increasing trend in the pre-peak non-linear behavior with increasing aggregate volume fraction, which the two-phase model could not predict suitably.Figs. 12–14 also show the experimentally determined stress-strain curves for MFRC with an aggregate volume fraction of 38%, taken from Pavan Kumar [28]. It may be observed here that in the deformation phase of the curve, up to around 50% of the peak stress, the experimental curve matches well with the numerical results. Approximately around this point, the accumulation of the failure of the elements in the ITZ phase causes a sudden decrease in the overall stiffness even though the compressive stress still increases to reach the peak. The mismatch of the numerical results with that of the experiments is visible from this zone even though there is a good correlation between the two, until the peak stress is reached. The experimental curve seems to hold back stress even after the peak is reached while the numerical curves come down gradually to get relieved of the stresses at much lower strains. The correlation between the post-peak portion of the numerical and experimental curves is not good in this sense. As the volume fraction, tensile strength and fracture energy of the ITZ increases, the correlation with experiment becomes worse.There is also an additional curve in Figs. 12–14 that corresponds to the MFRC results from the two-phase UC [6]. It is clearly observed that the two-phase UC could not simulate the experimentally determined stress-strain behavior of the material except the compressive strength and the strain at peak stress. This is consistent with the observations of Ghouse et al. [5] where they reported the prediction of compressive strength of normal strength plain concrete using a two-phase UC model, with more than 30% difference from the experimental result. However, the two-phase model, results of which are shown here, was designed with experimentally determined input parameters from Pavan Kumar [28] and the predicted compressive strength is therefore in good correlation with experiments. The study conducted on the three-phase model proves that the UC is powerful enough to capture the total pre-peak response of the material in good correlation with experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
