@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical and experimental analysis of factors leading to suture dehiscence after Billroth II gastric resection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The main goal of this study was to numerically quantify risk of duodenal stump blowout after Billroth II (BII) gastric resection.Our hypothesis was that the geometry of the reconstructed tract after BII resection is one of the key factors that can cause increased duodenal pressure and consequently duodenal dehiscence.If surgeon decide to perform BII type of reconstruction, findings obtained by this preoperative simulation are very useful in terms of minimizing the risk of duodenal dehiscence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gastric resection,CFD,Computer simulation,Duodenal stump,Dehiscence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The main goal of this study was to numerically quantify risk of duodenal stump blowout after Billroth II (BII) gastric resection. Our hypothesis was that the geometry of the reconstructed tract after BII resection is one of the key factors that can lead to duodenal dehiscence. We used computational fluid dynamics (CFD) with finite element (FE) simulations of various models of BII reconstructed gastrointestinal (GI) tract, as well as non-perfused, ex vivo, porcine experimental models. As main geometrical parameters for FE postoperative models we have used duodenal stump length and inclination between gastric remnant and duodenal stump. Virtual gastric resection was performed on each of 3D FE models based on multislice Computer Tomography (CT) DICOM. According to our computer simulation the difference between maximal duodenal stump pressures for models with most and least preferable geometry of reconstructed GI tract is about 30%. We compared the resulting postoperative duodenal pressure from computer simulations with duodenal stump dehiscence pressure from the experiment. Pressure at duodenal stump after BII resection obtained by computer simulation is 4–5 times lower than the dehiscence pressure according to our experiment on isolated bowel segment. Our conclusion is that if the surgery is performed technically correct, geometry variations of the reconstructed GI tract by themselves are not sufficient to cause duodenal stump blowout. Pressure that develops in the duodenal stump after BII resection using omega loop, only in the conjunction with other risk factors can cause duodenal dehiscence. Increased duodenal pressure after BII resection is risk factor. Hence we recommend the routine use of Roux en Y anastomosis as a safer solution in terms of resulting intraluminal pressure. However, if the surgeon decides to perform BII reconstruction, results obtained with this methodology can be valuable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computer simulations today are almost common medical tool used for prediction and sophisticated medical diagnostics. In conjunction with modern medical devices used for data acquisition computer simulation can be used for theoretical consideration and education, and also as a patient specific medical diagnostical tool. Multidisciplinary approach in medicine is necessary due to need of cooperation between medical doctor, computer scientist and engineer [1]. Using this modern tool medical doctors can perform their interventions more easily and safely. Due to limited hardware resources as well as software and medical acquisition devices, in the beginning computer scientists were not able to simulate complicated systems such as soft tissue organs with many physiological functions. That is the reason why first steps were made in the field of orthopedics and maxillofacial surgery where the problem could be solved with less powerful computer simulation [2,3]. In this study advantages of multidisciplinary approach were shown in the field of gastrointestinal surgery. We used three-dimensional computer simulation in regard to the real anatomical state in a human body. The duodenum is the first part of the small intestine with sensitive, motor and secretory functions regulated by neurological and hormone-dependent mechanisms [4–8]. Very important role of duodenum and pyloric sphincter becomes especially evident after surgical interventions on the gastroduodenum [9,10].Many authors researched complex feedback mechanisms in physiological state, but in this study our interest was to investigate how surgical intervention changes these mechanisms [11–13]. Experienced surgeons ex juvantibus know that geometry of gastroduodenum after Billroth II gastric resection is very important, but we tried to precisely numerically quantify influence of this factor [14]. According to literature insufficient attention has been paid on how geometry of the reconstructed gastroduodenal region influences pressure distribution and afferent loop syndrome that may cause duodenal stump blowout.There are various types of reconstruction after distal gastric resection, although Billroth II with omega jejunal loop and Roux en Y are most common. Billroth II gastric resection represents anastomosis (artificial connection) between the gastric stump and a loop of jejunum (gastrojejunal anastomosis, gut to side), and this type of intervention is the subject of our study. The afferent loop conducts duodenal juice toward the gastric stump and the rest of the intestine. The distal or efferent loop is the part of the duodenum that is downstream of the anastomosis, and it conducts duodenal and gastric stump content distally to the small intestine. The anastomosis is antecolic when the jejeunal loop is positioned in front of the transverse colon, or the jejunal loop may be brought up posteriorly through an opening made in the transverse mesocolon (retrocolic anastomosis). There are other methods of gastrointestinal tract reconstruction after gastric resection, and one of these is called Roux en Y gastrojejunoanastomosis, in which the small bowel is cut distal to the ligament of Treitz, and the anastomosis is created between the distal limb of the jejunum and remaining gastric tissue (or esophagus in cases of total gastrectomy). The proximal limb of the jejunum is positioned downstream to the jejunum at a distance of at least 45cm, where a termino-lateral end-to-side anastomosis is created. Dehiscence is a surgical complication in which surgical suture ruptures. In both of surgical interventions mentioned above dehiscence is the most dangerous complication (leading to peritonitis and sepsis) [15]. It is well known that after Billroth II gastric resection duodenal stump leakage and blowout is much more frequent than in case of reconstruction using Roux en Y jejunal limb [16].Standard reoperative procedure in case of afferent loop syndrome involves conversion to Roux en Y type of reconstruction by cutting afferent limb immediately proximal to an obstruction and creating gastrojejunal reanastomosis using 45–75cm long loop of the jejunum. Roux en Y gastrojejunostomy is also better in controlling dumping and bile reflux gastritis. Because there are not enough data from definite prospective randomized studies, surgeon preference often dictates the type of reconstruction [17]. Billroth II gastric resection is surgical intervention where omega jejunal loop is attached to gastric remnant (gastrojejunal anastomosis) and this type of intervention was the subject of our study (Fig. 1). We tried to get numerical proof that pressure in the afferent loop after Billroth II gastric resection is relatively high and it could be one of the main factors that cause duodenal dehiscence.The length of the afferent loop is variable and depends on anatomical variations (e.g. length of the mesenterium of the small intestine and adhesions), as well as the surgeon's preferences. There is a hypothesis that increased intraluminal pressure in the afferent loop is the dominant cause of duodenal stump dehiscence, that was our main subject of interest in this study. Possible causes of afferent loop syndrome are the length of afferent jejunal loop, narrow gastrojejunoanastomosis, insufficient peristaltic movements, etc. [18–20].Our presumption was that too long afferent loop in cases of surgery without Braun anastomosis between afferent and efferent loop can cause increased pressure in duodenal stump. Afferent loop should be tension free after surgery, thus should not be too short because it could lead to vascular insufficiency. Surgeon should be aware that conversion (in case of surgical complication) into Roux en Y reconstruction would be very difficult or impossible if gastrojejunal anastomosis with omega jejunal loop is created near ligament of Treitz. Inclination of gastrojejunal anastomosis should facilitate efficient emptying of afferent loop and also directs flow of gastric remnant content into efferent loop. Except increased duodenal intraluminal pressure there are a few other factors that have contributing role in pathogenesis of this complication, such as location and extent of cancer, non-adequate surgical technique (excessive dissection of duodenal stump; ischemia and necrosis of tissues caused by suturing too close or ligating too tight; local bleeding; increased tension of afferent loop, inappropriate usage of diathermy and coagulation), the presence of bacteria colonizing digestive tract, duodenal tissue quality, comorbidities (diabetes mellitus, pneumonia, asthma, malnutrition, hypoproteinemia) [21].Efferent loop is the part of the intestine positioned downstream of the anastomosis, and it conducts duodenal and gastric stump content distally to the small intestine. Position, shape and diameter of the anastomosis have influence on gastric and afferent loop emptying. Main factors that can interfere afferent loop emptying are obstructions from adhesion, kinking at the anastomosis, internal hernia, stomal stenosis, cancer recurrence, anastomotic edema or local inflammation [22].Suture dehiscence with consecutive peritonitis can occur as a complication after surgical intervention. Duodenal stump blowout is considered as a serious postoperative complication, with high mortality rate [23,24]. Duodenal suture dehiscence after distal gastric resection has been interesting subject for many researchers, but still many pathological mechanisms causing this postoperative complication remain unclear [25].There are just a few attempts of numerical solution to this type of problem [26]. We present numerical methods in order to quantify various parameters that cause duodenal stump dehiscence.In this study we used finite element computational fluid dynamics simulation, as well as ex vivo experiments on animal model.Preoperative three dimensional FE models were created using the DICOM data acquired from MSCT scanner. For that purpose 64 slice Toshiba Aquilion MSCT was used. We used the DICOM images of patients who were prepared for the resection of the stomach for cancer, and it was part of their routine preparations, regardless of our study. Personal data of patients were not used or presented. Three dimensional reconstruction and noise filtering were performed with our own software [27,28]. Using initial models we performed virtual Billroth II surgical intervention by changing the geometry in order to get adequate postoperative models. This was done using Femap software. In all computer simulations the walls of organs were considered as rigid, only the fluid was simulated. Our objective was to investigate how afferent loop length and inclination of gastrojejunal anastomosis as main geometrical parameters affect pressure distribution in postoperative state. We tried to focus on models with extreme geometry in that sense. For this purpose several models were created. Thus our attention was on models with maximal and minimal afferent loop length and with inclination of gastrojejunal anastomosis that provides minimal (negative inclination) and maximal (positive inclination) flow through anastomosis (Fig. 2).We have carried out numerical simulation of gastroduodenal region before the surgery and it was the starting point for a virtual resection (Fig. 3).All the models were segmented into finite elements in the same way, thus virtually the same density of the mesh was achieved. We used TetGen for segmenting the models into tetrahedrons [29], and our own software for splitting tetrahedrons into bricks [27,28]. We used bricks for calculations because of numerical stability [30]. Average number of nodes in one FE model is about 650,000. Boundary conditions and loads were prescribed to all the models using data from literature [31]. Our solver PAKF considered transit of chyme as a viscous incompressible fluid flow governed by the Navier–Stokes equations as well as continuity equation(1)ρ∂vi∂t+vj∂vi∂xj=−∂p∂xi+μ∂2vi∂xj∂xj+∂2vj∂xj∂xi(2)∂vi∂xi=0where νiis the chyme velocity in direction xi, ρ is the fluid density, p is pressure, μ is the dynamic viscosity; and summation is implied on the repeated (dummy) indices, i, j=1, 2, 3 [32,33]. The first equation represents balance of linear momentum, while the Eq. (2) expresses the incompressibility condition. For calculating transport of saliva, pancreatic juice and bile, mass was also taken into account thus additional transport equation was implemented into solver. We had assumption that the concentration of these juices has no influence on gastric fluid flow (i.e. a diluted mixture is considered). The mass transport process is governed by the convection–diffusion equation:(3)∂c∂t+vi∂c∂xi=D∂2c∂xi2where c denotes the juice concentration; νiare the gastric velocity components in the coordinate system xi; and D is the diffusion coefficient, assumed constant, of the transported juice.Our solver was compared to analytical solution for shear stress and velocities for Poiseuille flow. The finite element equations are solved with respect to velocities after the pressure was eliminated by a penalty procedure. The solution is obtained by use of an incremental–iterative approach and implicit integration scheme over time. The system of algebraic equations of balance for a finite element, and for a time step and equilibrium iteration “m”, can be written as:(4)1ΔtMv+Kvv(m−1)t+Δt+Kμv(m−1)t+Δt+0Kˆμv(m−1)t+Δt+Jvv(m−1)t+Δt+KλvKcv(m−1)t+Δt1ΔtMc+Kcc(m−1)t+Δt+Jcc(m−1)t+ΔtΔv(m)Δc(m)=Fˆv(m−1)t+ΔtFc(m−1)t+Δtwhere Mvis mass matrix for fluid domain; Kvvand Jvvare convective terms, Kμvis viscous term, Fvis additional force vector of Eq. (1), Kλvis penalty matrix of Eq. (2), the matrix Kccis mass the matrix for substance-concentration, Kcvand Jccrepresent the convective part of Eq. (3), and Fcis additional force vector for convection–diffusion equation (3). Other detailed expressions for the matrices and vectors can be found in [26,32]. Convergence criteria is achieved after increments of the solution for velocity and mass concentration Δv and Δc between iteration “m” and “m−1″ is less than 1.e−5.We used the material of animal origin, duodenal segment of domestic pig (Sus domestica), Landrace race, 1–2 years of age, weighing 50–80kg, male and female, that were kept and fed in the traditional manner on a commercial farm. Animals were not sacrificed for the purpose of the experiment, but due to the use of meat for commercial purposes, as it is usual in the slaughterhouses. The study was conducted with the permission of the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medical Sciences in Kragujevac, the number 01-2759/5. Isolated non-perfused ex vivo porcine duodenal segments were used to create a model of the afferent loop. We used porcine bowel models because of their similarity to human bowel in terms of histopathology. We used duodenal specimens of 7 animals. Duodenal segment was removed immediately after sacrifice of the animals and immersed in 0.9% NaCl saline. With respect to the absence of blood flow, the experiment was performed within an hour after sacrifice. Duodenal stump was sutured in four types of the suturing:1.interrupted, single layer suturingShort description: the bowel end was cleaned. Stay sutures are inserted in the mesenteric and anti mesenteric borders and seromuscular sutures are inserted and tied in an interrupted fashion (Lembert suturing).continuous, double layer suturingShort description: continuous seromuscular sutures started at mesenterial border, reaching antimesenterial end and tied. Than, suture line was reinforced with second layer of inverting seromuscular sutures inserted in an continuous fashion, completing the double layer.continuous in the first layer with interrupted in the second layerShort description: continuous seromuscular suturing started at mesenterial border, reaching antimesenterial end and tied. Finally, anastomosis was reinforced with inverting seromuscular sutures inserted in an interrupted fashion, completing the double layer.Moynihan suturingShort description: the bowel end is held in a non-crushing clamp and suturing started at the antimesenteric border. Suturing was performed as a continuous over-and-over suture incorporating the full thickness of the duodenal wall, starting from mesenteric border and reaching antimesenterial border. Then, the clamp removed and the stitch returned as a continuous stitch to the begining and tied. The second layer of seromuscular sutures are inserted in an interrupted fashion invaginating the anastomosis.For all the models suturing material we used was the same, Maxon 3.0 and was done manually. For each type of suturing we used ten samples.As a part of our experimental equipment we used a MPXA6115A/MPXH6115A series piezoresistive transducer, that is a monolithic, signal conditioned, silicon pressure sensor. This sensor combines advanced micromachining techniques, thin film metallization, and bipolar semiconductor processing to provide an accurate, high level analog output signal that is proportional to the applied pressure. In this experimental setup the MASTERFLEX EASY-LOAD II PUMP HEAD is used for gradually increased the pressure in the tissue specimen. The pressure control is achieved by adjusting the constant flow rate of pump on 480ml/min value into ex vivo preparation. The pressure increase during time due to the outflow is closed by tissue and it keeps liquid inside them all time before tissue damage. The pressure data is recorded using MPX 2100 pressure sensor.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
