@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Image-guided installation of 3D-printed patient-specific implant and its application in pelvic tumor resection and reconstruction surgery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A navigation system was developed for pelvic tumor resection and reconstruction.A novel method for tracking the 3D-printed patient-specific implant was proposed.Both the phantom and clinical case study demonstrated the system feasibility.The high and stable accuracy regarding TRE demonstrated the system repeatability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pelvic sarcomas resection,3D-printed customized implant,Surgical navigation,Calibration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nowadays, the diagnosis and treatment of pelvic sarcoma pose a major surgical challenge for reconstruction in orthopedics. With the development of manufacturing technology, the metal 3D-printed customized implants have brought revolution for the limb-salvage resection and reconstruction surgery. However, the tumor resection is not without risk and the precise implant placement is very difficult due to the anatomic intricacies of the pelvis. In this study, a surgical navigation system including the implant calibration algorithm has been developed, so that the surgical instruments and the 3D-printed customized implant can be tracked and rendered on the computer screen in real time, minimizing the risks and improving the precision of the surgery. Both the phantom experiment and the pilot clinical case study presented the feasibility of our computer-aided surgical navigation system. According to the accuracy evaluation experiment, the precision of customized implant installation can be improved three to five times (TRE: 0.75±0.18mm) compared with the non-navigated implant installation after the guided osteotomy (TRE: 3.13±1.28mm), which means it is sufficient to meet the clinical requirements of the pelvic reconstruction. However, more clinical trials will be conducted in the future work for the validation of the reliability and efficiency of our navigation system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the past decades, the diagnosis and treatment of pelvic sarcoma still pose a major surgical challenge in orthopedics [1]. With the development of molecular biology, biological materials, medical imaging, biomechanics, surgical techniques, comprehensive treatment, etc., the survival rate of pelvic sarcoma patients has been significantly increased [2]. However, since the traditional clinical treatments of pelvic sarcoma including neo-adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy cannot remove the pelvic oppression thoroughly, leading to high rate of associated complications, it is still a significant clinical problem in terms of improving the curative effect of patients, especially for the malignant tumors of the pelvis [3]. Nowadays, the resection surgery of pelvic sarcoma combined with the neo-adjuvant chemotherapy has been one of the most important kinds of orthopedic surgeries, while being widely accepted as a standard treatment by surgeons [4]. The advantages of the pelvic sarcoma resection surgery are described as follows: firstly, it can obtain an adequate surgical margin with the pelvic tumor completely removed; secondly, the local pain can be relieved promptly and the quality of life for the patient can be greatly improved [5]; thirdly, it can eliminate the oncothlipsis to the pelvis and prevent tumor recurrence effectively [6].After the pelvic sarcoma resection, the implant placement is also important for the function reconstruction. However, since the conventional off-the-shelf implant (usually just several types are available) cannot register uniquely to the adjacent tissues due to the different characteristics of the human body, it still remains a significant challenge for the ideal reconstruction for patients. For example, owing to the racial differences (such as bone size, shape, structure, etc.), some commercial humeral implants based on the Western population are currently not entirely compatible with Asian patients [34]. Furthermore, this unmatched structure may affect the stability of the implant and cause the complications [35]. In addition, the standard prosthesis may be incompatible with the diversity of osteotomy positions and surrounding regions in limb salvage surgery.Therefore, the patient-specific implants have been proposed and developed during the past decades. Since the custom-made implant is designed based on the patient's own medical images (such as CT data, MRI data, etc.) and the preoperative planning, it can provide more accurate implant positioning, better anatomical match, more predictable surgical result, and better limb axis alignment [36]. Some applications of the patient-specific implant have been reported in the literature. For example, Gerbino et al. utilized polyetheretherketone (PEEK) customized prostheses for primary and secondary reconstruction of complex craniofacial defects [38]. Demange et al. demonstrated that the patient-specific lateral unicompartmental implants can allow a better tibial coverage and provide excellent short-term clinical and radiological results as compared to the standard, off-the-shelf commercially available unicompartmental implants in lateral unicompartmental knee arthroplasties [36]. However, due to the limitations of the traditional manufacturing technology, the customized implant with complex shape may not be easily manufactured through the traditional machine tool.With the tremendous development of 3D printing technique over the past years, a great revolution has been brought in the fields of engineering, medicine and many more [37]. Compared with the traditional CAD/CAM technologies, the 3D printer can fabricate the products and implants directly from a 3D virtual model with very complex geometries. Therefore, it provides a new concept for the clinical treatment in orthopedics, maxillofacial surgery, etc. Recently, with the rapid development in additive manufacturing technology, the 3D printing machine with new metal alloy powder and metal fabrication strategies has been presented [8,9]. For example, Jardini et al. designed and fabricated a 3D-printed bio-model and customized implant for the surgical reconstruction of a large cranial defect [7]. Ciocca et al. utilized a customized titanium mesh for prosthetically guided bone regeneration of atrophic maxillary arches using 3D printing technology [10]. However, the application for the pelvic sarcoma reconstruction surgery is rarely reported in literature.Nevertheless, the difficulties of this kind of surgery are obvious. Due to the deep position in the pelvis and the surrounding intricate anatomical structures [11], it is not easy to find the bone tumor in the early stage, and the accuracy and reliability of the pelvic sarcoma resection cannot be effectively assured. Moreover, the intra-operative installation of 3D-printed patient-specific implant is difficult since the traditional equipment cannot be used and the actual position and orientation of the implant cannot be determined according to the pre-operative surgical planning.Nowadays, the use of computer-aided navigation technology has become more and more important in terms of improving the accuracy of surgery [12]. Many surgical navigation systems including commercially available and researching softwares have been presented for clinical applications in orthopedics. For instance, Behrendt et al. used the commercial software Spine and Trauma Fluoro-3D 1.6.0 (Brainlab AG, Feldkirchen, Germany) to evaluate the accuracy of 3D navigation for iliosacral screw fixation [13]. Inui et al. performed 31 total knee arthroplasties using the Stryker 3.1 image-free navigation system (Stryker Corporation, USA) [14]. Ungi et al. developed a spinal needle navigation system based on a free, open-sourced software package named 3D Slicer (Oueen's University, Canada) to improve targeting accuracy and efficiency in facet joint injections [15]. However, the applications of computer-aided surgical navigation are rarely reported regarding the pelvic sarcoma resection surgery combined with metal 3D-printed customized implant placement.In this study, a method for calibrating the patient-specific implant was proposed, and a surgical navigation system has been developed that encompasses the image segmentation, 3D-reconstruction, pre-operative surgical planning, calibration, registration, and intra-operative tracking. With the aid of this navigation system, the precision of pelvic tumor resection and implant placement can be improved, and the reliability and safety of the surgery can be achieved. The phantom experiment and the clinical report demonstrated the feasibility of our navigation system, and highlighted its benefits.The workflow of the surgical navigation system is shown in Fig. 1, and described as follows:(1)Image segmentation. On the basis of the original CT-scanned data, threshold, region growing and manual contouring methods are adopted for the segmentation of the pelvis, sarcoma, bladder, etc.3D-reconstruction. Then, the virtual three-dimensional models can be reconstructed through the marching cubes algorithm [16]. The results are further processed by mesh simplification, smoothing and trimming.Pre-operative surgical planning. Based on the series of 2D images and the 3D-reconstructed data, the pre-operative planning can be performed including the 3D geometrical measurement, the optimization design of the osteotomy trajectory, the simulation of implant placement, etc. In addition, the position and orientation of the implant can be adjusted to avoid injuring the surrounding critical anatomical structures, according to the corresponding contours of the planned cutting planes on the series of 2D images (axial, coronal, and sagittal).Design and manufacturing of 3D-printed customized implant. According to the planned cutting result, the patient-specific implant can be designed through the collaborations with surgeons (Fig. 6(a) shows a customized implant designed via the UG software (Unigraphics NX, Siemens PLM Software, Germany), and it can be saved as a Stereo Lithographic (STL) file and imported into our surgical navigation system.) This customized titanium alloy implant (shown in Fig. 6(b)) is then manufactured through the 3D printing machine (Arcam, Sweden) using the electron beam melting (EBM) technology.Calibration of the surgical instruments and implant. Since only the reference frames with mounted sphere-shaped retro-reflective markers can be tracked by the optical locating device (Polaris Vicra, NDI Inc., Canada), the calibration procedures are required before the navigated surgery so that the movements of the 3D-printed implant or the surgical instruments can be represented through the reference frames attached on them.Registration. The procedure of registration is to bring two coordinate systems into spatial alignment, which means the pre-operative images are registered with the patient on the operative table [17]. In our surgical navigation system, two kinds of registration methods are adopted, respectively the point-based registration method based on the singular value decomposition (SVD) algorithm, and surface matching registration method based on the iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm [18–21].Real-time navigation for the tumor resection and implant placement. After the procedures of calibration and registration, the position and orientation of the surgical instruments can be tracked in real time and rendered on the computer screen. Hence, the tumor can be resected according to the pre-operative planned trajectory and the precision can be improved. Furthermore, during the installation process of implant, the virtual model varies on both of the 2D and 3D views in real time so that the operation efficiency can be enhanced.Although most existing commercial or researching surgical navigation systems have solved the calibration of surgical instrument using a calibration tool [22,23], their methods were not suitable for calibrating the patient-specific implants with various shapes. Therefore, a novel method was proposed in this study so that the movement of the implants can be tracked during the intra-operative placement process, and the principle is described below.The coordinate systems in surgical navigation system are established shown in Fig. 2: World coordinate system (WCS-XYZ) is determined by the Polaris optical tracking system; Virtual coordinate system (VCS-X0Y0Z0, also referred to as the image coordinate system) is determined by the pre-operative planning image data; Reference coordinate system 1 (RCS1-X1Y1Z1, also referred to as the reference frame coordinate system of the patient) is determined by the reference frame mounted on the pelvis of the patient; Reference coordinate system 2 (RCS2-X2Y2Z2, also referred to as the reference frame coordinate system of the 3D-printed customized implant) is determined by the reference frame fixed on the implant; while A1 and A2 are the transformation matrices with which RCS1 and RCS2 can respectively be transformed to WCS; A10 is the registration transformation matrix with which RCS1 can be transformed to VCS; In addition, it should be noted that VSC can be regarded as identical to the modeling coordinate system of implant. Therefore, Mcal is the calibration transformation matrix that determining the spatial relationship between the coordinate systems of the 3D-printed implant (VCS) and the reference frame (RCS2), shown in Fig. 3.Suppose X=(x,y,z)T is the coordinates of any point under world coordinate system of the optical tracking camera, X0=(x0,y0,z0)T is the coordinates of this point under virtual coordinate system, X1=(x1,y1,z1)T is the coordinates of this point under the reference frame coordinate system of the patient (reference coordinate system 1), X2=(x2,y2,z2)T is the coordinates of this point under the reference frame coordinate system of the 3D-printed implant (reference coordinate system 2), X3=(x3,y3,z3)T is the coordinates of this point under the 3D-printed implant coordinate system (implant modeling coordinate system), hence:(1)X=A1X1X=A2X2X2=McalX3X0=A10X1Based on the first three equations of (1), thus, A1X1=A2X2⇒X1=(A1)−1 A2X2⇒X1=(A1)−1A2McalX3.Substitution of the above results into the fourth equation leads to:(2)X0=A10(A1)−1A2McalX3Since the transformation of a rigid body under world coordinate system can be described through the unit quaternion and the translation vector, the transformation matrices A1 and A2 are calculated on the basis of seven elements provided by the Polaris optical tracking system. And the registration transformation matrix A10 can be calculated through the point-based or surface matching registration methods [24,25].As for the calibration transformation matrix Mcal, the “Point-to-Point” registration method was proposed, and the detail is described as follows:Firstly, several pinholes are designed and marked on the surface of implant as fiducial landmarks. The coordinates of theses fiducial landmarks under the image coordinate system are pre-defined during the design procedure (for example, four fiducial landmarks are shown in Fig. 3). Meanwhile, the corresponding coordinates of these fiducial landmarks under the implant reference frame coordinate system can be obtained through the positioning probe [22], shown in Fig. 4. Then, the calibration transformation matrix Mcal will be calculated through the singular value decomposition (SVD) algorithm [26].Finally, on the basis of the above-mentioned algorithm, the function module of the implant calibration is programmed using some well-known open-sourced toolkits such as the VTK, CTK, ITK, IGSTK and QT, and integrated into our self-developed navigation software [12,24].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
