@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling of cement hydration in concrete structures with hybrid finite elements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid FE formulation is applied to the modelling of cement hydration in concrete.The accuracy of conventional FE is recovered with simpler meshes and fewer variables.Unstructured meshes and uncoupled FE bases simplify the modelling of staged construction.The hybrid FE formulation is well-suited to adaptive p-refinement and parallelization.Performance is assessed using experimental monitoring data and conform FE solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid finite elements,Transient thermal analysis,Concrete,Heat of hydration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A hybrid finite element formulation is used to model temperature evolutions in concrete structures at early ages, taking into account the thermo-chemical process of cement hydration. The most relevant fields in the application problem, namely the temperature and the hydration degree fields, are selected for direct and independent approximation. The Galerkin formulation used qualifies as hybrid because the heat flux is also approximated on the boundary of the element. The temperature and hydration degree bases are used to enforce the thermal equilibrium condition and the hydration law, respectively, and the heat flux basis is used to enforce the thermal continuity conditions. The resulting nonlinear transient hybrid formulation leads to high-degree, naturally hierarchical elements. They can be implemented on coarse meshes, eventually unstructured and involving high aspect-ratio elements to reduce the dimension of the solving system, while preserving adequate levels of accuracy. The system is symmetric, sparse and well-suited to adaptive refinement and parallelization. Modelling of boundary conditions and thermo-chemical properties of concrete is designed to accommodate experimentally defined properties and code of practice recommendations, as well as other research results reported in the literature. The quality of the model is assessed using a set of testing problems supported by experimental data and results obtained with conventional (conform) finite elements.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thermal analyses based on the experimentally determined cement and concrete properties and implemented with conform finite elements have proved to be successful in the prediction of temperature fields in actual concrete structures due to the cement hydration heat release [1,2]. This led to a substantial investment in the assessment of early age cracking [3–7] and, more recently, in the analysis of the thermo-hygro-chemo-mechanical behaviour of concrete structures, e.g. [8–11].Although the presence of hybrid finite element formulations in the solution of structural analysis problems is relatively strong, and despite the early formulation for steady-state heat conduction presented in [12] and the extension to transient analyses using the Trefftz variant [13], reports on applications to steady-state and transient heat transfer problems remain scarce and limited in scope, namely for thermoelastic fracture, inverse heat conduction and convection–diffusion problems [14–16].The paper reports on the first stage of a research program on the modelling of cement hydration in concrete structures using a hybrid finite element formulation. The results presented here focus on the solution of the transient thermal problem associated with cement hydration in early age concrete structures. They support the on-going extension into hygro-thermo-chemical modelling and its coupling with the mechanical response, also based on the hybrid finite element formulations [17,18].The option to abandon the conventional (conform) finite element used in commercial codes in favour of hybrid elements is justified by the computational gains that can be attained in the modelling of the thermo-chemical process of cement hydration and by the flexibility it offers in simulation of the boundary conditions most frequently used in practical applications.The nonlinear problem addressed here is well behaved under the simplifying assumptions commonly adopted in engineering applications, meaning that good estimates for the temperature and hydration degree fields can be obtained with relatively few degrees-of-freedom. However, the combination of geometric constraints with the reliance on structured meshes of conform elements often leads to unnecessarily high levels of refinement.This limitation, particularly relevant in the simulation of the staged construction of large, massive concrete structures, can be overcome by uncoupling the discretization of the domain from the approximation of the state variables, as adequate accuracy is often associated with distinct levels of refinement in the representation of geometry and thermo-chemical behaviour. This objective is easily met using hybrid elements.In the approach followed here, the design of the finite element mesh is essentially constrained by adequacy of the representation of the geometry of the problem and the characterization of zones with different thermo-chemical properties. This typically leads to coarse, unstructured meshes, eventually built on elements with high aspect-ratios. To ensure adequate levels of accuracy in the modelling of the thermo-chemical fields, high-order bases are used to approximate independently the temperature and the heat flux. Whenever relevant, different degrees of approximation can be implemented in each element of the mesh and, in every element, different degrees of approximation can be used in each spatial direction.In terms of computational robustness and performance, this added flexibility in modelling implies the use of numerically stable approximation bases. The experience gained in the assessment of alternative approximation bases for hybrid formulations [19] has supported the option to implement orthogonal and naturally hierarchical bases in the present application. Consequent upon these two properties, the formulation leads to highly sparse solving systems and is well-suited to adaptive p-refinement. It is also shown that a third feature of the hybrid finite element approach followed here, suitability to parallel processing, is preserved in the present context.The text is organized as follows: the mathematical model is presented first, to establish the notation and the basic thermo-chemical assumptions; the criteria for discretization in time and in space are presented next, with emphasis on the main concepts of hybrid finite element modelling; the structure of the solving system is analysed and the strengths and weaknesses of the approach are identified. This analysis is supported by the presentation of the modelling solutions, which are compared with experimental and numerical results reported in the literature.Assume that a typical element, with domain V and boundary Γ, is assigned to space and time systems of reference,xand t, respectively. The response of the element is governed by the following set of equations, written with reference to the undeformed spatial configuration:(1)∇Tσ+ρcṪ=Q∞α̇inV(2)ε=∇ΤinV(3)σ=−kεinV(4)nTσ=q¯+hN(Τ−Τa)onΓN(5)Τ=Τ¯+hDnTσonΓDThe domain equations are completed by the initial conditions of the problem, which can be defined either in terms of prescribed temperature and hydration degree fields, T andα, or, for the sake of generality, in terms of their time rates:(6)Τ=Τ0;α=α0att=t0inV(7)Τ̇=Τ̇0;α̇=α̇0att=t0inVIn the thermal equilibrium Eq. (1),σdefines the heat flow, ρc is the volumetric specific heat, Q∞represents the potential heat of the hydration reaction (the total heat that would be released upon full hydration of all cement, that is, for α=1) and∇Tis the transpose of the gradient vector (or its adjoint in non-Cartesian systems). Eq. (2) defines the temperature gradient and Eq. (3) the constitutive relation, askis the local conductivity matrix.The supporting code is written to accept nonlinear definitions of conductivity and specific heat. Because these options are not used in the assessment tests, both properties are assumed constant in the formulation of the finite element model to avoid complicating the presentation with features that have no support in the demonstrations.Indeed, the thermo-chemical model used here is based on the experimentally confirmed assumptions presented in [20]. For practical temperature field simulations in concrete structures at early ages, it is often assumed that both conductivity and specific heat are constant and isotropic during the cement hydration process [1,2,4,11], under the provision that the moisture content is sufficient to feed the hydration reaction [20].The limitations of this latter assumption are well-known, particularly in the modelling of the hydration process in high performance concrete structures, and justify the development of hygro-thermo-chemical models. However, it is often accepted in the present context, as it leads to a substantial simplification of the mathematical model without much loss in the quality of the essential information to be retrieved. It covers the most common applications in usual concrete structural practice, particularly in the case of mass concrete.The elements of the mesh are classified as ‘non-cement elements’ (not subject to hydration), ‘fully hydrated elements’ (‘completed’ chemical reaction, with α=αfinal), and ‘hydrating elements’. In the latter elements the chemical reaction is assumed to be governed by the Arrhenius law written in the form [21,22]:(8)Q∞α̇=ATf(α)exp(−Ea/RT)≥0whereEais the activation energy, R is the universal gas constant andATis a constant.The supporting code accepts alternative definitions of the function representing the evolution of the normalized heat production rate in terms of the hydration degree,f(α), namely under conditionf(0)>0, in which caseαis the increment on the initial degree of hydration. In the relative assessment tests presented here, the hydration function is defined either as a piecewise linear approximation of the results obtained in the experimental calorimetric characterization of the cement hydration, or by analytically fitted function, often defined [23] as follows (the constraints on the intervening parameters and comments on the alternative definition given in [24] are summarized in Appendix A):(9)f(α)=(αa)b(1−α1−a)cIn what regards the boundary conditions of the problem, Eqs. (4) and (5) condense the different forms the (generalized) Neumann and Dirichlet conditions used in the present application [26]. The boundary Γ of a typical element with domain V is uncoupled into complementary Neumann and Dirichlet parts,(10)Γ=ΓN+ΓDwhich combine the regions where the different conditions implied in Eqs. (4) and (5) apply, namely heat flux, convection, convection–radiation and thermal conductance conditions,(11)ΓN=Γq+Γc+Γcr+Γcdand temperature, thermal continuity and thermal resistance conditions:(12)ΓD=ΓT+Γi+ΓrsThus, Eq. (4) is used to model prescribed heat flux fields,q¯, and convection conditions,(13)nTσ=q¯onΓq(14)nTσ=hc(T−Ta)onΓcwherehcis the convection coefficient andTais the air temperature. In the present application, air and concrete surface temperatures are sufficiently close to justify the use of linearized radiation conditions. Condition (14) is often enforced [27,28] with an equivalent convection–radiation coefficient,hcr(on boundaryΓcr), defined as the sum of a convection term, dependent on the wind speed, and a radiation term that varies linearly with temperature.Contact of materials with dissimilar initial temperatures and/or thermal properties is a situation that, in the present context, is often modelled enforcing (instantaneous) thermal continuity. Because this implies the violation of the thermal equilibrium condition in the affected elements, the option here has been to extend Eq. (14) to model thermal conductance,(15)nTσ=hcd(T−Tk)onΓcdwherehcdrepresents the conductance coefficient and Tkis the temperature of the adjacent element sharing the internal boundaryΓcdwith the current element.The (generalized) Dirichlet condition (5) is used to model prescribed temperature,T¯, inter-element thermal continuity and thermal resistance conditions,(16)T=T¯onΓT(17)T=TkonΓi(18)T=Tk+hrsnTσonΓrswhere Tkstill represents the (boundary) temperature of a connecting element. The inverse form (18) of Eq. (15), wherehrsrepresents the resistance coefficient, cannot be directly implemented with conform elements. Although it is not essential, it is used here to enhance numerical flexibility.The prescribed temperature and heat flux fields and the air temperature are defined as functions of time and space. The convection, convection–radiation, conductance and resistance coefficients are defined in a similar way and may depend on temperature.This section summarizes the approximation criteria used to set up the finite element formulation of the cement hydration problem defined by Eqs. (1)–(8), under the alternative boundary conditions in Eqs. (13)–(18). The following aspects are addressed: the finite element geometric mapping, to clarify the use of unstructured meshes; the approximations in space and in time of the state variables, to identify the properties of the hybrid formulation being used and justify why elements with high aspect-ratios are stable; the equations that govern the thermo-chemical response of a typical hydrating element (which contain the solution for non-hydrating and fully hydrated elements).As the node concept is central to the development of conventional elements, it is important to stress at this stage that its role is marginal (to the extent of being avoidable) in the development of the hybrid formulation adopted here. It is used, for convenience, in the definition of the finite element mesh but is never called upon in the definition of the approximation bases and in the formulation of the algebraic solving system.The hybrid formulation is usually implemented on coarse meshes of high-degree elements. Most elements are regular in shape, as the decomposition of the domain is mainly constrained by the geometry of the medium and the heterogeneity of its thermo-chemical properties.Because of simplicity (no conceptual constraints limit the topology of hybrid elements, e.g. [25]), domain decomposition has been implemented using the geometric mappings that typify isoparametric elements,(19)xi=∑j=1NNj(ξ)xijwherexijdenotes the global xi-coordinate of master node j,Njis the shape function associated with that node andξrepresents the natural coordinate system of the master element. It is necessary to distinguish between master nodes from standard nodes: ‘master nodes’, the nodes of isoparametric elements, are those needed to define the mapping of the master element; ‘nodes’ are used to subdivide a boundary of the element in an arbitrary number of parts, and thus support the definition of unstructured meshes.Fig. 1 illustrates the use of two 4-node elements in the representation of a T-shaped domain. A mesh may combine different types of master elements, say 4- and 8-node elements, to obtain adequate shape representations.Similar to the standard definition of the data structure of a conventional finite element mesh, the number and the co-ordinates of nodes and master nodes are defined first. The next step, of identifying the elements by their nodes, is now replaced by two sub-steps: sides are identified by their nodes, and elements by their sides, with the explicit identification of the master nodes necessary to implement the geometry mapping defined by Eq. (19).Hybrid finite element formulations offer the possibility of selecting different fields for primary approximation, typically those that the analyst wishes to control directly. Two alternatives are possible in the present application: the temperature or the heat flow, as in [12] for steady-state heat conduction. Although the latter ensures the local enforcement of the equilibrium condition (1), as illustrated in [25] for solid mechanics problems, direct control of temperature estimates is the primary concern in the modelling of cement hydration related applications. Therefore, this field is directly approximated in the domain of the element as(20)T=∑j=1NVΘj(ξ)Tjor, listing in row-vectorΘthe approximation functions and in vectorTtheir amplitudes, as:(21)T=ΘTinVIt is worth stressing that there is no relation between the geometric mapping functionsNjin Eq. (19) and the temperature approximation functionsΘj(defined in Section 4), meaning that the same type of master element can be implemented with distinct approximations for the state variables, eventually with different degrees of approximation in each direction (as used in Section 5 in the implementation of high aspect-ratio elements).As for conform elements, the thermal gradient and the heat flow are determined enforcing conditions (2) and (3) for the assumed temperature approximation:(22)ε=(∇Θ)ΤinV(23)σ=−k(∇Θ)ΤinVIn consequence of generalizing the temperature approximation basis, the implicit enforcement of thermal conformity is no longer viable and implies the independent approximation of the heat flux on the Dirichlet boundary (12) of the element, in form,(24)q=φqonΓDwhere row-vectorφlists the approximation functions and vectorqdefines their amplitudes.Although not strictly necessary, and mainly with the purpose of controlling directly a variable central to thermo-chemo-mechanical analyses, the hydration degree is also independently approximated,(25)α=AαinVwithAandαdefining the hydration modes and their amplitudes. Preliminary numerical testing has shown that no performance gains are attained using different approximation bases for the temperature and hydration degree estimates (21) and (25). Although this option remains open in the supporting code, all tests presented below assumeΑ≡Θ. To simplify the presentation, the same assumption holds in the finite element equations presented below.The hydration flux is not explicitly approximated on the boundary of cement elements, because the condition on inter-element continuity of the hydration degree,(26)α=αkonΓiwhere subscript k identifies an adjacent element, follows from the weak enforcement of the Arrhenius law (8) and inter-element thermal continuity condition (17).The approximation of the temperature and hydration rate fields is written in form,(27)Τ̇=ΘΤ̇inV(28)α̇=Θα̇inVand the latter is used to control directly the irreversibility conditionα̇≥0.The use of high-order time integration methods has been assessed, because they lead to substantial gains in convergence under large time-stepping,δt, and pseudo-spectral decomposition is well-suited to parallelization, e.g.[29,30]. However, parallelization is not an issue at the present stage of the research reported here, and the smoothness of the application problem does not justify the added complexity those methods imply. Therefore, the option has been to use the well-proven trapezoidal rule,(29)γδtṪ=T−T0−γ0δtṪ0whereγandγ0are the integration factors for different schemes (the tests presented here are solved forγ=γ0=1/2). The same rule is used to approximate the hydration degree time rate.The finite element governing system is derived enforcing the Galerkin average of the thermal equilibrium, thermal continuity and cement hydration equations:(30)∫ΘT(∇Tσ+ρcṪ−Q∞α̇)dV=0(31)∫φT(T−T¯−hDnTσ)dΓD=0(32)∫ΘT[Q∞α̇−ATf(α)exp(−Ea/RT)]dV=0The derivation of the resulting first-order system of equations,(33)HṪ+(K+C)T+Bq−Q∞α̇=−Q¯q+Q¯h(34)BTT−Rq=T¯(35)Q∞α̇=hαis outlined in Appendix B, where the definitions of the finite element matrices vectors are summarized. The objective is to focus the main text on the role played by each equation and on its relation with the equations of the conform formulation, assuming the following notation:H,KandQ∞are the specific heat, conductivity and hydration heat matrices, defined in the domain of the element, andC,BandRare the (extended) convection, heat flux and thermal resistance matrices, defined on the relevant parts of its boundary.It is shown in Appendix B that Eq. (33) combines the domain and boundary thermal equilibrium conditions (1) and (4), and implies the enforcement of the thermal gradient and conductivity Eqs. (2) and (3). In what regards conventional elements, the essential difference is the explicit enforcement (34) of the thermal continuity conditions (16) and (17), now extended to accommodate the thermal resistance condition (18), and the direct control of the hydration law (8), through Eq. (35).This section summarizes the main aspects related to the implementation of the hybrid finite element model presented above. The approximation bases, their dimensions and their relations are defined first, followed by a brief description of the procedure used to compute and store the finite element arrays. The implementation of the alternative initial conditions (6) and (7) is commented next. The section closes with a description of the procedures used to set up and solve the nonlinear transient finite element model. Particular attention is paid to the properties inherent to hybrid elements and to the measures taken to improve numerical stability.The temperature approximation (21) is implemented with a basis defined by the tensor product of hierarchical polynomials, measured in the natural coordinate system of the element,ξ, to yield the following definition for two-dimensional applications:(36)Θ={⋯Li(ξ)Lj(η)⋯}The default option is to use complete bases, in the sense that the same degree of approximation is used in each direction,dξ=dη, and limits the highest degree of the binomial terms(dξ=dη). However, it is convenient to use different degrees in each direction to implement elements with large aspect-ratios (frequent in the simulation of staged construction, due to the limitations set on the height of concrete layers). Under these options, the dimension of the domain basis (36) is:(37)NV={12(dξ+1)(dη+1)ifdξ=dη(dξ+1)(dη+1)ifdξ≠dηThe same polynomial basis, now defined in the natural coordinate of the element side, is also used in the implementation of the heat flux approximation (24). The form and the dimension of the basis are, therefore:(38)φ={⋯Li(s)⋯}(39)NΓ=ds+1The domain and boundary approximation bases (36) and (38) are implemented with Legendre and Chebyshev polynomials in the supporting code. Although the latter are more stable for higher degrees, all tests presented below are solved with (orthogonal) Legendre bases, as they lead to higher sparsity indices.Assuming that resistance conditions are absent, the thermal continuity condition (34), withR=O, can be used to show that the degree in the boundary approximation (38) cannot exceed the degree of the domain approximation (37) mapped on that boundary. Under this provision, and under the basic requirements of completeness and linear independence, spurious solutions may be avoided by ensuring that the element is thermally undetermined.According to Eq. (34), written for a single element and assuming a pure Dirichlet problem, this implies that the dimension of its domain basis should exceed the sum of the dimensions of the approximations on its boundary:(40)NV≥∑ΓNΓDefinitions (36) and (38) extend as follows for three-dimensional applications,(41)Θ={⋯Li(ξ)Lj(η)Lk(ξ)⋯}(42)φ={⋯Li(u)Lj(v)⋯}where(ξ,η,ζ)are the natural co-ordinates of the master element and (u,v) the side co-ordinates. The general form of definitions (37) and (39) for a D-dimensional problem is:(43)NV=∏j=1D{1D!(d+j)ifdξ=dη=dζ=d(dj+1)ifindependentlyset(44)NΓ=∏j=1D−1{1(D−1)!(d+j)ifdu=dv=d(dj+1)ifindependentlysetThe finite element arrays present in Eqs. (33)–(35) are computed using the Gauss–Legendre quadrature rule. They are calculated once whenever linear, and at every time step when they only vary with time. The flux and hydration heat matrices,BandQ∞, are linear by definition, and so are the specific heat and conductivity matrices,HandK, in most applications on cement hydration. In that context, the same property often applies to the resistance matrix,R, and to the convection and conductance terms of matrixC. It is this set of assumptions that justifies the smoothness of most of the proposed applications in cement hydration in concrete structures.Moreover, when elements are regular (most elements in a hybrid mesh have constant Jacobians), the orthogonality of the polynomial bases leads to matrices with high sparsity indices. The extreme cases are the resistance, specific heat and heat of hydration matrices, which are diagonal for Legendre bases and regular elements. For this reason, only the non-null coefficients of the (linear or nonlinear) finite element arrays are computed and stored in sparse form. Because of the reasons justified below, the (frequently diagonal) hydration heat and specific heat matrices are factorized at the onset of the analysis.The supporting computer code has been prepared to simulate staged construction. At the onset of a new construction stage, the weighting vectors present in the temperature, heat flux and hydration degree approximations (21), (24) and (25) are known, as well as the weights in the approximations (27) and (28) of their time rates. This is the information that has to be determined for the elements used to model the new stage of construction, which may contain hydrating, fully hydrated and non-cement elements. The procedure used to define the initial solution of the thermo-chemical analysis is summarized in Appendix C.For a given time step, starting at instant t0, with duration δt and under the time integration rule (29), the system of Eqs. (33)–(35) is nonlinear. Despite the symmetry of the individual matrices, the gradient form of this system is non-symmetric prior to convergence of the iterative process. It is noted that the experimentally fitted constitutive relations, namely the thermal conductivity equation (3) and the hydration law (8), do not derive from thermodynamically consistent potentials.In order to exploit the gains yield by symmetry in storage requirements, and especially in the solution of the governing system of equations, two changes are introduced in the standard form of the Newton–Raphson method. The first consists in forcing symmetry of the system and adding the unbalanced term (as determined in the previous iteration) to the residue vector. The second consists in solving sequentially, in each iteration, the thermal problem defined by Eqs. (33) and (34), and the hydration problem defined by Eq. (35). The (numerically uncoupled, symmetric) gradient form of these problems is the following in iteration n,(45)[SnBT−B(R+R′)n]{T˜nq˜n}={RqnRTn}(46)Q∞α˜=HαnT˜n+Rαnwhere the tilde identifies the residual term, e.g.Tn=Tn−1+T˜n. Due to the number of terms involved, the definitions of the matrices and vectors present in systems (45) and (46) are summarized in Appendix D.The solving system for the finite element mesh maintains the structure of the elementary systems (45) and (46), and is assembled by direct allocation of the elementary matrices and vectors, without the nodal summation that characterizes the assemblage of the solving system of conventional elements. Therefore, matrixSand the (often null) thermal resistance termsRandR′are block-diagonal because the temperature degrees-of-freedom are strictly element-dependent. In system (45) the heat flux degrees-of-freedom,q˜, are the only variables that may be shared, namely by pairs of elements connecting at the boundary associated to the heat approximation. Moreover, system (46) is strictly element-dependent.These are the properties that enhance the parallelization of the solution. It is noted that systems (45) and (46) are highly sparse in consequence of the orthogonality of the finite element bases and of the dominance of undistorted elements in hybrid meshes. Implementation of adaptive p-refinement procedures is simplified by the structure of the system and by the naturally hierarchical structure of the approximation bases, as defined by Eqs. (36) and (38). The solution of system (46) is trivial, as the factorized form of matrixQ∞is available. System (45) is solved using the frontal method.Two levels of scaling are introduced to improve numerical stability. The data is non-dimensionalized and normalized to the typical element length and to the expected average temperature, and the thermo-chemical properties are normalized to the maximum values of the conductivity and latent heat of hydration coefficients. The second stabilization measure consists in normalizing system (45) prior to its solution.Upon convergence, the rates of the weights of the temperature and hydration approximations,Ṫandα̇, are determined using the weak forms (33) and (35) of the thermal equilibrium and hydration laws. The cost is marginal, as the updated information is necessary to set up the next time increment and the factorized forms of the specific heat and heat of hydration matrices,HandQ∞, are available. In addition, the quality of the convergence is assessed comparing theṪandα̇solutions determined in this manner with the equivalent solutions obtained in the iteration cycle, where they are computed using the time integration rule, e.g. Eq. (29) for the temperature field. Finally, approximation (28) is used to check the irreversibility conditionα̇≥0on a grid of points and at every time increment.Five tests are presented below. The first is finite element oriented, in the sense that it is designed to illustrate the implementation of the hybrid formulation under different boundary and initial conditions. The following three tests are selected to assess the formulation using monitoring data and numerical validation results reported in the literature. Besides the standard test on the one-dimensional modelling of the casting of reinforced concrete (RC) slabs, the simulation of the casting of a wind tower foundation and the phased construction of a roller-compacted concrete (RCC) gravity dam are chosen to illustrate the use of unstructured meshes and high aspect-ratio elements in axisymmetric and two-dimensional applications, respectively. The last test addresses the three-dimensional extension of the formulation.With the exception of the test on the gravity dam, the values used for the specific heat and conductivity coefficients are ρc=2.4MJ/m3K and k=2.6W/mK. The same set of units is used (and omitted below) for specific heat, conductivity and convection, convection–radiation and conductance (W/mK). The heat of hydration related properties used in the tests are summarized inTable 1, where constants Q∞and ATare defined per unit weight of cement content in the mix (cc).Besides the simplifications assumed in the definition of the cement hydration model, the simulation of experimental tests is also affected by different uncertainties in the quantification of thermo-chemical properties and environmental (boundary) conditions. However, testing has shown that the sensitivity of the results centres on the estimate of temperature and hydration degree at the moment of casting. The casting temperature mentioned in the supporting references is used and assumed constant, as in those reports. The same applies for the initial estimates of the hydration degree.The two-stage casting test defined inFig. 2 is designed to illustrate the enforcement of boundary and initial conditions (4)–(7) under the heat transfer mechanism modelled by the resistance condition (18). The heat of hydration data given in Table 1 is applied with definition (9) for the hydration function (b=0.51, c=2.91).The two-element mesh (L×L elements with L=0.5m) shown in Fig. 2a is solved first for condition (7), withṪ0=0andα̇0=0, and the boundary conditions shown in the same figure with a convection coefficient hc=5. The duration of this stage is 16h.A new layer of elements (L×h, h=0.3m) is added in the second stage under the external boundary conditions defined in Fig. 2b. To illustrate the effect of thermal resistance on the contact surface y=L, condition (18) is applied with a high coefficient, hrs=100, and a linear time function, which sets the resistance coefficient to zero after 16h of contact. Thermal continuity is enforced from that instant onwards, according to Eq. (18). In addition, to enhance the effect of hydration on heat transfer, the initial condition (6) is applied with T0=20°C (the temperature prescribed on the top surface during the first stage,T¯=20). A residual initial value for the hydration degree is used in the second layer,α0=0.01.The total duration of the analysis, 64h, is chosen to include a period when the effect of heat resistance is no longer visible while hydration progresses. The evolution of the temperature and hydration fields is presented inFigs. 3 and 4 and detailed inFig. 5 for the control points shown in Fig. 2c. The solutions in point pairs P2–P5 and P3 and P4 are taken from the independent temperature and hydration degree approximations (21) and (25) in the corresponding pairs of elements.The analysis of these results can be summarized as follows: the Neumann condition (13) on boundary x=L is adequately modelled throughout the test (see Fig. 3), although it is not explicitly enforced in system (45); the explicitly enforced Dirichlet condition (16) is met on boundaries y=L (first stage) and y=0 (both stages), as shown in Fig. 3 and detailed for points P1 and P2 in Fig. 5a (the relative error is lower than 0.02%); the thermal continuity condition (17), also enforced explicitly and in weak form, is satisfied on inter-element boundary x=0 throughout the test (the relative error in points P3 and P4 is lower than 0.01%), and the same applies to the boundary y=L as soon as the resistance coefficient becomes null (t≥32h), as shown for points P2 and P5 in Fig. 5a.As shown in this figure, at the onset of the second stage, the temperatures at points P2 and P5 are the same in consequence of the previous boundary condition at P2 (T¯=20°C) and the initial solution set for P5 in the second stage (T0=20°C). During the first period of contact, 16≤t≤32h, when the resistance coefficient varies linearly in time from 100 to 0, distinct evolutions of temperature occur at points P2 and P5, as they are in different stages of hydration. As thermal continuity is enforced at these points after 16h of contact, the initially distinct degrees of hydration converge as time evolves, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5b. The hydration at point P1 is lower, as it is subject to a constant temperature.The analysis is implemented using a 4-node element in the geometric mapping defined by Eq. (19). The domain approximations (21) and (25) are applied with degreedξ=dη=9, leading to elements with 55 degrees-of-freedom according to Eq. (37). The degree of heat flux approximation (24) is lower,ds=7, to illustrate the weak enforcement of thermal continuity conditions (16) and (17) on sides y=0 and x=0 in both stages, and on side y=L in the first stage. The dimension of system (45) is low, of the order of 150 in the first stage and 250 in the second, with sparsity indices (accounting for symmetry) ranging from 85% to 90%. Most fill-in of system (45) is caused by the hydration matrix (Hαin Appendix D). The specific heat and heat of hydration matrices,HandQ∞, are diagonal.The simulation reported in [2,31] on the one-dimensional modelling of the casting of a RC slab is used here. The slab, 0.35m thick and directly supported on a horizontal layer of soil, was instrumented with two thermal sensors placed at 5cm from the top and bottom surfaces, as shown inFig. 6. The boundary conditions are convective, with coefficients hc=7.5 and hc=4.5 at the bottom and top surfaces (these options are justified in [2]). The in situ measured air temperature is used in the analysis. The initial temperature in concrete is T0=17.5°C and 17°C at the surface of the supporting soil. The initial hydration degree is α0=0.05. The data given in Table 1 and the definition of the hydration function are determined from the adiabatic test temperature Tad=14+47[1−exp(−1.5t)], with temperature in degrees Celsius and time in days [31].The numerical solutions obtained for the temperature and the hydration degree at mid-height of the foundation slab are presented inFig. 7, where the temperature is scaled to the maximum variation in adiabatic conditions, ΔTmax=(1−α0)Q∞/ρc. The results presented inFig. 8 show that the numerical solutions recover adequately the experimental results (labelled ‘Measured’). The hybrid formulation solution is obtained with one element and approximationdξ;dη=(0;7), that is, constant in length and with degree seven in height, for a total of eight degrees-of-freedom. The DIANA code [32] results reported in [2] are obtained with a mesh of seven 4-node (conform) elements.The difference in the temperature solutions obtained with conform and hybrid elements in the three testing points is marginal but higher than expected in this rather simple test, bearing in mind that the approximations in the two models are practically equivalent. As convergence of the hybrid solution has been confirmed, the reason found to justify this difference is the use of different time integration rules, under different time steps. The estimates for the hydration degree are closer, due to the exponential form of the hydration law (8).The wind tower RC foundation problem reported in [20,33], with the geometry shown inFig. 9a, is simulated using an axisymmetric model and assuming that concrete casting takes place in a single stage. The concrete foundation is supported on a granite bedrock, and it includes a steel ring to anchor the tower mast. The boundary conditions are convective on surfaces Bd.1 and Bd.2 (hc=10.0 and hc=7.5) and adiabatic on Bd.3.The initial temperature estimated for the rock foundation (with the thermal properties ρc=2.04 and k=2.79) was 9.5°C. During the casting operations, the temperature measured in the concrete mass was 15°C and in the steel ring 5.6°C (ρc=3.27, k=54.0). The heat of hydration data is given in Table 1 and the hydration function used in the analysis is defined inTable 2. The estimate for the initial hydration degree is 0.01 [33].The solution reported in [33] is obtained with code DIANA. The structured mesh that is used (1444 bilinear elements) is strongly constrained by the discretization of the steel ring (100 linear elements). The total number of degrees-of-freedom is 4471.Geometry and heterogeneity of the thermo-chemical properties are the only constraints in the design of the hybrid element mesh shown in Fig. 9b. The problem is solved with nine elements, with the rock foundation and the steel ring being modelled with two elements each (the effect of the ring top lip is neglected). The degrees of the approximation bases range from 3 (in the width of the steel ring elements) to 11 (in the length of the largest rock element). System (45) has 712 degrees-of-freedom, 54 assigned to the heat flux vector and 658 to the temperature vector. The dimension of the hydration degree vector in system (46) is 390. The specific heat and heat of hydration matrices remain diagonal except for the terms associated with the trapezoidal cement element. The order of the sparsity index of system (45) is 90%.The results reported in [33] were obtained assuming instantaneous thermal continuity on the interfaces of different materials (with distinct initial temperatures). These interfaces are modelled here with the thermal conductance condition (15) with high conductance coefficients (hcd=103 on rock-concrete and hcd=104 on steel-concrete interfaces).The temperature measurements at the four thermal sensors S1–S4 indicated in Fig. 9b are compared inFig. 10 with the numerical predictions obtained with conventional and hybrid elements. The peak temperatures at those sensors are given inTable 3. The largest differences in the temperatures with respect to the measurements, commented in [20,33], are detected close to surface Bd.1 and close to the steel ring, where different boundary conditions are applied. The conform and hybrid finite element solutions nearly coincide at points S1 and S4 (where the same boundary conditions are used) and are marginally different at points S2 and S3 (different modelling conditions are applied close to point S2).The evolution of the temperature and hydration degree fields presented inFigs. 11 and 12 match the solutions reported in [20,33]. The cooling effect of the steel ring and the heat transfer to the granite bedrock are visible, and the adiabatic and thermal continuity boundary conditions are well enforced.The simulation of the phased construction of a RCC gravity dam presented in [23] is used to illustrate the use of meshes with high aspect-ratio elements. The geometry of the dam and the hybrid finite element mesh used in the analysis are defined inFig. 13. The construction of this dam is modelled in [23] with 126 layers, each with a constant thickness of 0.30m, and the construction schedule is set to account for the reduction of breadth along the height.The construction schedule is summarized inTable 4 for each phase, where ‘Time’ indicates the instant assigned to the installation of the first layer of each phase, and ‘Elevation’ defines the y-coordinate, in the reference system defined in Fig. 12b, of the surface at the beginning of each phase. Also given in Table 4 are the y-coordinates of the control points Pi to be referred next (Pi is placed at the centre of the first layer of phase i).The initial temperatures considered for the rock foundation (ρc=2.445, k=3.29) and the concrete layers (ρc=2.5, k=1.7) are 10°C and 20°C, respectively. The heat of hydration data is defined in Table 1 and the hydration function defined by Eq. (9) is applied (b=0.75, c=7.05). The boundary conditions identified in Fig. 13 are convective on boundaries Bd.1 and Bd.2 (hc=20 and hc=4, respectively, with Ta=15°C). The initial hydration degree used in the analysis is not clearly defined in [23] (it suggests a value of 0.01, adopted here) and the contact conditions are not mentioned. Boundary Bd.3 is adiabatic and conductance is enforced on the rock-concrete interface and between concrete layers (with hcd=100, assuming that instantaneous thermal continuity is enforced in [23]).The mesh used in [23] has 5214 bilinear conform elements. Its design is constrained by the option to set the height of the elements to the thickness of the layers (implying a quasi-linear approximation in height) and to set the length of the elements to aspect-ratios close to 1:1. The height constraint is adopted in the design of the hybrid mesh shown in Fig. 13b, the main difference being that each layer is now represented by a single element. The maximum number of hybrid elements is 143 and the highest aspect-ratio is close to 100:1.The approximation degrees in concrete elements aredξ=9anddη=d, with d ranging from 1 to 5 in the three convergence tests that have been performed. The ranges of the approximation in the rock hybrid elements are5≤dξ≤9andd≤dη≤5. The number of degrees-of-freedom are the following for each test: 2886 (d=1), 5647 (close to the dimension of the conform element solution for test d=3) and 8125 (d=5). As the level of shape distortion is relatively low and the dimensions of the systems (45) and (46) increase substantially, their sparsity indices exceed now 99.3% and 99.9%, respectively.The evolution of the temperature and hydration degree at the control points defined in Table 4 is presented inFig. 14. It shows the influence of the convective conditions up to the second phase of construction and the dominant effect the heat of hydration has from that instant onwards.The layered patterns of the temperature and hydration degree fields are visible inFigs. 15 and 16. They capture the slow cooling after completion of the construction (at day 77) and the slow progress of the cement hydration. These results recover the patterns and the order of the values presented in [23]. However, and as in previous tests, the temperature estimates of the hybrid model are lower, as shown inTable 5. The peak values given for the hybrid solution are searched in the domain of the elements, while the envelope shown in Fig. 14 is defined by the maximum temperature found at the mid-point of all layers.No reference is made in [23] to convergence criteria and time integration. The three tests defined above have been run with time increments ranging from 15 to 120min. It has been observed that the peak temperatures increase with the duration of the time step (60min is often used in practice). The results presented in Table 5 suggest that convergence of the solutions obtained with the mesh defined is reached in the second test, for d=3.The maximum difference found for the (scaled) temperature rate is 10−8 when the alternative definitions (29) and (33) are used, that is, when they are independently computed from the time integration rule and the weak form of the thermal equilibrium condition. The same applies to the equivalent independent estimates of the hydration degree rate, using now the hydration law (35). As shown in the foundation slab test, the convergence of the hydration degree is faster than the convergence in temperature. This is illustrated inFig. 17 for the relative error, ε=1−EFE/Eexact, measured on the variation of the thermal and heat of hydration energies,(47)ET=∫0t∫εTkεdVdt(48)EQ=∫0t∫TQ∞α̇dVdtdenoted by εTand εQ, respectively, and using the solution of test d=5 as ‘exact’.The three-dimensional extension of the formulation defined by Eqs. (41)–(44) is used to simulate the hydration of a massive concrete block cast on a rock foundation. The thermal properties, the hydration data and the initial temperatures in the concrete and in the rock mass defined for the wind tower foundation are adopted in this test, and symmetry is used to analyse one quarter of the structure. Its dimensions and discretization in five elements are shown inFig. 18.A convection–radiation condition [27] is applied to the horizontal (exposed) surfaces of both concrete and rock. The convection coefficient is hc=9.53, for a wind speed v=1m/s, and the (linearized) radiation coefficient (W/m2/K) is defined by,(49)hr=4.8ε{1+0.015625(Ta−278.15)1Ta≥278.15KTa<278.15Kwith emissivity ε=0.9. A convective boundary condition is applied to the lateral surfaces of the concrete block to simulate the effect of formwork (hc=5) and a conductance condition is implemented on the concrete interface with the rock foundation (hcd=50). Adiabatic conditions are assumed elsewhere.The results presented inFig. 19 show a delay in the hydration reaction caused by the residual value used for the initial hydration degree, α0=10−3. Hydration temperature at the top surface of the concrete block, z=6m, is strongly affected by the variation of the air temperature. The temperature at the base of the foundation rock, z=0, remains unchanged due to the value used for its depth. The effect of the conductance condition on the rock-concrete interface, z=4m, is visible, as well as the gradual convergence of the temperature field in the concrete block towards the average of the air temperature.The results presented in Fig. 19 confirm that hydration at the centre of the concrete block, z=5m, develops initially under adiabatic conditions. In the simulation of the adiabatic calorimetric test, the solution is space-independent (only the constant modes in approximations in the temperature and heat flux approximations (21) and (24) are active in the analysis). Moreover, the adiabatic relation,(50)Q∞(α−α0)=ρc(T−T0)holds throughout the simulation of the test (as no heat losses are allowed), independently of the definition used for the hydration function. These tests have been solved successfully, and the experimental and numerical results reported in [20,24,34] have been recovered. For the present test, a five-digit precision is obtained in the estimate of the adiabatic temperature rise (50), Tmax−T0=54.358°C, it being noted that the model allows for full hydration, αmax=1.The evolution of the temperature field in the concrete block and in (part of) the rock foundation in section x=0 is shown inFig. 20. The solution recovers the patterns reported in [20,35] for similar tests. The adiabatic conditions are met and the gradual enforcement of thermal continuity associated with the conductance condition is captured. The variation of the hydration degree field is shown inFig. 21. These results are obtained using a seventh-degree approximation for the temperature field and a sixth-degree approximation for the heat flux approximation on the interfaces of rock elements (x=1m and y=1m in Fig. 18), for a total of 712 degrees-of-freedom and a sparsity index in the 99% range.The results reported above confirm that the hybrid formulation of the finite element method can recover the levels of accuracy obtained with the conform Ritz formulation, using simpler meshes and a lower number of degrees-of-freedom, for the simulation of temperature variations induced by cement hydration in concrete structures. Consequent upon the approximation criteria, the resulting solving system is better suited to adaptive p-refinement and parallelization, features that are relevant in the solution of large-scale problems.Besides good levels of accuracy, the numerical tests illustrate the gains that can be attained by uncoupling the approximations of the geometric and state variables to use unstructured meshes with uncoupled finite element bases (in the sense of using different degrees of approximation in each direction, and independently of the geometric mapping). The price paid for this gain in flexibility and suitability to adaptive refinement and parallelization is the increase in the number of degrees-of-freedom caused by the additional approximation of the heat flux field. This may be relevant in solid mechanics problems, but has a marginal effect in the scope of the application presented here, where convective (and conductive) boundary conditions dominate, and temperatures are rarely prescribed.The (optional) approximation of the hydration degree field is justified by the direct control of the evolution of cement hydration, in a stage of development when the performance of the formulation was yet to be fully assessed. The additional cost is not significant because this field is determined at element level, in consequence of the uncoupling of the thermo-chemical problem during the iterative solution procedure.This option is maintained in the on-going development of this study in two directions, to be subsequently merged: the extension to hygro-thermo-chemical modelling of high performance concrete (adding the independent approximations of the moisture field and its flux, and the silica fume and silicate polymerization terms) and the extension to thermo-chemo-mechanical analysis of concrete structures (coupling the approach reported here with the hybrid models that have been developed for the analysis of single- and multiphase media, e.g. [25]).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
