@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational homogenisation from a 3D finite element model of asphalt concrete—linear elastic computations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A 3D random mesoscale model of asphalt concrete is presented.Computational homogenisation using the finite element method is performed.Representative volume elements of a linear elastic composite are determined.Both the material contrast and the volume fraction govern the representative volume element size.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Asphalt concrete,Random heterogeneous media,Representative volume element,Voronoi tessellation,Computational homogenisation,Finite element method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Asphalt concrete (AC) is a composite material consisting of bituminous binders, mineral aggregate, and voids. Experimental and computational efforts to assess the bulk mechanical properties of AC ubiquitously raise the question of representative sample size. It is well known that the dimension of a sample has to be larger than the largest morphological entity. However, it has been shown that the required size is a function of the morphological and physical properties under consideration, e. g. the difference between the properties of the constituents at the microscale, and their volume fractions. In the present contribution, representative sample sizes are determined numerically for a variation of parameters in terms of a tolerable amount of statistical scatter by conducting virtual experiments. If the scatter between distinct heterogeneous samples falls below a certain threshold, the corresponding volume is called a representative volume element (RVE). Finite element (FE) discretisations of AC volume samples are generated by means of a shrunk Poisson Voronoi tessellation. In order to provide estimates for the evolution of the RVE size under changing material properties of the mortar, the stiffness ratio between rocks and mortar is varied by two orders of magnitude. Furthermore, the influence of a variation in volume fraction is investigated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Whether or not a material should be treated as a composite can be considered as a question of the scale of interest. A small enough scale will reveal heterogeneities in almost any material. In order to get a better understanding of the bulk characteristics of a material, it is important to study and understand its microstructure. Thus, there is a need to create a mesomechanical virtual laboratory for AC to estimate its effective properties. The bulk behaviour of AC does not only depend on the material properties of its constituents, but also on structural properties such as shape, granulometric and orientation distributions [13]. In order to assess the impact of changes of the structural composition, the reconstruction of the structure from image data is not suitable. Rather, a flexible methodology to randomly generate structures that resemble AC is needed for this purpose. The effective properties can be thought of as the properties observed for testing a specimen of infinite dimensions, which contains all microheterogeneities characteristic to the material in an infinite number. Otherwise, material properties will always be mixed up with structural properties. For the testing—be it real or virtual—of specimens of finite dimensions, a compromise between effort and accuracy has to be found. Therefore, it is desirable to establish lower bounds for the specimen size that still allow to call it a representative volume element. As Huet [21] and Kanit et al. [23] point out, the RVE size is a function of the morphological or physical property under consideration. In the present study, it is a function of the contrast in the properties of the microconstituents, and their volume fractions.Current approaches to computational modelling of AC can be separated in continuum, mesoscale, and multiscale approaches. The terminology used throughout the present study is the following: Continuum approaches do not explicitly model the granular structure of AC, but treat the composite in a smeared fashion [6,40,38]. Mesoscale models take the grains explicitly into account via a geometric representation [35,54,55,50]. Multiscale models are bridging the gap between mesoscale and continuum approaches by performing homogenisation from the smaller scale to obtain smeared parameters for the use at the continuum scale [31,13,27,45]. This classification neglects that mesoscale models usually employ a size threshold of geometric modelling and treat only a fraction of the grain size distribution explicitly. In the context of AC, this means that small grains are mixed with the bitumen. The properties of this mixture are represented in a smeared way by considering a continuous mortar phase.The importance of conducting full 3D analyses of AC behaviour is highlighted, for example, by Mo et al. [37], who find that their 2D model underestimates the stresses in the mortar by a factor of 2.6–3.5. This is supported by the research of Fakhari Tehrani et al. [12], who conclude that experimental results of the complex modulus of AC mixtures are better reproduced by 3D approaches. Since computational resources are easily overpowered by 3D mesoscale simulations, for example, of moving wheel loads [37], the need for efficient computational homogenisation arises. The present work provides a first step towards a virtual laboratory that enables both mesoscale investigations and upscaling of homogenised properties to computationally efficient continuum approaches.Periodicity is a feature of paramount importance for computational homogenisation from RVEs. It has been shown by various researchers, that displacement (Dirichlet) boundary conditions (BCs) overestimate the effective material properties, whereas traction (Neumann) BCs underestimate them. Although the advantages of one type of BC over the other diminish with increasing RVE size is it worthwhile to keep the computational effort to a minimum. The superior performance of displacement based periodic boundary conditions (PBCs) for the prediction of effective properties has been demonstrated analytically [20,21,41] and numerically [34,23,45], see Nguyen et al. [39] for a review. However, the application of PBCs requires the geometry, as well as the FE mesh, to be periodic at the boundaries.FE based investigations to determine minimal RVE sizes for randomly generated structures have been performed for several materials. As the research field of computational homogenisation has experienced tremendous growth in recent years, only a few selected publications will be discussed here. The interested reader is referred to Nguyen et al. [39] for a broader discussion of the topic. Synthetic geometries are frequently used for the multi-scale simulation of metals. Fritzen et al. [16] investigate the convergence of effective properties for gold, nickel and copper by means of Voronoi tessellations. They later extend their methodology to metal-matrix composites [15]. They apply a method to shrink Voronoi cells in order to create space for a matrix, in which the particles are suspended. Periodicity of geometry and mesh is established and the required size is determined for a material contrast of ≈5.7 and particle volume fractions of 0.1–0.8. The applicability to high contrast materials is assessed for a stiffness ratio of 100, without investigating RVE convergence. Kanit et al. [23] thoroughly investigate convergence of a 3D dual-phase structure based on a neat Voronoi tessellation with contrasts of 100 and 1000 and volume fractions between 0.525 and 0.725. Shahzamanian et al. [46] determine the RVE size for a multi-phase cement paste based on block meshes. Stroeven et al. [47] employ the discrete element method to create structures of spherical matrix inclusions. The material contrast is ≈2.86, and the volume fraction ranges from 0.3 to 0.75. Wriggers and Moftah [53] create random sphere based models for the simulation of concrete. Their approach considers the granulometric curve. 3D computations are used to determine the effective properties. Savvas et al. [44] study the homogenisation of structures with arbitrarily shaped inclusions by means of the extended finite element method. They investigate values of material contrast up to 1000, and volume fractions between 0.2 and 0.4.Several researchers do not generate synthetic geometries, but digitalise real geometries from image data. Only few investigations of representativeness are conducted. RVE sizes for human cortical bone have been determined by Grimal et al. [18] based on acoustic microscopy. Kanit et al. [24] investigate two different materials from food industry, based on 3D confocal images. Digitalisation from image data is common in the context of AC. 2D models can be generated from simple images [32,7,49,2]. Tashman et al. [48] enrich continuum modelling of AC with a microstructure tensor that allows to take mesostructural geometric properties into account without explicit discretisation. Kim et al. [26] conduct an experimental and FE-based study on determining RVE sizes for the viscoelastic dynamic modulus of three different AC mixtures. Sinusoidal Dirichlet BCs are applied. They conclude that RVE dimensions have to be approximately four times larger than the nominal maximum grain size. Mitra et al. [35] perform 2D nonlinear viscoplastic simulations of the indirect tensile test. In their work, the results obtained from a random ellipsoid inclusions model are compared to results from an image based structure. They conclude that image based modelling does not offer significant advantages over their synthetic sample. 3D reconstructions of real AC geometries typically rely on computer tomography [51,28,54].Synthetic approaches to create AC mesostructures are frequently based on spheres/ellipsoids [37,22,8,45] and polyhedra [25,30,55,27,50]. A noteworthy contribution has been made by Fakhari Tehrani et al. [13], who employ a structural model generator for 2D mesoscale modelling of AC. Their approach captures the granulometric curve and allows the investigation of the influence of irregular polygonal over spherical particles. A mesh density study is performed and the numerically determined complex modulus is compared to experimental results.The present paper demonstrates a methodology to generate 3D synthetic structures of AC based on Voronoi tessellations and the computation of effective properties by means of homogenisation techniques. Periodicity is enforced in the geometry, the mesh, and through the application of PBCs. The sample size required for representativeness is determined numerically through a statistical measure of convergence. The two phases, rock and mortar, are modelled as linear elastic. Based on a threshold of the granulometric curve, volume fractions of rock and mortar for a German standard stone mastic AC are established. Inelastic material modelling of the bituminous mortar phase is out of scope of the present paper. Nevertheless, linear elastic modelling allows to show the validity of the methodology and furthermore highlights the influences of volume fraction and the contrast of material properties on RVE size.The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses the generation of periodic geometry and mesh for the example of AC. In Section 3, the realisation of specific volume fractions and the material properties are presented. A statistical measure of convergence is introduced in Section 4, followed by the results for all examples in Section 5.The geometry generation for mesostructural models of AC is independent of its mechanical quantities. On the other hand, estimations of the overall mechanical behaviour are only possible in combination with constitutive laws for the rocks, the bituminous mortar gluing the composite together, and their interaction. Thereby, aspects such as rate-dependence and thermomechanical coupling would be important for the modelling of bituminous binders/mortars. This is, however, out of the scope of this paper.Modern road engineering has developed a plethora of different AC types in terms of rock/binder ratio, grain size distribution and binder type. For example, AC on bridges must not be vibration rolled, hence it is “softer” than most other mixtures, and some AC types are open porous to increase drainage and reduce noise. Hence, computational modelling of asphalt geometries should be flexible enough to capture a variety of mixtures. Current mesostructural approaches cannot take the whole particle size distribution of AC into account for reasons of computational feasibility. Typically, the small aggregate fractions are assigned to a bituminous mortar phase, subsequently modelled as a continuum. Definitions of the size threshold for the mortar phase vary. Typical choices are 0.5mm [52], 2mm [1], 2.36mm [8,49,35,55,12], and 4.75mm [50]. Here, the 2mm threshold is adopted and applied to the example of German standard stone mastic asphalt with 11mm maximum aggregate size: SMA 11 S. A closeup of a cut through SMA 11 S is depicted in Fig. 1, and its granulometric curve is given in Fig. 2. The adjustment of the Voronoi tessellation to fit prescribed particle size distributions will be described in another publication.Existing approaches to model granular materials with irregularly shaped particles are based on different types of Voronoi tessellations, see e. g. Aurenhammer [3] for an overview. The input to a Voronoi tessellation is an arbitrary distribution of n seeds in a domain D. A projection of seeds and a yellow coloured cubic domain into the x–y plane is depicted in Fig. 3. If a random distribution is chosen, the term Poisson Voronoi tessellation is used. It is this randomness that causes scatter in the homogenised properties. A periodic tessellation is enforced by generating the seeds randomly within D and copying them around the domain 26 times, as proposed by Decker and Jeulin [10]. The Voronoi tessellation is generated using Matlab[33]. Extensive use is made of the geom3D package [29] for creating minimal convex hulls based on qhull[4] and numerous geometric operations. The peculiarity of the Voronoi tessellation is that every point P within a certain region Viis closer to its seed Si, than to any other seed Sj:(1)Vi={P∈D|d(P,Si)<d(P,Sj),∀i≠j}.11This is the definition used e. g. by Du et al. [11]. Mathematically, this definition creates a set of points which does not belong to any polyhedron, but constitutes its boundary which is used to define the polyhedron.Here, d is the distance as given by a certain metric. Depending on the choice of metric, the Voronoi tessellation looks differently. By using the Euclidean distance, the domain is divided into convex polyhedra, see Fig. 4. A critical view at typical ACs (see Fig. 1) proves that convexity does not hold strictly. Nevertheless is the assumption of convexity common in the modelling of AC and regarded as a minor idealisation. The Voronoi tessellation has physical justification for the modelling of some metals. In the context of AC, it is merely chosen for reasons of visual resemblance.In a neat Voronoi tessellation as depicted in Fig. 4, the grains22From a mathematical point of view, the Voronoi cells are convex polyhedra. However, from a road engineering perspective, the Voronoi polyhedra are representing the grains within asphalt concrete. Henceforth, both terms are used interchangeably.touch seamlessly. In order to create space for the bituminous mortar, the original Voronoi polyhedra are undergoing a shrinking procedure. Subsequently, the free space is filled by new polyhedra representing the mortar. The procedure is illustrated in Fig. 5(a), and the result of shrinking the grains of the structure shown in Fig. 4 is depicted in Fig. 5(b). For a given grain, all vectors from its seed to the nodes are computed and scaled by a shrinking factor0<s<1. Using this procedure, the facets of neighbouring grains remain parallel to each other and the thickness of the mortar layer is not constant throughout the domain, but per face pair. Please note that the shrinking procedure could be carried out using any point lying within the grain, therefore changing the geometric properties of the layer. Also, the shrinking factor could vary from grain to grain, but not within one grain, as this would violate convexity of the polyhedron. Nevertheless, a constant s is chosen throughout this study for reasons of simplicity. This method varies from the erosion process used by Fritzen and Böhlke [15] in several regards. In the present approach, the thickness of the layer between neighbouring grains is not constant throughout D. It appears from visual inspection that constant mortar thickness is untypical for AC (cf. Fig. 1). Furthermore, the present approach does not employ an iterative procedure to obtain a certain volume fraction. After the grains have been shrunk, the Voronoi tessellation is trimmed to desired domain shape and the convex hulls of all trimmed polyhedra are updated. Given a constant shrinking factor, simple geometric considerations allow to write the total rock volume VRby means of the equation(2)VR=VT(1-s)3,where VTis the total volume of the domain. In a periodic Voronoi geometry, the number of grains matches exactly the number of seeds lying within the domain. The nominal number of grains is higher, but if one takes into regard that grains intersecting the domain boundary continue on the opposite face of the RVE, the effective grain number, n, is obtained. In order to obtain the “correct” material response, the required RVE size has to be determined. We follow the convention used by Kanit et al. [23] to fix the mean grain volumeVGmto unity:VGm=1. That isVR=n×VGm=n×1. Hence an increase in VTis analogous to an increase of n. Please note that the absolute domain size does not matter for the identification of RVEs. It is also possible to keep VTfixed at an arbitrary value and treatVGmas a function of n. However, the accuracy of geometric operations should be kept in mind when choosing the absolute domain size. By using (2), VTcan be expressed as(3)VT=n(1-s)3.Periodic quadratic tetrahedral meshes are created by the open-source mesh generator GMSH[17], see Fig. 6for a depiction of a meshed volume element. It pursues a hierarchical meshing procedure by first creating a 1D mesh on the edges of the structure. This imposes a constraint on the 2D mesh of all facets and likewise on the full 3D mesh for volumes. Given a deterministic behaviour of the meshing algorithm, meshes of identical facets will be identical. It is well known that neat Voronoi tessellations are badly conditioned for meshing. This is due to the fact that a Voronoi tessellation produces some edges and facets that are extremely small compared to the characteristic length of the structure. Furthermore, trimming introduces additional disadvantageous geometric properties like thin layers and small dihedral angles. The presently generated meshes can clearly be improved. Particularly large elastic and/or inelastic strains are prone to require higher mesh quality.Mesh convergence has been checked for a high material contrast using a rock volume fraction ofΦR=0.73and 9 seeds. Only the mesh density is changed, the geometry for all computations remains the same. Fig. 8shows the results. The finest mesh has 2,155,980 degrees of freedom corresponding to a characteristic length of a single tetrahedron of 0.05. The discretisation error(4)err=E¯c−E¯fE¯f,where the subscripts f and c denote the finest and a coarser mesh, respectively, quantifies the relative change in mechanical response between different meshes. It is found that a characteristic element length of 0.1 is necessary to obtainerr≤2%. This is the characteristic element length used throughout the paper. Linear tetrahedra were found to require drastically finer discretisations and lead to higher computational effort.It is noteworthy that the tetrahedron size is relatively homogeneous throughout the domain, except where small geometric details need to be captured by the mesh. However, a fine mesh is only necessary within the soft binder between harder particles, since strains localise here, and the mesh inside rocks could be coarse. This could either reduce the degrees of freedom substantially or allow for higher resolution within the binder. It is hypothesised that mesh convergence is governed by the binder mesh, particularly for highcRM.The microconstituents exhibit a high variability in terms of material and morphological properties. For example, it is known that the material contrast of mortar to bitumen spans several orders of magnitude, depending on temperature, type of binder, volume fraction and mineralogy [36]. Likewise, the contrast between rocks and mortar,cRM, is tremendous. A real bituminous mortar is a thick viscoplastic paste and its properties are—among other factors—strongly dependent on temperature and loading frequency. For example, Fakhari Tehrani et al. [12] provide contrasts of rock modulus, ER, to the complex modulus of mortar of 22–9644, for loading frequencies of10−2–10+5Hz. Since experimental data of mortar behaviour with 2mm size threshold are unavailable, the mortar is modelled as linear elastic. Its Young׳s modulus, EMis implicitly defined as a fraction of the rock׳s modulus, see Table 1. Its Poisson׳s ratio is simply chosen to be the arithmetic mean between the Poisson׳s ratios of rock and pure bitumen, which is typically assumed to be incompressible. In order to assess the non-constant mortar stiffness, RVE sizes are determined numerically for values of EMwhich are one to three orders of magnitude lower than ER. The pivotal quantity is the material/stiffness contrast,cRM=ER/EM.Dolerite, or diabase, is a typical rock type used in road engineering. It has a specific gravity of approximatelyρR=2.8g/cm3. Together with the specific gravity of bitumenρB=1.05g/cm3, and neglecting the presence of voids these data allow the computation of VRfor a given bitumen content. Here, the bitumen mass fraction is taken from [14] to beχB=6.7%[w/w]. SMA 11 S furthermore contains about 0.3% [w/w] fibres, but their influence on the total mixture density is negligible. Thus, the total mixture density is obtained as(5)ρtotal=∑imi∑iVi=1χbρb+1-χbρR=2.56g/cm3.By taking the mean of the total mass percentage of rocks withheld by a 2mm sieve to be 75% [w/w] (see Fig. 2), we obtain the volume of rocks>2mmto be(6)VR>2mm=mR>2mmρR=0.75×0.93×Vtotal×ρtotalρR.The geometrically modelled rock volume fraction ΦRis then obtained as(7)ΦR=VR>2mmVtotal=0.75×0.93×ρtotalρR=0.63.By rewriting (2), s becomes a function ofΦR(8)ΦR=(1-s)3⇔1-ΦR3=s=0.1427.Furthermore the standards do not require strict bounds for the sieve residues, but allow rather loose bounds of 70–80[%w/w] at 2mm sieve spacing for SMA 11 S, see Fig. 2. In order to pay respect to these uncertainties, the current model is not overly exact in matching a certain parameter, but rather highlights a trend. First, in Section 5.1,cRMis varied by 2 orders of magnitude (see Table 1) while keepingΦRconstant. Second, in Section 5.2, five different volume fractionsΦR(see Table 2) are investigated for a fixedcRM.Periodic displacement based BCs have been implemented using a Python script for use with Abaqus R2012a[9]. For each of the investigated microstructures defined by a unique parameter set (n,ΦR), N=15 samples are randomly generated to obtain homogenised values and perform statistics. Identical geometries are used for the investigation of the impact ofcRM. A far-field strain of 1% is applied to the samples in three uniaxial strain and three shear deformation modes in order to fully populate the elasticity tensorC, cf. Fig. 7. For details about the application of PBCs, see Bednarcyk et al. [5]. In the following, the convergence behaviours of the mean Young׳s modulusE¯and the mean shear modulusG¯are investigated. They are computed by means of(9)E¯=1N∑i=1N13E1+E2+E3i,G¯=1N∑i=1N13G1+G2+G3i,where the index i refers to the current sample. The Young׳s and shear moduli are obtained fromC(given in Voigt-notation) by(10)Ej=1(C-1)jj,j=1…3,Gj-3=1(C-1)jj,j=4…6.Since the response of an RVE must not depend on its orientation in space, the notions Ejand Gjbecome meaningless. In order to quantify the remaining anisotropy, the 2×3 effective moduli are sorted by size for each realisation, before computing the statistics for all 15 realisations of one set of parameters. For example, the mean of the largest Young׳s moduli between different realisations is given by(11)E¯+=1N∑i=1NmaxEji,j=1…3.It holds analogously for G. These major (+), middle (o) and minor (−) moduli should converge to the same value. Please note that these apparent moduli depend on the specimen orientation and thus are in general not the extremal moduli. Only in the limit casen,N→∞true isotropy is obtained, and the apparent become the effective moduli. A different method to assess the deviation from isotropy in finite specimen sizes is presented in the following paragraph.In order to obtain one quantity that captures both the scatter of the three (Young׳s) moduli obtained from the same specimen—i. e. the anisotropy—and the scatter between different realisations, the standard deviation takes3×Narguments. Furthermore, the standard deviation, sd, is defined as the square root of an unbiased estimator of the variance of the population from which the samples are drawn:(12)sd(E)=(13N−1∑i=13N(Ei−E¯)2)1/2.It holds analogously for G. Through the use of Poisson-distributed seeds, the drawn samples are independent of each other.The procedure proposed in the previous section is only one of the many methods to derive elastic constants fromC. Another one is to use isotropic projection onC. The stiffness tensor can be additively decomposed into the projector representation [43,42,19]:(13)C=∑α=1βλαPα,where2≤β≤6is the number of distinct eigenvalues,λα, ofC. In the case of isotropic material behaviour,Cpossesses two distinct eigenvalues and the projectors are defined as(14)P1=13I⊗I,P2=I−P1,whereIis the second-order identity andIis the fourth-order identity on symmetric second-order tensors. These projectors allow to obtain the bulk modulus3K=C:P1and the shear modulus10G=C:P2. The Young׳s modulus is then given byE=9KG/(3K+G).Furthermore, the isotropic part of an effective stiffness tensor,(15)Ciso=λ1P1+λ2P2,allows to obtain the anisotropic part as(16)Caniso=C−Ciso.By computing the norms ofCand its anisotropic part,Caniso, a degree of anisotropy, κaniso, can be defined as(17)κaniso=∥Caniso∥F∥C∥F.Here, the subscript F indicates the Frobenius-norm. A small κanisohighlights that the direction dependence of the obtained elastic constants vanishes.In the following, the influence of N is assessed. Several stiffness tensors for nine grains(n=9), a material contrast ofcRM=1000, and an increasing number of realizations(N=1,5,15,30)are given in Voigt-notation. The derived elastic constants,E¯PandG¯P, obtained by using the projectors (14), κanisoand the elastic constants obtained by using (9) are shown. Where applicable, the standard deviation according to (12) of the respective elastic constant is displayed as well:One can seeCgradually obtaining isotropic shape for an increasing number of samples. This is quantified by the decreasing degree of anisotropy. Due to the small differences between N=15 and N=30 realisations it is concluded that using N=15 throughout the present study is reasonable.Furthermore, the hypothesis of ergodicity states that averaging a mechanical field at a fixed point over all possible realisations (the ensemble) yields the same result as averaging over the volume of one infinitely large sample. This is a pivotal assumption in computational homogenisation, as the time complexity of solving the system of equations isO(n3), via Gauss–Seidel. Furthermore, RVE sizes are often limited by the available RAM. The following results for n=50 and n=100 indicate that using large samples yields approximately the same results as a high number of small samples:The RVE is defined as the smallest volume of heterogeneous material that captures the global—i. e. smeared—properties. Real or virtual testing of smaller than representative volumes will introduce errors to the results, since microstructural fluctuations have not yet averaged out. The required size is dependent on the morphological or physical property of investigation. Furthermore, Kanit et al. [23] point out, that it is also possible to make use of ergodicity by using a high number of realisations for not converged RVE sizes to obtain apparent properties with high accuracy. However, this procedure is not valid for arbitrary small RVEs since one has to make sure that the mean is not biased. Furthermore, the material contrast demands the use of PBCs in order to rule out the influence of boundary conditions on the RVE size.The methodology adopted here is employed by various researchers to provide a qualitative measure of n[23,47,15]. Throughout this work, n is chosen as a multiple of 3. By assuming that the homogenised material response is normally distributed, we define a property as converged, if we can be2sd=^95.45%confident, that a random sample is not further away from the expectancy than 7%. In other words, the double of the coefficient of variation, cv, has to become(18)2cv(E)=2sd(E)E¯<0.07.2cv(G)is defined analogously. A monotonuos evolution of cvcannot be expected for practical values of n & N. Thus, it is additionally required that2cv<0.07holds for three consecutive choices of n in order to ensure systematic and rule out accidental convergence. For the material contrasts up to 1000 investigated here, a 2sd confidence interval and a threshold of 7% seem reasonable and furthermore do not restrict the generality of the method.Here, qualitative bounds for the minimal RVE size are obtained for linear elastic mechanical properties of the composite. In Section 5.1, the influence ofcRMis investigated for three differentcRMspanning two orders of magnitude.ΦRis kept constant at 0.63. AC types vary in terms of bitumen content, pores, additives and their granulometric curve. In order to take this variability into account, required RVE sizes are determined numerically for five values ofΦRin Section 5.2. All errorbars show2sdconfidence intervals. Numerical values show 4 significant digits for reasons of lucid presentation.Immediate convergence with no influence ofΦR, or n, is obtained for settingcRMto unity, which corresponds to homogeneous material. The same holds for settingΦRto zero, or unity. These extreme cases ofcRMandΦRrule out the influence from the morphology. It is expected that an increase of the material contrast,cRM, yields larger RVEs since strain and stress heterogeneities grow. In order to obtain a result that is independent of the drawn samples, the three sets of computations for the investigation of the influence ofcRMshare the same geometries. Hence, a similar shape of the graphs is obtained.The behaviour of the three Young׳s moduli forcRM=1000with increasing n is shown in Fig. 9. Fig. 10shows the results for the shear moduli. It can be seen that the mean moduli exhibit very little fluctuation with a small bias only for very coarse structures. Furthermore, the statistical scatter reduces rather slowly. This is in agreement with the findings of Kanit et al. [23] for a polycrystalline metal structure. They attribute the latter to the use of PBCs.As ERis kept constant, decreasingcRMcorresponds to increasing the mortar stiffness. The drastic influence of the mortar phase on the RVE size can be inferred from the double coefficients of variation2cv(E¯,cRM)and2cv(G¯,cRM)given in Figs. 11 and 12. Numerical values are given in Table 5. By changing the mortar stiffness from 80 to 800MPa, an almost tenfold increase inE¯is observed. The effect slightly wears out with increasing EMfurther to 8000MPa;E¯grows approximately sixfold. See Table 3for the homogenised material properties.It is concluded that computing 15 realisations per value of n is sufficient to highlight the influence ofcRM, since lower contrasts strictly yield lower n. LoweringcRMfrom 1000 to 100 yields the same drastic reduction of n by four increments of 3 as a further decrease of the contrast tocRM=10. As expected, an increase ofcRMrequires larger RVE sizes.As previously mentioned, immediate convergence is achieved for settingΦR=0as well as for settingΦR=1. High values ofcRMamplify the differences between different choices ofΦR. Thus,cRM=1000is used here in order to highlight these differences.The influence ofΦRfor fixedcRMon the RVE size can be inferred from Figs. 13 and 14. No significant change in RVE size is seen whenΦRis decreased from 0.73 to 0.63, see also Table 5. However, whenΦRis further decreased, smaller values of n are sufficient. The present data indicate an increase in RVE size with increasingΦR. The homogenised material properties are given in Table 4. There, it can clearly be seen that the homogenised stiffnesses are dominated by the mortar properties.The values forcv(E¯)andcv(G¯)are given in Table 5. No clear statement can be given whether E or G converges faster. In general, it can be said that the mean middle moduli obtained fromCprovide a good estimate of the overall mean values:E¯≈E¯oandG¯≈G¯o. Furthermore, the respective mean major and mean minor moduli are approximately equidistant to the mean middle and thus overall mean modulus. cv, as defined by (18), can also be interpreted as a measure of isotropy. Thus, isotropic behaviour of the composite AC is also provided in the same statistical sense.In this work, the influences of the material contrast and volume fraction on the size of linear elastic RVEs of geometric models of AC based on shrunk Poisson Voronoi tessellations have been determined numerically. For the parameter sets investigated here, RVE sizes range fromn=12in the best cases, to n=36 in the worst cases, see Table 5.The results clearly show that higher material contrasts require larger RVEs. This finding is of particular importance for temperature dependent materials as AC. RVE dimensions must not only be determined for one arbitrary temperature, but for the worst case, i. e. the one showing the highest contrast. However, the simplification to linear elastic materials has to be kept in mind here. The incorporation of further heterogeneities should yield larger RVEs and strain localisations caused by inelastic material behaviour are undoubtedly increasing heterogeneity. Nevertheless, particularly the incorporation of viscoplastic behaviour relaxes stress concentrations. In this case, the strain field becomes more heterogeneous, but the stress field does the opposite. Inelastic modelling of the mortar is a currently undertaken extension of the model and will shed light on this subject.The influence ofΦRis equally striking. Increasing volume fractions of the reinforcing rock phase monotonuosly lead to larger RVEs. Performing the following thought experiment supports the findings. Starting fromΦR=0and increasing it, grains grow in size, gain more and more influence on the effective properties, and increase e. g. strain heterogeneity. In the case of a shrunk Voronoi tessellation, the layer thickness between grains tends to zero asΦRapproaches unity. For a material contrast that is high enough for the strains to dominantly localise in the mortar, the application of arbitrarily small global strains will cause the local strains to grow over all bounds. AsΦR=1is reached, the material is homogeneous again and no localisations occur. Thus, it is hypothesised that there is a singularity for the size of linear elastic RVEs for highcRM:(19)limΦR→1n=∞,∀cRM⪢1.This case is not only of theoretical interest, althoughΦ→1is not realistic for most materials. The local layer thickness between adjacent reinforcing grains, particles, or fibres can approach zero (cf. Fig. 1) and strain and stress concentrations will occur at least for elastic materials. In the present model of AC, this could be achieved by a rotation of the grains. Furthermore, particular attention is necessary for materials that do not exhibit constant values of Φ due to phase changes, chemical reactions, etc.In general, the recommendation to perform worst case oriented RVE design can be given to the practitioner. For the idealised model of AC in the present study, the worst case is high values of bothcRMandΦR. The impressions gained from corresponding literature support the generalisation that increasing the material contrast means increasing the RVE size. Unfortunately, no clear picture can be drawn for the volume fraction. E.g. Stroeven et al. [47] conclude that “… lower [particle – author׳s note] densities generally lead to larger RVEs”, which seems contradictory to the present findings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
