@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tablet PC-enabled application intervention for patients with gastric cancer undergoing gastrectomy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A gap between hospital care and self-care at home.App provides a feasible solution for gastrectomy patients to do self-recording of postoperative information.With App support, the postgastrectomy patients had a lower proportion of body weight loss compared to traditional care.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Smartphone,Application,Gastric cancer,Surgery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundGastric cancer is among the most common gastrointestinal cancers worldwide. Patients who have undergone surgery for gastric cancer may suffer from malnutrition and potential consequences such as gastrointestinal complications, surgical stress, and cancer cachexia. A tablet PC-based intervention via a mobile application might enhance the early recovery of postgastrectomy patients.ObjectiveThe aim of this study was to develop and test a tablet personal computer (PC)-assisted intervention to hasten the recovery of postgastrectomy cancer patients with respect to nutritional status.MethodsThis single-arm pilot study investigated a tablet PC application developed to serve the functions of nutritional monitoring, medical information management, drainage follow-up, and wound care. All services were delivered by medical professionals.ResultsTwenty consecutive gastrectomy patients at the National Taiwan University Hospital received perioperative care via this application (App group). During the study period, we retrospectively collected an additional 20 demographically matched gastrectomy cases as a control group. The App group had a lower body weight loss percentage relative to the control group during a 6-month follow-up period (4.8±1.2% vs. 8.7±2.4%; p<0.01). However, the patients in the App group had more outpatient clinic (OPC) visits than did those in the control group (9.8±0.9 vs. 5.6±0.8; p<0.01).ConclusionsThis study supported the feasibility of a tablet PC-based application for the perioperative care of gastric cancer subjects to promote a lower body weight loss and the collection of comprehensive surgical records.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Gastric cancer is the fourth-most common cancer [1] and the second leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide [2]. In most patients, gastric cancer is discovered at an advanced stage because of the occult early clinical presentation of this type of cancer. Moreover, patients who are diagnosed with advanced gastric cancer more frequently exhibit gastric outlet obstruction and cancer bleeding, which result in a poor general condition and malnutrition (60–85 percent of cases) [3]. Surgery is considered the only potentially curative treatment [4]. However, pre-operatively malnourished patients who undergo curative surgery (another physical stress and insult) may continue to experience body weight loss because of wound pain, surgical complications, and gastrointestinal digestion disorders, which are associated with both reduced food intake and the malabsorption of vitamins, fats, and proteins [5,6]. Patients in whom this malnourished status is not recognized will have inferior clinical outcomes and a decreased quality of life relative to those with good nutritional statuses [7,8]. Moreover, postoperative body weight loss is the most important risk factor associated with oral adjuvant chemotherapy compliance in gastric cancer patients undergoing curative gastrectomy, thus emphasizing the requirement for adequate perioperative nutritional intervention [9].A poor discharge transition from the medical center to the home represents an important gap between evidence-based clinical practices and current health care delivery. For gastrectomy patients with gastrointestinal complications, some retained intra-abdominal drainage tubes are kept to monitor the leakage fluid with turbid contaminated characteristics. These drainage tubes caused patients or their families to hesitate with regard to returning home where they would be required to care for these tubes by themselves. If the intra-abdominal condition were to deteriorate, the drainage fluid may become turbid (new gastrointestinal leakage) or bloody (internal bleeding), which would imply a new medical emergency. Traditionally, medical professionals have not been able to immediately access the above-described information, thus potentially delaying a diagnosis or medical help. A major challenge to medical providers is the continued provision of postoperative care at home for patients with complications.Telecare is becoming a feasible and helpful tool for perioperative patient care [10,11]. With the popularity of smartphones or tablet personal computers (tablet PCs), the methods used to accessing information have changed, which has revolutionized the original telecare concept. There is an increased interest in smartphone applications (apps) as tools with which medical professionals and patients can deliver medical information and provide care [12–15]. It has been reported that the market for mobile health apps for smartphones and tablets will reach US $26 billion by 2017 [16]. As of 2013, there are an estimated 40,000 medical apps available on the market. Previous studies have addressed the feasibility of smartphone apps for patient self-monitoring [17,18] or surgical cases [19]. However, app-facilitated perioperative care for gastrectomy patients is lacking.We hypothesized that tablet PC application for gastrectomy patients compared with traditional care would be associated with less percentage of body weight loss, with that being associated with close follow-up and clinical rule support. To test our hypothesis, we designed one experimental pre/post single-arm study to investigate whether a 6-month intervention involving this application would contribute to a more rapid recovery after gastrectomy in gastric cancer patients (App group). The primary study outcome was the change in the percentage of body weight loss. Body weight is a reliable predictor of the general nutritional statuses of cancer subjects. Additionally, we prospectively collected age, sex, body mass index (BMI), operation method, and cancer staging-matched gastrectomy subjects during the same period to compare with the App group (Control group).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This software app provides a feasible solution to the challenge of self-recording postoperative information and an alternative self-care tool for gastric cancer patients. With this support, the postgastrectomy patients in our study had a lower proportion of body weight loss relative to patients who received traditional care.All authors disclosed no conflict of interests.