@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational modelling of bulging of inflated cylindrical shells applicable to aneurysm formation and propagation in arterial wall tissue

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bifurcation and postbifurcation of inflated hyperelastic thick-walled cylinders are analysed.Bulging mode of bifurcation is exploited in the context of aneurysm formation.The onset of bulging is considered to give aneurysm formation.Bulging is shown to propagate axially as aneurysms propagate in arterial wall tissue.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bifurcation,Bulging,Soft tissue,Aneurysms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we use a numerical procedure to analyse bifurcation and postbifurcation of inflated hyperelastic thick-walled cylinders based on the modified Riks method. In particular, the bulging mode of bifurcation is exploited in the context of aneurysm formation with cylindrical geometry in cardiovascular diseases. We focus here on orthotropic materials with two preferred directions which are mechanically equivalent and are symmetrically disposed. Arterial wall tissue is modeled with this class of constitutive equation showing significant stiffening behaviour. The onset of bulging is considered to give aneurysm formation. Analytical solutions can be found in the literature for very particular conditions involving specific material models and loads applied as well as, usually, a perfect geometry. Here, we provide a unified approach to both the prediction of bifurcation and postbifurcation propagation that can be applied to more general conditions. Furthermore, we show that bulging instability under the conditions at hand propagates axially in agreement with the propagation of aneurysms in arterial wall tissue.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last few years several analyses have investigated boundary value problems in the context of stability theory (see for instance [1–10]). In particular, a variety of authors have focused on bifurcation from a membrane tube configuration subject to axial loading and internal pressure (see, [1–8] and references therein) and on postbifurcation [4]. Recently, the analysis also focused on the bifurcation of isotropic thick-walled cylinders [3]. The motivation behind some of these analyses has been the formation of aneurysms in human arteries. Those works provided analytical solutions and gave great insight into the physical interpretation of the problem at hand. Nevertheless, analytical approaches are only practical in relatively simple cases, and they are generally unfeasible for more complicated conditions, such as finite thickness, different layers, initial stresses, etc. Furthermore, postcritical behaviour is difficult to be determined analytically and in the literature there exist solutions only for very simple cases and are based on complicated mathematical machinery. In general, these analyses capture and explain the failure modes provided that certain material models, simple loading conditions and non-imperfect geometries are assumed. However, a unified approach to capture bifurcation and postbifurcation under more general conditions has not been developed. It is clear that such an approach can be obtained using numerical methods. Here, our attention is focused not only on the possibility to obtain that methodology but also on the possibility to implement that numerical methodology in a commercial finite element code. With that purpose, we pay attention to bulging in inflated cylinders under axial loading and relate it to aneurysm formation and propagation in arterial wall tissue. In other communications we will deal with other surface instabilities.Among the instability modes of stretched pressurized cylinders bulging is likely to be the first that appears [3]. The bulging bifurcation mode of the cylinder is obtained considering axisymmetric incremental displacements with respect to a deformed configuration. All configurations are in equilibrium. It follows that incremental displacements are null along the hoop direction and do not depend on the azimuthal angle. Here we use a numerical procedure to determine the conditions under which bulging in inflated and stretched cylinders appears. Furthermore, we also show the postcritical behaviour and capture features of aneurysms propagation. Suffice it to say that analytical postbifurcation studies are based on analyses of perfect configurations and many simplifying assumptions. It is a tremendous effort that gives the tools to develop understanding of the problem at hand. Nevertheless, nowadays, the computational capability available can be combined with analytical methods to achieve a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the problem under study. Numerical methodologies are useful not only to generate solutions under complicated conditions but also to capture a better insight into the problem as we show in this paper. Our presentation enlightens new possibilities in several ways including scientific and professional practice. This analysis will help to promote the use of nonlinear methods of design in modern engineering.We develop the numerical analysis by means of nonlinear finite element models. The Newton–Raphson algorithm develops difficulties near instability points since these are close to maximum points in load–displacement curves. A constraint to limit the load increment is necessary. A numerical method that can be used in these cases is the modified Riks method [15]. This method considers the arc length of the load–displacement path as the constraint equation. That is the reason to also denote this method as the arc-length method. For the purpose of this communication we specifically focus on the finite element code Abaqus/Standard which has implemented this procedure. There are other available incremental iterative strategies for nonlinear analysis and we refer to [16] for further details.It has been recognized that accurate constitutive modelling is needed to evaluate aneurysm formation [8]. It is well known that many factors may be involved in this process. These include, among others, geometry, non-homogeneous material, anisotropy, growth, remodelling, age, etc. In our analysis we deal with a constitutive equation that is used to model arterial wall tissue (see [12,13]). It has been shown in [1] that aneurysm formation is related to values of the elastic constants of this particular model that are not within the range of values of these material moduli associated with healthy arterial wall tissue conditions. In particular bulging is possible when the collagen fibers that reinforce the arterial wall tissue and give the anisotropic character to the artery lose their role in the material mechanical response. The result is that the artery constitutive behaviour is close to being isotropic rather than to being anisotropic. This is in agreement with the idea that healthy arterial wall tissue must weaken prior to the onset of aneurysms. Nevertheless, new input data need to be included in the constitutive models to capture physiological conditions of aneurysm formation. Having said that, our methodology is able to capture qualitative features related to this cardiovascular disease. In particular, we show that aneurysms propagate in the axial direction of the artery. This result appears clearly in the competition between radial expansion and axial propagation of the aneurysm. The evolution of different aneurysms in arterial wall tissue has attracted the attention of different researchers and we refer to [8,14,20] for parallel analyses. Needless to say, to this day there is no physiologically relevant preclinical model of aneurysm formation.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the mathematical description of the problem is introduced, i.e. the deformation produced in a circular thick-walled tube subject to a uniform axial loading combined with a uniform internal pressure. In this section main equations are also described along with the elastic material model (constitutive law) of the tube. In Section 3, the specific finite element technique used to analyse the problem is detailed. More in particular, the numerical methodology is detailed and validated with regard to the onset of bifurcation. For that purpose, the role that the maximum point obtained with the Riks method plays with regard to the onset of bifurcation is clarified. Bifurcation and postbifurcation results of an initially circular cylindrical geometry made up of arterial wall tissue are shown in Section 4. Some final remarks and conclusions are provided in Section 5.In this section we pay attention to the mathematical description of the problem and describe the bulging instability.Consider a right circular tube that occupies the region(1)A≤R≤B,0≤Θ≤2π,−L/2≤Z≤L/2,in its undeformed reference configuration where(R,Θ,Z)are cylindrical coordinates. The position vector of a material point can then be written as(2)X=RER(Θ)+ZEZ,whereER,EΘandEZare unit vectors in the indicated directions. The length L of the cylinder may be finite or infinite. We denote the initial thickness of the material as e.The cylinder is inflated and extended so that it remains as a circular cylinder. The inflating pressure is denoted by p and the axial load by N. In this deformed configuration the cylinder is described by(3)x=rer(θ)+zez,a≤r≤b,0≤θ≤2π,−ℓ/2≤z≤ℓ/2,where r,θ=Θand z, are cylindrical coordinates in this configuration. The deformed length of the cylinder isℓ.Referred to cylindrical coordinates, the associated deformation gradient tensorFfor an incompressible material has componentsdiag(λ−1λz−1,λ,λz), whereλ=λθ=r/R>0is the azimuthal principal stretch andλzis the axial stretch, so thatℓ=λzL. Because of the assumed incompressibility, the principal radial stretch isλr=λ−1λz−1. The displacementuis given byu=x−X.In passing, we just note that for a membrane tube, we should consider a circular cylindrical membrane whose middle surface in its undeformed reference configuration is described by (2). In the deformed configuration the middle surface of the membrane is described by(4)x=rer(θ)+zez,0≤θ≤2π,−ℓ/2≤z≤ℓ/2,Referred to cylindrical coordinates, the associated deformation gradient tensor has the components just given above for the thick case.The cylinder is made up of an incompressible hyperelastic material with a constitutive equation given by a strain energy function W. In the literature (see [3,8], for instance), analytical solutions consider materials for which under the deformation at hand the principal Cauchy stressesσiican be written as(5)σii=λi∂W∂λi+q,i=r,θ,z,whereW=W(λr,λθ,λz)is the strain energy function and q is an arbitrary stress value associated with the incompressibility constraint. This includes isotropic materials as well as orthotropic materials with the axes of orthotropy coinciding with the principal axes of stress. In the latter case, one could think of a material with two preferred directions which are mechanically equivalent and are symmetrically disposed.In the context of nonlinear elasticity constitutive equations are given in terms of strain-energy functions that depend on certain deformation invariants. For a single family of fibers the independent invariants are, in the case of an incompressible material,(6)I1=trC,I2=tr(C−1),I4=M·(CM),I5=M·(C2M),whereC=FTFis the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor,Fis the deformation gradient,Tsignifies transpose, tr denotes the trace of a second-order tensor andMis a unit vector defined in the reference configuration that identifies the direction of fiber reinforcement. When there are two families of fibers, with the second family having directionM′in the reference configuration, then three additional invariants arise. These are(7)I6=M′·(CM′),I7=M′·(C2M′),I¯8=(M·M′)[M·(CM′)]=(M·M′)I8.Note that I6 and I7 are the analogues of I4 and I5, respectively, forM′, whileI¯8introduces a coupling between the two families (see [11]).In [12], arterial wall tissue has been modeled as an incompressible orthotropic material with two preferred directions (defined by two unit vectorsMandM′) which are mechanically equivalent and are symmetrically disposed. The collagen fibers which are inside the arterial wall act as fiber reinforcement directions. The elastic artery is composed of three layers and each layer is modeled within the same constitutive framework. In particular, each layer can be considered as a composite reinforced by two families of (collagen) fibers. The ground matrix of a layer is modeled by a neo-Hookean material (see [12])(8)Wg=μ2(I1−3),whereμis the ground state shear modulus of the material. The strain energy stored in each reinforced direction is taken to depend on the stretch in that direction. It follows that two independent invariants need to be considered, one for each single family of fibers, and these are I4 and I6 (see [13]). The total strain energy of an arterial wall layer is written as(9)We(I1,I4,I6)=μ2(I1−3)+k12k2∑i=4,6{exp[k2(κ(I1−3)+(1−3κ)(Ii−1))2]−1},whereκis related to the fiber dispersion and k1 and k2 are positive constants (see [13]). It is assumed that fibers contribute to the energy function when these are elongated. Furthermore, the fibers mechanical response gives rise to the so-called strain stiffening associated with healthy arterial tissue response. The fiber stretch invariants usingF=diag(λ−1λz−1,λ,λz), (6)3 and (7)1 are(10)I4=I6=λz2cos2φ+λθ2sin2φ,whereφis the angle of the fiber with respect to the axial direction of the cylinder.The equilibrium equations for the models at hand can be obtained, for instance, by minimizing the energy functional of this purely mechanical analysis. In the case of thin-walled cylinders, this analysis has been given in [8]. Results show that curves giving the applied pressure against the azimuthal stretch (in a more general sense load–displacement curves) reach instability points which are close to maximum points of these curves (see for instance [2,3]).Finite element analyses are developed from the so-called weak formulations of the problem, i.e. energy functionals. The problem at hand is transformed into a system of algebraic equations in which the displacements are involved. This is a well established procedure and we will not develop the formulation.We summarize the equations for cylindrical shells (see [5]). It follows that one can write(11)σθθ=λθ∂W^∂λθandσzz=λz∂W^∂λz,where we have introduced the notationW^(λθ,λz)=W(λθ−1λz−1,λθ,λz). The equilibrium equations for a membrane give the inflating pressure in the form(12)p=eW^θRλθλz,whereW^θdenotes∂W^/∂λθ. In what follows, we use the notationW^z,W^θθ, etc.To investigate the possible bifurcation modes of the cylinder one should consider incremental displacements with respect to the deformed configuration (under equilibrium), of the general form(13)δu=δur(θ,z)er+δuθ(θ,z)eθ+δuz(θ,z)ez,whereδis the increment. We are interested in the bulging instability mode in which case one should consider an axisymmetric displacement field of the form(14)δu=δur(z)er+δuz(z)ez.The bulging condition is (see [1])f(W^,λθ,λz,L/R)=0, where(15)f(W^,λθ,λz,L/R)=λz2W^zz(λθ2W^θθ−λθW^θ)−(λθλzW^θz−λθW^θ)2+(2πRL)2λθ2λzW^zW^zz.For a cylinder of infinite length, the last term on the RHS of (15) is zero.The neo-Hookean material model is recovered consideringk1=0in (9). In this case, as shown in [1], using (15), bulging occurs when(16)−λθ8λz4+6λθ4λz2+4λθ2λz4+3=0.It was also shown in [1] that if the isotropic part is negligible in (9) (i.e.k1⪢μ) then, for anyλθ≥1andλz≥1, it is necessary thatk2>k2c=1/(288cos4φ)to avoid bulging instability.These analytical results are based on the so-called normal mode method (see, for instance, [4]) which considers only sinusoidal or constant solutions. The results are found to be equivalent to the ones given by the incremental equations method [5]. It follows that the onset of bifurcation coincides with the maximum point that appears in load–displacement curves.To determine the bifurcation and postbifurcation behaviour of the problem means to capture the deformation of the initial circular thick-walled cylinder under the conditions at hand. In the next section we focus on the specific details of the technique developed and more in particular on the necessary details to implement the numerical analysis in a commercial finite element code.Here we describe the numerical technique developed, and, for the purpose of this communication, we focus on the commercial code Abaqus. We use a commercial software package for professional purposes since one of the main objectives of this work is to disseminate and promote nonlinear computational modelling techniques.The circular tube (artery) is generated by means of a (thin or thick) sector of finite axial length with one (or more) finite element in the hoop direction. An axisymmetric element model is not possible since it prevents the use of anisotropic hyperelastic constitutive equations. The axial length of the sector is a parameter that can be modified in the analysis as well as the inner and outer radius. A small imperfection should be introduced in the geometry to obtain a smooth solution during loading (more details are given in the next section). This can be achieved in several ways, for instance, varying the outer and/or inner diameter along the axial length of the sector. Sensitivity analyses should be done to verify that those non-perfect geometries do not modify substantially the results. On the other hand, it may be that the problem at hand has a non-perfect geometry. In that case, the model has to account for that geometry.We will consider for the purpose of this communication the constitutive equation (9) but more general material models can be used. The model is just a prototype and is useful to show qualitative results.Mixed three-dimensional reduce integrated linear elements were selected (Abaqus element type C3D8RH). The (hybrid) mixed pressure–displacement formulation is recommended to impose the material incompressibility constraint. A minimum of five elements are recommended in the radial direction and a sufficient number in the longitudinal direction to get well-shaped elements. The angle of the sector should also be adequate to generate elements with reasonable shape factors.In our analysis longitudinal displacements (axial stretch) at the end faces of the cylinder are imposed. Similarly, since we try to capture the bulging instability, hoop displacements are prevented during the analysis following (14). This is obtained by defining that particular condition in a nodal local cylindrical system.In our methodology, we first stretch the artery imposing axial displacements. The artery deforms and remains as a cylinder. Then, we apply pressure to capture both the instability and the postcritical behaviour. The modified Riks method introduces two concepts: the load proportional factor (LPF) and the arc length, for details see [15]. The arc length is a quantity related to the evolution of the structure that combines displacements and loads. The load proportional factor determines the load applied and it may decrease. In fact, Riks method is not very useful when the load proportional factor is monotonically increasing. Fig. 1shows a typical curve of the load proportional factor vs. the arc length. In this curve there is a maximum which is an indicator that the system exhibits an instability. The way to understand this curve is the following. LPF is related to the load applied. As loading is applied the structure will reach the maximum point shown in the curve in a sequence of states under static equilibrium. It is not possible to increase the load above the maximum LPF under static equilibrium. Furthermore, a sudden and new catastrophic rearrangement could be obtained by the structure for loads close to the maximum LPF. This is an indicator of an instability but it should not be understood as a bifurcation point. To capture bifurcation, an imperfection has to be introduced in the geometry of the problem. In that way, the structure will behave smoothly as loading approaches the instability point.A linear buckle estimation is not the methodology to be used since it is only accurate for relatively stiff structures. A general nonlinear analysis (other than the Riks method) is not recommended because it may not estimate properly the maximum point. The method may stop at a point in which no more loading can be applied but there is no certainty that this point is the maximum point. The modified Riks method overcomes this difficulty [15]. Using this technique the loading (internal pressure) can be decreased capturing the maximum point. A smooth (continuum) bifurcated and postbifurcated solution is obtained as loading is applied. It should be noted that in some cases the load–displacement (pressure-azimuthal stretch) response shows a very high curvature at the maximum point and the solution may reverse the path. In any case, the peak load proportional factor (which is a function of the arc length, see [15] for specific details) can be accurately determined and the postcritical behaviour can also be captured.To validate the numerical procedure, in this section, we compare analytical results for a membrane tube with regard to solutions obtained using the numerical procedure established here. In Section 4, we specifically will focus on details of the commercial code Abaqus but for now we elaborate the methodology and validate the analysis.Under perfect conditions, the onset of instability coincides with the maximum point of the load–displacement curve (which is the one obtained by the Riks method). Special caution has to be taken with the imperfection that is introduced in the analysis. This will be clarified in the next section. It follows that to capture the onset of bifurcation and validate the numerical procedure one needs to identify that point precisely. It may be that for certain values of the displacement in a given load–displacement curve the slope of the curve is nearly zero which makes difficult to identify the maximum point. One possible procedure to identify that point for the cylinder problem at hand is to follow the displacement of different points located at different altitudes of the cylinder. If there is no bifurcation, those points (actually two points are just sufficient) will have the same displacement. When bifurcation occurs the displacements of those points will differ. Let us illustrate the analysis and show different problems that one can face.Consider the anisotropic model (9) withφ=45°,k2=0.02>k2cand two different values for k1:0.02μand0.2μ, withμ=300kPa. Bulging is expected in the former case (k1 is not large enough, and0.06μwould be needed to avoid bifurcation) but is not expected in the latter (see [1] for details).A three dimensional sector of a cylinder is defined with only one element in the hoop direction. The length of the cylinder is 50R, where R is the external radius, and the thickness 0.025R. We take the value R=5mm. To avoid a strict numerical problem and capture the bifurcation, a small imperfection of maximum deviation4×10−5Ris introduced: at one end of the cylinder the external radius is R while at the other end the external radius is R minus the maximum deviation, i.e. the external radius changes along the axis of the cylinder while thickness is kept constant along the axis. Four elements are generated in the thickness direction, and 10,000 elements along the longitudinal direction to obtain a good-shaped mesh. The cylinder is stretched imposing relative axial displacements, i.e.λzis applied and considered fixed during the rest of the analysis. Once this is completed, internal pressure is applied using the modified Riks analysis (i.e. the arc length procedure). Hoop displacements (in a nodal local cylindrical system) are prevented during the simulation. Using one CPU core each analysis (i.e. for eachλz) needs around 100min to be completed. After this period of time, enough results are obtained to process and clearly identify bulging and postbulging—which also adds more time. It is time consuming but it is necessary to accurately determine the onset of bifurcation.Results are shown forλz=1.5. The evolution of the applied pressure with the arc length (which gives the evolution of the cylinder as it is deformed) is shown in Fig. 2. Bulging should occur at the maximum point in each curve. Thus, no bifurcation is expected for the anisotropic model withk1=0.20μsince the curve is monotonically increasing. On the other hand, bulging is expected for both the neo-Hookean material and the anisotropic model withk1=0.02μ.It is important to remark (as previously indicated) that the position of the maximum point in a given curve may not be clear (see Fig. 2). This may occur for some simulations. In any case, the bifurcation point can be captured with the following methodology. One can follow the evolution (with deformation) of the hoop stretch of two points which are located in the middle of the thickness of the cylinder at two different cross sections. One point is at one end of the cylinder and the other point is at the other end. Bifurcation is identified when the hoop stretches of these two points differ. In particular, we take the bifurcation point when the deviation of the hoop stretches of these two points is a small fraction of the hoop stretch average of both points (for instance, 1%). Fig. 3shows these results for the three cases under consideration. For each case, as loading is applied from the undeformed configuration (in the figure it corresponds with values in each curve for whichλθis close to 1), and prior to bifurcation, both points have a non-distinguishing hoop stretch difference. Under these conditions, Fig. 3 shows for each case just one line. Furthermore, as expected, for the anisotropic model withk1=0.20μ, Fig. 3 just shows one line. For the other two cases, when bifurcation occurs, from each curve in Fig. 3 two lines emanate. It follows that each line gives the hoop stretch of the two points considered. In each cylinder, the bulge appears at the cross section for which hoop stretch increases which is the end of the cylinder with the greater external radius.Fig. 4shows values of pressure vs. hoop stretch up to bifurcation for each cylinder as given by the FEM solution (for each model the thick curve) and the analytical one (for each model the thin curve) which is obtained usingf(W^,λθ,λz,L/R)=0, (15) and the corresponding material model. In the three cases, the FEM solution and the analytical one do not coincide since the thin and thick curves show small differences. This is due, mainly, to the thickness used to get the results with the FEM computational model as opposed to the results obtained for the analytical model which is based on the theoretical cylindrical shell assumption.Values of hoop stretch vs. axial stretch associated with the onset of bulging bifurcation as given by the FEM solution (points) and the analytical one (line) are shown in Fig. 5for the neo-Hookean material and the anisotropic model withk1=0.02μ. The results show a small disagreement as it has been explained previously. To complete the analysis, values of pressure vs. axial stretch at bifurcation are shown in Fig. 6for the neo-Hookean material and the anisotropic model withk1=0.02μas given by the FEM solution and the analytical one.As it has been previously mentioned, instability is close to the maximum point that appears in plots such as the one shown in Fig. 1. The existence of these maximum points are indicators of instability and, conversely, if there is no maximum point then instability is not to be expected. But the interpretation of the instability is not obvious. To capture the (bulging) bifurcation, an imperfection is introduced in the (perfect) geometry of the problem. This imperfection may modify the interpretation of the results in the following way. A tiny imperfection should not modify the results and the maximum point obtained with the Riks method should coincide with the onset of bifurcation. A non-small imperfection may modify the perfect conditions for bifurcation. A maximum would appear in the load–displacement curve but the bigger the imperfection the more sudden the rearrangement of the structure at the maximum point. One can conclude that the solution departs from bifurcation to snapping at the maximum point. This has to be clearly identified if the goal of the analysis is to accurately determine the onset of bifurcation. Nevertheless, critical and postcritical behaviour can still be captured and furthermore, under the conditions at hand, a bulge is captured as the instability mode. For a given problem, the bigger the imperfection that is introduced the easier that the Riks method captures an instability since the maximum point appears more clearly. On the other hand, the maximum point does not coincide with the breakdown of bifurcation (which occurs prior to the maximum point). Nevertheless, the bifurcation point can be identified, for the problem at hand, following the displacement of two points as explained in the previous section.To accept a solution, it is important to check that the maximum of the load proportional factor corresponds with an instability and it has a physical meaning. In particular, it is important to show that it is not related to, for instance, problems with the mesh (one of them, the so-called propagated hourglass modes or singular modes). Several precaution measurements should be taken into account before accepting the solution. First, it could happen that the bifurcation point does not correspond with the peak load proportional factor. This could be either due to the geometrical imperfection introduced in the model (as explained earlier) or due to excessive arc length increments. Second, with this methodology we are restricting the analysis to capture the bulging bifurcation mode. Other instability modes could appear prior to the bulging bifurcation mode during the loading process but these will not be captured with this analysis. All these aspects should be verified.For the purpose of this communication in the analysis of the next section, in which an imperfection is introduced, we capture the maximum point with the Riks method and consider that one as the instability point or critical point. Our main objective is to show the possibilities of the procedure. The constitutive model in this paper (as well as the geometry, loading conditions, etc.) is just a prototype and is useful to show qualitative results. Suffice it to say, with the data at hand, to accurately determine the onset of bifurcation in addition to being time consuming would not provide information useful for clinical applications. Physiological conditions are much more complex and involve, among other aspects, residual stresses, growth, remodelling, age, etc. On the other hand, the next example does provide useful qualitative data that can be interpreted in terms of aneurysms propagation. Simultaneously, it assesses the method capability.The undeformed geometry of the artery is chosen following [17]. Basic values include A=4mm, e=0.2mm and L=20mm. An imperfection has to be introduced in the model to capture the bulging mode of bifurcation. With this in mind, we introduce an inner radius and an outer one that are dependent on the coordinate Z. In particular, at the top and at the bottom of the undeformed perfect cylinder the inner radius is A=4mm while the inner and outer radius vary along the axial length of the cylinder by means of a very small curvature keeping the thickness constant. The maximum value of the imperfection deviation is3×10−2A. As a result the model is axisymmetric and the greatest values of the inner and outer radii are at the cross section that is in the middle of the axial length. As opposed to the analysis in the previous section, here the imperfection is of a greater value. This makes easier for the Riks method to identify the maximum point and it is also less time-consuming than with a tiny imperfection.It has been suggested that a diseased artery works at an axial stretch less than the one associated with a healthy artery [18]. Here we consider values of the axial stretch for which a healthy artery operates, typically in the rangeλz=1.1to 1.5.In Abaqus the constitutive model includes the parameterC10=μ/2and we choose C10=7.64kPa, see [17]. These data allow us to examine a cylinder made up of a neo-Hookean material (model (8)). Analyses were carried out and results are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. It is important to remark that we capture the bulging bifurcation mode. Results shown in [2,3] for the neo-Hookean material do not distinguish between bulging and necking. Furthermore, in some cases, those results are associated with necking. Our results here are only associated with bulging. Various analyses were run for different lengths including L=20mm, L=80mm and L=200mm as well as for different values of the shear modulusμand thickness e. In all cases, it was found that in the competition between radial expansion and axial propagation during the evolution of bulging, bifurcation evolves due to radial expansion. This is in agreement with the result given in [4] for thin-walled cylinders. Fig. 7gives this qualitative result for a cylinder made up of a neo-Hookean material. We also point out that for this analysis it is not necessary to use the element C3D8RH. The element CAX4RH of Abaqus can be used, for instance.After these results we focus on the anisotropic model (9). The elastic coefficients k1 and k2 were studied with regard to bulging in [1]. It was shown that aneurysm formation is related to values of these elastic constants that are not within the range of values associated with healthy arterial wall tissue conditions. In particular bulging is possible when the collagen fibers that reinforce the arterial wall tissue and give the anisotropic character to the artery lose their role in the material mechanical response. Here, as a first estimation, the values k1 and k2 are chosen following the analysis in [1]. These values make the constitutive model not highly anisotropic. On the contrary, the model does not depart much from the isotropic neo-Hookean. Nevertheless, very different qualitative results are obtained for this model as opposed to the neo-Hookean one.Different values of k1 and k2 were considered as well as different values of the fiber dispersionκand the angleφ. All these features were combined with different geometries as it has been explained for the neo-Hookean material.In Fig. 8, we display the critical curves for the bulging mode for some tubes in theλz–λθplane. In each curve, the values ofλ=λθgive the azimuthal stretch at the inner radius of the cylinder. The geometry of the tube in all cases is given by A=4mm, e=0.1mm and L=20mm. Elastic constants k1 and k2 take the values k1=0.005kPa and k2=0.012. The angleφis taken to beφ=15°and different values of the fiber dispersionκare considered. Analyses were also performed forφ=30°, 60° and 75°. Those results are not shown here since they are similar qualitatively to the ones shown in Fig. 8. In particular, the results establish that critical values ofλθagainst the fixed axial stretchλzassociated with bulging are heavily coupled. Small variations in the deformation as well as the elastic constants may trigger the existence of bulging. The associated critical values of the dimensionless hoop stressσθθ/C10evaluated on the inner surface of the cylinder againstλzfor the different cases are shown in Fig. 9. Similar plots to these ones are given in [2,3]. In all examples, critical points show a behaviour strongly influenced by the different parameters taken. These studies could be considered as analyses of thin-walled cylindrical shells.A parallel analysis was carried out for thick-walled cylinders. The basic geometry of the tube in this case was given by A=4mm, e=0.4mm and L=20mm. Elastic constants k1 and k2 were considered to be k1=6E−04kPa and k2=0.12. The angleφis taken to be againφ=15○and the values of the fiber dispersionκconsidered are the ones considered for the analysis of thin-walled cylinders. Results are shown in Fig. 10and indicate that critical values ofλθagainst the fixed axial stretchλzassociated with bulging are heavily coupled. Qualitatively, it is a result similar to the one shown in Fig. 8 for thin-walled cylinders.To analyse the effect of the tube thickness, various values of e are analysed for the thick-wall model just described withκ=0. Bifurcation curves in theλz–λθplane for e=0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5 (mm) are shown in Fig. 11. Coupling between the two deformation parameters is clearly appreciated. Pressure associated with these critical points is given in Fig. 12. All curves follow the same pattern. For each of these curves, pressure of inflation at critical points decreases as axial stretch increases. For a given axial stretch, it follows that as e increases the pressure at bifurcation points also increases. These two last results are expected and validate the analysis.For the sake of completeness, the effect of fiber orientation on bifurcation for thick-walled cylinders is shown in Fig. 13. Analyses were performed forφ=15°, 30°, 60° and 75° withκ=0and e=0.4mm. The other parameters are taken as explained previously for Fig. 11.Postbifurcation results were also obtained with regard to bulging propagation. To clearly identify the propagation mechanism three tube lengths were taken, namely, L=20mm, L=80mm and L=200mm. Fig. 14shows a bulge in each of these three tubes, the one on the left has L=20mm, the one in the middle has L=80mm and the one on the right has L=200mm. In all the examples considered which include different lengths and thicknesses as well as different material moduli the propagation of the bulging bifurcation mode is axial. In the competition between radial expansion and axial propagation during the evolution of bulging the bifurcation evolves due to axial expansion. Fig. 15shows the qualitative behaviour of this mechanism. Each line in Fig. 15 represents the outer contour of the cylinder. The line on the left gives the non-bifurcated cylinder. Next lines to the right of that one show the formation of bulging (aneurysm) and the axial propagation of the bulging mechanism. This result is in agreement with aneurysms propagation in arterial wall tissue (see [19]).To determine the onset of bifurcation instabilities is generally a challenge in soft structures. We have provided here a methodology (which includes many subtle details) to study bulging of stretched and inflated cylinders. Needless to say that parallel analysis can be carried out to capture other surface instabilities. The methodology is based on the modified Riks finite element analysis. Several examples have been carried out and the analysis could include other parameters such as more layers made up of isotropic or anisotropic hyperelastic materials, initial stress, etc. Furthermore, the methodology may be applied to even more complex problems such as curved arteries. Quantitative results given here are not of much use since the variables analysed, which include material model, geometry, loading conditions, etc., although can be interpreted in terms of artery dilatation, have been chosen to show the capability of the analysis. In addition, physiological conditions are much more complex.Nevertheless, there are two qualitative results that follow clearly from this analysis. First, physiological effects can take place within the body (in the artery) due to changes in the elastic constants as well as changes in the deformation of the body and the geometry of the artery. More in particular the formation of aneurysms can be triggered due to changes in all these factors. This is shown in the coupling between the values ofλzandλθassociated with the instability curves for the different models studied. It seems that the bulging mode is quite sensitive to changes in the elastic constants as well as to changes in deformation. This confirms the results established in [1]. Second, aneurysms propagate in the axial direction of the artery. This result appears clearly in the competition between radial expansion and axial propagation of the aneurysm. These qualitative results require further analysis that will be addressed in subsequent work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
