@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated estimation of disease recurrence in head and neck cancer using routine healthcare data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Routinely collected data can estimate rates of disease progression, progression-free and overall survival in patients with head & neck cancer.Estimates of overall survival are accurate.Estimates of recurrence and progression-free survival are less accurate.Patients who do not have treatment for recurrent disease may be missed by this approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Head and neck cancer,Disease recurrence,Routine datasets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundOverall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) are key outcome measures for head and neck cancer as they reflect treatment efficacy, and have implications for patients and health services. The UK has recently developed a series of national cancer audits which aim to estimate survival and recurrence by relying on institutions manually submitting interval data on patient status, a labour-intensive method. However, nationally, data are routinely collected on hospital admissions, surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. We have developed a technique to automate the interpretation of these routine datasets, allowing us to derive patterns of treatment in head and neck cancer patients from routinely acquired data.MethodsWe identified 122 patients with head and neck cancer and extracted treatment histories from hospital notes to provide a gold standard dataset. We obtained routinely collected local data on inpatient admission and procedures, chemotherapy and radiotherapy for these patients and analysed them with a computer algorithm which identified relevant time points and then calculated OS and PFS. We validated these by comparison with the gold standard dataset. The algorithm was then optimised to maximise correct identification of each timepoint, and minimise false identification of recurrence events.ResultsOf the 122 patients, 82% had locally advanced disease. OS was 88% at 1 year and 77% at 2 years and PFS was 75% and 66% at 1 and 2 years. 40 patients developed recurrent disease. Our automated method provided an estimated OS of 87% and 77% and PFS of 87% and 78% at 1 and 2 years; 98% and 82% of patients showed good agreement between the automated technique and Gold standard dataset of OS and PFS respectively (ratio of Gold standard to routine intervals of between 0.8 and 1.2). The automated technique correctly assigned recurrence in 101 out of 122 (83%) of the patients: 21 of the 40 patients with recurrent disease were correctly identified, 19 were too unwell to receive further treatment and were missed. Of the 82 patients who did not develop a recurrence, 77 were correctly identified and 2 were incorrectly identified as having recurrent disease when they did not.ConclusionsWe have demonstrated that our algorithm can be used to automate the interpretation of routine datasets to extract survival information for this sample of patients. It currently underestimates recurrence rates due to many patients not being well-enough to be treated for recurrent disease. With some further optimisation, this technique could be extended to a national level, providing a new approach to measuring outcomes on a larger scale than is currently possible. This could have implications for healthcare provision and policy for a range of different disease types.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Measuring clinical outcomes in cancer patients remains challenging. Studies often report results from single centres, from large national studies, or from clinical trials. Single centre studies often provide detailed data, but in small numbers of treated patients, while national studies have more patients but lack details of treatment and outcomes. Clinical trials may provide high-quality data, but in small groups of highly selected patients, and are expensive to perform. Therefore the challenge remains to report high-quality, detailed clinical outcomes in large numbers of patients, without relying on specialised data collection.Head and neck (H&N) cancers represent a large, heterogeneous group of cancers with ∼460,000 cases worldwide [1]. Treatment often involves an intensive combination of surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy and patients can suffer significant long-term side effects. Despite this, tumour recurrence rates remain high and survival rates are relatively poor (National Head & Neck Cancer audit 2011[2]). Similar treatments may be given at recurrence, depending on the pattern of recurrence and the patient's ability to tolerate further treatment, but are toxic and expensive. Therefore, assessment of treatment efficacy, through measuring recurrence rates and recurrence-free survival, is important for patients, clinicians and health services.The UK has had a dedicated national audit database for H&N cancer (DAHNO) since 2004 which requires manual data entry. As a consequence, by 2012 only 11.5% of patients had data on recurrence (National Head & Neck Cancer audit 2011[2]) Over this time period, the scope and scale of routinely-collected electronic healthcare data has expanded, often driven by the requirement for data for payment systems. In the UK, there are a variety of data sources, including data on hospital admissions and procedures (Hospital Episode Statistics; HES), radiotherapy (Radiotherapy Dataset; RTDS), chemotherapy (Systemic Anti-Cancer Therapy dataset; SACT) and deaths (Patient Demographics Service; PDS).Learning how to use these data to answer clinically-driven questions, in a timely, accurate and relevant fashion represents a significant challenge [3]. A computerised method of accessing and interpreting such data can potentially yield useful clinical patterns and outcomes that are currently measured by national audits at considerable expense.We have previously described a pilot study presenting a method of estimating recurrence and survival in H&N cancer patients based on manual analysis of routine data in a small group of 20 patients [4]. This work was based on capturing clinical intuitions about patterns of care and treatment in the form of simple rules about intervals between different treatment types. Since the routinely available data do not contain information on treatment intent, potentially curative treatments that were close to each other in time were assumed to be as part of a planned pattern of sequential, curative treatments, whereas if there was a significant gap between initial curative treatment and subsequent treatment, that subsequent treatment was assumed to be for recurrent disease. However, the assumptions underlying this approach are unlikely to be uniformly correct, and have never been validated in a large patient group.In this study we:1.Extend the range of clinical intuitions that we capture in computational formIntroduce a novel computer-based automated framework, written in Python, to merge and interpret the routine data and automatically identify diagnosis and recurrence events/dates;Use that as a basis for performing simple in silico experiments to validate and optimise our approach in a larger patient sample (n=122).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have developed a computer-based automated technique to extract data on relevant clinical events from routine healthcare datasets (HES, SACT, RTDS and PDS). Diagnosis, recurrence and death dates, and date of last follow-up were identified and overall survival and progression free survival intervals were calculated from this data. The automated algorithm was optimised to maximise correct identification of each timepoint, and minimise false identification of recurrence events. We tested our algorithm on 122 patients who had received radical treatment for head and neck cancer; the recurrence status for 82% patients was correctly identified, and in 98% of patients there was acceptable agreement between the routine and gold standard dataset for overall survival intervals (83% for progression free survival). 21 recurrence events were correctly identified out of a total of 40. The 19 who were missed were mainly due to the patient not receiving treatment for their recurrence; secondary treatment was used as an indicator for recurrence in the algorithm. We have demonstrated that our algorithm can be used to automate interpretation of routine datasets to extract survival information for this sample of patients, and the coding schemes and approach that the technique uses opens it up to use at a national level. There is potential to develop this algorithm to sensitise the recurrence dating strategy to contraindications of the patient, and also to perform retrospective analysis by predicting likelihood of recurrence through knowing the final status of the patient.No authors have been paid for this work, and all declare there are no conflicts of interest.