@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-attribute evaluation and selection of sites for agricultural product warehouses based on an Analytic Hierarchy Process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Methodological multi-criteria/attribute approach for agri-food warehouses location.Analysis of criteria and attributes, assignment, and assessment of importance levels.Development of the agribusiness location model based on Analytic Hierarchy Process.A real case study for a banana distribution warehouse exemplifies the methodology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Site selection problem,Analytic Hierarchy Process,Multi-criteria and Multi-attribute methods in agribusiness,Site selection attributes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Site selection for companies is a complex and unstructured problem that must be analyzed carefully and properly, since a localization error could drive to bankrupt. This problem has been discussed widely and effectively using multi-attribute methods in a manufacturing context, but it has been little studied in agribusiness. The goal of this work is a methodological approach oriented to evaluate optimal locations of new agri-food warehouses. Furthermore, a literature review is developed, analyzing the location problem and the attributes and techniques most widely used applied to agribusiness, and a case-study is presented in order to exemplify the methodological proposal. The multi-attribute technique called Analytic Hierarchy Process has been selected as the basis for the research, and it is applied to the real case study analyzed: the selection of a site for a new banana distribution warehouse. Six generic criteria have been analyzed: accessibility to the area, distance, cost, security of the region, local acceptance of the company, and its needs. The process includes the assignment of attributes to each one of the generic criteria, as well as the assessment of their importance levels. Three different areas of Guadalajara, Jalisco, and Mexico DF have been evaluated for the case-study, and the methodological proposal has been utilized to determine the best option.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the most important and difficult decisions posed to an investor who wants to promote a new company building is the identification of the location. The same problem is faced when an investor already well established in the market wishes to expand the business and seeks for a location for a new plant or branch. In both cases, the investor faces the same problem; however, those getting involved in this process for the first time are the ones who perceive a higher sense of risk and uncertainty when making this kind of decisions.Since this kind of decision-making is not too common and always presenting special features, it can be asserted that it is a complex and unstructured problem, because there is no consensus among the experts regarding the multiple aspects that must be taken into account, the techniques to be used, and who are the responsible people to make the decision.Due to the complexity of this selection problem, an investor should follow the course lead by several questions that assure the proper placement of the new company building or branch. Some of these questions are associated to: Which are the features or variables that should be taken into account when assessing a new placement as an alternative to establish a new company building or branch? Which are the most widely used techniques in the process of assessment and selection of a new placement location? Which are the main problems that an investor faces when selecting a new placement location? Which are the main mistakes that can be made when selecting a new placement location? (Osanloo and Ataei, 2003).Uncu et al. (2002) assert that the location of a company building should take into account the current market in global terms, the changing conditions of the market, and a long list of environmental macro-factors linked to technological, economical, socio-political and legal changes, etc. In the same way, there is a long list of micro-factors, mainly composed of environmental and ecological aspects. Furthermore, it should be taken into account which kind of client will receive the service or product, as well as if the production is focused on a local or foreign environment. Besides, it is necessary to consider aspects such as the quality of the commodities, availability of qualified work force, competitors and suppliers.Finally, the selection problem of a location of the new building involves the simultaneous assessment of several alternatives. There is also the possibility of buildings located in several distant places, since in the current globalized system there are many trade agreements between countries, such as the Free Trade Agreement between Mexico, the United States and Canada, the European Union, Mercosur, the GATT, and the like. It is quite common to see companies sponsored with foreign funds which are located in another country, according to certain commercial strategies that seek closeness to the clients, specialized work force, lower costs, and higher availability of resources and commodities for the production processes.The objective of this paper is to generate a multi-criteria and multi-attribute assessment model that allows selecting the ideal location for warehouses for perishable agricultural products. In the implementation of the case study selected for application of the methodology, all the above stated circumstances are present; but the criteria and attributes presented in this research can be applied, in general, to any land field selection process.In the coastal zone of Michoacán, Mexico, there is a wide group of farmers devoted to the plantation of banana. The local market is exhausted. The association of farmers has decided to establish a new distribution warehouse with different locations, with distances higher than 300 kilometers from the production site and with elevated options of exportation. And finally, the product (bananas), being perishable, requires special facilities for its preservation.Nowadays, there are different techniques for the decision making in the optimization of the selection process of the ideal location of production plants. The techniques more commonly used are (Au et al., 2006): Expanding the classification or scoring methods (Hoffman and Schniederjans, 1996); Analytic Hierarchy Process – AHP (Yurimoto and Masui, 1995; Liu et al., 2008; Dey and Ramcharan, 2008); Linear programming – LP (Brimberg and Revelle, 1999; Schmidt and Wilhelm, 2000); Heuristic (Rönnqvist et al., 1999) and Simulation (Chakravarty, 1999). Similarly, the multi-criteria mapping is also used, within which stands out the Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution – TOPSIS (Liang and Wang, 1991; Mahamid and Thawaba, 2010; Onut et al., 2010; Semih and Seyhan, 2011) and Analytic Network Process – ANP (Felice et al., 2012).However, the techniques used in the process of assessing and selecting new sites, require experience and knowledge from the evaluators about the several alternatives considered. Taking advantage of the accumulated knowledge and expertise, artificial intelligence and expert systems are being used in the decision-making for searching the appropriate solutions (Banar et al., 2007). In the same way, since a few years ago Decision Support Systems (DSS) are being brought supported by the On-Line Analytical Processing (OLAP) System and Data Mining (DM) System, as a basic element of consultation where a quick response is always needed. Finally, it is worth noting the use of the Simple Additive Weighting (SAW) method.Table 1presents a literature review including authors, dates, methodology used and journal that publishes on the subject area. It is observed that AHP is one of the most used methodologies in the studies that have been conducted to assess new sites (see Fig. 1).The study adopts AHP methodology, developed by Thomas Saaty in 1980. According to Saaty (1992, 1993), it is considered ideal and consistent with the objective of creating a methodology for selecting the ideal location of warehouses for perishable agricultural products, since it belongs to the family of multi-criteria and multi-attribute techniques, and also due to the wide options for creating attributes, sub-attributes, and decision alternatives. Likewise, in this technique, the attributes involved in the assessment process have a subjective and appreciative character according to the perception of the evaluator who causes its wide acceptance in terms of conducting an assessment when the subjectivity values are elevated.A detailed study has been made (shown in Table 2) to make a list of the main attributes suggested by 18 authors, who have researched the problem of site location for agricultural and industrial processing plants. The attributes are sorted descending from more to less cited. It can be seen that 16 of the 18 cites make reference to the road accesses of the location under assessment. Likewise, it is observed that the closeness and purchase capacity of the customers is a very important factor and requires further analysis. Moreover, the local labor force available is of great importance, as well as its training and expertise and the cost that it may imply. Finally, it is necessary to review the concept of tax facilities offered by the different administrations of a country.During the selection process of new work locations, every company usually faces the following problems (Coretz, 2008), these problems present a temporal sequencing, due to the decision making by the management team of the company:1st. There are numerous potential sites or rather excessive alternatives for the same issue.2nd. There are also differences in risk perception by the people involved in the decision-making process.3rd. The management board wants to meet a number of multiple objectives, quite often conflicting.4th. These shared objectives are intangible or difficult to quantify.5th. There is a wide variety of interests in the people responsible for the decision-making.6th. There is a need to analyze and assess the environmental, economic and technological impacts.7th. There are possible delays and problems in building permits and licenses.8th. There are different perception values when assessing the compensations granted by local, state, and federal governments.9th. When the alternatives are too distant from the place of origin of the investment funds, cultural aspects of the new location should be taken into account (gender and equity issues, customs and traditions, etc.).On the other hand, it is also necessary to control and minimize the number of errors that are frequently made during the selection process of a new work location, based on previous experiences and generated knowledge. Below, they are shown in a categorized way the mistakes more commonly made, which the AHP model should minimize.•Critical errors:Lack of thorough research and consideration of the factors involved.Use of inappropriate variables for the model.Selection of a very remote place.Not identifying properly the customer profile.Use of inadequate experts in the modeling process.Inadequate assessment of the workforce.Selection of a new location based on short-term criteria and policies and not on long term needs.Decision-making based on verbal promises of local or regional governments.Making decisions based on inadequate and insufficient samples.Over adjusting the model.Inadequate assessment of the competition.Non-critical errors:Imposition of prejudices of executives regarding a certain issue.Choosing a location where team members are afraid or uncertain.Not verifying physically the location of the alternatives.Lack of consensus among executives.Ignoring the personal likes and habits of residents of the town where the new warehouse or factory placed.Election of an existing facility that does not meet the needs, trying to find a bargain.Attempting to adjust the model to all the problems of work site selection.Not understanding the limitations of commonly used models.Excessive secrecy in the process.It is observed that the lack of reliable information about the locations analyzed and considered as alternatives is one of the issues most cited by the authors. It causes the improper integration of the variables in the assessment model; when variables are ignored, they simply do not integrate.Site selection is a complex problem that involves many qualitative attributes that make its assessment difficult. Likewise, there are several alternatives to be assessed, and the decision-making board is often multidisciplinary, what attempts greatly against reaching a consensus. These features, along with others, cause that this type of problems are considered complex or unstructured; therefore, there is no current agreement on the proper methodology to be followed to solve them.In this stage, the information associated to each of the alternative sites identified and a description of the attributes that characterize them are collected. It is necessary to create a decision-making board comprising people that are familiar with the company objectives and the eligible areas to establish the warehouse. This board is composed of administrators of Agricultural Cooperatives (AC) and some of the shareholders of the agribusinesses (Xu, 2008), given the strategic aspect of this type of decision (Zeleny, 1982; Chen and Yang, 2012).Similarly, an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the AC is made, in order to determine the size of the warehouse to be built, and the production capacities of the members of the AC are assessed, as well as the different banana varieties that those members can offer and the current and estimated demand for each variety. In Table 3, some of the strengths and weaknesses that the AC had at the time of the site selection are briefly illustrated.Once the Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) analysis is performed, it is considered as an important strategic tool, since the benefit obtained from its application consists in knowing the real situation of the implementation proposal, as well as the risk and opportunities provided by the new market.The SWOT analysis shows the strengths and weaknesses that are within the company’s internal, enabling the analysis of resources and capabilities. It is a fundamental in this proposed methodology, since it allows considering a wide range of factors relating to production, resources, funding, organization, etc.Furthermore, it permits determining the threats and opportunities that belong to the external environment of the company and must be taken into account in the attributes to be considered in the model. This analysis enhances the flexibility and entrepreneur dynamism of the business.Secondly, it is necessary to identify macro-locations in urban areas. The macro-location should be narrowed down even further, since there are influencing factors that should not be included in the criteria and attributes. In this case, some aspects are considered, such as building regulations and licenses established by the federal, state and local/municipal governments, forbidding or hindering constructions like the one required. Thus, the pre-criteria determine that only three potential locations should be assessed; they are identified as Z1, Z2 and Z3. In the case-study provided as example three possible locations are selected: Z1 Downtown Guadalajara, Z2 Industrial Zone of Jalisco, and Z3 México DF.To make a pre-assessment of the selected sites, the first step is to generate a list of the criteria and attributes that are to be assessed at each of the locations. Each of the integrant of the decision-making board evaluates the presence or absence of each of the attributes of each criterion, based on a Likert Scale containing values from one to five (wherein, number one indicates the absence of the attribute, and number five the absolute presence). The assessments of each of the attributes are arithmetically averaged, as shown in Table 4for only some selected attributes. A full list of the attributes assessed is presented below:It refers to the ease with which the warehouse can be reached with the product from the growing areas.•Land routes (LAR).Maritime routes (MAR).Railways (RAW).Distance (DIS).It refers to the distance between two given points over which the transportation of the bananas or the warehouse staff has to be done.•Distance from the house of the staff members to the warehouse (DIM).Distance from the growing area to the warehouse (DIG).Distance from the warehouse to customers (DIC).It refers to the perception that the members of the decision-making board have about the security issues in the three assessed areas.•Rate of loss by robbery (RAL).Presence of organized crime (POC).Security personnel (SEP).Security systems (SES).This attribute refers to the ease with which services are available for the proper functioning of the company.•Qualified labor force (QLF).Machinery and equipment (MAE).Energy (ENG).Terrain (TER).Services (SER).It refers to the social acceptance that the warehouse may have on the environment where it is supposed to be built.•Community acceptance (COA).Government Acceptance (GOA).In this criterion, the attributes analyzed are related to the costs of product transportation, wages and salaries of workers and managers, etc.•Supplies (SUP).Distribution (DIT).Wages and salaries (WAS).Energy (ENE).Insurances (INS).Including the above information associated with the criteria to be evaluated, Fig. 2shows the initial AHP model with the six generic criteria: accessibility to the production plant, distance, security, needs, social acceptance, and costs. The model is extended with the attributes that belong to each of the criteria previously selected.As discussed previously, the AHP is the methodology used to select the most suitable location to establish a warehouse for agricultural products. For Gass and Rapcsak (2004), AHP is used to solve complex problems that can be decomposed in a hierarchical structure, where each of the levels is sectioned into specific elements. The main objective has been given top priority; the criteria, attributes, sub-attributes and the decision alternatives are listed in descending levels of the hierarchy.One of the advantages of the AHP is that it analyses the attributes and criteria without the requirement of being based on a common scale for all of them. Table 5shows the scale used to make the paired comparisons with the AHP.Paired comparatives are made with the objective of determining the levels of importance of the criteria and attributes. For instance, the paired comparison of element i with element j is placed in the position of aijof the matrix A of paired comparisons, as shown in (1). The inverse values of these comparisons are placed in positions ajiof A, in order to preserve the consistency of the judgment. The decision-maker involved should compare the relative importance of one element to the other, using the nine points scale shown in Table 5. For example, if the first element is classified as element with strong dominance over element two, then in position a12 the value 5 is placed, and reciprocally, 1/5 is placed in position a21.(1)A=1a12⋯a1n1a121⋯a2n··⋯·1an1a2⋯1One of the advantages of this methodological proposal is that it allows identifying and taking into account the inconsistencies of the decision-makers, since they are rarely consistent in their judgments about qualitative factors. According to the AHP efficiency criteria that Saaty (1992) established (and further used by Condon et al. (2002)), a Consistency Index (CI) and a Consistency Relationship (CR) are incorporated into the analysis; they are estimated according to Eqs. (2) and (3); the RC is used to measure the quality of the judgments made by a decision-maker. An RC lower than 0.10 is considered acceptable; if it is higher, it will be necessary to ask the decision-maker to make the assessments or judgments once again.(2)CI=λMAX-nn-1(3)CR=CIRIThe CR index depends on the CI and RI, given that the latter represents a Random Index. Thus, CR represents a measure of the error made by the decision-maker and it should be lower than 10% of the RI. Table 6shows the RI for values of 3 to 10 attributes.Since in the trouble shooting of the issue hereby presented more than one decision-maker is involved, it is necessary to add up and average the judgments of the various decision-makers. Mikhailov (2004) and Escobar et al. (2004) suggest the use the geometric median as average when the personal assessments of the decision-makers are added up in a matrix of final decision, as shown in Eq. (4) for n decision-makers.(4)aijT=aij1*aij2*aij3*⋯*aijn1/nFor the modeling of the final structure of the decision-making problem, as well as for the calculations or estimations of the levels of importance that each of the problems had, the software package ExpertChoice® has been used in our case-study as a tool to make it easy. Fig. 3shows the final model generated to determine each of the weightings of the three alternatives analyzed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
After a revision of the methodologies, attributes, and frequent errors found during the process of selecting a placement location, it can be asserted that despite its wide variety, AHP is one of the most reliable methodologies according to the scientific literature consulted. Its main advantage is that it allows the integration of very diverse quantitative and qualitative attributes that depend on each specific case.The study shows that there is not a set of attributes that must necessarily be analyzed, as each agricultural company requires integrating its own attributes according to its needs and features. In this study, the methodology proves to be very effective and the analysis made provides valuable information for the people responsible of the decision-making in this type of problems. It is also worth noting that there exist specialized software applications that can constitute a great support, as it facilitates the application of the methodology and provides a user-friendly interface for the final user.The methodology presented, in both temporal sequencing and with the attributes and sub attributes evaluated by the AHP model, is assumable by any company wishing to locate a new agricultural storage facility. It is noteworthy that the methodology presented requires the companies to develop in-depth studies of SWOT and the creation of multidiciplinares teams. The obtained results have application not only in choosing a new location, but also in finding out the real situation of the company as well as the risk and opportunities offered by the new market.Regarding the mistakes made during the assessment process, the conclusion is that the companies often make decisions in haste, and the executives impose their prejudices due to the lack of more accurate information or due to time and resource constraints, as well as because of cultural differences between countries. Furthermore, the alternatives are not verified personally; it is thus strongly recommended that before making a decision, up-to-date information should be obtained and consulted as a basis support.In the case study presented in this paper about the selection of a location for establishing a new warehouse, the model generated by AHP methodology facilitates the decision-making process. Likewise, it has been proved that the accessibility to the storage place and the accessibility of the customers is the most important factor, which is consistent with recent works by Thompson et al. (2011), Pittman (2006), De Cesare, (2010) and others authors reported in Table 1.Finally, it is worth mentioning that in the practical case implemented with the proposed model, the Cooperative Society of Banana Producers has acquired the land and is currently in the process of management of construction permits and licenses from local government authorities. Furthermore, the technique is being used in other assessment processes related to this warehouse building, such as the selection of the building company and the design proposals presented, as well as the purchase of equipment and services.