@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Model updating of a dynamic system in a high-temperature environment based on a hierarchical method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Model updating in a high temperature environment is proposed based on the hierarchical method.Theoretical and numerical examples using the hierarchical method are presented.A method to improve the robustness and efficiency of the temperature field updating method was researched.The RBF with the difference basis function was evaluated by ANOVA.The analysis of variance method was used in dynamic structure model updating.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High temperature,Hierarchical,FE model updating,RBF predictor,Genetic algorithm,Analysis variance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the past, structural model updating methods have been widely researched as a means to reconcile mathematical models because the key parameters in dynamic systems often change during their life cycle due to repair and replacement of parts or the environment. However, there is very little literature that references model updating under the condition of complicated multi-physics fields such as a high temperature environment (HTE). In this paper, model updating in an HTE is proposed based on the hierarchical method, and an iterative procedure is presented. With this method, the temperature field updating of a structure is taken as the first stage, and the multi-objective optimization method and a surrogate model of radial-basis functions are introduced to improve the robustness and efficiency of this stage, respectively. Then, the temperature distribution achieved from the former is imposed on the structure as a thermal load, and the residuals of the modal characteristics are taken as objective functions to update the dynamic model of the structure in HTE. The proposed method is tested on an FE model of a wing model, and the analysis of variance approach is employed to evaluate the parameter variability significance and to select the updating variable. The results of the study show that the developed hierarchical method is capable of identifying the input parameters of the temperature field and structure with good accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The supersonic vehicle has been the subject of active research for over three decades due to its many unique attributes and the resulting potential for a variety of applications. Prior research in the area of thermo-vibration was conducted for hypersonic vehicle programs. Andrew [1] researched the temperature-dependent modal test and analysis method of the X-34 FASTRAC composite rocket nozzle. The hypersonic flutter and the thermo vibration analysis have been widely researched by the present authors [2,3]. Chang et al. [4,5] proposed the thermo-vibration function in landscape orientation for isotropic and orthotropic plates based on a nonlinear coupled thermoelastic analysis. The Boeing Company [6] created a list of knowledge gaps and the capabilities needed to overcome these gaps and predicted the benefits if the gaps were removed. Based on the historical and current research completed and the technology experimental vehicle (TX-V) data provided, a large portion of the limitations are found to be related to the temperature distribution. Nevertheless, abundant information sources to refer to for dynamic analysis of supersonic vehicles are still not available.Supersonic vehicles are always subjected to an extremely high surface temperature and large temperature gradients, which can seriously affect the modal characteristics of the structure and can affect the aeroelastic and aeroservoelastic stability of the vehicles. Usually, the finite element (FE) model analysis methods are to be employed to predict instability. Hence, accurately determining the modal characteristics of these structures at elevated temperatures is vital. However, the complexity of this problem, caused by the high speed flow and high temperature environment (HTE), has made it difficult to directly establish an accurate dynamic model. In practice, the temperature field is applied to the structure as an external load to simulate the environment of a hypersonic vehicle in the working state. Therefore, an accurate model of temperature fields is a precondition for updating the FE model for supersonic vehicles.It is well known that thermal property estimation, boundary heat flux reconstruction and heat source identification are the most important factors for the temperature field model. Fortunately, the heat flux gauges are available to measure heat flux directly. However, this is not applicable for thermophysical parameter estimation, which is an imperative problem because of its significant influence on temperature distribution [7]. Therefore, in the literature, there have been several papers that discuss the inverse problems of the thermophysical parameters. Sawaf et al. [8] estimated the constant thermal conductivity coefficients for orthotropic materials using both the conjugate gradient and the Levenberg–Marquardt methods. Sahoo et al. [9] used different curve fitting techniques to recover the temperature history of a real time flight based on temperature data, which was obtained by a nickel film sensor during a supersonic flight test, and the results have been compared. Gosselin et al. [10] reviewed when and how Genetic Algorithms (GAs) have been used in the field of heat transfer over the last 15 years. With the development of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) in recent years, the Bayesian statistical inference method [11] was introduced to estimate parameters and thermal history reconstruction problems, including the boundary heat flux and heat source reconstruction.Similarly, structural model updating plays an important role in dynamic modeling of supersonic vehicles. Finite element model updating approaches to improve the accuracy of a finite element prediction based on measured data are now well known and widely used in many industries. Mottershead et al. [12] and Doeblinget et al. [13] comprehensively reviewed the model updating methods of structural models. Goge [14] found a new way of updating analytical models of A320 using modal data obtained from a ground vibration test. Farid et al. [15] updated complex aerospace structures within the Bayesian framework using modal data, and a neural network was adopted to replace the computationally intensive evaluation of a full finite element analysis. Although considerable research has been devoted to model updating in industry, considerably less attention has been paid to model updating under the condition of complicated multi–physics fields such as the working condition of supersonic vehicles.In addition, it is well known that both the thermophysical parameter estimation and structural model updating can be solved by GAs based on optimization procedures, due to their great performance in global optimization problems. GAs were first introduced by Bagley [16] in 1967. GAs implement a stochastic searching procedure and operate with a population of chromosomes, which are genotype representations of the physical variables. The feasible space of the variables is continuously explored by GAs when searching for the optimal variable set by using two genetic operators, namely crossover and mutation. Through the application of selection, crossover and mutation on the current population, a new and likely better population will be generated. In general, this process repeats for a number of times (generations) before satisfactory results are reached. It should be noted that this optimization algorithm would generally be expensive when, for example, the range of parameters is extensive or the numbers of parameters is large. This problem is largely overcome by the use of a metamodel as a surrogate for the physical model.The idea of metamodeling is to construct a surrogate for the full finite element mathematical model using the values of some sampling points determined by experimental design methods, such as full factorial design (FFD) and central composite design (CCD). The response surface methodology (RSM), among the commonly used metamodels in optimization, has been the predominant method primarily because of its efficiency and simplicity [17,18]. However, the drawback of RSM is that it is not suitable to create models for highly nonlinear problems, in contrast to radial basis functions (RBF). Moreover, RBFs showed a great result for both large-scale and small-scale problems based on multiple performance criteria when compared with other metamodeling techniques [19].The focus of this study is to find a new way of updating for the structure in a high-temperature environment. The remaining sections of the paper are organized as follows. In Section 2, a brief overview of the RBF as one type of metamodel is provided. The hierarchical methodology and iterative procedure for model updating in a high-temperature environment are given in Section 3. In Section 4, the method is validated by a wing finite element model, and the results are discussed. This discussion is followed by the concluding remarks in Section 5.The RBF is a commonly used metamodeling technique in optimization, structural health monitoring and model updating. An RBF, as one type of methodology for scattered multivariate data interpolation [20], is constructed with a series of basic functions that are symmetric and centered at each sampling point. In this section, we give a brief overview of the RBF.A generalized form of the RBF predictor for a system with n sampling points can be written based on the equation of the RBF, given as(1)J′(x)=∑i=1nλiϕ(∥x−xi∥)where J′ is the approximation function of the true objective, obtained from an RBF in this paper,xis the vector of the updating parameters,xiis the vector of the updating parameters at the ith sampling point, ||x−xi|| is the Euclidean distance, ϕ is a basis function, and λiis the unknown weighting coefficient. In this paper, we used three types of basis functions such thatGaussian:ϕ(r)=e−cr2Inversemultiquadric:ϕ(r)=1/(r2+c2)Multiquadric:ϕ(r)=r2+c2where c is the coefficient that can be determined by the cross validation method.By replacingxand J′ in Eq. (1) with n vectors of the updating parameters and their corresponding values at the sampling points and placing them in matrix form:(2)J′=λXwhereJ′=[J′(x1)J′(x2)…J′(xn)]TXi,j=ϕ(∥xi−xj∥)i,j=1,2…nλ=[λ1λ2…λn]The coefficient vectorλis obtained by solving Eq. (2).An RBF using a highly nonlinear function, such as a multiquadric basis function, does not work well for linear responses. Krishnamurthy [21] has augmented an RBF by including a polynomial function to improve the universal property of the RBF:(3)J′=∑i=1nλiϕ(∥x−xi∥)+∑jmχjpj(x)where m is the number of terms in the polynomial, and χjis the corresponding coefficient. A detailed discussion of polynomial functions can be found in Ref. [21].Then, we imposed the orthogonality condition on coefficient χjto solve the underdetermined values of Eq. (3) because there are fewer equations with sampling points created than the number of parameters to be solved.(4)∑jnλipj(xi)=0j=1,2…mCombining Eqs. (3) and (4) in matrix form gives(5)[XPPΤ0]{λχ}={J′0}wherePij=pj(xi)(i=1,2,…n,j=1,2…m)andχ={χ1χ2…χm}T. The solution of Eq. (5) gives coefficientsλandβfor the RBF in the form of Eq. (3) with (n+m) equations.Generally speaking, it would not be possible to check the RBF fitness with statistical analysis techniques because an RBF passes through all of the sampling points exactly, which means that the function values from the metamodel and the real function values at the sampling points are equal. In this article, we use those points that are predicted by RBF and are different from sampling points to check the fitness of the surrogate. The major statistical parameters used for evaluating model fitness are root mean square error (RMSE) and estimate coefficients-R2, which are calculated as(6)R2=1−∑i=1n(Ji−J′i)2/∑i=1n(Ji−J¯)2RMSE=1n×J¯∑i=1n(Ji−J′i)2whereJ¯is the mean value of sample points. The RMSE value represents the percentage of the error in the average value; generally speaking, the larger the value of the former and the smaller the value of the latter ones, the better is the fit.It is well-known fact that the effect of the temperature field on the deformation field is not a one-way phenomenon: the temperature distribution of a structure can vary with its deformation, which is caused by heat exchange, and the mechanical and thermal aspects are coupled and inseparable [22]. However, this coupling considerably complicates the computational aspect of solving actual thermo-elastic problems. In addition, the vibration frequencies are slightly changed by the effect of thermoelectric coupling [23]. Hence, Nowinski [22] suggested discounting the coupling in practice and separately evaluating the temperature and deformation fields, in this order. That method is defined as a partially coupled thermo-mechanical problem considering the temperature as the primary variable. The temperature field as an external load, which is determined by solving the heat conduction problem, is applied to the structure. Furthermore, we negligent the effect of the structural vibration on the temperature field.Because the partially coupled thermo-mechanical models are extensively employed in the analysis of typical aeronautical structures [24,25], in this paper, the temperature field is updated as the first stage. The second stages takes the result as the thermal load when updating the dynamic model of the structure. The model updating approach proposed in this paper is based on this ideological framework.Consider a simple system with error that can be expressed as follows:(7)Z¯=Z(x)+ΔZ(x)whereZ(x) and ΔZ(x) represent the input model and error model, respectively. Eq. (7) shows the relationship between the input parameters x and the output parameters Z. Similarly, for the temperature field model, the system can be expressed as:(8)T¯=T(θ)+ΔT(θ)whereθ=[θ1θ2…θn]is the thermophysical parameters of n-dimensional vector; they are the main source of errors in the temperature distribution model.T¯(θ)andT(θ) represent the measured data and calculated data using the initial model.The updated model of the temperature field is given by:(9)T¯=T(θ′)+ΔT(θ′)whereT(θ′) is the calculated data using the updated model, and ΔT(θ′) is the inherent error that cannot be eliminated by model updating.Substituting the temperature field into the structural dynamic model as an external load, the dynamic response can be written in the form:(10)f¯=f(α(T(θ′)),β)+Δf(α(T(θ′)),β)whereα,βare the temperature-dependent parameters and temperature-independent parameters of the dynamic model, respectively.The total differential is given as:(11)df=∂f∂αdα+∂f∂βdβ=∂f∂α∂α∂T∂T∂θdθ+∂f∂βdβIn practice, we take the following approximation expression:(12)Δf=∂f∂α∂α∂T∂T∂θΔθ+∂f∂βΔβEq. (12) shows that the errors come from two sources. The first source is the uncertainty of the temperature field, and the second is the uncertainty of the independent parameters of the dynamic model. Because there is a partial coupling effect between them, we divide the high-temperature system into a temperature field model and a dynamic model that can be updated. Usually, we take the norm of the dynamic response as the objective function for model updating and obtain the following inequality based on the property of the norm and Eq. (12):(13)∥Δf∥=‖∂f∂α∂α∂T∂T∂θΔθ+∂f∂βΔβ‖≤‖∂f∂α∂α∂T∂T∂θΔθ‖+‖∂f∂βΔβ||Eq. (13) shows that dynamic responses, ||Δf||, will decrease with the decrease of Δθand Δβ; thus, the accuracy of the dynamic response in a high-temperature environment can be improved by updating the two subsystems: temperature field models and structural dynamic models.whenθtend toθ′, that leads to:Δf(α(T(θ)),β)→Δf(α(T(θ′)),β)andΔT(θ)→ΔT(θ′)Obviously,∥Δf(α(T(θ)),β)∥≥∥Δf(α(T(θ′)),β)∥and∥ΔT(θ)∥≥∥ΔT(θ′)∥Therefore,(14)∥Δf(α(T(θ)),β)∥−∥Δf(α(T(θ′)),β)∥∥ΔT(θ)∥−∥ΔT(θ′)∥≥0Eq. (14) indicates that an accurate model of the temperature field could contribute to the response results of the structure in a high-temperature environment. Based on optimization theory for large-scale systems, we can conclude that the optimization results of a subsystem (temperature field updating) are simply the global optimization results of the total system (dynamic model updating in the HTE).LetTiebe the measured temperature data, which can be combined with the solution of heat conduction problem by the FEA method, TFEA, and the measurement error owing to experimental uncertainty, which can be simulated by Gaussian noise. Then,Tiecan be expressed as:(15)The=TFEA+εwhere ε is the noise generated with the “normrnd” function of MATLAB with a zero mean, normal distribution and standard deviation of 2.5°C.The model updating in a temperature field is based on the minimization of an objective function that contains both the analysis and the measured temperature. The associated objective function, the root squares error, J, is expressed by:(16)J=∑h=1u|Tha(θ)−The|whereTheis the temperature from the hth sensor, andTha(θ)is the calculated temperature from the mathematical model governing the heat transfer phenomena with respect to the estimated parameter vector, which is the general function of the temperature. Therefore, a linear combination of a set of basic functions is employed to define the thermophysical parameters' variation with temperature:(17)θj=∑γiψi(T)j=1…swhere s is the number of thermophysical parameters, and γiis the coefficient of basis function ψi. The problem of model updating for estimating the thermophysical parameters' values can be formulated as an optimization problem. Finding the values of the parameter coefficient vectorγthat simultaneously minimizes the objectives:(18)findγminJs.t.γl≤γ≤γuwhere l and u represent the upper and lower bounds of the parameter coefficient vector, respectively.Although the metamodels are very efficient for the optimization problem when the sampling point size is not large, it may introduce some slight extra errors into the objective function and cause the problem to be ill-suited for optimization. For that reason, the multi-objective optimization method is introduced to improve the robustness of the optimization with the structure objective function, the sum of residuals of different temperature distributions with weighting factors. The new objective function J⁎ is expressed as:(19)J⁎=∑l=1rwlJ′iwhere r is the number of types of temperature distributions, and the relative importance of the residual in different temperature distributions is reflected in the choice of the weights wi. The results of the identification depend on the weight values used. In this paper, we chose wias:(20)wl=1/∑i=1nJ′l,inwhere n is the number of temperature test points in the lth temperature distributions. The GA method, as a robust nongradient method, is employed to estimate the thermophysical parameters based on metamodels; using this methodology could improve the search efficiency and could circumvent difficulties of nonconvergence when the parameters are correlated or similar.When using Eq. (19), in general, the greater the number of temperature distributions with different types, the greater is the probability that an optimal solution corresponding to objective function is the real solution. It should be noted that the process of identification is conducted in the temperature distribution with large gradients to estimate the relationship of the parameters and the temperature in the range of interest; however, that is always a very difficult task.As discussed before, the modal frequencies with the high temperature field, which are updated by identifying thermophysical parameters, can be expressed as:(21)f=f(α(T(θ′)),β)where the thermophysical parameters vector after the update isθ′.If we define the relationship for the temperature-dependent dynamic parameters and temperature as:(22)αj=∑κiφi(T)j=1…lwhere l is number of parameters, κiis coefficient of the basis function φi, and its vector format isκ, then the dynamic structural model updating is similar to the temperature field for identifying the model parameter values, such as spring stiffness, that give the best fit in all groups of modal properties. This problem can be formulated as an optimization problem, and it is written as:(23)findκ,βmin∥w(fε−fa(α(T(θ˜′)),β))∥s.t.κl≤κ≤κu,βl≤β≤βuwherefa andfεrepresent modal data, such as the frequencies vector, modeshape or logarithm magnitude of FRF by simulation and test, respectively.wis the vector of weight coefficients, which are usually chosen as the reciprocals of modal frequency vectors. The upper and lower bounds of the dynamic model parameters are represented by subscripts u and l.In many instances, the modal correlation of an updated model should be checked by the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) value, expressed as:(24)MACi=|φεiTφai|2(φεiTφεi)(φaiTφai)where φεiand φairefer to the calculated and experienced modeshape, respectively. In general, if the value of MAC is larger than 0.8, then those modeshapes have a strong correlation.The detailed process of model updating in an HTE is shown as follows:Fig. 1.The FE model of wing structure in an HTE will be used as an example to check the feasibility of the hierarchical updating methodology that is proposed in this paper. Typically, the variability of the dynamic characteristic of the test piece in a high-temperature experiment is supposed to arise not only from the decrease of the material stiffness and the thermal stress of a structure but also from the change of the boundary condition and gap state. Therefore, as shown inFig. 2, the boundary condition is fixed in the beam of a wing, assuming that the boundary condition and the stiffness will be changed with environmental temperature and that the end faces of the wing are nearly in contact with the rigid wall. The FE model updating of this structure is performed by considering the effects of a structural gap on the boundary condition and using the spring elements to simulate the stresses that are caused by the linear expansion phenomenon of material while taking the spring stiffness as structural updating parameters in the FE model.The wing is made of an aluminum alloy with the material properties of density ρ=2800kg/m3, Young's modulus E=76GPa, Poisson's ratio υ=0.3 and linear expansion coefficient γ=2.05e−5m/K. Because the FE model is only used to validate the method of updating the model, in this section, we make the following assumptions to simplify the specific process.The actual values of thermal conductivity, which are the temperatures of the quadratic polynomial, are assumed to be unknown, and the polynomial coefficients are listed inTable 1. The emissivity is constant as 0.09 [26], and the experimental data are simulated by a combination FEA analysis using the actual value and Gaussian noise.The temperature-dependent parameters of the dynamic model, such as Young's modulus and the linear expansion coefficient, are not varied with the temperature or have been updated such that they can be performed by a simple test article with the same material in a free-free boundary condition.Considering that the contact stiffness with the rigid wall in the normal direction (Z) is constant, the contact force, which is caused by thermal stresses that will affect the vibration characteristics of the wing, is the linear relationship with temperature. We assume that the value of contact stiffness is 4.35e6N/m and that it does not vary with temperature.Usually, it is not known in advance which metamodels have the highest fitness before the surrogate is used in model updating. The accuracy of the metamodel, on the other hand, is very important for successful studies; therefore, we selected six types of RBF and developed a model for the heat conduction problem to investigate the appropriateness of the metamodels.The six RBFs are:(a)GaussianInverse-multiquadric;Multiquadric;Gaussian with linear polynomial;Inverse-multiquadric with linear polynomial;Multiquadric with linear polynomial.There are three design variables because we assume that the thermal conductivity is the temperature of the quadratic polynomial. To take into account the accuracy of the surrogate and computational cost, we use the five-level central composite design and add some sample points at the diagonal of the design space for a total of 45 sample points, which are simulated by the FE code MSC/NASTRAN, to construct the RBF models. The RBF models created with the Gaussian, Inverse multiquadric, and Multiquadric models are represented by the symbols “RBF-GS”, “RBF-IMQ”, and “RBF-MQ”, respectively. The augmented RBF models are represented by adding “−LP” to the symbols of those without augmentation.We used seven-level FFD in the design space; those points differ from the sample points and are calculated by the RBF predictor to evaluate the fitness of the metamodels, and the R2 and RMSE values are calculated using Eq. (6). The results are shown inFigs. 3 and 4. It can be observed that the metamodels constructed by functions (d)–(f) give better overall prediction than functions (a)–(c); the functions (a)–(c), especially functions (a) and (b), cannot suitably represent the objective functions of condition No. 1 and condition No. 2 (as shown in Fig. 5). In contrast, all of the models augmented with a linear polynomial did well with regard to the objective functions of No. 1 and No. 2. The poor predictability of models in functions (a)–(c) may in fact be caused by the properties of the No. 1 and No. 2 distributions, which appear to have certain linear characters.Among the six RBFs, function (f), the multiquadric with linear polynomial, is identified to be the most stable function for all three objectives. Therefore, the models created by the multiquadric with linear polynomials are selected to perform the identification and model updating in the following sections.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
