@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Virtualisation of floricultural supply chains: A review from an Internet of Things perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assess how the Internet of Things can enhance virtualisation in floriculture.We define the concept of virtualisation and different perspectives in literature.A conceptual framework for analysis of virtual supply chains is developed.We analyse the existing situation and future challenges in Dutch floriculture.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtualisation,Internet of Things,Supply chain management,Virtual commerce,Virtual logistics,Horticulture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Supply chains are increasingly virtualised in response to market challenges and to opportunities offered by nowadays affordable new technologies. Virtual supply chain management does no longer require physical proximity, which implies that control and coordination can take place in other locations and by other partners. This paper assesses how the Internet of Things concept can be used to enhance virtualisation of supply chains in the floricultural sector. Virtualisation is expected to have a big impact in this sector where currently still most products physically pass through auction houses on their fixed routes from (inter)national growers to (inter)national customers. The paper defines the concept of virtualisation and describes different perspectives on virtualisation in literature, i.e. the organisational, team, information technology, virtual reality and virtual things perspectives. Subsequently it develops a conceptual framework for analysis of virtualisation in supply chains. This framework is applied in the Dutch floriculture to investigate the existing situation and to define future challenges for virtualisation in this sector.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The floricultural sector in the Netherlands is of world-class quality, and serves as main trading hub for Europe. It is internationally renowned as a strong cluster (Porter, 1998). The sector has a big impact on the Dutch economy (Berkhout and Roza, 2012; PT, 2013). It is the largest exporter of fresh-products in Europe and belongs to the top-3 largest exporter in the world with still significant opportunities for further growth (CBI, 2008a,b; van der Vorst et al., 2012). Despite the current leading position, the sector needs to look forward and innovate to stay in the lead.In floriculture currently most products physically pass through auction houses on their fixed routes from (inter)national growers to (inter)national customers. Physical presence of goods seems to be still necessary to allow for physical inspection, quality control and break-bulk activities. However, it is now widely accepted in the sector that virtualized supply chains are an important answer to challenges posed by the markets and the opportunities offered by nowadays affordable new technologies (van der Vorst et al., 2012; Verdouw et al., 2012). In such virtual supply chains, planning, orchestration and coordination are based on virtual representations of physical products and resources, enabled by new information and communication technologies. The actors responsible for planning, orchestration and coordination are not necessarily the ones handling and observing these physical objects. They can be at total different locations. As a consequence, virtualized networks enable the decentralization or decoupling of physical flows from (centralized) planning, orchestration, and coordination taking place in other locations and by other partners. As a result future chains might by-pass current actors and aim for shorter more responsive routes from grower to end consumer.Virtualisation has been an important topic in research already for a long time. Traditional research streams in particular focus on virtual machines (e.g. Goldberg, 1974), virtual reality (e.g. Steuer, 1992), virtual organisations (e.g. Davidsow and Malone, 1992) and virtual teams (e.g. Townsend et al., 1998). More recently, the virtualisation of physical objects as digital representations has received much interest, in particular due the emergence of the Internet of Things concept (IoT). In the IoT, physical entities have digital counterparts and a virtual representation; things themselves become context aware and they can sense, communicate, interact, exchange data, information and knowledge (Guillemin and Friess, 2009). We believe that the introduction of virtual objects as a central means for planning, orchestration and coordination has the potential to revolutionize supply chains. However, available literature on virtual Supply Chain Management (SCM) is mainly considering virtualisation from an organisational perspective, for example Chandrashekar and Schary (1999), Ho et al. (2003), Gunasekaran and Ngai (2004) and Manthou et al. (2004). In this perspective, virtual supply chains are dynamic and digitally connected organisational structures that temporally bring together resources of different organisations to better respond to business opportunities. To the best of our knowledge it is not yet researched how the virtualisation of physical objects in the Internet of Things (IoT) can impact SCM practices.This paper aims to contribute to this gap by assessing how the IoT concept can enhance virtualisation of supply chains in the floricultural sector. This sector is an highly instructive example because it is currently making major progress in the virtualisation of transactions, including remote auctioning, and in the virtualisation of logistics processes. More specifically, the paper aims to analyse the existing situation and to define future challenges.The paper is structured as follows. It first defines the concept of virtualisation and describes main perspectives identified in literature on virtualisation. Subsequently the paper develops a conceptual framework for analysis of virtualisation in a supply chain context. Next, the paper presents the existing situation concerning the virtualisation of supply chains in the Dutch floriculture. This analysis focusses on the enabling role of Information and Communication Technologies. The paper concludes with the main future challenges concerning supply chain virtualisation in the floricultural sector.The research is carried out as part of the DaVinc3i project in close interaction with the involved business partners, which represent the majority of the Dutch sector, including auction, traders, growers and industry associations (van der Vorst et al., 2012). The research was organised in four steps: (i) definition study, (ii) development of a framework for analysis, (iii) investigation existing situation and (iv) definition of future challenges.The research started with a definition study based on literature review. There is much confusion about the concept of virtuality because it is applied in many domains and consequently it is used in different meanings. The definition study has therefore identified the main perspectives on virtualisation in literature and subsequently it defined virtual supply chains from a virtual things perspective.The next step was the development of a conceptual framework, i.e. a systematic classification of concepts for analysis of virtualisation in a supply chain context. This framework for analysis comprises three parts. The first part is an object system definition, which is a conceptual view of the object of research, i.e. virtual supply chains. The model was developed by reviewing SCM literature from a general systems perspective. The second part is a basic information systems architecture for enabling virtual supply chains, which was derived from the IoT literature. The third part is a definition of key themes within this architecture that can be used to analyse the existing situation regarding the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) that enable virtualisation in floriculture.The subsequent research step was an investigation and analysis of the existing situation (i.e. between Q3 2011 and Q2 2012) concerning the virtualisation of supply chains in the Dutch floriculture. We first conducted an in-depth desk research that identified and described a list of virtualisation practices in floriculture (see Appendix). The results were reviewed and completed in unstructured interviews with key industry experts. In total 30 interviews were conducted with 35 experts with the following roles: 9 traders, 3 auction staff, 9 growers, 7 service providers (software vendors and consultants) and 7 experts from industry associations. The analysis was based on the framework discussed above and focussed on the enabling role of ICT in virtualisation.Last, main future challenges for the virtualisation of floricultural supply chains were defined. This was done by the team of the Da Vinc3i project by a synthesis of the investigation results.The remainder of the paper introduces the results following the research steps as described above.The concept of virtualisation has been used as a compelling catchphrase to describe the revolutionary impact of ICT on business processes, organisations and society (Crowston et al., 2007). Basically, the word “virtual” contrasts with “real” or “physical”, which implies having the essence or effect without a real-life appearance or form (World English Dictionary). Virtualisation is used in reference to digital representations of real or imaginary real-life equivalents. As such, virtualisation removes fundamental constraints concerning:•Place: virtual representations do not require geographic presence, i.e. physical proximity, to be observed, controlled or processed.Time: besides the representation of actual objects, virtualisation can reproduce historical states, simulate future states or imagine a non-existing world.Human observation: virtual representations can visualise information about object properties (such as temperature information or X-rays) that cannot be observed by the human senses.Although dealing with the same basic concept, virtuality has been applied to different domains and the concept has been used in different meanings and with different focuses. The main perspectives as apparent in literature will be discussed in the following sections.The term ‘virtual organisation’ or ‘virtual enterprise’ became popular in the 1990s to characterise the development towards dynamic organisational structures that temporally bring together resources of different organisations to better respond to business opportunities (Davidsow and Malone, 1992; Goldman et al., 1995; Venkatraman and Henderson, 1998). It can be seen as a consequence of the focus of companies on core competences (Prahalad and Hamel, 1990). End customers can only be served by the collaboration between independent companies that form a network of complementary resources, i.e. a virtual organisation.More recently the network perspective of virtual organisations is stressed by using terms such as virtual networks or virtual supply chains (Chandrashekar and Schary, 1999; Ho et al., 2003; Gunasekaran and Ngai, 2004; Manthou et al., 2004). Virtual networks are formed on-the-fly during business operations based on a selection of capabilities and enabled by flexible inter-organisational information systems (Vervest et al., 2004; Grefen et al., 2009). Basically, the underlying concepts are the same as at virtual enterprises or virtual organisations. However, the focus slightly differs since the emphasis is in particular on the rapid (re)construction of supply chain configurations that plan, coordinate, execute, monitor and control the business processes required to achieve a specific value proposition at a specific moment in time. Consequently, in virtual networks a dynamic variety of chain processes, connecting network partners in horizontal and vertical relations, take place in order to satisfy demand (Verdouw, 2010).Also the enabling role of information systems is an important issue of virtual network concepts. Information systems make it possible to share supply chain information timely and subsequently to alert the firms early in order to respond quickly to changes in demand or supply (Lee and Whang, 2000; Li et al., 2007). To do this in the dynamic context of virtual networks, it must be possible to connect and disconnect the information systems of the involved actors and hence to set-up and change integrations rapidly, i.e. a ‘pick, plug and play’ approach (Verdouw et al., 2010b). This leads to great demands on, in particular, the interoperability and agility of supporting information systems (as used by participants in supply chain processes).In virtual teams people collaborate via computer-mediated communication systems with co-workers they may never or rarely meet face-to-face (Crowston et al., 2007). These virtual collaborative working environments are geographically dispersed and may be located anywhere in the world (Townsend et al., 1998; Maznevski and Chudoba, 2000; Kirkman and Mathieu, 2005). Important technologies for virtual collaboration include video conferencing, group decision support systems, Computer Aided Design tools and social media. Virtual teams can be found in many different domains, such as collaborative product design, open innovation in digital living labs, e-Learning and virtual classrooms, collaborative software development, consumer co-creation and virtual coordination in supply chains.A virtual machine (VM) is a software replication of a computer system or component that executes programs like a physical machine. This approach emerged in the end of the 1960s in information technology research to decouple the hardware and software layer. A virtual machine provides a uniform view of underlying hardware, independent from the specific implementation (Rosenblum and Garfinkel, 2005). The heart of a Virtual Machine system is the Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM) software which transforms the physical machine into one or more replicas of the original computer system (Goldberg, 1974). Consequently, the real system appears as a different virtual system or as multiple virtual systems (Smith and Ravi, 2005). This makes it possible to run several different operating systems concurrently on one physical computer i.e. each operating system on its own virtual machine (Goldberg, 1974). Furthermore, the VMM layer can map and remap virtual machines to available hardware resources at will and even migrate virtual machines across machines (Rosenblum and Garfinkel, 2005). As a consequence, machine virtualisation is a powerful technology for a more optimal use of computer capacity. It enhances reliability, scalability and security without imposing the space or management overhead that would be required if applications were executed on separate physical machines (Rosenblum and Garfinkel, 2005).Virtual reality (VR) aims to create a digital environment that is experienced by a human users as reality (Steuer, 1992). As a result the main challenges and advancements of VR are concerned with the development of advanced human–computer interfaces (Lu et al., 1999). At this, the emphasis is on visual experiences, but also aural and haptic experiences can be simulated. Important technologies to enable these experiences are display technologies including advanced 3D user interfaces, graphics rendering engines, user tracking systems and the databases for building and maintaining detailed and realistic models of the virtual world (Brooks, 1999). VR is applied in different domains, including training e.g. flight and surgical simulators, product design and prototyping, gaming and virtual worlds like Second Life.Virtual reality is usually considered to be a purely artificial world, in which the users are immersed in a completely synthetic world that mimics the properties of some real-world environments, either existing or fictional (Azuma, 1997; Brooks, 1999; Lu et al., 1999). However, this virtual reality increasingly is mixed with real environments, resulting in a continuum between real and virtual worlds (Milgram and Kishino, 1994). Contrary to virtual reality, the concept of augmented reality (AR) is close to the real world in this continuum because it aims to supplement reality rather than completely replacing it (Azuma, 1997). AR aims to superimpose (i.e. augment) computer-generated graphics over real objects in the user’s field of view as if they appear in the real world (Lu et al., 1999). This can be done in three ways: video augmentation, optical see-through and projection (Azuma, 1997; Lu et al., 1999; van Krevelen and Poelman, 2010). As a result, AR allows the user to see real objects enriched with virtual information that the user may not directly be able to detect with his own senses. AR is still in its infancy (Carmigniani et al., 2011). However, recent advances in mobile computing have enabled a new breed of mobile AR solutions (for example Layar and Blippar for smartphone apps), which is resulting in a new impulse of applications (Papagiannakis et al., 2008; Carmigniani et al., 2011).The virtual things perspective is related to the Internet of Things concept (IoT), which provides a vision of a world in which the Internet extends into the real world embracing everyday objects by utilising the power of combining ubiquitous networking with embedded systems, RFID, sensors and actuators (Mattern and Floerkemeier, 2010; FI-WARE, 2012). IoT combines the concepts “Internet” and “Thing” and can therefore semantically be defined as “a world-wide network of interconnected objects uniquely addressable, based on standard communication protocols” (Infso and EPoSS, 2008)The interaction between real/physical and digital/virtual objects is an essential concept behind this vision. In the IoT, physical entities have digital counterparts and virtual representation; things become context aware and they can sense, communicate, act, interact, exchange data, information and knowledge (Guillemin and Friess, 2009). In other words, each physical object is accompanied by a rich, globally accessible virtual object that contains both current and historical information on that object’s physical properties, origin, ownership, and sensory context (Welbourne et al., 2009). The Internet acts as a storage and communication infrastructure that holds a virtual representation of things linking relevant information with the object (Uckelmann et al., 2011). As such, virtual objects serve as central hubs of object information that combine and continuously update data from a wide range of sources (Fig. 1).The literature review presented in this section has shown that the concept of virtuality is used in different domains and with different meanings. This section has contributed to a shared understanding by defining and introducing main perspectives as apparent in literature, i.e.:•Organisational perspective: virtual enterprises and virtual networks.Team perspective: virtual collaborative working environments.Information technology perspective: virtual machines.Virtual reality perspective: digital environments that are experienced by human users as reality.Virtual things perspective: digital representations of physical objects that link all relevant object information, usually in the internet (IoT).The research object of this paper are virtual supply chains. Supply chains are concerned with flows of products (i.e. objects, things) that are handled by a network of autonomous companies (i.e. organisational structure) working together to provide products or services for end customers (based on Stevens, 1989; Cooper and Ellram, 1993; Lambert and Cooper, 2000; van der Vorst and Beulens, 2002; Christopher, 2005). Therefore, virtual supply chains will mainly combine the perspectives of virtual organisations and virtual things. They can be defined as dynamic organisational structures that temporally bring together resources of different organisations based on the virtualisation of the physical objects such as containers, shipments, products, trucks and vessels. As argued in the introduction, existing literature considers virtual supply chains mainly from an organisational perspective. In addition, this paper approaches virtual supply chains in particular from a virtual things perspective. The next section elaborates this into a conceptual framework.This section develops a conceptual framework for analysis of virtual supply chains. To do so, it first defines the object of research, i.e. supply chain systems. Subsequently, the impact of virtualisation on the management of supply chains is analysed and included in the object system definition. Next, the role of information technology is introduced and a basic information systems architecture for enabling virtual supply chains is defined. The section concludes with the definition of key themes within this architecture that can be used to investigate and analyse the existing situation in floriculture.The term supply chain is used first in the beginning of the 1980s in the context of an inventory management approach that optimises the physical flow from raw material to end products as one integrated system with a shared objective (Cooper and Ellram, 1993; van der Vorst and Beulens, 2002). In the 1990s SCM evolved towards an integrated process approach in which the concepts of logistics management were extended to incorporate the integration of firms in its supply chain. This development was enhanced by the introduction of the term ‘value chain’ by Porter and Millar (1985). A firm’s value chain is a system of interlinked processes, in which every activity adds value to the product or service.The philosophy behind SCM is the application of a total systems approach in managing the fulfilment of demand, rather than, as so often was in the past, managing the goods flow as a series of independent activities (Chase, 1998; Christopher, 2005). The basic underlying claim is that management of a supply chain system as a whole will result in a better performance than the summed performance of separately managed organisations. Based on these notions, a supply chain system can be defined as a connected series of business processes performed by a network of autonomous companies working together to provide products or services for end customers (adapted from Stevens, 1989; Lambert and Cooper, 2000; Christopher, 2005).According to Lambert and Cooper (2000), supply chain systems comprise three main elements: (i) the supply chain network structure of cooperating actors, (ii) the supply chain business processes that are performed by these actors, and (iii) the management of these processes. The management of supply chain processes can be further categorised into strategic, tactical and operational management (Anthony et al., 1992). SCM primarily focuses on the operational integration of business processes. This implies that the participants coordinate the control of their business processes in order to improve the value delivered to the ultimate customers (Stevens, 1989; Ballou et al., 2000; van der Vorst and Beulens, 2002; Romano, 2003; Gibson et al., 2005). Consequently, the main concepts of supply chain systems are business processes (performed by a network of firms), control and coordination (Verdouw et al., 2011a). Fig. 2illustrates this. Below, these concepts are further defined and classified.A Business Process is a set of logically related tasks performed to achieve a defined business outcome (Davenport and Short, 1990). Business processes can be subdivided into primary processes that directly add value to products and supporting processes (Porter and Millar, 1985). Primary business processes can further be classified into transformation and transaction processes (among others based on Day, 1994; Persson, 1995). Transformation processes are primary processes that contribute directly to the creation and movement of products by a company such as engineering, production and distribution. Transaction processes are primary processes that contribute directly to the establishment and conclusion of transactions between two actors, in particular, sales and purchasing. Consequently, the business processes of a supply chain consist of a sequence of transformation processes that add value to the product and transaction processes that connect transformations of the involved partners.Control is a basic concept in system dynamics. It ensures that the system’s objectives are achieved, also if disturbances occur. The basic idea of control is the introduction of a controller that measures system behaviour and corrects if measurements are not compliant with system objectives (de Leeuw, 1997). Supply chains are ‘in control’ if its business processes maintain a steady state. Therefore, the activities of these processes must include the cybernetic control functions necessary to demonstrate ‘cybernetic validity’. Basically, this implies that they must have a feedback loop in which a norm, sensor, discriminator, decision maker and effector are present (Beer, 1981; in ‘t Veld, 2002). Fig. 3depicts these control functions in a basic control model. The object system executes activities that transform input into the desired output. In supply chain systems these are the business processes of the involved actors that transform input material to final products at the end customers location. The sensor measures the actual performance of the object system. The discriminator function compares the measured performance with the norms that specify the desired performance (system objectives concerning e.g. quantity, quality and lead time aspects) and signals deviations to the decision-making function. Based on a control model of the object system, the decision-making function selects the appropriate intervention to remove the signalled disturbances. Finally, the effector implements the chosen intervention to correct the object system’s performance.Coordination becomes relevant when systems are decomposed into sub systems. Coordination is aimed at managing the dependences between sub systems in such a way that the impact on the total systems behaviour is maximal positive (optimal synergy). Interdependences are managed via the alignment of both sub system’s control norms.Fig. 4shows that coordination comprises three basic functions (based on in ‘t Veld, 2002). The initiation function sets the norms for both control systems in manageable rules and standard values (Veeke, 2003). The synchronisation function manages the alignment of these norms, which can be done via different coordination mechanisms. The evaluation function compares the aligned norms with the observed performance and triggers the adjustment of norms if necessary.Coordination mechanisms are studied in-depth in organisational science. Thompson (1967) distinguished three basic types of dependency: pooled, sequential and reciprocal interdependence, which require different types of coordination. Based on his work, which is refined by many others, three basic coordination modes can be defined (Verdouw et al., 2011a):•Coordination by standardisation: specifies the necessary activities, output or skills in advance, which eliminates the need for further communication during execution.Coordination by plan (direct supervision): central planning by a coordinating manager who takes responsibility for implementation by others, issuing instructions to them and monitoring their actions during execution.Coordination by mutual adjustment: decentralised alignment through mutual feedback processes for joint problem solving and decision making, heavily relying on informal communication.In literature, the focus initially was on coordination between organisational subunits. However, Malone and Crowston (1994) argue that the primary source of coordination problems is dependence among processes using resources. They distinguish three basic types of such dependencies:1.Flow dependencies arise whenever one process produces a resource that is used by another process (precedence relation).Sharing dependencies occur whenever multiple processes use the same resource.Fit dependencies arise when multiple processes collectively produce a single resource.SCM is primarily concerned with coordination of flow dependencies: the business process output of one actor is the input of another actor’s processes. The main flows among supply chain business processes are products, orders, and demand and supply information. Besides these flow dependencies, there are some key dependencies among multiple flows in a supply chain. These are related to the usage of shared resources, i.e. material and capacity.The next section elaborates the impact of virtualisation on the control and coordination of supply chain systems.In virtual supply chains, the control and coordination of supply chain processes is based on virtual objects instead of on direct observation of physical objects. This allows for the decoupling of physical flows and information aspects of supply chain operations (Clarke, 1998). As argued before, virtualisation removes fundamental constraints concerning place, time and human observation.SCM does no longer require physical proximity, which implies that the actors responsible for control and coordination are not necessarily also the ones responsible for handling and observing the physical objects. They can also be at total different locations, which implies that the path or route followed by the physical products from source to destination is no longer dependent on the location of the partners executing control and coordination. These controlling and coordinating partners thus may not have physical access to the products and resources and may have no hierarchical control over the partners that execute operations.Furthermore, virtual objects do not only represent actual states, but can also reproduce historical states and simulate future states. Moreover, virtual objects can be enriched with sensor data about object properties (such as temperature information or X-rays) that cannot be observed by the human senses. This allows for more ‘sophisticated’ control and coordination capabilities, including tracking and tracing, advanced quality monitoring and planning functionalities. More specifically, the decoupling of SCM from physical flows by virtualisation is twofold: decoupling of control and decoupling of coordination (see Fig. 5).Decoupling of control means that the measurements of the object system’s state are translated into a virtual object system (see Fig. 6). The discriminator function compares a virtual view on the object system with a specific control objective. Dependent on the specific purpose of usage, the virtual view may filter irrelevant information or include additional data (e.g. simulations of future states). Next, the discriminator function reports deviations to the decision-making function, which selects the appropriate intervention based on its control model, just as in conventional control systems. However, before deciding on the intervention, the decision making function now can simulate the impact of interventions on the virtual objects. Last, the selected intervention is communicated with the effector function, either directly or via the virtual object system using remote actuator systems.Decoupling of coordination means that the norms of both sub systems are evaluated based on a view on the virtual objects instead of direct observation of the object systems (see Fig. 7). As a result, physical proximity of the coordinator is no longer necessary. Like the usage of virtual objects for control, the views on the virtual objects may filter irrelevant information or include additional data that are relevant for coordination purposes. Also the impact of synchronised norms can be simulated into future states of the virtual objects. These capabilities improve the quality of the synchronisation process. As argued before, coordination aims at managing flow, sharing or fit dependencies.The coordination of flow dependencies requires that the virtual representation of an input object is compared with the control norms of the process that will use this object. These norms include timeliness (input object must be available when the process demands for it), accessibility (it must be at the right place), usability (it must have the appropriate characteristics), costs (it must have the right price) and information (it must include the information that is necessary for further processing) (adapted from Malone and Crowston, 1994). In case of any conflict, the control norms of the current process can be changed in order to prevent problems in a next business process.The coordination of sharing dependencies requires that the virtual representation of an object includes its allocation to the different processes that need the object. The representation should also include allocation constraints e.g. sharable, reusable and non-reusable resources. An example is a virtual production tool that visualises to what extent its capacity is reserved over time.The coordination of fit dependencies requires that the virtual representations of components are compared with the virtual representation of the end product. The virtual components should fit into the virtual end product. If this is not the case, it can be corrected pro-actively via the control system of the process that is dealing with the component concerned.In sum, virtual supply chains decouple the management activities from the physical flow from source to destination. Control and coordination of supply chain processes are based on virtual objects instead of on direct observation of physical objects. The next section further elaborates on the enabling information architecture.Virtual objects have a central role in virtual supply chains. Virtual objects are digital representations of objects that are stored, communicated and processed and communicated via the internet. As such, virtual objects are serving as central hubs of object information in the internet that integrate data about the objects from different sources. In virtual supply chains the objects are transferred between many different partners from primary production to the market. As a result, virtual objects are composed of information from different companies and also used by different organisations for different purposes of usage. This leads to great demands on, in particular, the interoperability of supporting information systems of these companies.Atzori et al. (2010) define three groups of technologies that enable such an IoT approach:(i)Identification, sensing and communication technologies, which include auto identification and data capture technologies such as barcoding and RFID, sensors that measure object state and wireless networks that connect identification and sensor data to intermediary platforms.Middleware technologies that enable a seamless exchange of object information between different supply chain participants. In an IoT context effective middleware start with an object abstraction layer that creates virtual representations of the heterogeneous set of underlying objects. The abstraction layer harmonises the access to the heterogeneous set of underlying objects with a common language and procedure. On top of the object abstraction layer, middleware technologies comprise functionalities for service management and service composition.Finally, applications that provide specific functionalities for different supply chain users based on the virtual object information, made accessible via the middleware layer.Ma (2011) uses a similar classification. He divides the architecture of an IoT system into four layers: object sensing layer, data exchange layer, information integration layer, and application service layer. The object sensing layer is concerned with sensing the physical objects and obtaining data. The data exchange layer handles an efficient and secure transmission of object data. The information integration layer processes the uncertain information acquired from the networks and transforms it into usable information. The application service layer provides specific content services based on the processed information for various users (Ma, 2011).Based on the IoT classifications of Atzori et al. (2010) and Ma (2011), Fig. 8illustrates the basic information systems architecture that is needed to enable virtual supply chains.The starting point is the sensing of physical objects i.e. the real-life things that are to be virtualised. These objects can be on different levels of aggregation (e.g. product, box, pallet, container, truck). The physical objects must include tags for identification, usually barcodes or RFID transponders. Sensors and other devices measure dynamic properties of physical things including object identification, location, processing actor, quality issues (such as product colour, length, ripeness) and ambient conditions (such as temperature, light and humidity). Object sensing can be supported by mobile devices such as smartphones or dedicated barcode/RFID readers, which allow humans to perform additional actions such as checking the data quality (e.g. are all products read?).The next step is to communicate object information in the supply chain in an efficient and secure way. The data are first sent to intermediary platforms (internet gateways or cloud proxy machines) using technologies such as networked RFID, wireless sensor networks and near-field communication (Verdouw et al., 2013). These intermediary platforms are local computers that are usually located at proximity of the devices to be connected. The further communication in the supply chain is done via electronic EDI or XML messages usually in a service-oriented approach (Wolfert et al., 2010).The successive architectural layer is information integration. This layer starts with object abstraction i.e. creating virtual representations of the heterogeneous set of underlying physical objects. Based on the exchanged object data, virtual objects are created in the internet. Virtual objects filter irrelevant information or include additional data (e.g. simulations of future states) dependent on the specific purposes of usage. Each view should only be accessible for authorised users and the reliability must be unquestionable. As a consequence the information integration layer includes basic data management capabilities such as cloud storage and security. Virtual objects must be updated continuously, which imposes stringent requirements on the timeliness of object sensing and data exchange.The last architectural layer is concerned with application services that provide specific functionalities for different supply chain users based on the virtual object information that is accessible via the middleware layer. The type of services is determined by the level of intelligence of virtual objects, which may differ from basic virtualisations that only show the whereabouts of physical objects to smart virtual objects that pro-actively take actions. As a consequence, application services can be classified into information handling, problem notification and decision making services (Meyer et al., 2009). Information handling is concerned with basic operations with object data such as collecting, storing, and delivering (e.g. to legacy information systems of the different supply chain actors). Problem notification assumes informing the relevant stakeholders and users if something is wrong (e.g. temperature too high) or if there are any events causing deviations from the plan (Vucic et al., 2012). This functionality is often coupled with certain rules which are applied to filter the collected data and extract the exception message. Finally, decision making is concerned with assisting or completely replacing humans in performing sophisticated decisions and triggering certain actions concerning the virtualised object. This presents the highest level of intelligence in which objects are able to make relevant decisions by themselves (Meyer et al., 2009).It is important to notice that there are some important architectural issues behind the basic architecture that is introduced above. Although the development of a detailed technical architecture is beyond the purpose of this paper, important additional dimensions include (Vucic et al., 2012):(i)Location of data storage: Fig. 8 may suggest that object data are all stored as virtual objects in the internet (cloud). However, object data are usually also stored on intermediary platforms or on the physical objects themselves, among others to ensure availability in case of communication breaks (Verdouw et al., 2013). As a consequence, the architecture should include advanced capabilities to synchronise local and cloud object data. The architecture should allow asynchronous communication, enabling to send data without waiting for immediate response, in order to compensate disconnects from the internet on mobile devices.Location of application services and user interfaces: Also the application services are not all located in the cloud. They usually are also available on mobile devices and local computers or on the object itself, e.g. board computers of vehicles or smart containers. As a result the architecture must allow both cloud and local user interfaces. Furthermore, the user interface should provide personalised, role-based views on virtual objects in order to support multiple purposes of usage.Routing of information: Fig. 8 may suggest a centralized routing approach in which all clients are connected to a single server that is capable to redirect/proxy the request from one node to another. However, the architecture should enable an hybrid routing approach i.e. a combination of centralized and peer-to-peer (P2P) in which all clients are directly connected to each other. The advantages of hybrid routing are confidentiality of direct communication, low data traffic via the central server, decentralised management of access rights is possible and a single entity in the network for look-up of information (Vucic et al., 2012; Verdouw et al., 2013).The previous section has introduced an architecture of the basic functionalities for enabling virtual supply chains. This section clusters these functionalities into in total seven key themes that are used to analyse the existing situation concerning the enabling Information and Communication Technologies in the virtualisation of floricultural supply chains.The basic information architecture, as developed in the previous section, includes four architectural layers: Object Sensing, Data Exchange, Information Integration and Application Services (see Fig. 8).The Object Sensing layer comprises two essential features: object identification and interaction with the object’s environment via sensors and actuators (Atzori et al., 2010; Miorandi et al., 2012). As a consequence, for the investigation two themes can be identified: Automatic Identification and Data Capture (theme 1) that focuses on automatic object identification usually via barcodes or RFID transponders (global unique identifiers) and Quality Control (theme 2) focussing on sensing of and acting on the dynamic object properties which are mainly quality-related in floricultural supply chains (see Fig. 9).The Data Exchange layer starts with the storage of object data on intermediary platforms and then further communicates these data in the supply chain via electronic EDI or XML messages (Wolfert et al., 2010; Verdouw et al., 2013). As a consequence, two investigation themes are identified: eBusiness Messages (theme 3) for an efficient and secure transmission of object data and Enterprise Information Systems (theme 4) that serve as the main intermediary platforms.The Information Integration layer is concerned with the virtual representation of objects in the internet and includes basic data management capabilities. In line with the Object Sensing layer, virtual representation comprises two essential features: object identification (coding) and representation of other relevant object properties, which depend on the purpose of usage. Within the context of this paper, there is an essential difference in the usage of virtual representations within supply chain processes for the creation and movement of products (transformations) and the usage of virtual representations for the establishment and conclusion of transactions (see the object system definition in Section 4.1). Virtual representations that are used in transformation processes are usually part of supply chain applications. Virtual representations that are used in transaction processes are usually part of commercial applications. As a consequence, the following themes are relevant for investigating the information integration layer: Product and Logistic Coding (theme 5), Supply Chain Information Systems (theme 6) and Market Information Systems (theme 7).Finally, the Application Services layer adds specific functionalities to the virtual representations as available in the Information Integration layer. As a result, both layers are closely connected. For this reason, the classification of transformation-related and transaction-related applications is also used to investigate the Application Services layer: Supply Chain Information Systems (theme 6) and Market Information Systems (theme 7). Both types of systems include application services for information handling, problem notification and decision making.This section describes the existing situation concerning virtual supply chains in the Dutch floriculture, including bottlenecks and relevant best practices. It first introduces the structure and specific characteristics of floricultural supply chains. Subsequently the existing situation on of the enabling role of ICT is described, using the classification of key themes as developed in the previous section.The floricultural industry comprises of cut flowers and pot plants production, mainly in greenhouses. Europe is the leading floricultural producer in the world. The overall production value of cut flowers and plants is estimated to exceed €10 billion (CBI, 2008b). The Netherlands, Italy and Germany are leading producing countries in Europe. The total European imports of cut flowers amounted to €3.3 billion and the total exports to €3.1 billion, both intra-EU and extra-EU in 2007 (CBI, 2008a). The total imports of plants and young plant material amounted to €2.9 billion and the total exports to €3.2 billion, both intra-EU and extra-EU in 2007 (CBI, 2008b).The Netherlands is by far the largest producer, accounting for approximately 40% of the total European production value. The Dutch floriculture is concentrated in so-called Greenports. It has an intricate and high-quality network of companies, ranging from breeders and growers to sales experts and export firms, representing every aspect of the business (van der Vorst et al., 2012). The main actors in the floricultural supply chains are:•Growers: there are about 3000 floricultural producers in The Netherlands (PT, 2013). The number of growers is declining, while the size is increasing. The production is stable (about 7600 hectares in 2011).Auction houses/producer organisations: the world’s largest flower and plant auction is located in The Netherlands (FloraHolland, turnover €4.4 billion in 2012 (FloraHolland, 2013) where the flower auctioning system originally started. Other countries, such as Germany, Italy, Spain and Denmark also trade at auctions. The importance of these auctions for international trade is small in comparison to The Netherlands, with exception of the German auction Landgard (€1.3 billion revenue in flowers and plants in 2012 (Landgard, 2013).Traders: in particular wholesalers, exporters, and importers; these organisations are closely connected to retail and have a crucial role in logistics orchestration. There are about 2200 Dutch traders (PT, 2013), dealing with many (inter)national customers. Most important import countries are Kenya, Ethiopia, Israel, Ecuador and Germany. Most important export countries are Germany, United Kingdom, France, Italy and Belgium.Logistic service providers: in particular transportation and storage/transhipment activities are often outsourced a logistics service provider. In some cases the providers execute extra activities like quality control, handling and packaging.Suppliers of logistic assets: important containers in floriculture include CC trolleys of Container Centralen and auction trolleys of Flora Holland.Retailers: the main retail channels are florists, supermarkets, garden and Do-It-Yourself (DIY) centres, and street market. The shares differ a lot between European countries. Furthermore, web shops are becoming increasingly popular.The floricultural industry is characterised by high uncertainty of both demand and supply (Verdouw et al., 2010a). Supply uncertainty is high, because chains are vulnerable to product decay, weather conditions, pests, traffic congestion and other uncontrollable factors. Further, also demand uncertainty is high amongst others because of weather-dependent sales, changing consumer behaviour, and increasing global competition. This results in high variability of supply capabilities and demand requirements in terms of volume, time, service levels, quality and other product characteristics (van der Vorst et al., 2012).Furthermore, there is a high variety of supply chain configurations in the floricultural sector (Verdouw et al., 2011a). The extent to what processes are order-driven differs a lot, not only among different companies but also within firms. For the spot market, products are made to stock and distribution is either to order (usually via traders) or anticipatory (usually via auctions). For other cases, flowers and plants are often produced to forecast, while assembling, labelling and packaging are order-driven. There are also differences in the supply chain network of pot plants and cut flowers in particular due to the fact that a flower after being cut can decrease 15% in value a day in case not delivered to the customer, whereas the quality of ornamental plants may even increase if they are cared properly.The next sections analyse the existing situation on each of the key themes as defined in the previous section, i.e. Automatic Identification and Data Capture, Quality Control, eBusiness Messages, Enterprise Information Systems, Product and Logistic Coding, Supply Chain Information Systems, and Market Information Systems.Automatic Identification and Data Capture (AIDC) is concerned with technologies that automatically identify objects, collect data about them and enter that data directly into computer systems. The most well-known AutoID technologies are barcode scanning and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID).One-dimensional barcode scanning is the most widely used AutoID technology in the Dutch floriculture. This technique is used on different levels of aggregation, including individual products, crates, trolleys and locations. Also multi-dimensional barcodes (GS1 Databar, QR code) are increasingly being applied, in particular in the provision of product information to consumers (e.g. about optimal treatment of plants).The sector is also for a long time active with RFID. In the 1990s this technique was applied on an experimental basis to optimise internal logistics. Since 2011 there has been a breakthrough in the usage of RFID because the complete pool of CC containers is equipped with RFID (3.9 million trolleys). CC trolleys are the most-widely used logistic containers in the sector. This was the world’s largest RFID implementation up to then (Wessel, 2010). Furthermore, recently all auction trolleys are tagged with high frequency (UHF) transponders (around 270.000 trolleys), next to an already available LF tag used from 1999 (den Bakker, 2009). Several projects utilise this technology base for tracking and tracing, logistic planning and scheduling and RFID-based Quality Controlled Logistics (in combination with different types of sensors). For example, the Plant-to-Customer project analyses and demonstrates the benefits of RFID in plant supply chains based on a pilot implementation including growers, traders and logistic service providers (Swedberg, 2010). The GO! project implements a RFID Supply Chain Platform (based on the tagged CC containers) for inbound logistics of a plants trader (Wessel, 2012).However, RFID is not yet applied on the item level, including individual products, plant trays and flower buckets. There are technological constraints like limited reading quality of tags due to damp, dust and metal, but the decisive factors are organisational conditions, in particular: a proper business case for all involved participants, agreement on the distribution of benefits, trust in the privacy of data and the use of RFID for business process improvements.The monitoring and control of environmental conditions that impacts on quality parameters is an essential issue in supply chains that deal with fresh products such as flowers and plants. It is an important basis for a concept in development called Quality Controlled Logistics, i.e. advanced logistics decision making in the supply chain taking real-time information on product quality behaviour into account (van der Vorst et al., 2011). If product quality changes can be predicted in advance (due to e.g. changing environmental conditions), control actions can take place to either improve the conditions or take logistics actions to redirect goods flows to other market locations for profit maximisation. Important enabling technologies that support this concept are fixed sensors, advanced barcodes, data loggers, Time Temperature Indicators, RFID-enabled sensors and wireless sensor networks.In the Dutch floriculture, mainly fixed sensors and data loggers are used at the moment (mostly for cut flowers). Fixed sensors are installed in e.g. buildings, cold stores or trucks. They do not travel with the products when they are shipped. By contrast, data loggers are attached to the product or container and travel with the products along the entire supply chain. However, they are not directly connected to back office systems and have to be returned to the sender. As a consequence, the most important bottleneck is the timeliness of quality condition information. The monitoring information is mostly used in a defensive way, i.e. in order to determine the causes of quality problems afterwards (Scheer et al., 2011). However, there are some examples that go beyond this static approach, including:•Cold Chain Score Card: development and implementation of a quality monitoring system for the sea transportation of flowers (ten Hoope and van der Hulst, 2010).Greenrail: project to stimulate rail transportation of flowers and plants, including the development of a dedicated container with a built-in GPRS system for remote temperature control.Smart Agri-Food pilot Quality Controlled Logistics: pilot in a plants supply chain that combines RFID and sensor technologies for quality controlled logistics and retail store replenishment (Robbemond et al., 2012).The communication between participants of floricultural supply chains is increasingly done electronically by the exchange of eBusiness messages. A rapid, error-free and efficient information transfer is only possible when information systems in the chain ‘speak the same language’. This can be realised by agreeing and applying standards about the format, meaning and exchange procedures of eBusiness messages. The Dutch floricultural sector has been active in eBusiness for a long time (Verdouw et al., 2011b). In the early 1990s, an industry association was started for the development, maintenance, application and promotion of eBusiness standards, i.e. Floricode (formerly Florecom). The core participants are FloraHolland (largest flower auction of the world; growers cooperative with about 6000 members), VGB (sector organisation for wholesale trade of flowers and pot plants) and the Trades Council Agricultural Wholesale Trade (HBAG). As a consequence, much progress has been made in the development of EDI and XML standards. Furthermore, generic standards (like orders, invoices, and despatch advices) are well integrated with international standards, in particular because of cooperation with GS1. However, the international embedding of floriculture-specific standards is still an important point of attention (Punter and Roes, 2011; Verdouw et al., 2011b). The horticultural sector collaborates on this issue in Tuinbouw Digitaal (Verloop et al., 2010; Verdouw et al., 2011b).Last but not least, the adoption of standards is still too low. Several initiatives are running to increase the usage of standards by the floricultural business and ICT vendors, for example ‘Together 4 Better’ Plantcenter Europe. This is a consortium of traders, growers, auction and logistic service providers that collaborates in the application of eBusiness standards to improve supply chain logistics (tuinbouwdigitaal.net).Enterprise Information Systems support the processing of information at different levels ranging from operational to strategic, including mechanized cultivation and logistic systems, enterprise management systems and business intelligence applications. In the horticultural industry impressive achievements have been made concerning the mechanisation of production, harvesting, sorting, packaging and warehouse management. However, many companies in the sector, in particular growers, struggle with their enterprise management systems. They are often characterised by island automation, which results in insufficient management information and a lot of manual data entering with a high risk for errors (Verloop et al., 2009).The main reasons are threefold. First, an important prerequisite of successful implementation of an integral management system is a professional management of business processes. However, many horticultural companies heavily rely on improvisation and consequently lack a well-structured administrative organisation (Robbemond and Verdouw, 2012). Second, flexibility is a critical capability for the floriculture to cope with high uncertainties in both demand and supply, especially due to the dependence on the growth of living materials (Verdouw et al., 2010a). However, there is a lack of solid and seamless integrated enterprise management systems that are at the same time flexible and include dynamic planning (Verloop et al., 2009). Third, the integration of technical greenhouse and logistics systems with enterprise management systems is still insufficient in particular due to a lack of standards (Verdouw et al., 2011b). These difficulties were the reason for around 30 plants growers to start Plantform, an association for horizontal cooperation in the development and implementation of integrated enterprise management systems (Verloop et al., 2009).Product coding is a difficult issue in floriculture. The product variety is very high (over 35,000 commercially available products), floricultural products are living products with dynamic characteristics and the required level of detail differs for different purposes of usage. For example: the product ‘green indoor plant’ might be sufficient for the Point of Sales, but the specific variety must be known for tracking and tracing purposes. This complexity has resulted in the availability of several conflicting standards for coding of floricultural products (Verloop et al., 2010). The VBN coding system is the dominant upstream product code (mainly used by growers, traders and auctions). The Linnaeus project has recently renewed this standard (vbn.nl). Coding Living Green (CLG) is a coding system based on EAN13/GTIN for Point of Sales scanning. Furthermore, many retailers, traders and producers issue own codes, based on the generic GTIN standard or otherwise. Floricode is currently working on harmonising these different standards and on integrating them with relevant international standards, in particular those of GS1 (floricode.com).Floricode is also the central industry platform for logistic coding standards. For this purpose, it usually adopts international cross-industry standards such as the GS1 standards for asset and location identification, i.e. the Global Returnable Asset Identifier (GRAI) code and the Global Location Number (GLN). For example, in previous years all relevant Dutch locations for logistics in the flowers and plants sector (about 20,000 in total) are coded with GLN. A point of attention is the international embedding of container coding since the Serial Shipping Container Code (SSCC) of GS1 is not yet used. Last but not least, the adoption of coding standards in the sector is still too low despite important progress in the last decade.Supply Chain Information Systems are software systems that support the rapid, error-free, efficient and safe information exchange between supply chain participants, including systems for Tracking & Tracing and Supply Chain Planning. There are several of these systems available in floricultural supply chains, in particular for logistic tracking and tracing. The most important examples are:•KissIT: central logistics data hub that combines dynamic Tracking & Tracing information with orders and shipping documents.RSLM: central system of transporters to manage the pool of auction trolleys.LIPSS: collaborative system for logistics planning and monitoring of a group of traders.However, the adoption of these systems advances only with difficulty. Important limiting factors are a lack of intra-enterprise interoperability and organisational factors such as unclear business models, a lack of trust in the privacy of data and the big number of SMEs that miss the competences and mass needed for the implementation. In response to these difficulties, the emphasis in floriculture is shifting from individual software interfaces and central systems towards software platforms based on Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) that support the exchange of information and the configuration of customised solutions. The project Hubways aims to provide such an information platform on the level of the logistics between market places in The Netherlands (hubways.nu). It is developing a sector-wide adopted digital platform that supports the exchange of cargo, capacity and information.Market Information Systems support the processing of transactions via a market mechanism. They include functionality to provide information about available products, to compare products on buying criteria, to agree on price, and to process the transaction administratively (including payment). Market information systems can be subdivided into Business to Business (B2B) and Business to Consumer (B2C) systems.The usage of B2B market information systems in the Dutch floriculture has expanded a lot in the previous years. The most important developments are (i) the emergence of on-line trade platforms and (ii) the digitalisation of the auctioning process.In on-line trade platforms growers publish available product supply, including visual information (picture), quality information and other relevant parameters. Traders can transfer this supply information directly to their own web shops. Traders can combine, split and pass on orders to growers and orchestrate delivery. Important trade platforms are Plantconnect (plants) and eTrade (flowers), both deployed by the auction FloraHolland (floraholland.com/plantconnect; florahollandetrade.nl). Many traders and growers also have their own B2B web shops.Traditionally, auctions are dominant market places in the flowers and plants industry. The largest flower and plant auction in the world is FloraHolland in the Netherlands. In the previous years FloraHolland has implemented a virtual auctioning system called KOA (Remote Auctioning). Customers can buy, anywhere in the world, real-time via internet on all the FloraHolland auction clocks (floraholland.com). The products need not to be physically present at the auction clock, which implies that they can directly be transported from producers to customers. In Q4 2011 almost 70% of the flowers of the two main auction locations were traded via virtual auctioning.A crucial precondition for both on-line trade platforms and virtual auctioning is the quality of product information and images in two dimensions. First, a buyer must be able to form a good judgment of the product according his specific frame of reference and purposes of usage (fit-for-use). For example, Koppius et al. (2004) have shown that a decrease in the quality of product representation after the introduction of image auctioning may result in lower prices. Secondly, the reliability of information must be unquestionable (trustworthiness). Therefore, the quality attributes are standardised in floriculture and there are strict procedures for supply and verification of product information and pictures. FloraHolland has also implemented additional incentives to provide high-quality product information, e.g. publication of a reliability index during the auctioning process and early auctioning of products with correct information (may result in higher prices). Besides the product information of the growers, there are databases with high-quality standard product reference information. The most important example is the VKC image base (plantscope.nl), which is a central database of standardised product information and pictures of all varieties of flowers and plants that are on the market. Another example is Wikiplant: a website with extensive product information about indoor and outdoor plants (wikiplant.nl).Also for consumers many web shops are introduced, mainly for flowers. Important European web shops for flowers include fleurop.de, interflora.fr, interflora.co.uk, inteuroflorist.nl. A recent development is the emergence of web shops in which local consumers can buy directly from local growers (local for local), for example Fresh from the Grower (versvandekweker.nl). Another trend is the emergence of electronic displays in retail stores, which consumers can use to order personalised bouquets or plants while shopping (e.g. hetboeket.com).The communication with consumers via smartphone apps is in its infancy. There are several examples of QR codes on plant labels that are linked to consumer information such as optimal treatment, including ficusforever.nl, flowercouncil.org and the PlantScanner App of plantconnect.nl. Also some web shops have a mobile application that is available as smartphone app, e.g. the Android app of the web shop Flowerservice.nl. Furthermore, recently the first flower shop on Facebook was introduced.However, the volume of B2C internet trade is still very low in comparison with traditional market channels like flower shops and super markets. The most important reason is that most consumers still want to see flowers and plants before buying.This section has reported the state of the art concerning the virtualisation of floricultural supply chains. It shows that the Dutch floricultural sector is making major progress in the virtualisation of transactions, including remote auctioning and on-line trade platforms. However, the virtualisation of the logistics lags behind this development. Several persistent issues are identified concerning the underlying preconditions that should be solved to not constrain the further virtualisation of supply chains. These issues include the quality of product information and images, harmonisation of product coding and availability of well-integrated backend systems. Also organisational issues are crucial preconditions, in particular the trust in privacy of data, a proper division of benefits among supply chain partners and the awareness of the impact of virtualisation on business processes resulting in new business models.This section discusses main future challenges for virtualisation of floricultural supply chains based on a synthesis of the investigation results reported above. It was found that these challenges are not only concerned with technology issues (like most IoT challenges as addressed in literature), but especially also with functional and organisational issues. We therefore classified these challenges into: (i) dynamic virtual representation, (ii) connectivity, (iii) intelligence and (iv) implementation and configuration (see Fig. 10).The starting point of virtualisation in an IoT context is that each physical object is accompanied by a rich, globally accessible virtual object that contains both current and historical information on that object’s physical properties, origin, ownership, and sensory context (Welbourne et al., 2009). This implies that geographically dispersed physical objects have to be tied to and continuously update a virtual representation of the object, i.e. (lots of) floricultural products and logistic resources. The virtual objects must ‘adequately’ represent the identity, place and (dynamic) properties of the (physical) objects of interest, they must be ‘reliable’ for different purposes of usage, they must be timely available and the data integrity, security and privacy must be unquestionable. Furthermore, virtual objects may provide multiple views for different users, having distinct purposes of usage. Each view should only be accessible for authorised users. Visualisation plays an important role to create views that are experienced by human users as reality. Promising enabling technologies include advanced visioning technologies (including high-speed/low-cost solutions, 3D, and internal features such as ripeness), the mixture of real and virtual objects in augmented reality (including mobile applications) and in particular the combination of both technologies.Our research shows that there is a good technology basis available for supply chain virtualisation in the Dutch floricultural sector. Technologies for auto identification and data capture (including RFID on trolleys), for quality control (in particular fixed sensors and data loggers) and for product information (including pictures) are implemented. However, the usage of these technologies for dynamic virtual representation is still basic and focusses on supporting B2B trade, including remote auctioning and on-line trade platforms. The virtual representation for other purposes like logistic planning, tracking and tracing and consumer information is in its infancy. Important challenges for increasing virtualisation also in these usage are concerned with the quality of product information and images, the harmonisation of product coding and the timeliness of quality condition information along the supply chain. Sensors are used to measure environmental conditions of in particular cut flowers, but this information is currently used to determine the causes of quality problems afterwards. If real-time quality information is available, as well as advanced predictive models, it can not only be used to virtualise the current quality conditions but also to project the future state of virtual objects, e.g. for a continuous prediction of the remaining shelve life.Virtual SCM requires the communication of relevant object information within the supply chain network. Information about relevant physical objects must be available, accessible and shared timely and secure with other organisations in order to enable adequate response within allotted timeframes. This in particular requires (i) solid infrastructures to communicate information of objects while safeguarding property, access and usage rights, (ii) standards for a seamless identification and exchange of product/logistics data, and (iii) trustworthy authorisation and security mechanisms. The enabling technologies are mainly related to the Internet of Services and include SOA-based interoperability platforms, business process management systems, data exchange standards, trust/identity capabilities and cloud technologies.There is a good basis available for logistics connectivity in the Dutch floriculture. There is an active association for eBusiness (Floricode) that develops, maintains, applies and promotes connectivity standards in the sector. Furthermore there are central data hubs for logistics and several internet market places. An important remaining challenge is to find solutions that combine the advantages of local and centralised supply chain information systems (distributed software applications based on web services, without central data storage). These applications should support rapid, reliable, secure and flexible data communication.So far, the Dutch floricultural sector has focussed on technology and standardisation issues. The usage of dynamic virtualisation data for intelligent decision support is an important future challenge. The shared information needs to be appropriate for planning, coordination, orchestration and control of the logistics network. Therefore, information systems must support the intelligent analysis and reporting of exchanged data. These functionalities enable early warning in case of disruptions or unexpected deviations (e.g. in lead time, temperature, etc.) and advanced forecasting about consequences of detected changes by the time the product reaches destination. Enabling technologies include Business Intelligence, Business Process Management, Decision Support Tools, Configurators, Event Management Systems, Fuzzy Logic and Data Mining.In temporal virtual networks, it must be possible to easily set-up, connect and disconnect information systems needed to achieve a specific value proposition. There is not one dominant supply chain design (‘one size fits all’), but it must be possible to design and instantiate new or adjusted supply chain configurations rapidly and at low costs (Verdouw et al., 2011a). However, many difficulties emerge when implementing virtualisation in floriculture. It is a major challenge to accelerate implementations by combining flexible customisation with efficient standardization approaches. Last but not least, besides the technical implementation challenges discussed above, organisational implementation is a major issue. Virtualisation has a big impact on supply chain organisation and is expected to result in new business models such as specialised virtual orchestrators and local-for-global trade by SMEs without traders as offline intermediaries.This section has discussed main challenges for virtualisation of supply chains based on an investigation of existing practices conducted in the Dutch floriculture. In addition, generic infrastructural challenges are expected when the Internet of Things will be implemented on a large scale. A breakthrough of the IoT will result in a massive amount of distributed and heterogeneous objects generating large amounts of data. This results in very demanding technical challenges, among others concerning: (i) computing, communication and identification technologies, (ii) addressing and networking technologies for distributed systems, (iii) distributed intelligence and big data analysis, (iv) standardisation issues including the interoperability of different technical standards; and (v) security and privacy including authentication, trust and data integrity issues (Atzori et al., 2010; Miorandi et al., 2012). In addressing these challenges, the current internet infrastructure faces important limitations concerning the processing, storage, transmission and control of data (Zahariadis et al., 2011). The intended development of Future Internet (FI) technologies is promising to overcome these limitations. The FI is a general term that labels the emergence of a new era in the evolution of the Internet based on the combination of several trends in internet development, including the on-going industrialisation of IT in the form of cloud computing and open service delivery platforms (FIWARE, 2013).This paper has assessed how the Internet of Things (IoT) concept can enhance the virtualisation of supply by means of the highly instructive example of the Dutch floriculture. It has defined the concept of virtualisation and described main perspectives in literature on virtualisation, i.e. the organisational, team, information technology, virtual reality and virtual things perspectives. Subsequently the paper has developed a conceptual framework for analysis of virtualisation in supply chains from an IoT perspective. Next, this framework is applied in the Dutch floriculture to investigate the existing situation and to define main future challenges concerning supply chain virtualisation in the floricultural sector. The paper has shown that the Dutch floricultural sector is making major progress in the virtualisation of transactions, including remote auctioning and on-line trade platforms. These developments are expected to have a huge impact on supply chain cooperation. However, the virtualisation of logistics lags behind this development. Several persistent underlying issues are identified concerning the underlying preconditions that should be solved to not constrain the further virtualisation of supply chains. These issues include the quality of product information and images, harmonisation of product coding, availability of well-integrated backend systems. Also organisational issues are crucial preconditions, in particular the trust in privacy of data, a proper division of benefits among supply chain partners and the awareness of the impact of virtualisation on business processes, SCM and new business models.The main contribution of this paper to existing literature is that it has researched how the virtualisation of physical objects can impact Supply Chain Management (SCM). In order to do so, it has presented a conceptual framework for analysis of virtual supply chains from the perspective of the Internet of Things (IoT), which goes further than the dominant organisational perspective on virtual supply chains. Compared to other available conceptual frameworks for SCM, e.g. Lambert and Cooper (2000) and Verdouw et al. (2011a) among many others, the present framework adds the role of virtual objects in decoupling the management activities from the physical flow from source to destination. On the other hand, in relation to the IoT literature the paper adds a systematic application of the concept of virtual things to the domain of SCM, which has not yet received enough attention in IoT research. Furthermore, the paper defined main perspectives in literature on virtualisation showing that the concept of virtuality is used in different domains and with different meanings. As such, it has contributed to a shared understanding of the concept of virtuality in these domains. Finally, the conceptual framework for analysis has been applied in a specific sector, i.e. the Dutch floriculture. The investigation in this sector shows that future challenges are not only concerned with technology issues (like most IoT challenges as addressed in literature), but especially also with functional and organisational issues.To conclude, this paper has assessed how the Internet of Things can enhance virtualisation in floriculture. We are currently working on the design and implementation of innovative solutions for the addressed challenges in the national Da Vinc3i project (davinc3i.com) and the European FIspace project (fispace.eu). Concerning future research, especially the diversity and dynamics of virtualisations in a supply chain context should be further studied. For example: when objects travel through supply chains they may change ownership. It should be further researched how to manage multiple representations of the same object for different organisations and different purposes of usage, how to ensure the data integrity of these heterogeneous object representations and how to provide an overarching view of an object stream given situational access and usage rights. On top of this, supply chains often comprise converging and diverging streams of objects, which result in series of connected objects. It should be further researched how to maintain the relations between the virtualisations of these linked objects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
