@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Designing a robust feature extraction method based on optimum allocation and principal component analysis for epileptic EEG signal classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of a novel feature extraction method denoted as OA_PCA.Introducing Optimum allocation approach that in our innovative concept to get most representative data points from a time-window.Better performances than some existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electroencephalogram (EEG),Optimum allocation,Principal component analysis,Least square support vector machine (LS-SVM),Naive Bayes classifier (NB),k-Nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study is to design a robust feature extraction method for the classification of multiclass EEG signals to determine valuable features from original epileptic EEG data and to discover an efficient classifier for the features. An optimum allocation based principal component analysis method named as OA_PCA is developed for the feature extraction from epileptic EEG data. As EEG data from different channels are correlated and huge in number, the optimum allocation (OA) scheme is used to discover the most favorable representatives with minimal variability from a large number of EEG data. The principal component analysis (PCA) is applied to construct uncorrelated components and also to reduce the dimensionality of the OA samples for an enhanced recognition. In order to choose a suitable classifier for the OA_PCA feature set, four popular classifiers: least square support vector machine (LS-SVM), naive bayes classifier (NB), k-nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN), and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) are applied and tested. Furthermore, our approaches are also compared with some recent research work. The experimental results show that the LS-SVM_1v1 approach yields 100% of the overall classification accuracy (OCA), improving up to 7.10% over the existing algorithms for the epileptic EEG data. The major finding of this research is that the LS-SVM with the 1v1 system is the best technique for the OA_PCA features in the epileptic EEG signal classification that outperforms all the recent reported existing methods in the literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders that hugely impair patient’ daily lives. The disorder is associated with abnormal neural activities which may lead to seizures. According to a 2009 report by the World Health Organization (WHO), worldwide over 50 million people suffer from epilepsy [1–4], while over the course of a life time, 100 million people will experience an epileptic episode [4]. This makes epilepsy the single most widespread serious neurological condition in the world today. In Australia, it is estimated that 2% of the population is affected by epilepsy [5]. Electroencephalography (EEG) is an important clinical tool that is used for the purpose of epileptic detection as it is a condition related to the brain's electrical activity [6,7]. Epileptic activity can create clear abnormalities on a standard EEG and leaves its signature on it. Abnormal epileptic waveforms can be identified in EEG signal if there is abnormal neural activity during ictal state [8].In order to find traces of epilepsy, visual marking of long EEG recordings by human experts was a very tedious, time-consuming and high-cost task [9]. On the other hand, due to visual analog analysis, different experts could give contradictory diagnosis for a same EEG segment. Therefore, it is a big challenge in the current biomedical research how to classify time-varying epileptic EEG signals as accurately as possible [10,11]. In order to perform classification upon signals, first the most important task is to extract distinguishing features or characteristics from the epileptic EEG data, which directly dictate the detection and classification accuracy. The features characterizing the original EEG are used as the input of a classifier to differentiate normal and epileptic EEGs. As optimal features play a very important role in the performance of a classifier, this study intends to find out a robust feature extraction method for the recognition of epileptic EEG signals.Most recently, Shen et al. [12] introduced a method based on a cascade of wavelet-approximate entropy for feature extraction in the epileptic EEG signal classification. They tested three existing methods for classification: support vector machine (SVM), k-nearest neighbor (KNN), and radial basis function neural network (RBFNN), to determine which has the best performance in such a cascaded EEG analysis system. In 2012, Acharjee and Shahnaz [13] used twelve Cohen class kernel functions to transform EEG data in order to facilitate the time frequency analysis. The transformed data formulated a feature vector consisting of modular energy and modular entropy, and the feature vector was fed to an artificial neural network (ANN) classifier. Murugavel et al. [14] reported a method based on Lyapunov feature and a multi-class SVM for the classification of epileptic EEG signals. The wavelet transform (WT) and Lyapunov exponent were used to extract features from the EEG data and probabilistic neural network (PNN), radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) and multiclass SVM with 1vsA were applied to classify the five-category EEG signals. Ubeyli [15] developed an approach that integrated automatic diagnostic systems with spectral analysis techniques where the wavelet coefficients and power spectral density (PSD) values obtained by eigenvector methods were used as features. These features were fed to each of the seven classifiers: SVM, recurrent neural networks (RNN), PNN, mixture of experts (ME), modified mixture of experts (MME), combined neural networks (CNN), and multilayer perceptron neural network (MLPNN). By Ubeyli [16], a method based on eigenvector methods and multiclass SVMs with the ECOC was introduced for the classification of EEG signals. In the feature extraction stage, three eigenvector methods such as, the Pisarenko, multiple signal classification (MUSIC), and minimum-norm, were used to obtain the PSD values of the EEG signals and then these features were employed as the input of the multiclass SVMs. Guler and Ubeyli [17] developed another method based on the multiclass SVM with the ECOC where features were extracted from the epileptic EEG data by computing the wavelet coefficients and Lyapunov exponents. The PNN and MLPNN were also tested for their performances on the same epileptic EEG data. In [18], Acharya et al. discussed various feature extraction methods and the results of the different automated epilepsy stage detection techniques in detail. In that paper, the authors briefly discussed some challenges to develop a computer aided diagnostic system to automatically identify the normal and abnormal activities using a minimum number of highly discriminating features for classification. Lee et al. [19] proposed several hybrid methods to classify normal and epileptic EEG signals using wavelet transform, phase-space reconstruction, and Euclidean distance based on a neural network with weighted fuzzy membership functions. The classification of abnormal activities of the brain functionality was achieved by understanding abnormal activities caused by changes in neuronal electrochemical activities through identifying the EEG signal features reported in [20] by Oweis and Abdulhay. Hilbert weighted frequency was used to help discriminate between healthy and seizure EEG patterns. In [21], Li et al. designed a method for feature extraction and pattern recognition of ictal EEGs, based upon empirical model decomposition (EMD) and SVM. First an EEG signal was decomposed into intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) using the EMD, and then the coefficients of the variation and the fluctuation index of the IMFs were extracted as features. Pachori et al. [22] presented a method for the classification of ictal and seizure-free EEG signals based on the EMD and the second-order difference plot (SODP). The EMD method decomposed an EEG signal into a set of symmetric and band-limited signals (the IMFs). The SODP of the IMFs provided an elliptical structure. The importance of the entropy based features was presented in [23] for recognizing the normal EEGs, and ictal as well as interictal epileptic seizures. Three non-linear features, such as wavelet entropy, sample entropy, and spectral entropy, were used to extract quantitative entropy features from the given EEGs, and these features were used as the input into two neural network models: recurrent Elman network and radial basis network for the classification. Siuly et al. [24] introduced a new approach based on simple random sampling (SRS) technique with least square support vector machine (LS-SVM) to classify EEG signals. In that paper, the SRS technique was applied in two stages to select random samples and sub-samples from each EEG channel data file and finally different features were evaluated from each sub-sample set to represent the original EEG signals and reduced the dimensionality of the data that were used as the inputs to the LS-SVM classifier.From the literature, it is observed that many of the feature extraction methods were not a perfect choice for non-stationary epileptic EEG data [25,26] and the reported methods were limited in their success rate and effectiveness. Some existing methods cannot work properly for large EEG data. None of the prior methods considered the variability of the observations within a window where the time variability is an important consideration for describing the characteristics of the original data. In most of the cases, the methods did not select their parameters through experimental evaluation, although the parameters significantly affect the classification performance.This research intends to design a robust method for feature extraction based on the optimum allocation (OA) and principal component analysis (PCA), denoted as OA_PCA. The reason of using the OA method is to acquire representative sampling points from the huge amount of EEG data when the data is heterogeneous. It is worthy to mention that epileptic EEG data is heterogeneous in term of the time period. The idea to use the PCA is due to the fact that, in most of the EEG data, there is a large amount of redundant information unnecessary for diagnostic applications. The PCA method is practical when there are a large number of correlated variables in a dataset and it is believed that there are some redundancies in those variables. The PCA is an excellent method to make uncorrelated variables that can contribute to get an enhanced classification accuracy and it also can reduce the dimension of the data for easy handling. The core objective of this research is to develop a new method for feature extraction and also to discover a suitable classifier for the features that can improve overall classification accuracy (OCA) with low false alarm rate (FAR).In order to acquire better representative features from the non-stationary EEG signals, it is required to make them stationary. That's why, this study partitions epileptic EEG data into a number of windows where the number of windows depends on the size of data and data structure (discussed in detail in Section 2.2.2). Then the OA scheme is effectively used to search representative sampling points from each window, which can efficiently describe the signals based on the variability of their observations within the window. After that, the PCA method is employed on the OA data to produce uncorrelated variables and also to reduce dimensionality. Because there is a possibility of much correlation among the brain electrical activities through the brain volume, and correlation may exist among different channels. The obtained principal components are treated as features in this study, called OA_PCA feature set. To find out an efficient classifier for the OA_PCA feature set, this study employs four prominent classifiers namely, least square support vector machine (LS-SVM), naive bayes classifier (NB), k-nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN), and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). In this research, the four different output coding approaches of the multi-class LS-SVM: error correcting output codes (ECOC), minimum output codes (MOC), One vs One (1vs1) and One vs All (1vsA), are also investigated to test which one is the best for the obtained features. The parameters of the proposed classification methods are selected by extensive experimental evaluations. The k-fold cross validation is employed to test the consistency of the proposed methods. The performance of each approach is evaluated by corrected percentage (CP) in each class, overall classification accuracy (OCA) and false alarm rate (FAR). In order to further evaluate the performances, we compare our proposed methods with some existing well-known algorithms. One of the major findings of this study is that LS-SVM with 1v1 (denoted as LS-SVM_1v1) is the best classifier for the OA_PCA features. To the best of our knowledge, the OA and PCA methods together have not been used on the epileptic EEG data for feature extraction so far.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the data used in this study are described, and the proposed methods are presented. Section 3 provides how the performances of the proposed methods are evaluated. Section 4 describes the experimental set-up with results and discussions. Comparisons among the proposed methods and also the existing methods are discussed in Section 5. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section 6.In our experiments, we used an ‘epileptic EEG dataset’, which is publicly available in [27,28]. The whole database consists of five EEG data sets (denoted as Set Z, Set O, Set N, Set F, Set S), each containing 100 single-channel EEG signals of 23.6s from five separate classes. Fig. 1illustrates a plot of different classes of EEG signals for each of the five sets (from top to bottom: Set Z, Set O, Set N, Set F and Set S). Each signal was chosen after visual inspection for artifacts, e.g. due to muscle activities or eye movements. All EEG recordings were made with the same 128-channel amplifier system, using an average common reference. The recoded data was digitised at 173.61 data points per second using 12-bit resolution. Band-pass filter settings were 0.53-40Hz (12dB/oct). Set Z and Set O were collected from surface EEG recordings of five healthy volunteers with eyes open and eyes closed, respectively. Set N, Set F and Set S were collected from the EEG records of the pre-surgical diagnosis of five epileptic patients. Signals in Set N and Set F were recorded in seizure-free intervals from five epileptic patients from the hippocampal formation of the opposite hemisphere of the brain and from within the epileptogenic zone, respectively. Set S contains the EEG records of five epileptic patients during seizure activity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This research presents an optimal feature extraction technique, named as OA_PCA, and also searches for a suitable classifier for the feature set to identify multi categories epileptic EEG signals. The proposed schemes demonstrate many advantages, such as high classification performance and very low FAR for all classifiers tested. The main conclusions of this study are summarized as follows:•The OA_PCA system is very effective for feature extraction for the epileptic EEG data. The experimental results for the proposed classifiers, the LS-SVM_ECOC, LS-SVM_MOC, LS-SVM_1v1, LS-SVM_1vA, NB, KNN and LDA, confirm that the extracted features are very consistent to detect epileptic EEG signals.The parameters of the proposed methods are optimally selected through experimental evaluations indicating the reliability of the methods.The results show that the proposed LS-SVM_1v1classifier with the OA_PCA features achieves the best performance compared to the other classifiers with the same features.The experimental results also indicate that our proposed approach, LS-SVM_1v1 outperforms the other six recently reported research results with the same epileptic EEG database. It demonstrates that our method is considered the best method for the epileptic EEG signal classification.This study concludes that the LS-SVM_1v1with the OA_PCA feature set is a promising technique for the epileptic EEG signals recognition. It can offer great potentials for the development of epilepsy analyses. The proposed technique can assist physicians or doctors to diagnose brain function abnormalities. One limitation for performing the proposed optimum allocation based algorithm is dealing with the problem of considering the window size based on an empirical evaluation. In the future, we will extend the proposed approach to online and real-time applications in the multiclass classification problems.We hereby state that we don’t have any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work.