@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measuring electro-mechanical properties of thin films on polymer substrates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Electromechanical properties of metal films are studied with in-situ AFM-4PP tensile straining.AFM characterizes the surface damage and 4PP measures the resistance under tensile strain.The difference between local film necking and through thickness cracks can be made.It will be shown when the strain is removed, cracks bridge and the resistance decreases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
AFM,Fragmentation,Thin films,Flexible substrates,Resistance,In-situ,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to advance flexible electronic technologies it is important to study the electrical properties of thin metal films on polymer substrates under mechanical load. At the same time, the observation of film deformation and fracture as well as the stresses that are present in the films during straining are also crucial to investigate. To address both the electromechanical and deformation behavior of metal films supported by polymer substrates, in-situ 4 point probe resistance measurements were performed with in-situ atomic force microscopy imaging of the film surface during straining. The 4 point probe resistance measurements allow for the examination of the changes in resistance with strain, while the surface imaging permits the visualization of localized thinning and crack formation. Furthermore, in-situ synchrotron tensile tests provide information about the stresses in the film and show the yield stress where the deformation initiates and the relaxation of the film during imaging. A thin 200nm Cu film on 23μm thick PET substrate will be used to illustrate the combined techniques. The combination of electrical measurements, surface imaging, and stress measurements allow for a better understanding of electromechanical behavior needed for the improvement and future success of flexible electronic devices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Advances in fabrication and design are making flexible electronic devices and sensors more available. From flexible solar cells [1–2], wearable sensors [3–5], and foldable displays [6,7], these devices will soon become a reality. The special combination of stiff films and islands connected by deformable metal lines and supported by a compliant polymer substrate is important for flexible device design and reliability. It is essential that these material systems have consistent electrical and mechanical behavior over a wide range of loading conditions (stretching, bending, rolling, twisting, etc.). However, measuring the combined electro-mechanical properties and investigating the failure mechanisms is often difficult, requiring the development or advancement of new techniques.In order to study the mechanical behavior of metal films on compliant polymer substrates, fragmentation testing is often employed [8–12]. During fragmentation testing, the film-substrate couple is strained under uni-axial tension and observed with light microscopy (LM) or scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Brittle metals or ceramic films fracture, forming through thickness cracks (channel cracks) at low strain perpendicular to the straining direction. On the other hand, ductile metal films will first deform locally in the form of necks at low strains (Fig. 1a) and with increased strain through thickness cracks (TTC) can evolve (Fig. 1b). Fragmentation testing is best performed in-situ with LM or SEM so that the strain when the first crack forms can be observed. The initial fracture strain of the film, also known as the crack onset strain, can then be used to determine the interfacial fracture shear stress with knowledge of the crack spacing at saturation, λ, film thickness, h, and the fracture stress, σf=Efilmεf, where εf is the fracture strain, using the shear lag model [8,13,14]. In-situ fragmentation testing with LM or SEM allows for the crack spacing evolution to be observed as a function of applied strain (Fig. 1c). Under tensile straining conditions, a brittle film will initially fracture at very low strains (<1%) and then with further strain continue to form cracks until the saturation crack spacing is reached. After the saturation spacing has been reached, cracks can no longer form between existing crack fragments and the film could delaminate via buckling.LMs and SEMs are very good imaging techniques for brittle films, however, the same methods are more difficult to use on ductile films like Cu and Au because the SEM is unsuited to resolve small changes in surface height, especially at large working distances required to accommodate in-situ straining stages. For fragmentation testing of ductile films, atomic force microscopy (AFM) is an approach that allows for the recognition of TTC and localized necking at the film surface [15–18]. With the ability to distinguish between a TTC and a neck, the spacing of TTC and necks can be quantified as a function of strain. In-situ AFM fragmentation testing has also been utilized on brittle films to reveal bending the crack fragments under strain [14,19] which could not be detected without the height resolution of the AFM.Another in-situ fragmentation test measures the resistance of the film using the 4 point probe (4PP) geometry [20–23]. The advantage of this in-situ technique is that the exact fracture strain can be determined for brittle films. The fracture strain of the film can be determined when the resistance ratio deviates from the theoretical resistance ratio (Fig. 2). To date, in-situ 4PP fragmentation testing has been utilized on both brittle and ductile films on polymer substrates, with more advanced work on ductile films. These advances with in-situ 4PP have occurred on ductile films because the resistance gradually increases with applied strain rather than abruptly increasing to infinity. The theoretical background was also developed using ductile Cu films on polyimide [20,22,24]. For the ideal situation of a homogeneous, uniform and stress-free film the initial resistance, Ro, before straining is described as(1)R0=ρL0A0where ρ is the resistivity, Lo is the initial distance between the contacts, and Ao is the initial cross-section of the film. It should be noted that Lo is assumed to be equal to the initial gauge length. During straining the instantaneous resistance is described by(2)R=ρLAwhere L=Lo+ΔL is the instantaneous gauge length with the strain is defined as ε=ΔL/Lo and A is the instantaneous cross-section of the film. As the film is deformed plastically under tension, it is assumed that the volume of the film remains constant which gives rise to the very simple relation between the relative resistance (R/Ro) and the relative elongation (L/Lo)(3)RR0=LL0≡(1+∊)2When the film displays significant structural modification through the formation of cracks, Eq. (3) is no longer valid and the resistance is difficult to describe by an analytical formula. It should also be noted that although many researchers utilize in-situ 4PP fragmentation testing, the direct correspondence between the crack spacing and resistance for ductile films has not been demonstrated.In this study, in-situ 4PP and in-situ AFM fragmentation methods are combined to investigate the role of film mechanical deformation on the electrical behavior. Localized necking of the film is the first sign of yield but it is unknown how the initial deformation affects the electrical behavior. By combining the two methods, a direct measurement and correlation of the induced mechanical deformation and the electrical properties as a consequence of the deformation can be measured. From the experiments, new insights into electromechanical behavior of metal films on polymer substrates can be uncovered.Ductile copper films were sputter deposited onto 23μm thick polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates using an industrial method. In order to improve the adhesion of the 200nm Cu to the PET substrates, a 5nm Cr layer was deposited before the Cu film. The Cu films had an average grain size of about 100nm which was measured using ion channeling contrast images.Uni-axial tensile straining was performed on rectangular samples with approximate dimensions of 8mm×35mm. For the combined electro-mechanical behavior, the samples were strained under a Dimension 3100 AFM utilizing a custom built small-scale straining stage which is screw-driven [15,16]. The AFM was used to image the Cu surface and to quantify the amount of mechanical damage as a function of strain. It should be noted that the custom built straining stage can only be used in displacement control, thus only the strain was determined. At every straining step, a 30μm×30μm image was obtained of the same area using tapping mode. The AFM stage was adapted so that the straining stage could be fastened tightly to it. This adaption made it easy to always find the same area on the sample and no additional markers on the sample were needed. In order to capture the electrical behavior, four point probes were incorporated into the grips of the straining stage to measure the resistance of the film during straining [24]. The electrical resistance was measured with a Keithley 2400 source meter and the data recorded using a PYTHON script. The measurement combination of the electrical resistance and mechanically induced damage as a function of strain allowed for a direct comparison of both behaviors at once.An experiment is performed in the following manner. A sample is loaded and the original gauge length and resistance and an image in the unstrained position are recorded. Then the sample is strained in small increments (approximately 1.5–3% steps) and the procedure repeated (gauge length and resistance measured, AFM image made) until the desired maximum strain. Strain increments of 1.5% were used in the early stages of straining in order to better capture the initial surface deformation and cracking. Once these events had been observed (after 6% strain), the straining increment was increased to 3%. In the final step, the strain was carefully reduced so that the sample was in a flat, unloaded state and another set of measurements was performed. The electrical resistance data was then normalized by the original resistance, Ro, so it could be plotted as a function of strain as in Eq. (3).The AFM images were analyzed following the process reported by Cordill and Marx [15,16]. For every image (straining step), three surface profiles were taken at the left and right edges of the image as well as in the middle of the image approximately at the same place for each step (Fig. 3a). Necks and TTCs were identified in the surface profiles as places where the surface profile dramatically decreases (Fig. 3b). At these positions, the average depth, Δ, of the neck or crack was calculated using the surface profile data 250nm on both sides of the lowest point. With the defined criteria, a neck was classified as having a Δ/h<0.15 and a TTC was classified as Δ/h>0.15, where h is the film thickness. From the determination of a neck or TTC, the average deformation spacing and crack spacing were determined.As a comparison, evolution of the stress of the Cu film on PET was also measured in-situ using the X-ray based sin2ψ method. This type of in-situ fragmentation procedure allows for the direct measurement of the lattice strains. The in-situ sin2ψ measurements were conducted at the KMC-II beam line at the Berliner Elektronenspeicherring–Gesellschaft für Synchrotronstrahlung (BESSY II) in Berlin, Germany [25]. Using a Vantec 2000 (Brucker AXS, Germany) and a 5s exposure time, the monochromatic 7keV beam (diameter of 300μm) was used to measure the Cu (111) reflection at four different ψ angles. The samples were continuously strained with an Anton Paar TS600® straining stage at a displacement rate of 2μm/s to 15% with a 5min hold before unloading to zero force at the same displacement rate. The lattice strains were then used to derive the stresses applying the X-ray elastic constants (½ S2) of an untextured copper film. The film stresses were correlated to the compound stress-strain curves of the film and substrate measured with the calibrated load cell and strain gauge of the TS600.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A 200nm Cu film on a 23μm thick PET substrate was strained in-situ under the AFM and with 4PP electrical measurements. The goal of the combined in-situ fragmentation techniques was to try to understand how mechanically induced deformation and electrical properties were connected. With the AFM images, the through thickness crack spacing (only cracks) and the deformation spacing (cracks and localized necking) were quantified for each straining step up to 18% strain using the Δ/h ratio. The deformation and crack spacings were then compared to the measured film resistance at the same strains and increased from the expected theoretical values once the first through thickness crack formed in the film. In-situ XRD fragmentation was also employed to relate the stress present in the film to the observed damage (cracks and necks) during straining and unloading of the sample. The measured XRD stress-strain behavior correlated well to the observed deformation. The combined techniques of in-situ AFM-4PP fragmentation and the complementary in-situ XRD experiments help to shed light on the resistance recovery phenomenon and how it could be harnessed for future flexible electronic design.