@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Microstructure evolution modeling of FGH96 superalloy during inertia friction welding process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A DRX model of FGH96 of IFW process is established.An axisymmetric coupled thermo-mechanical FE model of IFW process is established.The microstructure evolution of FGH96 superalloy during IFW process is simulated.The DRX fraction and average grain size during IFW process are predicted accurately.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FGH96 superalloy,Inertia friction welding,Microstructure evolution,Finite element method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to investigate the microstructure evolution of inertia friction welding process of FGH96 ring part, the dynamic recrystallization kinetic model of FGH96 superalloy was established and a two-dimensional axisymmetric coupled thermo-mechanical finite element model was developed using the MSC.Marc software. By the second development of MSC.Marc, the dynamic recrystallization kinetic model was integrated into the finite element model to simulate the microstructure evolution of inertia friction welding process of FGH96 superalloy. The distributions of dynamic recrystallized fraction and average grain size during the inertia friction welding process were obtained and analyzed. The inertia friction welding experiments of FGH96 ring parts were carried out. The comparison results show that the simulated results agree well with the measured ones.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A superalloy is a kind of aeronautical metallic material which was developed since 1940s. It is applied for high-temperature applications in aerospace industries due to its high strength at elevated temperature (600–1100°C) and high resistance to creep and oxidation [1]. FGH96 is a kind of precipitation strengthening superalloy. γ′ is the main strengthen phase and the volume fraction of γ′ phase is about 33%. FGH96 is designed by the principle of damage tolerance and its resistance to crack growth has doubled compared with the first generation superalloy. The using temperature of FGH96 has reached 750°C [2]. Consequently, the capability of FGH96 to withstand high temperature under loading conditions and retain acceptable ductility at room and high temperature make it ideal for high thrust-weight ratio engines and the turbine disk applications [3]. However, FGH96 may be prone to microcracking as solidification occurs during fusion welding due to its high γ′ levels. As a result, only solid state welding techniques are considered suitable to joint this superalloy.Inertia friction welding (IFW) is a solid state joining process. Under normal conditions, the highest temperature at the interface is just below the melting temperature. The coalescence of materials is obtained through the combined effects of pressure and relative rotation of the two workpieces. During the IFW process, one of the two workpieces is clamped to a flywheel while the other is restrained from rotating. The flywheel is accelerated to a predetermined rotational speed and then disengaged from the drive unit. Finally, the workpieces are forced into a joint under application of axial pressure [4]. As an efficiency and energy-saving welding technology, IFW has become the dominant and standard method to produce high-performance aeroengine turbine discs and other rotating parts.During IFW process, most of the kinetic energy stored in the flywheel is converted to thermal energy. The temperature rising at the interface results in softening of the adjacent alloy. Deformation is largely restricted to the vicinity of original interface by an adiabatic shear process under axial pressure. Therefore, dynamic recrystallization (DRX) occurs and a very fine and equiaxed grain structure is observed near the interface [5]. It is well known that the grain size of weldment is not only the important factor to determine the joint performance but also a key feasibility indicator of an IFW process. Consequently, the study on the microstructure evolution of the welding joint during IFW process has a significant meaning to optimize the IFW technological parameters. The traditional method is to carry out a large number of costly welding experiments which is a long development cycle, while finite element (FE) simulation combined with a small amount of experiments can effectively shorten the development cycle and reduce costs of the IFW process.The deformation process of weldments is not only accompanied with energy conversion and temperature changing but also microstructure evolution during IFW process. Some literatures are available on the temperature and stress-strain field. Moal and Massoni established a complete thermo-mechanical model of the IFW process of two similar parts and the elastic effects are negligible in their model. The simulated results of rotating velocity show good agreement with actual industrial weldment. However, the simulation is based on experimental results and the model could not predict a new IFW process without experiments [6]. Wang et al. established a 2D FE model of inertia friction welding based on the energy input method. The model could predict the thermal history of joint and the final residual stresses field of RR1000. Because the energy input was derived from experiments, the model could not predict the other friction welding process which the welding parameters were not same to the model [7]. Fu and Duan established a coupled thermo-mechanical finite element model to predict temperature field, stress-strain field, and the final deformation of IFW parts. The simulated results showed a good agreement with experimental results [8]. Mümin Sahin built a 3D FE model of continuous drive friction welding and simulated the welding flashes occurrence in the welded joints of AISI 1040 steel [9]. The simulated results were compared with the experimental ones. Granta et al. established an IFW process model of RR1000 using the energy balance approach [10]. Their work showed that the heat-affected zone (HAZ) reduced, while the peak temperature and strain rate of joints increased with the increasing welding pressure. However, literature available on the simulation of microstructure evolution during IFW process is scarce. Especially the number of reports of IFW correlation research on the second generation material for the aero-engine turbine disk parts of China-FGH96 is very limited.Based on the metal plastic processing theory, a 2D axisymmetric coupled thermo-mechanical FE model of IFW process of FGH96 was established. The DRX kinetic equations was developed and combined into the FE model by the second development of MSC.Marc to study the microstructure evolution of FGH96 during IFW process. The distributions of dynamic recrystallized fraction and average grain size were predicted and analyzed in detail. The simulated results were compared with the experimental ones.The weldment is a FGH96 ring part.Fig. 1 shows the 3D sectional view (Fig. 1(a)) and the axisymmetric FE meshes (Fig. 1(b)) built by MSC.Marc. Since the two same weldments are strictly of axial symmetry, the symmetric nature of the joints means that 1/2 of the meridian plane is used enough for analysis. The other one is idealized as a rigid plane. This simplification could extremely reduce the amount of calculation and time on the premise of the permission of calculation accuracy [11]. The deformation of FGH96 is largely restricted to the vicinity of original interface and the joint exhibits steep temperature gradients during IFW process. As a result, the meshes near the friction interface are fine to guarantee the accuracy of the calculation. The meshes away from the friction interface are relatively sparse whose purpose is to further reduce the amount of calculation and computing time.Since IFW is a fast welding process with extremely high deformation rates and steep temperature gradients, the remesh function is adapted in order to prevent severe distortion of the meshes which goes against the convergence as well as the calculation accuracy of simulated results [12]. The relative residual force convergence criterion in MSC.Marc is used. The criterion is as follows:(1)∥Fresidual∥∞∥Freaction∥∞<TOL1where∥F∥∞is the component of F of a node with the highest absolute value, TOL1 is the control tolerance. Usually, TOL1=0.1.The meshes would be remeshed if the strain in any element of the current contact body has reached the specified maximum value (0.4).As is shown in Fig. 1, a rigid body is introduced to describe the axial pressure applied to the weldment. The axial pressure is applied to the rigid body. A contact constraint criterion is adopted between the weldment and rigid body to reflect the gripping force imposed on the weldment by the texture. The other surfaces of weldment are set as free surfaces.The temperature throughout the weldment before IFW process is set as room temperature:(2)T|t=0=T0Since IFW is a quite rapid process and the welding process generally lasts a few seconds, the influence of nature convection and thermal radiation is neglected [8,13,14]. Consequently, the thermal boundary conditions could be determined as(3)k(T)∂T∂n|Γ=−q(r,T)where k(T) is the thermal conductivity of FGH96, q(r,T) is the heat flux generated in the friction interface. The heat flux is determined by the friction pressure applied on the friction interface, the friction coefficient and relative speed of the weldments. Then, the equation of heat flux generated in the friction interfaces can be written as follows [15]:(4)q(r,t)=η2πτfnrwhere η is the heat conversion efficiency (in general, η=0.9–0.95), τfis the friction stress, n is the rotating speed of the weldment, r is the radius of the computation nodes.IFW is a connection process by the thermo-plastic deformation of the weldments. During the IFW process, the materials at the vicinity of original interface experience intense plastic deformation under axial pressure and torque. DRX is the major microstructure evolution mechanism during hot deformation in the face-centered cubic (FCC) metals [16]. FGH96 is a FCC metal. It has quite low stacking fault energy and wide extended dislocation which prevent the cross slip of dislocations during hot deformation. As a result, FGH96 could hardly experience dynamic recovery during hot deformation. At the same time, IFW is a quite rapid process and usually just lasts a few seconds. The heating and cooling rate of welding joints are very high, so the metadynamic recrystallization and static recrystallization do not occur during the IFW process generally. Consequently, only DRX behavior is considered in the simulation of IFW process of FGH96.According to Sellars's basic model of DRX [17], the DRX kinetic model of IFW process of FGH96 has been established through single hot compression test on a Gleeble-1500 thermo-mechanical simulator as follows:(1)Critical strain εc(5)εc=2.08×10−5Z0.09254(6)Z=ε̇exp(983.6×103RT)where εcis the critical strain, Z is the Zener–Hollomon parameter andε̇is the strain rate.Volume fraction of DRX(7)Xdyn=1−exp[−0.693(ε/ε0.5)2](8)ε0.5=0.01147ε̇0.06678exp(5169.46T)where Xdynis the DRX volume fraction, ε is the equivalent plastic strain, ε0.5 is the strain when 50% of DRX occurs,ε̇is the strain rate and T is the absolute temperature.Grain size of DRX(9)lnDdyn=−0.16lnZ+17.5where Ddynis the grain size of DRX.Average grain size(10)Dave=DdynXdyn+D0(1−Xdyn)In order to combine the FE model with DRX kinetic model, a Fortran subroutine which is used to describe the DRX behavior of FGH96 during the IFW process is designed. The flowchart of the subroutine is shown inFig. 2. In each time increment, the temperature field and stress-strain field of FGH96 weldment are obtained by the coupled thermo-mechanical FE model firstly. Then, they were passed to the subroutine. Finally, the subroutine predicts the DRX behavior according to the simulated results of macroscopic field-variables.The IFW process generates large amounts of plastic deformation at very high strain rates in the vicinity of joint. This demands a good understanding of microstructure evolution during the IFW process.Fig. 3 shows the DRX fraction distribution of FGH96 ring part during the IFW process. It can be seen that the DRX fraction increases with time. Moreover, the DRX occurs within an extraordinary narrow region in the vicinity of joint. According to the classic DRX theory, DRX occurs only if the deformation of material exceeds a critical strain. Therefore, no DRX grain appears because the deformation is too small to exceed the critical strain at the initial stage of IFW process (Fig. 3(a)). The constraint force applied on the two sides of ring part is less than that of the inner materials, which makes the two sides of ring part deform more easily. Therefore, the deformation of two sides of the ring part exceeds critical strain firstly when the welding proceeds to a certain extension. As a result, DRX is observed preferentially in the two sides of ring part (Fig. 3(b)). The DRX region progressively expands along the axial and radius with time subsequently (Fig. 3(c)). When the IFW process finishes, the DRX grains are distributed all over the friction interface as well as the vicinity regions of the joint (Fig. 3(d)). In addition, it also can be seen that there is no DRX grains in the tips of flashes. That is because the temperature is too low and the deformation is too small for the DRX occur when the tips of flashes are squeezed out.According to Eq. (9), the average grain size of joint during the welding process is the arithmetic average of DRX grain size with original grain size. It reflects the actual grain size of the joint and has a direct effect on the mechanical properties of joint.Fig. 4 shows the average grain size distribution of FGH96 ring part during the IFW process.The average grain size of joint is determined by both the initial grain size and the DRX grain size. At the initial stage of IFW process, the two ring parts just begin to contact with each other and neither the deformation nor the temperature of joint meets the conditions of DRX. Therefore, no DRX grain is observed in the whole joint and the grain size does not change (Fig. 4(a)). The deformation of two sides of the ring part exceeds critical strain firstly, when the welding proceeds to a certain extension. Consequently, DRX occurs and the refined DRX grains are observed in the two sides of the ring part preferentially (Fig. 4(b)). The materials flows towards outside and become flashes. The regions of refined DRX grain expand gradually under the torque and axial pressure with the welding process going on (Fig. 4(c)). When the IFW process is finished, the original grains in the vicinity regions of joint are completely replaced by fine grains, which means DRX fully occurs in this region (Fig. 4(d)). There is no DRX grains observed in the tips of flashes, so the grain size in these regions is basically the same as the base metal.A series of IFW experiments of FGH96 ring part which has different welding parameters were conducted to validate the accuracy of microstructure evolution simulated results.Table 1 shows the comparison of the experimental results and the simulated ones. The weldments were polished and corroded (the corrosive is 100ml HCl+10ml H2SO4+5g CuSO4). Then, the microstructure of joints was observed. The grain size of joints was measured by linear intercept method.Fig. 5 shows the macro morphology of joint after IFW. Because DRX takes place during the welding process, the weld zone is relatively brighter than the base metal. It can be seen that the shape of joint is very similar to the simulated result.Fig. 6 shows the comparison of simulated grain size (Fig. 6(a)) with experimental result (Fig. 6(b)) in the weld zone. Fig. 6(b) is taken from region A which is marked in Fig. 5. It can be seen that the joint can be divided into three regions with the increasing distance from the friction interface. Only fine and distortion less grains could be observed in region I which implies that fully DRX have taken place in this region. Region II is the transition zone. Some fine and distortion less grains are observed between the original grain boundaries and the original grains flattened perpendicular to the axial direction. This indicates that partially DRX occurs in this region. In addition, the volume fraction of DRX increases with the decreasing distances from the friction interface. Region III is the base metal region which is far away from the friction interface. The temperature is too low so that there is hardly plastic deformation occuring in this region during the welding process. Consequently, the microstructure after IFW is the same as the initial microstructure which consist of equiaxed grains and some annealing twins.Moreover, the shape of the simulated weld zone (Fig. 6(a)) is similar to the experimental result (Fig. 6(b)). It can be seen that the refined DRX grains are distributed all over the friction interface as well as the vicinity regions of joint. The simulated average grain size of joint is about 7.6μm (Fig. 6(b)) and it increases with the increasing distance from the friction interface. At the same time, the experimental average grain size in the weld zone is about 7.5μm. The relative error between simulated result and experimental one is 1.3%.Some more IFW experiments which have different welding parameters were conducted to further validate the accuracy of model. The comparison results were shown in Table 1. It can be seen that all of the relative error between the predicted ones and measured ones are less than 10%, which means that the model could predict the grain size in the weld zone precisely regardless of the changing rotation speed or the changing axial pressure.Zhu et al. [11] established a 2D finite element model to simulate the microstructure evolution of GH4169 superalloy ring part. The experimental grain size in the weld zone is 7.5μm and the predicted grain size of their model in the weld zone is 9.0μm. The relative error between simulated result and experimental one is 20%. The comparison result reveals that the accuracy of models in this work increases significantly.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A two-dimensional axisymmetric coupled thermo-mechanical FE model was established to simulate the IFW process of FGH96. The DRX kinetic model was established through experiments and it was integrated into the coupled thermo-mechanical FE model to predict the DRX behavior of FGH96 during the IFW process. The distributions of dynamic recrystallized fraction and average grain size during the inertia friction welding process were numerically predicted and analyzed. Corresponding experiments were conducted to validate the FE models. From the analysis, the results can be summarized as follows:(1)The DRX occurs within an extraordinary narrow region in the vicinity of the joint. The joint can be divided into three regions with the increasing distance from the friction interface: weld zone, transition zone and base metal region. The grain size increases with the increasing distance from the friction interface.The fraction of DRX decreases with the increasing distance from the friction interface which is according with the experimental results. Moreover, the shape of weld zone is similar to the experimental ones.The relative error between simulated grain size and experimental ones in this work is less than 10%. Compared with the published data, the accuracy of models in this work increases significantly.