@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated breast cancer risk assessment and management model based on fuzzy cognitive maps

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of an integrated breast cancer risk prediction model using a two-level fuzzy cognitive map (FCM) model.The proposed model combines the demographic risk factors with the findings of the initial screening mammogram to elicit the hidden and impeding risk of developing breast cancer.Hebbian-based learning capabilities of FCM were used to improve the modeling issue and contribute to classification of tumor grading and risk prediction.The accuracy of the system is compared with benchmark machine learning methods showing its superiority.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast cancer,Risk assessment,Fuzzy cognitive maps,Hebbian learning,Mammogram screening,Medical decision support systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThere is a growing demand for women to be classified into different risk groups of developing breast cancer (BC). The focus of the reported work is on the development of an integrated risk prediction model using a two-level fuzzy cognitive map (FCM) model. The proposed model combines the results of the initial screening mammogram of the given woman with her demographic risk factors to predict the post-screening risk of developing BC.MethodsThe level-1 FCM models the demographic risk profile. A nonlinear Hebbian learning algorithm is used to train this model and thus to help on predicting the BC risk grade based on demographic risk factors identified by domain experts. The risk grades estimated by the proposed model are validated using two standard BC risk assessment models viz. Gail and Tyrer–Cuzick. The level-2 FCM models the features of the screening mammogram concerning normal, benign and malignant cases. The data driven Hebbian learning algorithm (DDNHL) is used to train this model in order to predict the BC risk grade based on these mammographic image features. An overall risk grade is calculated by combining the outcomes of these two FCMs.ResultsThe main limitation of the Gail model of underestimating the risk level of women with strong family history is overcome by the proposed model. IBIS is a hard computing tool based on the Tyrer–Cuzick model that is comprehensive enough in covering a wide range of demographic risk factors including family history, but it generates results in terms of numeric risk score based on predefined formulae. Thus the outcome is difficult to interpret by naive users. Besides these models are based only on the demographic details and do not take into account the findings of the screening mammogram. The proposed integrated model overcomes the above described limitations of the existing models and predicts the risk level in terms of qualitative grades. The predictions of the proposed NHL-FCM model comply with the Tyrer–Cuzick model for 36 out of 40 patient cases. With respect to tumor grading, the overall classification accuracy of DDNHL-FCM using 70 real mammogram screening images is 94.3%. The testing accuracy of the proposed model using 10-fold cross validation technique outperforms other standard machine learning based inference engines.ConclusionIn the perspective of clinical oncologists, this is a comprehensive front-end medical decision support system that assists them in efficiently assessing the expected post-screening BC risk level of the given individual and hence prescribing individualized preventive interventions and more intensive surveillance for high risk women.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer (BC) is the most common invasive cancer in females worldwide. BC is the second leading disease, next to lung cancer, which increases the mortality rate in women [1]. It develops from breast cells, primarily in the milk ducts (ductal carcinoma) or glands (lobular carcinoma) which begin with the formation of a small tumor or a mass [2]. A mass with a smooth, well defined border is non-cancerous (benign). Mass with an irregular border or with spiculations may be cancerous (malignant) [48]. Even though the causes of BC are not fully and thoroughly understood, every woman needs to be aware of her own chances of developing BC in order to be proactive about the risk reduction strategies and for better management of the disease. Independent studies have identified a number of factors that either increase or decrease the chances of developing breast cancer [3–15]. By analyzing these risk factors, it is possible to assess an individual woman's expected risk level of developing a malignant breast disease.An annual BC screening using digital mammograms is proposed for all women above 40 years old for early detection of suspicious tumors. Although the digital mammograms are considered to be effective in detecting suspicious breast masses and lesions, as well as grade the findings on a zero to six scale according to BI-RADS [16] guidelines, they do not give accurate indications about the post screening risk of developing a malignant breast disease for those diagnosed with normal or benign findings. As some of the women may carry genetic predispositions or other BC risk factors that push them to the high risk category, they ought to be treated separately from other cases with less risk factor. Hence there is a strong need to develop an integrated BC risk assessment model that combines the current findings of the initial screening study with the demographic risk factors of the individual, to help women become more BC aware. This could help women falling at a high risk level seek rational advice from their physicians regarding the optimum follow up routine that will improve their chances of detecting the malignant tumors early.National Cancer Institute developed an interactive risk assessment tool, namely Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (BCRAT) which is based on Gail model [17]. The major limitation of this model is that it underestimates the risk of the individuals with strong family history of BC or other related cancers [18]. Claus Model [19] estimates the risk assessment based on extensive family history; however it excludes other risk factors. The BRCAPRO [19] program calculates the probability of risk based on the mutation of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Vasu et al. (2013) [20] have extended Gail model to the Indian population. All these models are either based on statistical studies or numerical computations to calculate the risk score and they lack the learning and reasoning capabilities of knowledge based systems. In the image screening part, early detection of BC using digital mammograms is an active research area and several papers suggest different image processing algorithms to accurately detect suspicious masses and calcifications [21–25,62].The research study presented in this manuscript deals with developing an integrated breast cancer risk assessment model using a two-level structure of fuzzy cognitive maps. Fuzzy cognitive map is a soft computing approach modeling complex decision making problems. The objectives of the proposed work are to (i) develop an FCM-based system to model the demographic risk factors and next classify the BC risk level of a given individual into three different grades viz. High, Moderate and Low using a NHL algorithm (level-1 FCM), (ii) develop an FCM model consisting of the significant image features from mammograms and then categorize the outcome into three classes viz. Normal, Benign and Malignant with a data driven NHL algorithm used to train the new FCM model (level-2 FCM) and (iii) develop an integrated risk prediction model with the guidance of clinical oncologists to calculate the overall BC risk grade by combining the predictions of the level-1 and level-2 FCMs.The soft computing modeling technique of FCMs is used in this study due to its capabilities to model complex systems in a way that mimics the perception of domain experts. FCM is appropriate for the cases where hard scientific data is incomplete or entirely missing, but where local, indigenous and traditional knowledge is available [26]. The main features of FCM such as simplicity in construction, flexibility in system analysis and design, user-friendly, practicality and low time consuming as well as high-level decision making, make it very suitable for use at the front-end of knowledge engineering for acquisition of causal knowledge from human experts [31]. Especially in the medical field, many studies have proved the suitability of FCM in medical decision support systems as an efficient inference engine for modeling complex causal relationships easily, both qualitatively and quantitatively, where a large number of factors exist and are interrelated [26–42,56,57,63].More specifically, FCMs have been used for classification and prediction tasks in medicine. These articles have dealt with grading of urinary bladder tumors, differentiation of brain tumors using the histopathology characteristics, classification of autism disorder, prediction of prostate cancer as well as prediction of pulmonary infections [34,36,63,64]. Recently, FCM were introduced for the screening and separation of Usual Ductal Hyperplasia (UDH) from the rest of intraductal lesions, thus providing classification of these regions into three groups [58].In this study, FCM is initially built with the help of the accumulated knowledge and clinical experience of the domain experts, who are physicians/clinical oncologists. Subsequently, Hebbian learning algorithms are used to train the model with real patient records to fine-tune the initial causal weights assigned by the experts. Even though numerous papers have been published independently on the two areas namely, breast cancer early detection and breast cancer risk assessment, no previously published paper has attempted to study the effect of combining the findings of these two approaches using the decision making methodology of FCMs. The estimation of an overall BC risk grade aids the clinical oncologists to get a more accurate picture of the individual's expected risk level of developing BC in future and thus to plan a tailored care setting procedure that is proper for individual patient case.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of FCM, Section 3 describes the development of level-1 FCM model concerning the risk factors associated with the demographic patient profile and the evaluation of this FCM model for risk assessment. Section 4 describes the development of level-2 FCM model based on mammographic image features for BC categorization, whereas Section 5 provides the estimation of overall risk by integrating the two outcomes of the two FCMs and discusses the result. Section 6 concludes the paper.FCM is a soft computing technique which incorporates the available knowledge and experts’ opinion in the form of concepts and the interconnections between concepts. FCM can be represented as a signed fuzzy weighted graph with closed loops. It consists of nodes and directed arcs connecting between them. Each node in the map represents the concept (C) in the problem domain. The inter relation between the concepts (Ci, Cj) is given by the strength values (weights Wij) which reflects the degree of causal influence between them. The concepts and the weights strongly incorporate the available knowledge and expertise in that field. The weights are the fuzzy values that lie in the interval [−1,1].Fig. 1illustrates a graphical representation of a FCM consisting of five concepts (C1 to C5) and eight weights Wij. The weight gives the fuzzy relationships among the concepts.The values of concepts at every simulation step are calculated by applying the following equation:(1)Ai(k+1)=fAi(k)+∑j≠ij=1NAjk⋅WjiwhereAi(k+1)is the value of concept Ciat each simulation step k+1, Aj(k) is the value of concept Cjat simulation step k, Wjiis the weight of the interconnection from concept Cjto concept Ci.The sigmoid function, f, belongs to the family of squeezing functions, and usually the following function is used:(2)f=11+e−λxwhere λ>0 is a parameter that determines its steepness.The most important issue in modeling and analysing a complex system with FCMs is to determine automatically the causal relationships (weights) between the influential components of the system. This issue is called “learning” of the FCM model. Learning of FCM involves updating the strengths of causal links. A learning strategy is to improve FCMs by fine-tuning its initial causal link or edge strengths applying training algorithms similar to that of artificial neural networks.There are three main groups of FCM learning methods [43]: (1) methods which use experts knowledge for developing and learning FCMs, (2) methods which rely on historical data about the given system and (3) hybrid methods which use both experts knowledge and historical data with a two-stage learning process. The first group is devoted to modeling issues/problems for where there is expertise about the problem and a small data set is available. In the investigated problem, we concentrate our efforts on the first category of learning methods, the Hebb-based learning algorithms, as they are well established and mainly usable in cases that there is a small set of historical data where the other machine learning methods cannot work sufficient [37,39].The learning rule for Hebb-based FCM algorithm is given in Eq. (3). This equation is used in each iteration step to update the weight matrix.(3)Wij(k)=Wij(k−1)+(ηk×Aj(k−1)(Ai(k−1)−(Aj(k−1)×Wji(k−1))))where Wji(k) is the updated weight in kth iteration. ηkis the learning parameter value in kth iteration, which is a small positive value. The values of concepts belong to the interval [0,1] and values of weights to the interval [−1,1]. This algorithm has been previously used in medical problems for classification and decision support [30,34,36].The construction of the FCM-based system for modeling demographic risk factors (DRF) and next the categorization of the BC risk based on these factors requires the identification of the multifarious risk factors and their influence on each other that together contribute in deciding an individual's chances of developing the BC. FCM is mainly based on domain knowledge from physicians to determine the cause-effect relationships of the various knowledge representation elements (concept/nodes) of the system under study. In this research work, the information regarding the demographic BC risk factors was gathered from physicians, different official online medical resources [5–15], previously reported risk prediction models [17,42,43,63,64] and medical literature [3,4,18,19] that provide recommendations and guidelines related to BC and its clinical management. The gathered knowledge was then transformed as a well-structured questionnaire and was presented to three oncologists affiliated to the Radiology department of St. Lukes Radiation Oncology Network, Dublin, UK. The questionnaire covers different age related, life style related and family history related risk factors. The gathered concepts are depicted in the tree structure shown in Fig. 2. On the basis of the aforementioned three experts’ opinion, 14 concepts were identified as the main influencing personal risk factors of BC. These are provided in Table A1. The experts (clinical oncologists) also described the degree of causal influence of each concept on one another and also on the Decision Concept (DC) which describes the cancer Risk Grade (RG). DC represents the outcome of interest and is described as a fuzzy variable from the fuzzy set {Low, Moderate, High}. The categorization of the RG was accomplished based on the boundary conditions initially defined by the experts as: 0<low<0.45, 0.46<moderate<0.65 and 0.66<high<1. The output of the inference is also in this range after the transformation function implementation.The 14 DRF concepts together with the DC form the basic units/nodes of level-1 FCM. The range of values assumed by each concept is summarized in Table A2. These were assigned by the experts in accordance with the relevant literature and online resources. Table A3 illustrates the fuzzy rules that relate the concepts with the RG (DC). The experts describe the influence of one concept on the other using fuzzy rules. Different experts may possibly have slightly different perceptions about the causal associations between different pair of concepts. In order to calculate the numerical weight of an edge that connects two nodes (concepts), the opinions of different experts are combined using a suitable aggregation function. Thus subjectivity is eliminated. The produced aggregated output is then defuzzified (using Center of Gravity method) to arrive at a numerical weight of the link that connects two given concepts [32]. In a similar way, the weights of all links connecting the cause and effect nodes of the entire system are obtained. The obtained weights reflect the combined opinion of the experts on the strength of causal associations between different attributes of the modeled system [31].Let us consider the interconnection between the concept Family history of 1st degree relatives (C5) and the output concept RG aiming to illustrate how the experts’ suggestions on causal relationships are converted into numerical weight values:First Expert: If C5 is High then RG is High. This means that there is a positive high influence from C5 to RG.Second Expert: If C5 is High then RG is Very high. This means that there is a positive very high influence from C5 to RG.Third Expert: If C5 is High then RG is Very high. This means that there is a positive very high influence from C5 to RG.Using the SUM method, the above three linguistic weights (high, very high, very high) are aggregated. Then the “centroid” defuzzification method is implemented to calculate the numerical value of the weight in the range [−1,1] as illustrated in Fig. 3.The aggregated influence of C5 on RG is 0.704, which is shown as the center of gravity in Fig. 3. This is the weight value assigned to the interconnection from C5 to RG. In a similar way, the weights of all interconnections of the FCM model are obtained and illustrated in Fig. 4. It also depicts the whole L1-FCM model with the concepts and the weighted relationships among them.Clinical oncologists used as experts in our approach have sufficiently contributed in building/constructing the FCM model; however, due to the non-availability of a relatively large historic data set, the Nonlinear Hebbian Learning (NHL) method was employed to refine the weights till a decision is reached [36]. The values of the concepts C1 to C14 and the decision concept RG were updated till the system reaches a steady state or an equilibrium point [37]. The learning rate was set to 0.001.After reaching the termination state given in Eq. (4), the value of concept RG provides the category of the cancer risk based on the demographic risk profile of the case under study.(4)F2=DCi(k)−DCi(k−1)<eHere, e is the tolerance level in the magnitude of the difference in decision concept in two successive iterations.For illustration purposes, let us consider a patient case with the following personal risk profile. The actual/real values of the DRF concepts for this patient case are given below:Age of patient52 years old, Age at menarche13 years, Age at first child26 years old, Age at menopause50years old, Family history of 1st degree relatives2, Family history of 2nd degree relatives3, BMI27, Number of Children2, Breast feeding10 months, OCP1 year, HRTNo, Alcohol intake0, Physical exerciseYes, Exposure to chest radiation therapy0.The above values are normalized in the 0–1 scale, following the known equation for normalization:(5)Xnormalized=(X−Xmin)(Xmax−Xmin)For example, using Eq. (5), the age of the patient (52 years) is normalized to the value 0.3, assuming the maximum value Xmax as 90 years old and the minimum value Xmin as 25 years old. Similarly all other concept values are normalized.After normalizing the above values, the input vector is formed as follows:Cinitial_1=[0.41 0.63 0.42 0.67 0.75 0.67 0.35 0.33 0.42 0.125 0 0 0 0 0]The proposed L-1 FCM model was simulated using these initial values. The concepts and weights are updated using Eq. (1) through Eq. (3) till their values do not change any more after a number of iterations. This means that they converge to an equilibrium point according to the termination criteria presented in Eq. (4).The learning rate was set initially to 0.1 and decreased exponentially at each iteration k as:(6)η(k)=η(k−1)(2k+1)The concepts reached the steady state after 9 iterations take the next values:Cfinal_1=[0.739 0.719 0.728 0.659 0.784 0.659 0.735 0.579 0.659 0.659 0.659 0.526 0.659 0.659 0.659 0.659 0.659 0.659 0.659 0.826]The value of RG converges at 0.826 after 9 iterations. The value above 0.66 is considered as high risk by the experts/oncologists as previously described. Therefore the final result obtained by L1-FCM corresponds to the high risk.For analyzing the classification performance of the proposed L1-FCM learnt by NHL algorithm, the model was trained and subsequently tested with 40 patient records in various age groups ranging from 30 to 70 years old. For assessing the classification accuracy of the proposed L1-FCM, the risk score for all the 40 cases were calculated using the Gail [17] and Tyrer–Cuzick model [45], the two standard BC risk assessment models used in clinical practice. Though the Gail model is very popular in BC risk assessment, it underestimates the risk of women with strong family history to a significant extent. On the other hand, the Tyrer–Cuzick model is quiet comprehensive in covering all the risk factors and hence taken as a benchmark for comparing the results of L1-FCM trained by NHL. Out of the 40 records tested using the proposed approach, the classification results of 36 of these records concur with the Tyrer–Cuzick model. Out of the 40 cases tested, 22 records were estimated as high risk category cases, 11 records as moderate risk category and 7 as Low risk category.Table 1shows the 40 patient cases whose risk scores are calculated by the standard models and the corresponding risk grades obtained through the L1-FCM trained by the NHL algorithm (namely NHL-FCM). From Table 1, it is evident that the performance of L1-FCM goes hand-in-hand with the Tyrer–Cuzick model. Besides, from the patient cases 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12–15 and 19, it is evident that Gail model underestimates the risk of about 28% of women who have strong family history, whereas the other two models correctly capture the risk level.For comparing the classification accuracy of the proposed L1-FCM trained by NHL algorithm, the same data set was used for classification with other benchmark machine learning models. The WEKA toolbox version 3.7 (Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis – Weka) was used to test the other machine learning algorithms such as back propagation neural network, support vector machine, Bayesian classifier and decision trees. The back propagation neural network with 14 input neurons, one hidden layer with 10 neurons and 3 output nodes (corresponding to the 3 output classes) was used as the multilayer perceptron (MLP) [59]. The Support Vector Machine, J48 decision tree learner C4.5 (Release 8) [60] and the Naïve Bayesian Classifier were also used for categorizing the risk into three classes, high, medium and low.The classification accuracy obtained from L1-FCM using the NHL algorithm as well as the classification performance of the other standard classifiers for each class of risk are gathered in Table 2. The results show the superiority of the proposed NHL-FCM algorithm. The proposed L1-FCM outperforms the other classification methods in terms of overall classification accuracy. This happens due to the efficiency of NHL to work with a very small data set for modifying the FCM weights, thus producing desirable decisions for the output concepts. This is one of the main advantages of the NHL-FCM instead of the other benchmark machine learning algorithms [30–32,34,36].A mammogram which is taken to look for signs of cancer when there are no symptoms of cancer is known as screening mammogram [46]. A potential abnormality that we can find on a mammogram may be a nodule, mass, lump, density, or distortion [1,2,43,49] as shown in Fig. 5. Studies show that 20–30% signs were not addressed by visual inspection by radiologists [1,37]. Using appropriate image processing algorithms, the computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems assist in accurately classifying the masses into benign and malignant.Feature extraction and feature selection plays a very important role in the area of classification. In the past two decades, several feature extraction techniques [47,24,48,49] have been discussed for tumor detection by extracting the texture, shape and margin based features. Though there are more than 200 texture and morphological features that could be statistically derived from the Region of Interest (RoI) (in this case, masses present in the mammogram), there is only a small group of significant features that represent certain abnormal conditions and patterns found in the breast parenchyma. Selection of significant features plays a vital role in the diagnosis of suspicious tumors. The shape and marginal features are considered by the experts as essential features to discriminate between the benign and malignant masses. Typically benign masses are having well defined circumscribed areas while the malignant masses are irregular in shape. The texture features are important to differentiate between the fatty and dense breast tissue. For the purpose of this research, images from MIAS database which is a standard online repository of mammograms [50,51] were taken for tumor grading. To extract the masses from the mammogram, average threshold method [24] was used which clearly defines the boundary between the masses from its surroundings. The shape and marginal area extracted from the mammogram mdb10 found in the MIAS database are shown in Fig. 5(b) and (c).From conducting a literature survey, a subset of 31 widely adopted margin, shape and texture based features were statistically extracted from the RoI of the mammogram. From this subset, only the most significant 11 features were selected using the Principal Component Analysis technique [48]. The 11 selected features were approved by two independent radiologists, who were used as experts to describe the causal relationships between each pair of features. Table A4 gives an overview of the 11 features extracted from the digital mammogram images Table 3provides the values corresponding to different sample mammograms which were calculated using the standard mathematical formulae given in Table A4 using MATLAB.Table 3 gives a hint about the distinguishing parameters between benign and malignant masses. The measured area of mass will be high for irregular masses (probably malignant). The Max Radius and Perimeter values tend to be higher for irregular masses than round or oval masses (probably benign) [24]. Eccentricity takes zero for round masses and maximum value of 1 for irregular masses [48]. Energy and Homogeneity values are high for benign masses. Entropy, contrast and correlation take high value for irregular masses. For the sample mammogram (mdb10) shown in Fig. 5, the area of the mass is low and energy value is nearly 1. The eccentricity value is nearly zero. Similarly all the feature values extracted from the RoI of mdb10 show that the mass type is oval and benign.These 11 features presented and discussed above as well as the decision concept (DC) comprise the 12 concept nodes of the L-2 FCM. The aforementioned two radiologists determined the degree of influence between these concepts using the “if-then” rules (as previously described) to infer the causal relationships between every pair of concepts for the L2-FCM. The linguistic associations described by the radiologists/experts for each interconnection were aggregated using the SUM method as discussed in the earlier section. The aggregated fuzzy weight was defuzzified with the Center of Gravity method and a numerical weight Rijwas calculated for each interconnection [58]. The L-2 FCM including the calculated weights is depicted in Fig. 6.After construction of the L-2 FCM model using the procedure discussed above, we evaluated the proposed FCM model using 70 images from MIAS database. Out of the 70 images, 30 feature vectors are from images correspond to normal tumor findings, 28 feature vectors are derived from images correspond to benign tumor findings and the remaining 12 feature vectors correspond to malignant tumor findings.As sufficient historic patient data records were available, the Data Driven Nonlinear Hebbian Algorithm (DD-NHL) was used for learning the weights of the interconnections among the features of these 70 images. During this learning process new weights were calculated, which next were used for model testing, for validation purposes. The 10-fold cross validation method was selected. In this method, the available records were divided into 10 sets. Training was done using 9 data sets and the remaining one set was used for testing. During each algorithm run/experiment, the classification accuracy was calculated by the testing cases. The overall classification accuracy was estimated by the mean value of the calculated classification accuracies produced after a large number of experiments.Summarizing, the proposed classification algorithm consists of the following input, output, learning and testing phases which are mainly based on the steps of DD-NHL as described in [61].Input: For a system with N concepts and K data points, the input data form a matrix D=[dti], where dti corresponds to the value of ith concept (i=1, …, N) at the tth pattern, where t=1, …, K (K is the number of records), with size K×N, which is called input data matrix. Each row of the given matrix, illustrated as A(t)=[A1(t), A2(t), …, An(t)] where t=1, …, K, stores values of activations of the concepts at the tth iteration.In the learning phase, the algorithm has to determine the decision boundaries that partition the underlying output vector from step one into three sets, one for each class. For this purpose, one-dimensional decision boundaries were determined by using the minimum Euclidean distance method [52]. The FCM model was learned using the Eq. (1) through Eq. (3) till the termination condition in Eqs. (4) and (5) is reached. The learning rate was set as 0.001.Next, in the testing phase, the remaining one set was classified following the steps of DD-NHL using the previously produced decision boundaries at each experiment which were used to estimate the classification accuracy. Fig. 7depicts the classification results of DDNHL-FCM obtained for the given data set. Thus, for a total number of 10 experiments, the mean classifier accuracy was estimated.In the graph depicted in Fig. 7, the X-axis gives the calculated grade values for cancer risk. The Y-axis gives the number of records used for classification. The classification accuracy for normal class is 100%, benign class is 89.3% and for malignant class is 91.6%. The overall accuracy is 94.3%.To test the credibility of the FCM for the task under study, the same data set was used for classification by using some benchmark machine learning models. The comparison results are gathered in Table 4. The 10-fold cross validation was conducted in a similar way as performed above in DDNHL-FCM. The classification accuracies obtained by the same benchmark machine learning methods are compared with that of DDNHL-FCM. From Table 4, it is evident that DDNHL-FCM proves to be far superior for the given classification task. This happens due to the advantageous characteristic of FCM to consider the domain knowledge for the initial determination of the weights and FCM construction, and next to use the relatively small dataset for training the FCM model in order to tune these weights.To estimate an overall risk grade for breast cancer, this study aimed at proposing a novel approach for the individualized overall BC risk assessment by combining the risk calculated from the L1-FCM and the tumor grading obtained from the L2-FCM. These two levels of FCM are integrated as illustrated in Fig. 8.The following rules are formed with the help of our experts and the published medical guidelines [53–55]. These rules integrate the outcomes of the two FCM models, respectively:IF L1-FCM prediction is Low AND IF L2-FCM grading is Normal, THEN the integrated model grades the person's cancer risk as Low overall risk.Recommendation: American Cancer Society (56) recommends Biennial Screening Mammogram beginning at age 40 (screening every 2 years).IF L1-FCM prediction is Moderate AND IF L2-FCM grading is Normal, THEN the integrated model grades the person's cancer risk as Average risk.Recommendation: The patient is recommended to have Annual Screening Mammogram and Annual clinical breast examination (CBE). Further, the person should be breast aware11Should be familiar with their breasts and changes (e.g. nipple discharge, nipple retraction, change in skin color, etc.) should be promptly reported to the health care provider.[54].IF L1-FCM prediction is High AND IF L2-FCM grading is Normal, THEN the integrated model grades the person's cancer risk as Increased Risk.22These persons have strong family history of breast or ovarian cancers. Experts recommend such persons to consider beginning mammogram screening at the age of first degree relative's diagnosis of cancer if younger than age 40.Recommendation: Frequent screening is recommended to detect any future malignancy at early stage. The patient should have Annual Screening Mammogram and CBE every 6–12 months. Further, the person should be breast aware1and consider risk reduction strategies33NCCN panel has published online the risk reduction strategies for high risk patients [54].[54].IF L1-FCM prediction is Low AND IF L2-FCM grading is Benign, THEN the integrated model grades the person's cancer risk as Average Risk.Recommendation: The patient is recommended to have Annual Screening Mammogram and Annual clinical breast examination [56]. Experts consider the benign finding from the mammogram as normal as long as such women do not carry any other risk factors.IF L1-FCM prediction is Moderate AND IF L2-FCM grading is Benign, THEN the integrated model grades the person's cancer risk as increased 10 year Risk.Recommendation: The patient should consider Breast Ultrasound and/or diagnostic mammogram at 6 months, then every 6–12 months for 2–3 years she consider risk reduction strategies3[54].IF L1-FCM prediction is High AND IF L2-FCM grading is Benign, THEN the integrated model grades the person's cancer risk as increased 5 year risk.2Recommendation: Frequent follow up is recommended to detect whether the current benign finding turns into a malignant condition. The patient can consider MRI as an adjunct to mammography [54,55].To evaluate the integrated BC risk assessment model and show its inference capabilities, the same patient cases given in Table 1 were considered. For these 40 cases, the respective mammographic features were selected and the L2-FCM model was used to calculate the tumor grading. Next, the results obtained from these 40 patient cases were evaluated by two independent clinical oncologists (not the same used for the construction of the integrated risk assessment model). The evaluation process revealed the efficient performance of the integrated tool as in 36 out of 40 patient cases, the recommendations concur with those provided by the medical guidelines.From these patient cases, we selected two of them as the most representative ones to illustrate the decision making capabilities of the integrated BC risk assessment model.Case 5 from Table 1:Let us consider the patient case 5 from Table 1. The Clinical Oncologists as well as the standard risk prediction models considered this case to be at a moderate risk level due to the late age at first child and short duration of breast feeding. The results obtained from the proposed L1-FCM goes in line with standard models as already depicted in Table 1 for this patient case.Besides, from the morphological and texture features extracted from the mammogram study, this individual was classified as Benign by the proposed L2-FCM. Following the fifth rule of the proposed integrated risk assessment model “if L1-FCM prediction is Moderate and if L2-FCM grading is Benign, the integrated model considers the woman withincreased 10 year Riskof developing BC”, the integrated model recommends the patient to consider Breast Ultrasound and/or diagnostic mammogram at 6 months, then every 6–12 months for 2–3 years.Case 24 from Table 1:Let us consider the patient case 24 from Table 1, where a patient at age 55 years old has a BMI index of 27. She is a regular moderate consumer of alcohol and is involved in routine moderate physical work outs. According to the established studies, since this particular individual has no strong breast cancer risk factors and the life style choices like breast feeding, physical exercise are good enough, her risk level is considered as Low by the experts. Also the results obtained for this patient case from the proposed L1-FCM conform that her risk level is also Low. Yet, from the mammographic features, this individual is classified as Benign by the proposed L2-FCM. Following the second rule, if L1-FCM prediction is Low and if L2-FCM grading is Benign, the integrated model grades the person's cancer risk as Average Risk, the proposed integrated risk assessment model recommends the patient to be subjected to Annual Screening Mammogram and Annual clinical breast examination.In short, the proposed integrated model is quiet comprehensive in incorporating the status of the current breast parenchyma of the given woman as well as her hidden and impending risk of developing a malignant breast disease. To date, there is no other single model that is comprehensive enough in covering family history, life style factors and imaging features derived from the screening mammograms. Besides, the standard risk assessment models have the following limitations: (i) different models cover different risk factors for risk assessment, (ii) provide a quantitative risk score that has no standard scale and thus convey different notions of interpretations to different people and (iii) breast cancer risk scores assigned to a woman by these models vary considerably. For example, the BCRAT model tends to assign lower risks than the IBIS model to women with a strong family history of breast cancer [45]. Hence, oncologists and genetic counselors would be well served by a single model that avoids having to choose among several models on the basis of patient characteristics and the results of their initial screening study. The proposed cognitive mapping based decision support system not only integrates the outcomes of demographic risk assessment and mammographic screening study but could also be used to help clinical oncologists to address several “what-if” questions to analyze the effect of changes in various risk factors on the final risk grading.The drawback of the study pertains to the interpretation of the combined output of the two FCMs. There are no standard guidelines available to precisely calculate the 5 year and 10 year BC risk of women. The present study utilized the clinical experience of the domain experts (following also the medical guidelines) to suggest the risk level in terms of time scale. This extrapolative ability of the experts is however subjective, and hence the lack of objectivity in the final interpretations is one of the minor drawbacks of the present work. Nevertheless, this is an innate difficulty experienced in designing most of the medical expert systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
