@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated anterior segment OCT image analysis for Angle Closure Glaucoma mechanisms classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new method for automated classification of various mechanisms of angle closure disease.Compound image transform features are directly extracted from the raw AS-OCT images without any segmentation.Anterior chamber area measurement is not required in this method.Selected morphological features are used to achieve better classification result.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Angle closure glaucoma,Compound image transforms,Feature selection,Segmentation-free method,Machine learning classifier,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectivesAngle closure glaucoma (ACG) is an eye disease prevalent throughout the world. ACG is caused by four major mechanisms: exaggerated lens vault, pupil block, thick peripheral iris roll, and plateau iris. Identifying the specific mechanism in a given patient is important because each mechanism requires a specific medication and treatment regimen. Traditional methods of classifying these four mechanisms are based on clinically important parameters measured from anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) images, which rely on accurate segmentation of the AS-OCT image and identification of the scleral spur in the segmented AS-OCT images by clinicians.MethodsIn this work, a fully automated method of classifying different ACG mechanisms based on AS-OCT images is proposed. Since the manual diagnosis mainly based on the morphology of each mechanism, in this study, a complete set of morphological features is extracted directly from raw AS-OCT images using compound image transforms, from which a small set of informative features with minimum redundancy are selected and fed into a Naïve Bayes Classifier (NBC).ResultsWe achieved an overall accuracy of 89.2% and 85.12% with a leave-one-out cross-validation and 10-fold cross-validation method, respectively. This study proposes a fully automated way for the classification of different ACG mechanisms, which is without intervention of doctors and less subjective when compared to the existing methods.ConclusionsWe directly extracted the compound image transformed features from the raw AS-OCT images without any segmentation and parameter measurement. Our method provides a completely automated and efficient way for the classification of different ACG mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glaucoma is a kind of optic neuropathy disorder which makes a gradual loss of eye vision due to the damages of retinal cells and retinal nerve fiber layer in the eye [1]. It is mainly associated with increased intraocular pressure (IOP) of fluid inside the eye [2]. If it is left untreated, the damaged optic nerves will not be recovered, leading to eventual blindness; however, reducing IOP may slow disease progression. It is the second major cause of visual impairment and blindness worldwide. Globally, the number of glaucoma patients is estimated as 60.5 millions in 2010, which may increase to almost 80 millions by 2020 [3]. The timing of interference is a key element in glaucoma treatment and it is usually asymptomatic in its early stage; so early diagnosis is required to slow down the disease progression toward complete vision loss.There are mainly three types of glaucoma, namely, angle closure glaucoma (ACG), open angle glaucoma and developmental glaucoma. ACG is a specific type of glaucoma in which a sudden rise in IOP is experienced, usually as a result of poor drainage due to the eye, producing more aqueous humor than it can remove, hence causing a build-up of fluids [4]. ACG is more prevalent than the other two types. An eye that is susceptible to ACG usually has noticeable features which can be identified upon visual examination [5]. Anterior chamber angle (ACA) assessment is mainly used for the detection of ACG, and it can be visualized and quantified by anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) imaging technique [6,7].It has been observed that ACG could be the result of one or more mechanisms in the anterior segment of the eye, such as exaggerated lens vault (L), pupil block (PB), thick peripheral iris roll (PIR), and plateau iris (PL) [6]. Laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI) is performed at an early and appropriate time for the eyes with anatomically narrow angles. Ophthalmologists and clinicians have found that the LPI is not always suitable for treating ACG patients with different mechanisms, and many patients continue to have appositional angle closure after treatment using LPI [7]. The optimal treatments for ACG patients with different mechanisms should be different. Therefore, it is important to classify these four mechanisms of ACG effectively, in order to not only provide different treatments for patients with different mechanisms, but also help the doctors tailor the best treatment for each mechanism accordingly.It has been demonstrated that these four mechanisms of ACG have different patterns of angle configurations with different anterior chamber (AC) parameters [7]. AS-OCT provides excellent repeatability and reproducibility for imaging the anterior segment of eyes. AS-OCT was used to measure the AC parameters in the above mentioned four different mechanisms of ACG [6]. Wirawan et al. used some key parameters which were provided by customized software measured from the segmented AS-OCT images such as scleral spur-to-scleral spur distance, anterior chamber depth, anterior chamber angle and area [8]. Some reliable selected features were fed into Adaboost classifier and it was found to be clinically important to distinguish the four mechanisms of ACG [8]. In another study [9], the selected features are cross examined with four types of ACG mechanisms. In [10], various supervised and unsupervised features selection methods are used to find the reliable features and achieve the classification of different ACG mechanisms. However, the measurement of AC parameters relies on the accurate identification of the scleral spur in the segmented AS-OCT images by the clinicians, which is subjective and may not be reliable, introducing additional noise to the features. In [11], a new ensemble learning method based on error-correcting output code (ECOC) is proposed with application to classification of four ACG mechanisms and it is shown as an effective approach for multiclass classification. The existing methods for the classification of different ACG mechanisms are still not fully automated, requiring the help of the clinicians in feature extraction.In this paper, our study is motivated by providing a fully automated expert system for the classification of different ACG mechanisms. We attempt to directly extract the features from the raw AS-OCT images without segmentation and parameter measurement. It is less subjective without the intervention of doctors. Specifically, in the proposed method, compound transform [12] is applied to the raw AS-OCT images to extract around three thousand different morphological features, from which a small set of discriminative features is selected for classification.In the rest of this paper, Section 2 reviews related literature on general glaucoma diagnosis methods. The proposed method is presented in Section 3, followed by experimental results in Section 4. The conclusion is made with future works highlighted in the last section.During the past one decade, several studies have investigated the usefulness of the computer-based expert support systems for the early detection of glaucoma using different imaging modalities as listed in the literature [13–18]. From the fundus images, using image processing techniques, the optic disk and blood vessels were extracted which could provide useful information to diagnose glaucoma. Higher order spectra features and textural features of fundus images combined with a random-forest classifier resulted with an accuracy of more than 91% for correctly identifying the glaucoma images [13]. An algorithm based on neural network classifier using the internal morphological features from the fundus images [14] used for glaucoma diagnosis. Another study [15] explored the ability of the combination of the imaging methods for distinguishing the normal eyes from the glaucoma defect using optic nerve head stereo photographs, scanning laser polarimetry, confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy and optical coherence tomography (OCT) images.The optical nerve head (ONH) topography images were explored by orthogonal decomposition method for the detection of glaucoma in [16]. The super pixel information from three-dimensional OCT images was used in the boosting algorithm based machine classifier to improve early detection of glaucoma [17]. An expert support system for glaucoma using three-dimensional ONH features, stereometric ONH parameters, disc and cup margin features were measured and used in [18]. Aforementioned works have attempted to distinguish the glaucoma and non-glaucoma cases using various image sources, rather than classifying any subtypes of glaucoma. AS-OCT images are most convenient in diagnosis for ACG, since they provide useful information for clinicians to observe a cross sectional view of the anterior chamber and the inside angle structures of the eye. Classifying various mechanisms of ACG using reliable features from the measured parameters of AS-OCT images was studied through machine learning classifiers with improved accuracy in [8–11].There were a number of tools available for glaucoma with different diagnostic approaches. However, the sensitivity and specificity of any single diagnostic test are not adequate to be considered as the golden standard. Also, to the best of our knowledge, no works have been done previously for ACG mechanism classification using textural features without prior segmentation. Hence, in this research work, we make an attempt to classify the different ACG mechanisms just based on AS-OCT images in a fully automated process. Features based on the compound hierarchy of algorithms representing morphology (CHARM) algorithm are extracted, followed by a multivariate classifier for classification.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Angle-closure glaucoma, which is a specific type of glaucoma, has been observed to be the result of one or more mechanisms in the anterior segment of the eye. Traditional methods for classification of the different mechanisms are based on calculation of the key parameters, such as the angle opening distance (AOD), trabecular-iris space area (TISA) and angle recess area (ARA) from the segmented AS-OCT images with the help of doctors, which are not fully automated. Since the manual diagnosis mainly based on the morphology of each mechanism, in this study, we directly extract multiple morphological features using compound transform and image statistics, from which a small set of features is selected by using mRMR, and then used for classification. Our method provides a completely automated and efficient way for the classification of different ACG mechanisms. Segmentation of anterior chamber area and its measurement is not required in this method. Experimental results show that our method achieves 89.20% classification accuracy.The limitation of this method is that the all features extracted from the raw AS-OCT images are based on compound image transformed features and its supervised learned feature selection method. Practically, manual labeling of various mechanism in huge ACG dataset are time consuming tasks for medical practitioners. In future work, unsupervised learning method and transfer learning method will be explored to conquer this problem. The possibility that a mechanism occurs in conjunction with other mechanisms could also be studied e.g. an iris roll mechanism occurring with a lens mechanism. Classifying all samples under only one class label, when some of these samples may have the features of two or more mechanisms, may adversely affect the performance of feature selection and classification; this can be investigated as well.None declared.