@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development of a web-based liver cancer prediction model for type II diabetes patients by using an artificial neural network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Developed a liver cancer prediction model for type II diabetic patients.Found the risk factors of liver cancer for type II diabetic patients.Built a web-based application for liver cancer prediction for diabetic patient.Provided methods and model facilitating clinicians to remind those diabetic patients prevent liver cancer as early as possible.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artificial neural network,Prediction model,Health data analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundDiabetes mellitus is associated with an increased risk of liver cancer, and these two diseases are among the most common and important causes of morbidity and mortality in Taiwan.PurposeTo use data mining techniques to develop a model for predicting the development of liver cancer within 6 years of diagnosis with type II diabetes.MethodsData were obtained from the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan, which covers approximately 22 million people. In this study, we selected patients who were newly diagnosed with type II diabetes during the 2000–2003 periods, with no prior cancer diagnosis. We then used encrypted personal ID to perform data linkage with the cancer registry database to identify whether these patients were diagnosed with liver cancer. Finally, we identified 2060 cases and assigned them to a case group (patients diagnosed with liver cancer after diabetes) and a control group (patients with diabetes but no liver cancer). The risk factors were identified from the literature review and physicians’ suggestion, then, chi-square test was conducted on each independent variable (or potential risk factor) for a comparison between patients with liver cancer and those without, those found to be significant were selected as the factors. We subsequently performed data training and testing to construct artificial neural network (ANN) and logistic regression (LR) prediction models. The dataset was randomly divided into 2 groups: a training group and a test group. The training group consisted of 1442 cases (70% of the entire dataset), and the prediction model was developed on the basis of the training group. The remaining 30% (618 cases) were assigned to the test group for model validation.ResultsThe following 10 variables were used to develop the ANN and LR models: sex, age, alcoholic cirrhosis, nonalcoholic cirrhosis, alcoholic hepatitis, viral hepatitis, other types of chronic hepatitis, alcoholic fatty liver disease, other types of fatty liver disease, and hyperlipidemia. The performance of the ANN was superior to that of LR, according to the sensitivity (0.757), specificity (0.755), and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (0.873). After developing the optimal prediction model, we base on this model to construct a web-based application system for liver cancer prediction, which can provide support to physicians during consults with diabetes patients.ConclusionIn the original dataset (n=2060), 33% of diabetes patients were diagnosed with liver cancer (n=515). After using 70% of the original data to training the model and other 30% for testing, the sensitivity and specificity of our model were 0.757 and 0.755, respectively; this means that 75.7% of diabetes patients can be predicted correctly to receive a future liver cancer diagnosis, and 75.5% can be predicted correctly to not be diagnosed with liver cancer. These results reveal that this model can be used as effective predictors of liver cancer for diabetes patients, after discussion with physicians; they also agreed that model can assist physicians to advise potential liver cancer patients and also helpful to decrease the future cost incurred upon cancer treatment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Liver cancer is the sixth most common type of cancer worldwide and is the third leading cause of cancer-related mortality [1,2]. In Taiwan, approximately 7000 patients die each year from liver cancer. The main reasons are alcohol abuse [3] and a high prevalence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C, which progress to chronic cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma [4]. One study found that nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is common in diabetes patients [5], and several liver-related diseases including alcoholic fatty liver disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and cirrhosis may also increase the risk of liver cancer development [6–8].Although these risk factors have been investigated adequately, increasingly more papers are reporting positive and negative associations between diabetes and cancer. In addition, pathogenic mechanisms underlying the relationship between diabetes and cancer were elucidated [9]. Certain US studies have indicated that diabetes patients are at a higher risk of cancer development compared with those without diabetes [10–12]. In diabetes patients, because the liver and pancreas are exposed to high concentrations of insulin, the probability of cancer may increase [13].The primary objective of this study was to employ data mining algorithms to devise a prediction model for developing liver cancer in type II diabetes mellitus patients. Because diabetes patients are required to visit physicians regularly, providing physicians with decisional support for early detection regarding the probability of cancer is crucial for patients with diabetes.On the basis of the prediction model, we developed a web-based application to enable physicians to detect the probability of liver cancer in future 6-year period.Data were obtained from the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan, it was established by the National Health Research Institutes in collaboration with the National Health Insurance (the former Bureau of National Health Insurance, BNHI). The NHIRD encompasses all medical claims data of approximately 23.72 million people, comprising over 99% of the Taiwan population [14]. The NHIRD contains encrypted secondary data, which have been released to the public for research purposes. Institutional review board approval was waived for this study. Patient confidentiality in the dataset was protected according to the regulations of the Bureau of National Health Insurance.This study used the Longitudinal Health Insurance Database 2010, which comprises the health insurance data of 2 million people from the 2000–2009 period; this database was compiled by selecting the identification data of 2 million people from the Registry for Beneficiaries database in 2010, and these identification data were subsequently used for extracting health insurance data (including data from outpatient clinics as well as admission records) for the 2000–2009 period.We selected patients newly diagnosed with type II diabetes (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD9) codes 250.0–250.9) from 2000 to 2003 who did not have a history of cancer (n=65,871). Afterward, we used encrypted personal identification data to perform data linkage with the cancer registry database in order to identify whether the patients had been diagnosed with liver cancer (ICD-O-3=C22.0 and C22.1) between 2001 and 2009.As shown in Fig. 1, we identified 515 diabetes patients who developed liver cancer within 6 years after diabetes diagnosis. Certain studies [15–17] have reported that the ratio of the experimental group to the control group should not be more than 1:3; using other ratios may lead to a biased comparison. However, these studies have also recommended not using a 1:1 ratio, because it results in problems during analysis. Therefore, we used a 1:3 ratio for the experimental and control (no cancer) groups in this study.We also explored all of the comorbidities of each patient. We considered alcoholic cirrhosis (ICD9 codes 571.2 and 571.3), other types of cirrhosis (ICD9 codes 571.5 and 571.6), alcoholic hepatitis (ICD9 code 571.1), viral hepatitis (ICD9 code 0.70), other types of chronic hepatitis (ICD9 codes 571.4, 571.8, and 571.9), alcoholic fatty liver disease (ICD9 code 571.0), other types of fatty liver disease (ICD9 code 571.8), and hyperlipidemia (ICD9 code 272) as risk factors that potentially contribute to the development of liver cancer.LR and the ANN are two of the most frequently used prediction models in clinical risk prediction. Neural networks are computer-based, self-adaptive models used in the medical sciences for analyzing complex nonlinear relationships and provide a novel alternative to LR models [18], which are the most commonly used tools for developing predictive models for dichotomous outcomes in medical research [19]. The ANN is a powerful tool aiding physicians in analysis, modeling, and understanding complex clinical data across a broad range of medical applications [20]; it has been successfully applied to various areas in the medical sciences including diagnostic systems, biochemical analysis, image analysis, and drug development [21]. The advantages of the ANN include the following: (1) less formal statistical training; (2) an ability to implicitly detecting complex nonlinear relationships between dependent and independent variables; and (3) an ability to detect all possible interactions among predictor variables, and the availability of multiple training algorithms [19]. The ANN uses data for training, testing, and finally, generating a prediction model. ANN discriminant analysis (DA) is an effective tool, is preferred over LR for complex nonlinear problems, and has a higher predictive accuracy [22,23].The LR model was first developed by Truett et al. (1967). In statistical analyses, LR has emerged as a major tool for predicting outcomes on the basis of the specific features of individual cases [24]. It is a statistical modeling technique that can be applied for estimating the simultaneous effects of a set of predictors (e.g., gestational age and birth weight) on the risk of a certain outcome variable (e.g., neonatal death) [25]. LR can be categorized as binomial or multinomial. Binomial or binary LR is used for conditions under which an observed outcome for a dependent variable can have only two possible outcomes (e.g., dead or alive). By contrast, multinomial LR models are used with three or more outcomes (e.g., disease A versus disease B versus disease C) [26].This study also considered other predictive algorithms including the decision tree and support vector machine (SVM). However, we found only few articles have using the decision tree and SVM as prediction models for cancer. Only seven studies can be found in PubMed that have focused on liver cancer prediction models have reported total accuracy rates of between 65% and 78%, which are inadequate.We used STATISTICA (version 10) to establish and evaluate both the LR and ANN models for predicting liver cancer risk in diabetes patients. The factors were determined sequentially by performing the chi-square, and those found to be significant were selected as the predictors. This study proposed three types of submodels. Different models were used for different clinical purposes. However, certain factors that have not been described in past studies were found to be significant in our dataset and were thus considered in our models. Factors suggested by physicians were also included to test the nonlinear characteristics of the ANN model. As listed in Table 1, all variables were included in Submodel 1. The purpose of Submodels 2 and 3 was to investigate the effectiveness of alcoholic behaviors in the selected population by using alcoholism-related factors. Several studies have reported that the ratio of alcoholic to nonalcoholic hepatitis patients is approximately 7 to 3. Both types of hepatitis may cause chronic liver inflammation and progress to liver cancer. Therefore, in our study, Submodel 2 included only alcoholism-related variables in order to elucidate the role of alcohol-related risk factors in the development of liver cancer. By contrast, in Submodel 3, we excluded alcoholism-related risk factors to determine the power of using only non-alcoholism-related factors.The dataset was randomly categorized into two groups (i.e., a training group and a test group); the training group consisted of 1442 cases (70% of the entire dataset). The prediction model was developed on the basis of the training group. The remaining 30% of cases (618 patients) were assigned as the test group for model validation. Model training was performed numerous times. The 70/30 percentage rule was applied on the basis of several studies such as those by Antonio Mucherino [27] and CogNova Technologies [28], they have indicated that when a sample is generally sufficiently large, 70% of the data are used as the training set for developing ANN models, and the remaining data can be used for validation. Conversely, if the sample is small, then 90% of the dataset should be used for training the model, and 10-fold validation should be used. The data sample in the present study was large (n=2060), and thus, we followed the 70/30 rule for model development and testing.The ANN has three layers: input, hidden, and output layers. The multilayer perceptron network is an emerging tool for designing special classes of layered feed-forward networks [21].We also tested the SVM and decision tree on our data in this study and employed WEKA to devise these two models. The decision tree included sex, alcoholic cirrhosis, cirrhosis, viral hepatitis, chronic hepatitis, alcoholic fatty liver disease, hyperlipidemia, and age as parameters, and the J48 algorithm was used to construct the model. By contrast, to devise the SVM, we used the sequential minimal optimization algorithm, and included as factors sex, alcoholic cirrhosis, cirrhosis, viral hepatitis, chronic hepatitis, alcoholic fatty liver disease, and other types of fatty liver disease, hyperlipidemia, and age.The discriminatory power of the generated models was analyzed using the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC). It was used to assess the ability of the model in identifying patients susceptible to liver cancer. We also trained and tested the models by performing 10-fold cross-validation. The model with the highest accuracy was finally selected.On the basis of the ANN model, we constructed a web-based application for identifying type II diabetes patients at risk of liver cancer development. This system was constructed on an Apache Server and a client–server platform. After the prediction model was trained and tested, we chose the optimal model (Submodel 1). Afterward, we saved the arithmetic formula of the ANN model as a C++ function, which can be embedded into a PHP program and used to construct a web-based application system. The system architecture is shown in Fig. 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
