@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design of novel non-contact multimedia controller for disability by using visual stimulus

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A noncontact multimedia controller is proposed to operate via visual stimuli.A wearable EEG acquisition device is developed to monitor EEG in daily life.The proposed system can effectively reduce long-term care burden.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-contact,Multimedia controller,Visual stimulus,Electroencephalogram,Wearable and wireless EEG acquisition device,Disabled patients,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The design of a novel non-contact multimedia controller is proposed in this study. Nowadays, multimedia controllers are generally used by patients and nursing assistants in the hospital. Conventional multimedia controllers usually involve in manual operation or other physical movements. However, it is more difficult for the disabled patients to operate the conventional multimedia controller by themselves; they might totally depend on others. Different from other multimedia controllers, the proposed system provides a novel concept of controlling multimedia via visual stimuli, without manual operation. The disabled patients can easily operate the proposed multimedia system by focusing on the control icons of a visual stimulus device, where a commercial tablet is used as the visual stimulus device. Moreover, a wearable and wireless electroencephalogram (EEG) acquisition device is also designed and implemented to easily monitor the user's EEG signals in daily life. Finally, the proposed system has been validated. The experimental result shows that the proposed system can effectively measure and extract the EEG feature related to visual stimuli, and its information transfer rate is also good. Therefore, the proposed non-contact multimedia controller exactly provides a good prototype of novel multimedia controlling scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the dramatic development of emerging electronics and digital media publishers, multimedia has exerted a great influence on our daily life. The revolution of multimedia also brings people new approaches to communication, commerce, education, and entertainment [1]. With the development of new multimedia presentation, novel and refreshing multimedia controllers and interaction forms have entailed huge shifts to human life.A conventional multimedia control mechanism usually involves in manual operation, such as artificial control panels manipulated directly by hands. However, it is inconvenient for the disabled patients to operate the conventional multimedia systems by themselves. Recently, with the noteworthy improvement in studies and techniques related to multimedia control, many more natural and convenient user interfaces, such as voice control, hand gesture recognition and eye tracking, have been proposed. In 1998, Bolcioni et al. proposed a novel voice-controlled video decoding system by using an on-chip isolated word speech recognizer [2] for implementing command-oriented and menu-based applications. However, the voice-recognition based media controllers were easily affected by noise interference, and required sample training and back-end database. Gupta et al. proposed a gesture-based interaction and communication scheme using automated classification of hand gesture contours in 2001 [3]. By using nonlinear alignment, they achieved relatively high accuracy in hand gesture classification samples. However, the common drawback of these vision-based hand gesture recognition schemes was that they were easily affected by environmental conditions, such as illumination conditions and misidentified normal hand movements. Recently, eye tracking technique was also applied to the design of multimedia controllers. In 2012, Corcoran et al. proposed a real-time eye-gaze tracking scheme for the applications to game design and consumer electronics systems [4]. Instead of using wearable sensors or enhanced infrared (IR) illumination, they only used video feed from a low-resolution user-facing camera. These eye tracking-based multimedia control systems required eye-gaze or eyeball movements to perform active control commands. However, these eye tracking-based control systems were difficult to discriminate when the user wanted or did not want to perform a control command. Unintentional eyes movements and illumination conditions might cause wrong judgment on the active control commands.Brain–computer interface (BCI) is a distinctive human–computer interface (HCI), which allows the subject performing control commands with active or passive mental commands without muscles and any physical movements [5]. By using this property of BCI techniques, a neoteric non-contact multimedia controller is proposed in this study. By focusing on the control icons of the visual stimulus device, the user can easily operate this multimedia controller without manual operation. In this study, a commercial tablet is successfully used as the visual stimulus device for the first time. This also effectively improves the convenience and practicability of other system integration applications. Moreover, a wearable and wireless electroencephalogram (EEG) acquisition device is also designed to monitor real-time EEG signals in daily life. Different from other BCI systems which require bulky EEG machines and additional processing units, the advantages of light weight, small volume, and easy setup of the proposed wearable and wireless EEG acquisition device also improves the practicability of applications in daily life.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a novel non-contact multimedia controller is proposed. Based on the technique of brain–computer interface, the proposed system can be used for controlling multimedia without manual operation directly. Here, a tablet is first used as the visual stimulus device, and a specific coding scheme is proposed to provide the property of asynchronous operation in order to improve the practicability of the proposed system. Moreover, a wearable and wireless EEG acquisition device is also developed in this study. By the advantages of light weight, small volume, and easy setup of the proposed EEG sensor, the proposed system can be easily set up and used in daily life. The whole system performance of the proposed non-contact multimedia controller has been tested and validated, and its information transfer rate is good (2.25bits/trial). The properties of non-contact operation and easy setup and use of the proposed non-contact multimedia controller provide a good prototype for novel multimedia controllers, and from Table 3 we knew that patients felt happy because they could operate the proposed system by themselves. Therefore, the proposed system could effectively reduce the long-term care burden of the patients’ families and nursing assistants.The authors declare no conflict of interest.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2015.08.010.The following are the supplementary data to this article: