@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact damage and residual strength predictions of 2D woven SiC/SiC composites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Specialized progressive damage model for fiber-toughening of CMC was developed.ABAQUS Explicit numerically predicted impact damage and residual strength of CMC.Good agreement between FEA predictions and test results was found.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Impact damage,SiC/SiC,Residual bending strength,Progressive damage,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lightweight, Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMC) are very attractive alternatives to superalloys for applications in hot turbine sections. However, debris, such as dirt, ice and metallic particles may be ingested by aero-engines and impact from them may cause serious damage and/or degradation to CMC components of the engines. It is important to develop predictive models and computational tools that would address this problem. The objective of this paper is to develop a progressive damage model for Ceramic Matrix Composite and implement it into ABAQUS Explicit to numerically predict impact damage and residual strength of a CMC component. To achieve this objective, experimental data on 2D woven SiC/SiC beams subjected to high velocity impact and subsequent four-point-bending tests were used. Modified Hashin–Rotem criteria were assumed for damage initiation and specialized cohesive traction-separation laws were developed to address the fiber toughening mechanism experienced by the CMC in tension and shear modes. Impact damage and four-point-bending of the SiC/SiC specimens were simulated in ABAQUS Explicit, and relatively good agreement was found between FEA predictions and test results, including the impact zone shape and size, as well as the load-deflection response and residual bending strength from the four-point-bending tests.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ceramic Matrix Composite (CMC) consists of ceramic fibers embedded in a ceramic matrix. Compared to pure ceramic materials such as Silicon Carbide, Alumina and Silicon Nitride, CMCs have much higher fracture toughness so that they become attractive alternatives to superalloys in hot turbine applications. Not only can the CMC resist higher temperatures, but it is more lightweight than a superalloy. However, there are serious concerns to the damage resistance and tolerance of a CMC from impacting debris, such as dirt, ice and metallic particles ingested by aero-engines. A means of using finite element analysis (FEA) to quantify damage associated with the so-called Foreign Object Damage (FOD) will help engineers to better design CMC components in aero-engines. Furthermore, knowledge of the damage extent and material degradation of the CMC provide valuable information on the remaining life of a CMC component, which is critical for the aerospace industry. The objective of this paper is to use FEA to simulate impact damage and predict the residual flexural strength after impact of a SiC/SiC composite beam.The concept of Cohesive Zone Model (CZM) is a relatively new method to describe crack growth, and some research has been done to simulate the fracture of CMC by using the CZM. Chandra et al. [1] proposed a specific form of traction-separation equations in a CZM during fracture of a brittle composite material. Walter et al. [2] used cohesive elements to simulate crack propagation in matrix, matrix-fiber interface and fibers in unidirectional fiber-reinforced ceramic matrix composites. Brost et al. [3] applied a CZM to simulate the entire crack initiation, growth and breaking of brittle material under dynamic loading. They also investigated the problem of mesh-dependency and provided a proper mesh representation for the CZM. However, the cohesive zone models used in the above-mentioned studies are all based on cohesive elements or cohesive interfaces, which required a pre-defined crack path during the FEA simulation. In this paper, specialized CZMs are developed and embedded in progressive damage criteria to predict the deformation and fracture behavior of a 2D woven SiC/SiC material. Because the CZM is embedded in the material properties and constitutive equations of the SiC/SiC, it can be used to predict crack initiation and growth regardless of the geometry of the components. It does not require a pre-defined crack path. The CZMs for a 2D woven SiC/SiC material is used to numerically simulate experiments by Choi [4], who conducted high velocity impact and subsequent four-point-bending tests on plain weave, 5 harness satin woven SiC/SiC beams specimens.Unlike Polymer Matrix Composites (PMCs), weak interfaces between the fiber and matrix of the CMC allow them to achieve their high toughness from a fiber-bridging mechanism [5,6]. Such fiber-toughening is only apparent when the CMC is in tension and/or shear, and results in non-linear, strain-hardening response after damage initiates and before material instability or the load drop. A three-dimensional progressive damage approach is taken in order to address damage in the through-thickness direction of the CMC. Material deformation, damage initiation and damage evolution for the SiC/SiC are developed and programmed into ABAQUS user-defined material subroutine (VUMAT). The ABAQUS software has a built-in progressive damage model for composite materials [7], but it is two-dimensional and limited to PMCs, which do not undergo the same fiber-toughening mechanism of a CMC.Recently three-dimensional progressive damage models for FEA predictions of projectile impact damage of PMCs have been proposed [8,9]. However, three-dimensional progressive damage models are lacking for CMCs. Three-dimensional progressive damage criteria are needed to capture through-thickness damage, including cratering, delamination and spalling of a CMC structure. While such local damage may not cause total failure, it weakens or degrades a CMC component. Furthermore, degraded material properties are stored as material state variables in the VUMAT subroutine. The proposed user-material subroutine should therefore be able to address residual strength of the CMC after impact. The following section describes impact and residual bend tests conducted by Choi [4]. A constitutive or progressive damage model that can be used to describe the impact damage is then proposed and implemented in a user-defined material subroutine. The user-subroutine is used in ABAQUS Explicit to numerically simulate high velocity impact damage of a SiC/SiC beam with a steel ball followed by four-point-bending test of the impacted beam to determine the beam׳s residual bending stiffness and strength after impact.In Ref. [4], CMC beams were made from five harness-satin weave SiC preforms, and then manufactured with BN-based interface and SiC matrix by chemical vapor infiltration (CVI). The composite was 0/90°, 8 ply-stacked, and composed of about 34vol% SiC fibers, 5vol% BN interface coating, 58vol% SiC matrix and about 2–3% porosity. Panels were cut into beam specimens with 8mm in width, 45mm in length and 2.2mm in thickness. Material axes and dimensions of the 2D woven SiC/SiC composite are shown inFig. 1.Foreign Objective Damage (FOD) test was conducted with a steel ball projectile. The hardened (HRC>60) chrome steel ball had a diameter of 1.59mm. The target or beam specimen was either partially or fully supported as shown inFig. 2(a) and (b), respectively. Each specimen was aligned such that the projectile impacted at the center of the beam with a normal incidence angle. Impact damage on the target specimens was then examined by optical and scanning electron microscopy after the impact test. Results from these impact tests will be presented and compared to FEA predictions in later section.After the impact tests, four-point-bending tests were performed on the damaged beams to evaluate their residual stiffness and strength. The setup of the four-point-bending test is shown inFig. 3. Displacement loading was applied evenly in the middle of beam, while force was measured by load cells at the ends of beam. Deflections were measured at center of beam on the opposite side of the impact crater with a linear variable displacement transformer (LVDT).The maximum bending stressσat the back side of the beam center is given by(1)σ=3FL4bd2where F is total loading force, b=8mm is the width of the beam, d=2.2mm is the thickness of the beam,L=40mmis length between pin supports, andLi=L2=20mmis the length between displacement loading, as defined in Fig. 3. The residual flexural strength is calculated from Eq. (1) at the load drop when the CMC beam can no longer sustain increasing force with increasing displacement. Results from the four-point-bending test will be also presented and compared to FEA predictions in a later section.A general stress–strain curve of the CMC is characterized by three events as shown inFig. 4: (1) linear elastic behavior before damage OA, (2) damage initiation at A, and (3) nonlinear elastic behavior after damage ABC. The load drop after Point B may occur earlier to coincide with Point A if ideal brittle behavior is to occur after damage initiation. As mentioned earlier, CMCs experience fiber-toughening when they are loaded in-plane tension and/or shear. This is represented as nonlinear strain-hardening response before the load drop (AB). The strain-hardening event does not occur in compression or out-of-plane shear because CMCs are ideally linear elastic and brittle in these modes. The following sections describe specific constitutive equations for 2D woven SiC/SiC in Regions OA, AB and BC of Fig. 4.The 2D woven SiC/SiC composite behaves as an orthotropic, linear elastic material in which the material properties vary according to the fiber orientations. The constitutive behavior before damage, OA in Fig. 4, is described as(2){σ11σ22σ33σ12σ23σ13}=[C11C12C13000C21C22C23000C31C32C330000002G120000002G230000002G13]{ε12ε22ε33ε12ε23ε13}whereCijis given byC11=E1(1−ν23ν32)ΨC22=E2(1−ν13ν31)ΨC33=E3(1−ν12ν21)ΨC12=C21=E1(ν21−ν31ν23)Ψ=E2(ν12−ν13ν32)ΨC13=C31=E1(ν31−ν21ν32)Ψ=E3(ν13−ν12ν23)ΨC23=C32=E2(ν32−ν12ν31)Ψ=E3(ν23−ν21ν13)ΨandΨ=11−ν12ν21−ν23ν32−ν31ν13−2ν21ν32ν13.For woven fibers that are balanced in X–Y Plane, the material properties in 1- and 2-directions are the same and different from properties in 3-direction. In other words,E1=E2,υ13=υ23andG13=G23.Damage initiation is based on Modified Hashin–Rotem criteria [10] adapted for textile composites. The Modified Hashin–Rotem criteria are a set of Mode-Dependent failure criteria, each operating independently of each other.Table 1 describes all eight modes included in the Modified Hashin–Rotem failure criteria. Because the CMC in this paper is extremely brittle and has high resistance in compression, a maximum stress failure criterion is used instead of the original Modified Hashin–Rotem criterion for pure compression mode in Plane-3.The subscript “t” denotes “tension mode”, “c” denotes “compression mode”, “y” denotes “yield”, “u” denotes “ultimate tensile failure”, and “ij” means the “j-direction on Plane-i”, where i,j=1,2,3 directions are given in Fig. 1. In the in-plane tension and shear modes, the damage initiation criterion is applied twice. Damage initiation of the CMC in these modes is first defined by the yield point. A second damage initiation point occurs at the peak load or right before the load drop, and it is associated with the ultimate tensile strength. These definitions of yield and ultimate strength of the CMC is analogous to the elastic–plastic response of a metal.The expression for equivalent strain in Table 1 is derived from the corresponding damage initiation criterion. The symbol “〈〉” in Table 1 represents the Macaulay function, which is defined as(3)〈a〉={a,ifa≥00,ifa<0The equivalent stress ensures that strain energy from equivalent stress and strain are equal to the strain energy from individual stress and strain components on a particular failure plane. Equivalent stress and strain allows one to consider an equivalent one-dimensional stress–strain or traction-separation law for each failure mode of the CMC.The constitutive equations after damage, ABC shown in Fig. 4, are defined by(4){σ11σ22σ33σ12σ23σ13}=[C11dC12dC13d000C21dC22dC23d000C31dC32dC33d0000002G12d0000002G13d0000002G23d]{ε11ε22ε33ε12ε23ε13}The subscript “d” indicates the stiffness matrix component is degraded. Eq. (4) is the damage form of the corresponding linear elastic, orthotropic material constitutive equations. Degraded stiffness Cijdand Gijddepend on damage functions, which will be explained later.Because there are eight failure modes in the Modified Hashin–Rotem criteria, one needs to define eight different damage functions to quantify damage contribution from each failure mode. The notation for modal damage functions and their associated failure modes is listed inTable 2. The subscript “t” denotes “tension mode”, “c” denotes “compression mode” and “s” denotes “shear mode”. Specific procedures of finding dijterms will be given in the following section.A resultant damage function Di(i=1, 2, 3) is introduced to indicate how much damage accumulated on Plane-i. If Di=1, the material is totally damaged and loses all stiffness or ability to resist load on Plane-i. If Di=0, the material has no damage on Plane-i. During degradation (ABC in Fig. 4), Diis between 0 and 1. The resultant Diis a function of each independent damage function on Plane-i. For example, D1 is the resultant damage on Plane-1, and it is therefore a function of d11t, d11cand d1s. The following functions for Diare assumed:(5)D1=1−(1−d11t)(1−d11c)(1−d1s)(6)D2=1−(1−d22t)(1−d22c)(1−d2s)(7)D3=1−(1−d33t)(1−d33c)The above multiplicative form ensures that failure in each mode can be treated independently. In this case, Diwill be one if any one of the related damage function is one.The components of the damage stiffness matrix in Eq. (4) are now expressed in terms of Diby(8)C11d=(1−D1)C11(9)C22d=(1−D2)C22(10)C33d=(1−D3)C33(11)C23d=(1−D2)(1−D3)C23(12)C13d=(1−D1)(1−D3)C13(13)G23d=(1−D2)(1−D3)G23(14)G13d=(1−D1)(1−D3)G13(15)C12d=(1−d11t)(1−d11c)(1−d22t)(1−d22c)(1−(d1s+d2s)/2)C12(16)G12d=(1−d11t)(1−d11c)(1−d22t)(1−d22c)(1−(d1s+d2s)/2)G12In each of the above equation, a specific component Cijdor Gijdis zero if Di=1 on Plane-i, which is the plane associated with the particular stiffness component. In contrast, a stiffness component has no damage if Di=0. Two special cases are C12dand G12d, which are associated with shear failure and defined in Eqs. (15) and (16). The C12dand G12dshould be functions of D1 and D2. However, D1 involves d1sand D2 involves d2s, so that the damage contribution from shear on Plane-1 could be treated twice. To alleviate this problem, C12dand G12dare defined with average values of d1sand d2s.A general methodology for calculating damage functions dijis presented in this section. When the CMC is under in-plane tension or shear loading, fibers continue to sustain loading after cracks initiate and propagate within the matrix. Weak interfacial fracture strength between the fiber and matrix allows cracks to migrate along interfaces, and this mechanism manifests into a strain-hardening portion in the stress–strain curve for fiber tension or in-plane shear. Eventually, the ultimate strength in tension or shear is reached after strain-hardening. There are two distinct failure strengths: yield and ultimate as shown inFig. 5(a). The subscript “y” denotes “yield”, “u” denotes “ultimate tensile point”, and “f” denotes “final fracture point.” The fiber-toughening mechanism does not occur in loading conditions other than in-plane tension and shear. In these other modes, the CMC is linear elastic and brittle, and is described by the behavior shown in Fig. 5(b).According to the concept of a cohesive zone ahead of a crack, every material point is controlled by a traction-separation curve. Cracks grow when the area under the traction-separation curve is equal to the material fracture toughness. The traction-separation curves are similar to the corresponding equivalent stress–strain curve shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), where the strain is replaced by separation distance at the crack tip.In FEA, all the constitutive equations are applied at integration points of an element. The element deformation is actually the relative displacement change between integration points which are dependent on the strain and element size. However, the element size may change depending on the mesh. To alleviate this negative effect caused by the mesh size, the characteristic length Lcof the element is introduced. The Lcis self-adaptable and based on the mesh density so that it can act as a bridge between strain and displacement. The relationship between equivalent stress–strain and equivalent traction-separation is given by(17)δ=Lc⋅εeqand(18)T=σeqwhereδis the equivalent displacement andTis the equivalent traction. Specific expression forεeqandσeqcan be found in Table 1 in terms of certain failure mode. In each case, a general curve of equivalent stress–strain and corresponding traction-separation can be developed from Eqs. (17) and (18). The following sections explain how to derive damage functions from the traction-separation with and without strain-hardening.A general traction-separation curve with hardening shown in Fig. 5(c) indicates that there are two distinct damage regions in 2D woven SiC/SiC composite: (1) hardening behavior AB (after yield) and (2) degradation BC (associated with load drop).To obtain damage functions, the curve based on the equivalent traction and displacement is normalized with respect to initial yield as shown inFig. 6. The curve AB in Fig. 6 is described by a power function given by(19)TTy=δδynwhereTyis the yield strength, n is hardening exponent, andδyis the equivalent displacement at yield point. The strain-hardening coefficient n is derived by curve fitting a power-law function to actual stress–strain curves of the CMC. The secant modulus of a point within curve AB is described by(20)Ed=Tyδ(δδy)nwhereEdis the degraded secant modulus in AB. Whenδ≤δy, the original or undamage Young׳s modulus is given by(21)E=TyδyThe damage function in the strain-strain-hardening curve AB is defined as(22)dAB=1−EdESubstituting Eqs. (20) and (21) into (22) gives the damage function during strain-hardening behavior AB as(23)dAB=1−(δyδ)(1−n)If damage continues to evolve in the load drop portion BC as shown in Fig. 5(c), the damage will continue to increase fromd¯AB, which is the specific amount of damage at Point B, to 1, which is total damage at Point C. A standard linear damage function is used in this stage:(24)dBC=d¯AB+(1−d¯AB)δf(δ−δu)δ(δf−δu)whered¯ABis the specific damage at B,δuis the ultimate equivalent displacement at B, andδfis the final equivalent displacement. The above function is equal tod¯ABwhenδ=δuand equal to 1 whenδ=δf.To obtainδf, the total area under the traction-separation curve (see Fig. 5(c)) is set equal to the fracture toughnessGc:(25)Gc=Tyδy2+Tyn+1δynδun+1−δyn+1+Tu2δf−δuThe right-hand side of Eq. (25) represents the area under the linear response (OA), nonlinear response (AB), and the load drop (BC). Note that Eq. (19) is un-normalized and integrated to obtain the area under AB. Solving Eq. (25) forδfgives(26)δf=2TuGc−Tyn+1δynδun+1−δyn+1−Tyδy2+δuTheGcin Eqs. (25) or (26) is the lamina fracture toughness which could be mixed-mode if there are more than one stress components in the failure criteria. Equations for mixed-modeGcare given after the next section.The traction-separation curve without strain-hardening shown in Fig. 5(d) indicates that there is only one damage region in 2D woven SiC/SiC composite as AB. The damage function derived from the traction-separation without strain hardening is therefore a special case of the previous discussion. A linear damage function is assumed to start at Point A:(27)dAB=δf(δ−δu)δ(δf−δu)IfdAB=0, there is no damage and ifdAB=1, there is complete damage. To obtainδf, the total area under the traction-separation curve (Fig. 5(d)) is set equal to the fracture toughnessGc:(28)Gc=Tuδf2The final equivalent displacement is given by(29)δf=2GcTuHere againGcis the lamina fracture toughness, which may be mixed-mode if there are more than one stress component on the failure plane.The mixed-mode fracture toughnessGcis assumed to be of the following power law form:(30){GniGI,i}2+{GsiGII,i}2+{GtiGIII,i}2=1whereGni,GsiandGti(i=1,2,3) are the energy release rates in Mode I, II and III on Plane-i andGI,i,GII,i,GIII,i(i=1,2,3) are the corresponding lamina fracture toughness (or critical energy release rate) in Mode I, II and III on Plane-i. A cornerstone of damage evolution is that it is described by a series of damage initiation. At damage initiation, the ratiosa1=GniGc,a2=GsiGc,a3=GtiGcare defined, whereGc=Gni+Gsi+GtiandGni,GsiandGtiare the energy release rates in Mode I, II and III calculated at damage initiation. It is assumed that these ratios are kept constant during damage evolution. The final mixed-mode fracture toughness based on Eq. (30) is then given by(31){a1GcGI,i}2+{a2GcGII,i}2+{a3GcGIII,i}2=1Eq. (31) can be rewritten as(32)Gc=[1{a1GI,i}2+{a2GII,i}2+{a3GIII,i}2]12whereGcis the mixed-mode fracture toughness.Table 3 summarizes damage function associated with each Modified Hashin–Rotem failure criteria listed in Table 1. The damage functions are either of the strain-hardening or non-hardening type. Strain-hardening occurs under in-plane tension and shear loading on Plane 1 and 2. All other loading modes are linear elastic and brittle.During finite element analysis, the current strain increment is provided by ABAQUS, and the stress is first calculated according to the current stiffness matrixCijd(old)as shown in the flowchart ofFig. 7. Then the damage functions,d11t,d11c,d1sand so on, are evaluated for the each failure mode of the Modified Hashin–Rotem criteria. If damage occurs, the VUMAT checks for element erosion. Elements should be eroded when damage Diis greater or equal to 1. An erosion flag returns to the ABAQUS Main program that the integration point of the element satisfies the erosion criteria. If damage occurs but the element is not to be eroded, the stiffness matrix is updated asCijd(new)and the stress is calculated again in terms of this update stiffness matrix. The updated stress or the element erosion flag is returned to ABAQUS Main program, and the process is repeated for the next strain increment.Mechanical properties of the SiC/SiC composite and steel are discussed in this section. Many of the SiC/SiC properties came from different sources because of the difficult nature of testing CMCs. In some cases, best estimates are made for properties that could not be found in the open literature.Table 4 lists room temperature, material properties of 2D woven SiC/SiC composite used in this paper. Refs. [11–16] were used to gather the three-dimensional stiffness and strength of the SiC/SiC laminate which consists of 8-stacked lamina, i.e. plies.From the viewpoint of the structure of CMC, there are two types of material properties: intralaminar (within plies) and interlaminar (between plies). The term “intralaminar” is used to describe the material property within the lamina or ply. The term “interlaminar” signifies the material property between the plies. Interlaminar strength is a measure of the material׳s ability to resist delamination between the plies.Table 5 lists interlaminar strengths associated with Modes I, II and III, of which all were taken from Ref. [17]. The “I, II, III” denotes Mode I (opening), Mode II (in-plane shear), and Mode III (out-of-plane shear), respectively. Intralaminar strength properties were given as ply properties in Table 4.Fracture toughness is the critical strain energy released per unit area of newly created crack surfaces. This material property represents the resistance to opening or tearing during certain loading conditions. As in the previous discussion, there are two types of fracture toughness: interlaminar (between plies) and intralaminar (within plies). The interlaminar fracture toughness of the 2D woven SiC/SiC composite,GI,GIIorGIII,represents the material׳s ability to resist delamination between the laminas, and is given in the first column ofTable 6. The intralaminar or ply fracture toughness of each woven ply is different on each material plane, and the notationGI,i,GII,iandGIII,iare used in which the subscript “I, II, III” denotes Mode I (opening), Mode II (in-plane shear), Mode III (out-of-plane shear), respectively, and “i” denotes Plane-i (i=1, 2, 3).General properties for 52100 Chrome Steel are given inTable 7. When the steel projectile hits the CMC beam with very high velocity, it will undergo yielding and plastic deformations that are strain-rate and temperature dependent. The Johnson–Cook material model is introduced to characterize 52100 Chrome Steel under these conditions associated with high velocity impact, and the constitutive equation is given by(33)σ=(A+Bεpn)(1+Cln(ε̇pε̇0))(1−(T−TrTm−Tr)m)whereεpis the plastic strain,ε̇pis the plastic strain rate,ε̇ois a reference strain rate,Tris a reference temperature,Tmis the melt temperature, andA,B,C,m,nare Johnson–Cook material constants.Table 8 lists Johnson–Cook parameters for 52100 Chrome Steel, which were taken from Ref. [18] and assumingϵo=0.001s−1andTr=21.7°C. Other thermodynamic properties needed for implementing the Johnson–Cook material model are given inTable 9.To simulate the whole procedure of the test, two FEA steps were created: projectile impact and four-point-bending. In the first step, a quarter model of the CMC beam was created because the projectile impacted the center of the beam thereby producing symmetry with the x- and y-axes, as shown inFig. 8. Specific details of the FEA are discussed below and given inTable 10. The FEA was classified in two groups in term of the support type: partial support and full support. The initial velocity of the projectile was set as 150, 220, 300, 350, 400 and 450m/s for each group. Therefore, 10 program results were obtained from the FEA simulation.The quarter model of the beam and projectile shown inFig. 9 was taken from the full model shown Fig. 8. Symmetry boundary conditions with respect to x- and y- directions were applied. In the first step, initial velocity loading was placed on the projectile. The boundary conditions of partial and full support were realized by fixing the bottom surface of the assembly model. In Fig. 9, fixing the bottom surface from O to F described partial support, while fixing the bottom surface from O to E described full support.The second FEA step was created to simulate four-point-bending and obtain the residual flexural strength after impact damage from the first step. Rigid-body rollers were added to the FEA model to act as the loading and support points of the beam, as shown inFig. 10. The diameters of the rollers were 4mm. The boundary conditions in the second step were fixed roller support at the bottom of the CMC beam and displacement ramp loading from the roller at top of beam. The reaction force of the fixed roller and displacement at the center backside of the beam (Point E) were read out and then compared with test data. Thus the entire FEA simulation consisted of continuous two steps: (1) impact, (2) four-point-bendingIn the FEA model, the CMC beam was modeled by 8 ply-stacked laminates, and a surface-based cohesive behavior was used to describe the contact interaction between each of the 8 stacked plies in order to simulate the delamination in a composite material. The surface-based cohesive constitutive behavior is similar to the CZM developed for CMC. However, before damage initiation, the stiffness is determined byKI=GI2E3;KII=GII2G13;KIII=GIII2G12, where E3, G13 and G12 are the modulus in normal, in-plane shear and out-of-plane shear of the Plane-3.A quadratic traction law is used for damage initiation function as(34)(tntn0)2+(tsts0)2+(tttt0)2≥1wheretn,ts,ttare the tractions in normal, in-plane shear and out-of-plane shear, respectively, andtn0,ts0,tt0are the corresponding interlaminar strengths in Mode I, II and III listed in Table 5.The damage evolution is an energy-based power law which is given by(35)(G1GI)2+(G2GII)2+(G3GIII)2≥1whereG1,G2,G3are the interlaminar energy release rate in Mode I, II and III, respectively, andGI,GII,GIIIare the corresponding interlaminar fracture toughness listed in Table 6.All the other contact law of the FEA model is defined as “General contact” in ABAQUS. The friction coefficient between the steel ball and SiC/SiC composite was set as 0.3 [20].A bias of 5:1 was used to generate the mesh of the projectile so that the mesh density of the bottom was finer than the top, as shown inFig. 11(a). Also, by introducing the partitions in the FEA model of the beam, the CMC beam could have finer mesh densities where it was in contact with the projectile and rollers. Fig. 11(b) shows the mesh of the entire CMC beam and the projectile. Mesh convergence for this problem is discussed in Appendix A.This section compares ABAQUS results for impact damage size and residual flexural strength of SiC/SiC beams with Choi׳s experimental results [4].After projectile impact of the CMC beam, a crater was formed on the front surface of the CMC beam, and the damage from the FEA model was manifested by the element deletion or erosion. The impact damage for each impact velocity and support type is shown inFig. 12. The projectile velocities were selected to range between 150m/s and 450m/s, which covers both the lower and upper limits of the impact velocity in the tests. Even though the size of the crater on the front surface was close in both partially and fully supported beams subjected to the same projectile impact velocity, the damage on the back surface from each support was very different. There was no visible damage on the back surface of the fully supported specimens. However, severe damage on the back side was observed in partially supported specimens. For example, in the picture of the velocity 400m/s with partial support, many elements are deleted in both front and back sides of the CMC beam. This type of damage was caused by in-plane tension on the back side of the beam due to bending and transverse deflections, and has been confirmed in Choi׳s paper [4].Fig. 13 shows a close-up view of the damage sustained by the partially-supported CMC beam. The size of the crater on the front side is measured with radius R1, while the damage radius at the back side is indicated by R2. Typically radius R2 is bigger than R1, and the cone angle of the cone-shaped damage pattern is roughly 45°. The above damage phenomena was cited in Ref. [4] in the high velocity impact case (v=400m/s) of the CMC beam with partial support.Front damage size in Choi׳s experiments is defined by the diameter of the crater, and its variation with impact velocity is compared with test data inFig. 14(a) and (b) for partial and full support conditions, respectively. Note the large experimental scatter in the beams with partial support, as repeatability in high velocity impact tests of CMC beams is very hard to achieve. The crater sizes calculated from FEA and tests appear to be in better agreement with the fully support beams than the beams with partial support. Actual percentage difference between the FEA predictions and test values are listed inTable 11. The crater size for the partially-supported tests is an average value.Reaction forces at the fixed roller and the center displacement at Point E were obtained during the four-point-bending FEA step and plotted against each other. Results for three impact velocities in the partial support FEA results are shown inFig. 15 and compared to actual force–displacement curves from Choi׳s test. Note that the beam stiffness decreases with higher impact velocity because of more damage. The FEA model is able to capture this general trend, and is also a fairly good predictor of residual stiffness after impact.The stress at Point E was calculated using Eq. (1). The flexural strength corresponds to the maximum force that can be carried by the beam before it breaks or the load just before it drops. A comparison of the flexural strength with impact velocity as predicted by FEA and test result is shown inFig. 16. Residual flexural strength in the fully support beam cases decreases linearly with increasing impact velocity. However, under partial support, residual flexural strength is roughly bi-linear, decreasing at a faster rate when the impact velocity is about 220m/s because the damage at the back side of the CMC beam starts to dominate the entire damage at this trigger point.Because the test data is scattered, an average value from repeated test at the same impact velocity is compared with FEA inTable 12. Even though the previous comparison indicated that full support cases are in a better agreement with respect to crater size on the front side, the FEA result has worse correlation in residual strength of the fully supported beams. The FEA model appears to underestimate the amount of damage in the beams with full support.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
