@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Topology synthesis of multi-material compliant mechanisms with a Sequential Element Rejection and Admission method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A generalized formulation to design multi-material compliant mechanisms.The SERA method used for the optimization considers separate material models.Separate criteria to move material between the different material models are used to achieve the optimum topology.Numerous examples prove the validity of the proposed formation to design complex compliant mechanisms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Topology optimization,Compliant mechanisms,Multiple materials,SERA method,Output displacement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The design of multi-material compliant mechanisms by means of a multi Sequential Element Rejection and Admission (SERA) method is presented in this work. The SERA procedure was successfully applied to the design of single-material compliant mechanisms. The main feature is that the method allows material to flow between different material models. Separate criteria for the rejection and admission of elements allow material to redistribute between the predefined material models and efficiently achieve the optimum design. These features differentiate it to other bi-directional discrete methods, making the SERA method very suitable for the design of multi-material compliant mechanisms. Numerous examples are presented to show the validity of the multi SERA procedure to design multi-material compliant mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Compliant mechanisms can be defined as monolitic structures that rely on its own elastic deformation to achieve force and motion transmission [1]. They have undergone considerable development since the introduction of both advanced materials and the field of MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS). These submillimeter mechanical systems are the most promising application area of compliant mechanisms. They are coupled with electronic circuits and manufactured using etching techniques and surface micromachining processes from the semiconductor industry [2]. The use of hinges, bearings and assembly processes are prohibitive due to their small size, and must be built and designed as compliant mechanisms etched out of a single piece.The most widely studied compliant mechanisms are single-material devices. Originally accomplished by trial and error methods, researchers took an interest in the systematic design of this type of compliant mechanisms by means of topology optimization techniques [3–5]. The main advantage of these techniques was that the optimum design was automatically suggested for a target volume fraction for a prescribed design domain, boundary conditions and functional specifications. There was no need to pre-determine the number of links or the location of the flexural joints in the device [6].The optimization methods used for this purpose were diverse. Among others, the homogenization method [3,7], the SIMP method [5], the Genetic Algorithms [8], the Level Set methods [9] and, more recently, the SERA method [10].During the last decade, the design of devices with multiple materials gained popularity with the recent development of manufacturing methods. It is the case of the coextrusion of plastics, the shape deposition manufacturing [11], or the layered manufacturing with embedded components [12].As a result, some of the methods applied to single-material compliant mechanisms were also applied to the design of multi-material compliant mechanisms. Sigmund [13] performed topological synthesis of electrothermal actuators with nonlinear deformation and multiple materials and output ports. In this work, Sigmund studied the effect on the mechanisms performance of using two materials for thermal and electrothermal actuators. The conclusion was that the use of two materials was beneficial only in some cases and that those gains were, in many cases, insignificant. Yin and Ananthasuresh [14] proposed a peak function material interpolation scheme to incorporate multiple materials to the design of compliant mechanisms without increasing the number of design variables. In the two aforementioned works, the optimization methods used were gradient based with algorithms comprising the optimality criterion [14] or the method of moving asymtotes [13].More recently developed methods were also applied to the design of multi-material compliant mechanisms. Wang et al. [15] extended the Level Set approach to the design of monolithic compliant mechanisms made of multiple materials. The mechanical advantage of the mechanisms was used as the objective function. Saxena [16] used Genetic Algorithms to compute the synthesis of compliant mechanisms with multiple materials and output displacements. Geometrically nonlinear analysis was used and the implementation was accomplished usign frame finite elements.This research presented in this article focuses on the design process of multi-material compliant mechanisms which have already been used in several applications such as piezoelectric devices [24], bimorph actuators [13], and grippers and clamping devices [15,25]. For these applications, the need to use multi-materials for the design of the compliant mechanisms arose because: (a) one of the materials was more expensive; (b) there was a requirement for a stiffer internal mechanism structure with a flexible exterior shell made from a weaker material; (c) there was a requirement for the mechanism to be porous; (d) there was an electrical insulation requirements so regions of the mechanism had to have an electrically non-conductive phase; and (e) the esthetic requirements of the mechanism as specified by the designer, meant that more than one material had to be used.The aim of this article is to present a generalized formulation for the design of multi-material compliant mechanisms with the use of a Sequential Element Rejection and Admission (SERA) method [17,18]. This method was succesfully applied to the design of single-material compliant mechanisms [10]. The procedure considers two separate criteria for the rejection and admission of elements and material was redistributed between two material models: “real” material and “virtual” material with negligible stiffness. This feature of the SERA method makes it ideally suited for the design of multi-material compliant mechanisms. The formulation presented here is an extension from the one used for single-material compliant mechanisms [10] where the objective was to maximize the Mutual Potential Energy of the mechanism under a constraint in the target volume fraction. Benchmark examples are used to demonstrate the validity of the proposed method to design multi-material compliant mechanisms.A multi-material compliant mechanism is required to meet the flexibility and stiffness requirements in order to withstand the applied loads and produce the predefined displacement transmission.Fig. 1 shows such a multi-material compliant mechanism domain Ω. It is subjected to a forces Finat the input port Pinand is supposed to produce an output displacements Δoutat the output port Pout.The goal of topology optimization for multi-material compliant mechanisms is to obtain the optimum design that converts the input work into an output displacement in a predefined direction. The mathematical formulation of this work is expressed as the maximization of the Mutual Potential Energy (MPE) (Eq. (1)) subjected to M constraints on the target volume fraction of the M materials, Vm* (Eq. (2)). The summation of target volume fractions must be the unit (Eq. (3)) as each element can only be in one material model:(1)maxMPE(2)subjectedto:form=0,…,M∑e=1Nρme⋅VmeVTot≤Vm⁎,ρme={ρmin,1},e=1,…,N(3)∑m=0MVm⁎=1,m=0,…,Mwhere ρmeis the density of the eth finite element and material m,Vmeis the volume of the eth element and material m,VTotis the total volume for the domain, M is the number of materials, N is the number of finite elements and ρminis the minimum density considered, a typical value of which is 10−4. Void material is represented with m=0.The MPE (Eq. (4)) [19] was defined as the deformation at a prescribed output port in a specified direction. To obtain the MPE, two load cases are calculated: (1) the input force case, where the input force Finis applied to the input port Pin, named with the subscript 1 in (4) and (5) and Fig. 2a and (2) the pseudo-force case, where a unit force is applied at the output port Poutin the direction of the desired displacement, named with the subscript 2 in (4) and (6) andFig. 2b:(4)MPE=U2T⋅K⋅U1(5)K⋅U1=F1(6)K⋅U2=F2whereKis the global stiffness matrix of the structure;F1 is the nodal force vector which contains the input force Fin;F2 is the nodal force vector which contains the unit output force Fout; andU1 andU2 are the displacement fields due to each load case.The global stiffness matrixKis expressed by the density of the eth finite element and the elemental stiffness matrix:(7)K=∑eNρme⋅Kme(Em,υm),m=0,…,M,e=1,…,Nwhere Kmeis the elemental stiffness matrix of the eth element, which depends on the Young modulus Emand Poisson ratio υmof the m isotropic material.The definition of the stiffness at the input and output ports is done in this work with the use of the spring model of Fig. 1. The artificial input spring kintogether with an input force Finsimulates the input work of the actuator. The resistance to the output displacement is modeled with a spring of stiffness kout. This allows the displacement amplification to be controlled by specifying different values of the input and output springs.As part of the optimization process, a sensitivity analysis is carried out to provide information on how sensitive the objective function is to small changes in the design variables. The derivative of the MPE with respect to the element density is given as(8)∂MPE∂ρe=∂∂ρe(U2T⋅K⋅U1)=(∂U2T∂ρe⋅K⋅U1+U2T⋅∂K∂ρe⋅U1+U2T⋅K⋅∂U1∂ρe)Since the stiffness matrix is symmetric, the first derivative is then given as(9)∂U2T∂ρe⋅K⋅U1=(K⋅U1)T⋅∂U2∂ρe=U1T⋅KT⋅∂U2∂ρe=U1T⋅K⋅∂U2∂ρeGiving the derivative of the MPE to be as(10)∂MPE∂ρe=(U1T⋅K⋅∂U2∂ρe+U2T⋅∂K∂ρe⋅U1+U2T⋅K⋅∂U1∂ρe)The two equilibrium Eqs. (5) and (6) are differentiated with respect to the density and are given in the following equations. The input load is independent from the design variables and its derivative is zero:(11)∂K∂ρe⋅U1+K⋅∂U1∂ρe=0→∂K∂ρe⋅U1=−K⋅∂U1∂ρe(12)∂K∂ρe⋅U2+K⋅∂U2∂ρe=0→∂K∂ρe⋅U2=−K⋅∂U2∂ρeThe equivalences obtained in (11) and (12) are introduced to (10), giving the derivative of the MPE to be as(13)∂MPE∂ρe=(−U1T⋅∂K∂ρe⋅U2−U2T⋅K⋅∂U1∂ρe+U2T⋅K⋅∂U1∂ρe)=−U1T⋅∂K∂ρe⋅U2As each density variable corresponds to a unique mesh element, only the displacements and stiffness of that element needs to be considered in the calculation. The sensitivity number for an element e, αecan be calculated using the following equation:(14)αe=−U1eT⋅∂Kme∂ρme⋅U2ewhereU1eis the displacement vector of element e due to load case 1;U2eis the displacement vector of element e due to load case 2; and∂Kme/∂ρmeis the derivative of the elemental stiffness matrix with respect to the density.The derivative of the stiffness matrix with respect to the density can only be approximated to the variation of the elemental stiffness (Eq. (15)). This is because the design variables are discrete (density can only be zero or one) and as a consequence, the elemental stiffness can only be the value of the stiffness of the m real material,Kmeor a negligible value equivalent to zero.(15)∂Kme∂ρme≈ΔKmeWhen the approximation to the variation of the elemental stiffness in (15) is substituted to the expression of the elemental sensitivity number (Eq. (14)) and the relative volume of the FE is factored, Eq. (16) is obtained. This sensitivity number in each element determines which elements are removed or added so that the objective function is maximized:(16)αe=(−U1eT⋅ΔKme⋅U2e)⋅VmeVTotwhereU1eis the displacement vector of element e due to the applied load F1;U2eis the displacement vector of element e due to the output load vector F2; and ∆Kmeis the variation of the elemental stiffness matrix.The SERA method was originally defined for single-material structures. It considered two separate material models: (1) “real” material and (2) a “virtual” material with negligible stiffness [17,18]. Two separate criteria allowed material to be introduced and removed from the design domain by changing its status from “virtual” to “real” and vice versa [10].In the SERA method for multi-material compliant mechanisms, the definition of separate criteria for each material model is maintained. The method is extended for multiple materials so that elements can flow between consecutive levels of material models. Elements in material model m “move forward” to material model (m+1) or “move backwards” to material model (m−1). The final topology is made of all the different “real” materials m= [1, M] present at the end of the optimization (Fig. 3).The twelve steps that drive the SERA method for multi-material compliant mechanisms are given below, and can be seen in the flow chart ofFig. 4.1.Define the design problem. The maximum design domain must be defined and meshed with finite elements. All boundary constraints, loads and the target volume fraction for each material model Vm* must also be specified.Define properties for each material model and assign material properties to the initial design domain, Section 3.1.Calculate the amounts of volume to redistribute in the ith iteration which consists of the volume to be “moved forward” ΔVFw,m(i) and “moved backwards” ΔVBw,m(i) in each material model m, Section 3.2.Carry out a Finite Element Analysis of the two load cases to produce the displacement vectorsU1 andU2. The elemental and global stiffness matrixes,KmeandK, are also calculated as part of the FEA.Calculate the elemental sensitivity numbers αe(Eq. (16)).Apply the mesh independent filtering to the sensitivity numbers, Section 3.3.Separate the sensitivity numbers in those for each material model, αm.Define the threshold values for each material model, αFw,mth and αBw,mth, Section 3.4.Re-distribution of elements between material models, Section 3.4.Calculate the volume of each “real” material model and the total volume of “real” material in the domain.Calculate the convergence criterion εi, Section 3.5.Repeat steps 3–11 until the target volume fractions are reached and the optimization converges. The final topology is represented by the “real” material in the design domain.The SERA method can start from a full design domain (all elements are “real” material), from a void design domain (all elements are “virtual” material), and also with any amount of material present in the domain. In a previous work by the authors [20], it was stated that a void initial design domain was the most efficient starting point to design compliant mechanisms as fewer iterations were needed to achieve the optimum. This is the strategy considered in this work and, therefore, all elements in the design domain are assigned “virtual” material properties as the initial design domain.The rest of material models (m=1, …, M) are initialized so that m=1 is the weakest “real” material available and m=M the one with higher material properties. That is, elements “move forward” from “void” material towards material M.Material is moved between material models in a two stage process (Fig. 5):1.Different amounts of material are moved forward and backwards in each iteration until the target volume fraction for each material model Vm* is reached.Once the target volume fractions of each material model are reached, material re-distribution takes place by moving the same amount of material between material models until the problem converges.The volume of material to be moved forward and backwards are given in Eqs. (17) and (18) when an equal target volume fraction Vm* is to be achieved in all “real” material models. This can be adjusted for any other relationship between target volume fractions.(17)ΔVBw,m(i)=PR⋅Nform=1,…,M(18)ΔVFw,m(i)=PR⋅N⋅(M+1−m)form=0…(M−1)where PR is the progression rate, with typical values ranging between 0.005a and 0.05; N is the number of finite elements.The stage of material re-distribution consists of redistributing material without increasing the total in each material model:(19)ΔVBw,m(i)=RR⋅Nform=1,…,M(20)ΔVFw,m(i)=RR⋅Nform=0…(M−1)where RR is the material re-distribution rate, with typical values ranging between 0.001 and 0.005.The mesh independent filter is based on the one by Sigmund and Petersson [21] and modifies the sensitivity number of each element based on a weighted average of the element sensitivities (Eq. (21)) in a fixed neighborhood defined by a minimum radius rmin(Eq. (22)):(21)α′e=∑k=1nρk⋅ωk⋅αk∑k=1nωk(22)ωk=rmin−dist(e,k),{k∈n/dist(e,k)≤rmin},e=1,…,nwhere αe′ is the eth element filtered sensitivity number. n is the number of elements which are inside of the filter radius. ρkis the density of element k. ωkis the weighting factor for element k, its value decreases linearly the further element k is away from element e and for all elements outside the filter radius its value is equal to zero. αkis the kth element sensitivity value. rminis the filter radius specified by the user. dist(e,k) is the distance between the centers of elements e and k.The sensitivity numbers of each eth finite element αe(Eq. (16)) are listed separately in (M+1) lists, one for each material model m=0, …, M (Fig. 6).The threshold values αFw,mth and αBw,mth are the sensitivity values that allows the transmission of ΔVFw,m(i) from material m to material (m+1), and ΔVBw,m(i) from material m to material (m−1) (Fig. 6).The objective is to maximize the MPE and, therefore, in general for material m: elements with the higher values of sensitivity number are the ones to be moved forward to the next material model (m+1). Elements with lower values of sensitivity number are the ones to be moved backwards to the previous material model (m−1) (Fig. 6b).Special cases of this rule are material models m=0 and m=M. For m=0, elements can only be forwarded to material model m=1 (Fig. 6a). For m=M, material can only be moved backwards to the previous material model (Fig. 6c).The convergence criterion is defined as the change in the objective function in the last 10 iterations (Eq. (23)), which is considered an adequate number of iterations for the convergence study. It implies that the process will have a minimum of 10 iterations as the convergence criterion is not applied until the iteration number has reached 10:(23)εi=|∑i−9i−5MPEi−∑i−4iMPEi|∑i−4iMPEiwhen εiis the convergence criterion, with typical values ranging between 0.001 and 0.01.Examples of multi-material compliant mechanisms are presented in this section to demonstrate the validity of the proposed method: (1) bi-material inverter mechanisms, (2) bi-material crunching mechanisms, and (3) tri-material gripper mechanisms.For the inverter mechanism, different target volume fractions for the two material models are considered. In the case of the crunching mechanisms, different target volume fractions and material properties are used for compliant mechanisms with different stiffness ratios. Finally, two different designs of tri-material gripper mechanisms are presented. The evolution charts of these two optimization processes are also given in this section.The design domain for an inverter mechanism is shown inFig. 7. It is a square of size 120mm×120mm subdivided using square four node 2mm×2mm finite elements.Two real materials are considered: Material m=1 with E1=0.1, ν1=0.3, and Material m=2 with E2=1, ν2=0.3. That is, material 2, represented in black in the figure, is ten times stiffer than material 1, represented in orange in the figure. The density of the virtual material m=0 is ρmin=10−4, which is equivalent to 0.01% of the stiffness of a real material.The two target volumes fractions considered are (a) V1⁎=0.2, V2⁎=0.2, (b) V1⁎=0.1, V2⁎=0.3 of the initial design domain. In both cases, the same input force Fin=1N is applied and a stiffness ratio between the input and output ports of kout/kin=1 is defined. The filter radius used in all cases is rmin=4mm. The final topologies obtained for the two cases are shown inFig. 8.As it can be observed in Fig. 8, material is efficiently distributed in the design domain in order to transmit the motion from the input to the output port. Regarding the distribution of each material model, the stiffest one defines a topology capable of providing the transmission of movement and the weakest material is located where it provides stability to the mechanisms without reducing its capacity of movement.The design domain for the crunching mechanism is shown inFig. 9. It is a square of size 120mm×120mm subdivided using square four node 2mm×2mm finite elements.Three different input–output situations are considered in this section: (1) kout/kin=0.01, (2) kout/kin=1, and (3) kout/kin=100. The topologies obtained for single-material mechanisms [10] were significantly different so it could be thought that the inclusion of a second material could beneficiate the mechanisms performance in, at least, some of the cases. Two different volume distribution for the bi-material mechanisms are also considered: (1) V1⁎=0.2, V2⁎=0.2 and (2) V1⁎=0.3, V2⁎=0.1 (cases (b)–(d)). All the rest of parameters remain unchanged (Fin=1N, rmin=6mm).For each stiffness ratio, five cases of real material properties are studied: (a) single-material with E1=1 and V1⁎=0.4, V2⁎=0, (b) bi-material with E1=2·E2, (c) bi-material with E1=10·E2, (d) bi-material with E1=100·E2, and (e) single-material with E1=1 and V1⁎=0.2, V2⁎=0. For all cases, Poisson’s ratio is υ1= υ2=0.3 and the density of the virtual material m=0 is ρmin=10−4. Results are shown inFig. 10–12.It can be observed from Figs. 10–12, that the topology of bi-material crunching mechanism changes considerably if different material properties are defined for each material model (cases (b)–(d)). In all cases, the SERA method proposed provides an efficient distribution of material in the design domain.An analysis of the displacements in this and previous section reveal that all displacements are between 0.0012% and 0.9% of the dimensions of the mechanism. Due to such small displacements, the use of linear analysis with small displacements is appropriate for this work. The conclusions drawn from this study are based on the comparison of the performance of all examples under the same type of analysis and displacement range.The design domain for two different gripper mechanisms are shown inFig. 13. In both cases, it is a square of size 200mm×200mm subdivided using square four node 2mm×2mm finite elements. In case (a) a 50mm×50mm square in the right side is removed from the design domain to allow the mechanism to grip the workpiece, modeled by the output spring kout. In case (b) the square is 150mm×50mm size.Three real materials are considered: material m=1 with E1=0.01, ν1=0.3, material m=2 with E2=0.1, ν2=0.3, and material m=3 with E3=1, ν3=0.3. The density of the virtual material m=0 is ρmin=10−4.The target volume fractions considered for each material model are V1⁎=V2⁎= V3⁎=0.15 of the initial design. An input force Fin=1N is applied and a stiffness ratio of kout/kin=1 is defined. The filter radius used in all cases is rmin=6mm. The resulting topology and evolution chart of the gripper mechanism (a) case is shown inFig. 14. The equivalent for the gripper mechanism (b) case is shown inFig. 15. As it can be observed, in both cases, the three materials are efficiently distributed in the design domain.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A generalized formulation to design multi-material compliant mechanisms is presented in this work. A multi Sequential Element Rejection and Admission (SERA) method is used to achieve the optimum design. This procedure considers each material in the domain as separate material models. The rejection and admission of elements is done via separate criteria for each material model and elements flow between predefined material models. The examples presented in this work show the versatility and robustness of the method to achieve the optimum topology for compliant mechanisms with multiple materials.The authors are aware of the need for a nonlinear analysis when large displacements are considered in compliant mechanisms [22,23]. However, for the purpose of studying the validity of the method, a linear analysis has proven to be a good approximation as all examples exhibit small displacements.The SERA method has efficiently distributed material in all bi- and tri-material mechanisms presented in this work. It has therefore been demonstrated to be an efficient and robust method for the design of multiple materials compliant mechanisms.