@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
BIOMedical Search Engine Framework: Lightweight and customized implementation of domain-specific biomedical search engines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The wealth of knowledge laying in biomedical publications is invaluable to make new scientific discoveries.Domain-specific search engines aim to improve retrieval performance and to enhance user search experience.The BIOMedical Search Engine Framework aims to speed up the construction of biomedical domain-specific search engines.The BIOMedical Search Engine Framework enables the retrieval and annotation of biomedical documents and the customised visualisation of indexed concepts and documents.The BIOMedical Search Engine Framework supported the construction of the Smart Drug Search (SDS) in assistance of antimicrobial research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Search engine framework,Biomedical literature,Vertical engine,Text mining,Web application,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectivesText mining and semantic analysis approaches can be applied to the construction of biomedical domain-specific search engines and provide an attractive alternative to create personalized and enhanced search experiences. Therefore, this work introduces the new open-source BIOMedical Search Engine Framework for the fast and lightweight development of domain-specific search engines. The rationale behind this framework is to incorporate core features typically available in search engine frameworks with flexible and extensible technologies to retrieve biomedical documents, annotate meaningful domain concepts, and develop highly customized Web search interfaces.MethodsThe BIOMedical Search Engine Framework integrates taggers for major biomedical concepts, such as diseases, drugs, genes, proteins, compounds and organisms, and enables the use of domain-specific controlled vocabulary. Technologies from the Typesafe Reactive Platform, the AngularJS JavaScript framework and the Bootstrap HTML/CSS framework support the customization of the domain-oriented search application. Moreover, the RESTful API of the BIOMedical Search Engine Framework allows the integration of the search engine into existing systems or a complete web interface personalization.ResultsThe construction of the Smart Drug Search is described as proof-of-concept of the BIOMedical Search Engine Framework. This public search engine catalogs scientific literature about antimicrobial resistance, microbial virulence and topics alike. The keyword-based queries of the users are transformed into concepts and search results are presented and ranked accordingly. The semantic graph view portraits all the concepts found in the results, and the researcher may look into the relevance of different concepts, the strength of direct relations, and non-trivial, indirect relations. The number of occurrences of the concept shows its importance to the query, and the frequency of concept co-occurrence is indicative of biological relations meaningful to that particular scope of research. Conversely, indirect concept associations, i.e. concepts related by other intermediary concepts, can be useful to integrate information from different studies and look into non-trivial relations.ConclusionsThe BIOMedical Search Engine Framework supports the development of domain-specific search engines. The key strengths of the framework are modularity and extensibilityin terms of software design, the use of open-source consolidated Web technologies, and the ability to integrate any number of biomedical text mining tools and information resources. Currently, the Smart Drug Search keeps over 1,186,000 documents, containing more than 11,854,000 annotations for 77,200 different concepts. The Smart Drug Search is publicly accessible at http://sing.ei.uvigo.es/sds/. The BIOMedical Search Engine Framework is freely available for non-commercial use at https://github.com/agjacome/biomsef.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In Life Sciences, the wealth of knowledge in journal publications is of significant importance for researchers in making scientific discoveries. However, the acquisition of such information is becoming increasingly difficult due to the large volume and heterogeneity of articles, and the intense rate of publication in these fields.The PubMed search engine is quite powerful in that its keyword-based Boolean query interface is practical and easy to use, and it lays on the millions of abstracts available in the Medline database [1]. However, it can be difficult for researchers to explore and search such huge volume of data in an efficient manner. Queries about general topics are likely to return a large number of potentially relevant documents (hundreds or thousands of documents) that require further manual revision. Conversely, queries about very specific topics demand that the researcher knows in advance the most relevant keywords of the topic (which often vary over time).It is much more intuitive for users to query about concepts relevant to the domain and with which they are familiar with. Within this context, domain-specific literature search is currently of high demand by biomedical researchers [2]. Efforts are being invested in the development of alternative ways to query documents from the Medline database and offer topic-driven search facilities. Alternatives are quite varied in purpose and nature, but most of them take advantage of text mining technologies and domain-specific semantics to offer a more focused and contextualized search experience [3,4].Today, major biological databases, such as UniProt protein resources, BioCyc pathway knowledge bases and BRENDA enzyme information system enable concept-driven searches of the curated documents (abstracts or full-texts) [5–7]. Furthermore, the annual report of the Nucleic Acids Research journal about biomedical databases and Web services presents a wide variety of specialized literature search engines, created to meet the information needs of particular research communities [8].Table 1presents a summary of recent projects that developed domain-specific literature search systems. The purpose is not to provide a complete list of available domain-specific systems but rather to describe the technical standpoint of these applications, most notably the support provided by domain-specific semantics, the use of text mining technologies, and the visual artifacts used to enable concept-driven knowledge discovery. Text mining methods and tools are used to incorporate semantic functionality such as the automatic suggestion of synonyms for user-submitted query terms, the assessment of document relevance, the description of document contents, or the inspection of documents in which concepts are related in specific ways. Controlled vocabularies and ontologies, such as DrugBank [18], UMLS [19], MESH [1], and SNOMEDCT [20], help define the knowledge domain to be captured by the search engine and offer the means to convert keyword-based queries in domain concepts, and navigate within domain semantics [21].For example, the Protein Interaction information Extraction (PIE) system implements a machine learning approach to provide a PubMed-like search interface that prioritizes documents mentioning protein–protein interactions [9] while Alkemio Web tool uses a naïve Bayesian classifier to predict the relatedness of chemicals to query topics [11]. In turn, the PolySearch2 supports the discovery of associations between human diseases, genes, drugs, metabolites and toxins in MEDLINE abstracts, PubMed Central full-text articles, and text-rich biological databases [13].Typically, all search engines present results as a ranked list. Semantic annotations are visually highlighted and some semantic facets (based on concept types) may exist to narrow down the list. Graph- or tree-based visualizations are provided as advanced means of navigation, namely, to find indirect associations between concepts of interest.From a technical standpoint, one obvious observation is that most projects undertake the construction of the domain-specific search engine from scratch, and that all these new implementations include modules for document retrieval, text mining, document indexing and scoring, and query execution. Typically, document retrieval relies on MEDLINE web services and text mining relies on open solutions for linguistic processing and biomedical entity recognition. Moreover, document/concept scoring is often based on well-known algorithms, such as the term frequency inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) algorithm [22].Understandably, domain requirements and goals of analysis determine the practical choice of methods and tools used, but many technologies and tools have the potential of being applied across domains. In particular, the core infrastructural components linking main operations and resources in most biomedical semantic search engines could be generalized with the help of a web development framework.There are general purpose and open-source search engine development frameworks, but they are hardly used in bioinformatics applications. These frameworks are typically equipped to deal with distribution and scalability concerns, i.e. enabling the construction of large-scale engines, rather than delivering generalized semantic functionality, i.e. enabling the construction of domain-specific engines (Table 2). So, the learning curve associated with using these frameworks together with the need to program additional biomedical semantic processing and analysis modules discourages bioinformatics application.These observations led us to consider building the new and open-source BIOMedical Search Engine Framework. This framework aims to provide a solution to bioinformatics applications in demand of a small to medium size semantic search engine. To meet this goal, the BIOMedical Search Engine Framework integrates core features typically available in search engine frameworks with a set of features useful to perform biomedical semantic analysis. Its architecture is modular and component agnostic, and enables the interchange of different components to build biomedical domain-specific search engines at a reduced programming cost. Basic implementation covers well-established algorithms and state-of-the-art open-source tools, namely, it incorporates modules for document retrieval, text mining, document indexing and scoring, query execution, and knowledge reasoning. Controlled vocabulary is at the core of knowledge representation and reasoning, and the graph data structure helps to scale query and visualization abilities for large literature collections.The rest of this paper aims to disclose the architecture and application of the framework and is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the architecture of the BIOMedical Search Engine Framework, and describes how each component contributes to building a customized domain-specific literature search engine. Section 3 discusses the development of the Smart Drug Search (SDS) engine as proof-of-concept of the BIOMedical Search Engine Framework. At the end, we provide some conclusions and identify areas of future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper introduces the BIOMedical Search Engine Framework, which supports the construction of domain-specific literature search engines for biomedical applications. This framework integrates consolidated search engine technologies and state-of-the-art text mining methods and tools. Its primary aim is to take advantage of semantic analysis to enhance domain-specific search experience while minimizing the programming costs of elementary document retrieval and processing. Its modular architecture enables the customization and interchange of components to meet the requirements of a particular domain of application. It also provides a RESTful API that enables the integration of the engine in existing systems and the complete personalization of the web interface.The Smart Drug Search system was built on top of this framework and aims to assist researchers in the study of alternative and novel antimicrobial products. This engine uses NER tools to automatically recognize textual mentions to drugs/compounds, diseases, species, proteins and genes in the articles, and construct an efficient search index with those domain-specific concepts.Administrator and user experience with SDS provided valuable insight on how to keep developing the framework. Future versions of the framework will provide an easier mechanism to include different document sources (e.g. patents or full-text collections) in the same way that different annotators and searchers can be already included. At the same time, the web-based interface is being enhanced to deliver a richer and more visually appealing experience to the end users. The graph view of search results is being explored in that direction, but more web-interface capabilities are already being planned.The code of the BIOMedical Search Engine Framework and its documentation are accessible at https://github.com/agjacome/biomsef and freely available under MIT License. The Smart Drug Search engine can be accessed at http://sing.ei.uvigo.es/sds/.