@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Classification of lung sounds using higher-order statistics: A divide-and-conquer approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A pattern recognition system to classify five lung sounds is proposed.The system is based on HOS and on a divide-and-conquer approach.The proposed approach uses Genetic Algorithms to dimensionality reduction.K-Nearest Neighbor and Naive Bayes classifiers are used to recognize the signals.The system achieved a high classification accuracy and can be implemented in an embedded system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lung sounds,Pattern recognition,Higher-order statistics,Genetic Algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveLung sound auscultation is one of the most commonly used methods to evaluate respiratory diseases. However, the effectiveness of this method depends on the physician's training. If the physician does not have the proper training, he/she will be unable to distinguish between normal and abnormal sounds generated by the human body. Thus, the aim of this study was to implement a pattern recognition system to classify lung sounds.MethodsWe used a dataset composed of five types of lung sounds: normal, coarse crackle, fine crackle, monophonic and polyphonic wheezes. We used higher-order statistics (HOS) to extract features (second-, third- and fourth-order cumulants), Genetic Algorithms (GA) and Fisher's Discriminant Ratio (FDR) to reduce dimensionality, and k-Nearest Neighbors and Naive Bayes classifiers to recognize the lung sound events in a tree-based system. We used the cross-validation procedure to analyze the classifiers performance and the Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference criterion to compare the results.ResultsOur results showed that the Genetic Algorithms outperformed the Fisher's Discriminant Ratio for feature selection. Moreover, each lung class had a different signature pattern according to their cumulants showing that HOS is a promising feature extraction tool for lung sounds. Besides, the proposed divide-and-conquer approach can accurately classify different types of lung sounds. The classification accuracy obtained by the best tree-based classifier was 98.1% for classification accuracy on training, and 94.6% for validation data.ConclusionsThe proposed approach achieved good results even using only one feature extraction tool (higher-order statistics). Additionally, the implementation of the proposed classifier in an embedded system is feasible.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since antiquity, physicians have auscultated sounds inside the chest to identify signs of disease [1]. Lung sound auscultation by stethoscope is a simple, quick, and non-invasive method to provide diagnostic information about a patient's lung [1]. However, proper use of this method depends on the ability of the physician to recognize normal and abnormal sounds generated by the human body.In addition, lung sounds are non-stationary signals, which makes them both difficult to analyze and hard to distinguish when using traditional auscultation methods. Thus, the use of an electronic stethoscope together with a pattern recognition system helps to overcome the limitations of traditional auscultation, providing an efficient method for clinical diagnosis [2].Lung sounds are classified as either normal (healthy individuals) or adventitious (abnormal). Adventitious sounds are divided into two categories: continuous sounds (wheezes and rhonchi) and discontinuous sounds (crackles).According to the American Thoracic Society (ATS) [3], wheezing sounds are defined as high-pitched continuous sounds and rhonchi are low-pitched continuous sounds. The ATS [3] specifies that a wheeze contains a dominant frequency above 400Hz, while rhonchi are characterized by a dominant frequency of about 200Hz or less. The wheeze can be monophonic if it contains a single frequency, or polyphonic when several frequencies are simultaneously perceived [4]. The diseases associated with wheezing sounds are asthma, pneumonia, and bronchitis.Crackles are discontinuous adventitious sounds caused by the sudden opening of small airways that had collapsed [2]. Crackles are usually defined by their time-domain features such as initial deflection width (IDW) and two-cycle duration (2CD). According to the ATS [3], the average duration of IDW and 2CD of fine crackles are 0.7 and 5milliseconds (ms), respectively, and those of coarse crackles are 1.5 and 10ms, respectively [5]. Fine crackles are heard in patients with pneumonia, pulmonary fibrosis, and congestive heart failure (CHF) [6].Other categories of lung sounds include pleural rub, stridor, and squawks. Pleural rub is the characteristic sound produced when inflamed pleural surfaces rub together during respiration. Stridor is very loud wheezes and squawks are short inspiratory wheezes [1].Several authors have used a variety of techniques for filtering, feature extraction, separation, and classification of lung sounds. For instance, to increase the accuracy of the forced oscillation technique (FOT) in categorizing the level of airway obstruction in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), [7] developed a pattern recognition system using the k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN), random forest (RF), and support vector machines (SVM) as classifiers. They used the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve for performance evaluation and the results achieved were higher than 0.9.The SVM classifier was used in [2] and [8] to classify lung sounds. In [2], normal, crackle, and rhonchus sounds were classified and the authors used the frequency ratio of Power Spectral Density (PSD) values and the Hilbert-Huang Transform (HHT) method for feature extraction. The classifier achieved an accuracy of above 90%. In [8], the authors proposed a time-frequency and time-scale analysis of pulmonary signals. They also used the k-NN and Multilayer Perceptron to classify crackling and non-crackling sounds and they conclude that the SVM classifier achieved the best result obtaining a classification accuracy of 97.5%.Instantaneous kurtosis, discriminating function, and entropy were used in [9] to classify respiratory sounds ranging from normal to continuous adventitious, including wheezing, stridor, and rhonchi. The authors achieved an optimal classification accuracy (between 97.7% and 98.8%). In [10], the authors also classified normal and continuous adventitious signals, but only wheeze signals were used as continuous adventitious signals. Using the Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) for feature extraction and the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to classify the signals, the authors achieved a classification accuracy of 94.2%.Finally, a technique to obtain the time-frequency representation (TFR) of thoracic sounds was proposed by [11]. Using time-frequency patterns, the authors assessed the performance of ten TFRs for heart, adventitious, and normal lung sounds. After simulations, they concluded that the best TFR performance was found using the Hilbert–Huang spectrum (HHS).The purpose of our paper is to develop a pattern recognition technique to classify lung sounds including normal, fine crackle, coarse crackle, monophonic wheezes and polyphonic wheezes. We used Higher Order Statistics [13] to extract features, Genetic Algorithms (GAs) [14] to reduce dimensionality, and k-Nearest Neighbors [15] and Naive Bayes [16] classifiers to recognize lung sound events.Our application of HOS for lung sound classification is based on the study reported in [12] which used the parametric approach of bispectrum estimation (the Double Fourier Transform of the third-order moment sequence) to reveal information about lung sounds, such as deviations from normality. After performing several experiments, the authors conclude that bispectrum-based methods are more suitable and robust than second-order statistic-based methods for lung sound analysis and characterization due to their superior performance in noisy environments. However, unlike [12], we use a reduced number of second-, third-, and fourth-order cumulants extracted from the sound time series as features. In addition to properties of noise immunity, cumulant-based features have the following advantages: (i) they are not dependent on moments of lower order, in contrast to moment-based features; and (ii) from a computational perspective they are simpler than polyspectrum-based features. As such, cumulants provide a compact and representative feature vector signature for each sound class.The analysis of adventitious sounds is helpful in diagnosing pulmonary dysfunction. In contrast to other studies in this area, this paper looks to classify the five most important classes of lung sounds, including two types of crackle and wheezes that are linked to several lung diseases. The importance of this paper lies in its ability to provide classification for lung sounds that can be easily implemented in embedded systems by using a new system based only on HOS and the divide-and-conquer approach. The system developed herein is capable of efficiently distinguishing several lung sounds.The materials and methods proposed in this paper are described in Section 2 and results are shown in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 presents the conclusions and future work.Pattern recognition is a science that deals with the classification and description of objects in particular classes by observing their features [17].The pattern recognition system developed in this study follows the sequence shown in Fig. 1and each step is described in detail below.The real data set (respiratory sounds) used in this study was obtained from [1], where vesicular sounds, fine crackle, coarse crackle, monophonic and polyphonic wheezing sounds are available. The data is composed of 36 samples: 8 vesicular respiratory cycles, 7 respiratory cycles with fine crackle, 13 with coarse crackle, 4 with monophonic wheezes, and 4 with polyphonic wheezes.The signals are sampled at 8kHz. The pre-processing stage and the construction of the data set are summarized in Fig. 2. The available lung sounds (signals) were divided (splitting and windowing) into non-overlapping 320-sample segments, which represent about 40ms, as shown in Fig. 2. This procedure was applied to the entire available data set.Since crackles are discontinuous sounds, and according to [18] and [8] the duration of a crackle is less than 20ms, some of the 320-sample split segments do not contain this type of adventitious sound, as noted in Fig. 2 (step 2). Thus, only the segments which contain crackles were selected for the next step, signal normalization. The other respiratory sounds, normal and wheezes, are continuous sounds, which means segment selection was not required.It is worth mentioning that the selection of segments containing a crackle is employed only during the design stage of the proposed pattern recognition system and it is performed manually by a lung-sound expert. The objective of this step is to guarantee the classifiers are trained using proper lung sound patterns. At the operation stage, only steps 1 and 3 are performed and the selection step is not necessary. Thus, non-overlapping segments of the lung sound under evaluation are extracted and normalized. If at least one extracted event (split segment) is a crackle, it will be properly classified as a coarse or fine crackle lung sound.The next step (Fig. 2, step 3) involves signal normalization. The selected events were normalized with zero mean and unit variance. Thus, we obtained 102 vesicular sound signals (events), 57 fine crackle signals, 57 coarse crackle signals, 51 monophonic wheezing, and 51 polyphonic wheezing signals. Fig. 3illustrates one event of each type of lung sound randomly selected from the input data set.Our study uses HOS as its feature extraction tool. Methods based on HOS are more suitable to deal with non-Gaussian processes and nonlinear systems [13]. The major advantage of using HOS as a feature extraction method for pattern recognition is its noise immunity.Let x be a random process composed of real random variables with zero mean. The second-, third-, and fourth-order cumulants are given, respectively [13]:(1)cum(x1,x2)=E(x1x2),cum(x1,x2,x3)=E(x1x2x3),cum(x1,x2,x3,x4)=E(x1x2x3x4)−E(x1x2)E(x3x4)−E(x1x3)E(x2x4)−E(x1x4)E(x2x3),where “E” is the expected value operator.Suppose that x(t) is a stationary random process with zero mean and that the cumulants of order k, denoted by Ck,x(τ1, τ2, …, τ3), where τ1, …, τk, are lags in time, are defined in terms of the signals x(t), x(t+τ1), …, x(t+τk). Setting τ1=τ2=τ3=τ, from (1), the second-, third-, and fourth-order cumulants can be rewritten as:(2)C2,x(τ)=E{x(t)x(t+τ)},C3,x(τ)=E{x(t)x2(t+τ)},C4,x(τ)=Ex(t)x3(t+τ)−3C2,x(τ)C2,x(0).For a discrete signal x[n], (2) can be approximated using the circular method proposed by [19]:(3)C2,x(τ)=1N∑n=0N−1x[n]x[mod(n+τ,N)],C3,x(τ)=1N∑n=0N−1x[n]x2[mod(n+τ,N)],C4,x(τ)=1N∑n=0N−1x[n]x3[mod(n+τ,N)]−31N2∑n=0N−1x[n]x[mod(n+τ,N)]⋅∑n=0N−1x2[n],wherex∈ℝN,τ=0,1,…,N−1, and mod is the modulo operator (that is, the remainder after integer division).Fig. 4illustrates the mean values (±2 standard deviations) of the second-, third-, and fourth-order cumulants extracted from the available vesicular and adventitious events. It can be inferred that each class has a different signature pattern according to their cumulants showing that HOS is a promising feature extraction tool for lung sounds. It is clear from Fig. 4 that although the extracted features of the lung sounds have different means, their large standard deviations can make classification difficult. The classification task is even harder when the objective is to distinguish between coarse and fine crackle or between monophonic and polyphonic wheeze.After applying (3) to each lung sound event, 160 second-order cumulants, 320 third-order cumulants, and 320 fourth-order cumulants were obtained. Since this is a high dimensional feature space (800 features), it is prudent to reduce its dimensionality. The core purpose of this step is to build a compact and representative cumulant-based signature vector for each sound class.Thus, in order to reduce the computational cost of the classification system, we implemented Genetic Algorithms (GA) to reduce the feature space dimensionality and to maximize classification performance.Genetic Algorithms, a branch of evolutionary algorithms, are based on the biological process of natural evolution. While the first study involving GA was presented by [14], this type of research became widely used in the 1980s. The basic operating principle of Genetic Algorithms can be summarized by the steps presented in Fig. 5.The first step of the algorithm is to randomly create an initial population of individuals. Secondly, the fitness of each population member is calculated based on its performance in an objective function; the higher the level of fitness value, the better its performance, thus increasing its chance of survival over generations. The best individuals are then selected using a selection procedure. After selection, standard crossover and mutation genetic operators are applied to the population. Subsequently, the best individual from the current population is included in the new one (elitism strategy). These procedures are repeated until the user defined maximum number of generations is reached.In our study, GA is designed to minimize a cost function that accomplishes the number of features (cumulants) used by the classifiers and their classification performance. Thus, the evaluation of each individual is given as:(4)Evaluation=ClassificationError+0.001*NumberCumulantswhere the variable ClassificationErroris the classification error of the evaluated individual in percentage and the variable NumberCumulantsis the number of features (cumulants) used by the individual to perform its task. The latter variable was added to reduce the number of cumulants selected by the classification method.When the same classification error is obtained by distinct individuals, the one that selects fewer cumulants is given a better evaluation.Fig. 6illustrates the individual evaluation process. Each individual of the GA population is a binary sequence with 800 positions, where each position indicates whether the respective cumulant is used. After this feature selection procedure, the classification is completed by a previously defined classification method (in this study we used k-NN and Naive Bayes classifiers) and, subsequently, fitness evaluation is performed (4).It is important to note that GA is performed only during the design stage. At the operation stage, only the selected features are extracted from the lung sound signal and presented to the classifier.The signals were classified using two different classification methods: k-Nearest Neighbors and Naive Bayes.1)k-Nearest Neighbors: the k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) classifier was introduced in 1957 by Fix and Hodges [15]. This simple classification method finds, according to a distance function, the k nearest neighbors of the unknown object among the data set and uses the majority vote approach to predict the object label [20]. In our study, Euclidean distance was used and k was chosen to be 5. The Euclidean distance d(x, y) between two instances x and y is defined as follows:(5)d(x,y)=∑i=1n(xi−yi)2.According to [20], the basic steps of the k-NN algorithm are:•calculate the distances between the unknown object and all previous labeled objects;select the k closest objects to the unknown object;use the majority vote approach to predict the unknown object class.Naive Bayes classifier: the Naive Bayes classifier [16] learns probability distributions from data and classifies the unknown instance by choosing the class with the highest posterior probability. The class is chosen to satisfy:(6)ℋMAP=argℋiεℋmaxp(x|ℋi)p(ℋi),where P(ℋi) is the a priori probability, and p(x|ℋi) is the conditional probability density function of class ℋi, in which x is the attribute value and i corresponds to the class number. The conditional probability density function is based on the Gaussian distribution expressed by:(7)p(x|ℋi)=1(2πσi2)1/2exp−12σi2(x−μi)2,with μibeing the mean value of class ℋi and σibeing its variance.Assuming uniform a priori probabilities, (6) is simplified such that(8)ℋML=argℋiεℋmaxp(x|ℋi),where ℋMLis the Maximum Likelihood hypothesis.After selecting the cumulants through the GA individual binary sequence, the k-Nearest Neighbors and Naive Bayes classifiers are used to classify the lung sounds into vesicular, fine crackle, coarse crackle, monophonic and polyphonic wheezes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
