@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An entropy-based evaluation of contact forces in continuum mechanics of elastic structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We extend entropy and its relevance in statistical physics, e.g. microsate, ensemble, and information, to evaluate the contact forces of elastic bodies, which are discretized with finite elements, some concepts in contact mechanics are considered as the same or similar meaning of that in statistical physics.We obtain an explicit probability distribution for the normalized contact forces by maximizing entropy subject to an expectation value and the principle of minimum potential energy.We construct an efficient iterative procedure by solving a series of isolated systems to obtain the contact forces, and give a novelty termination criteria to terminate the iteration.We also examine the iterative procedure by some examples to show its feasibility, efficiency and robustness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Contact forces,Entropy,Ensemble,Finite elements,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The maximum entropy principle has proved to be a versatile tool for solving problems in many fields. In this paper, we extend entropy and its use in statistical physics to evaluate contact forces in the continuum mechanics of elastic structures. Each potential contact node of an elastic structure discretized by finite elements along with the normalized contact force on the node is considered as a system and all potential contact nodes together with their normalized contact forces are considered as a canonical ensemble, with the normalized contact force of each node representing the microstate of the node. The product of non-penetration conditions for potential contact nodes and the normalized nodal contact forces then act as an expectation that its value will be zero, and maximizing the entropy under the constraints of the expectation and the minimum potential energy principle results in an explicit probability distribution for the normalized contact forces that shows the relation between contact forces and displacements in a formulation similar to the formulation for particles occupying microstates in statistical physics. Moreover, an iterative procedure that solves a series of isolated systems to find the contact forces is presented, with a novel termination condition. Finally, some examples are examined to verify the correctness and efficiency of the procedure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Entropy is one of the core concepts in statistical physics and information theory [1–4], and the parallelism between the two subjects goes beyond replacing one name with another, as each gives us a new way of thinking about the other. The concept of entropy has been used in various fields of science and engineering and has received much attention in problems aimed at determining the disorder, possibility, or uncertainty in a physical ensemble. Entropy is a versatile tool for solving problems in different fields – for example, it has been used to solve granular materials problems using microstate quantity to determine the macrostate quantity [5–9] and has also been used to solve moment problems in solid-state physics [10,11], geophysical applications [12–14], econometrics [15], and transport planning [16,17].At the same time, entropy is also thought of as merely a very useful formalism, that is, a convenient means for understanding and representing physical principles in mathematical terms. In solving optimization problems, Li was the first to think of the activity or inactivity of constraints as their possibility, and used the maximum entropy principle to change the multi-constraints problem into a single constraint problem [18,19]. Entropy has also been added to the objective function in optimization problems, where it plays the role of a penalty function to accelerate the process of optimization [20].Although entropy has been used in many fields, to the best of our knowledge, there is very little work that uses entropy in solving contact forces, except in granular material, which we believe is the largest scale material for which entropy has been related to contact forces. Thus the question arises: Can entropy be used to solve contact forces in the continuum mechanics of elastic bodies? The contact mechanics of continuum elasticity is foundational to the field of mechanical engineering; it provides necessary information for the safe and energy efficient design of technical systems and for the study of tribology and indentation hardness. It is one type of highly nonlinear mechanics and studies the deformation of solids that touch each other at one point or more. Central ingredients of contact mechanics include the pressures and adhesion acting perpendicular to the contacting bodies׳ surfaces, the normal direction, and the frictional stresses acting tangentially between the surfaces [21].Numerical methods have proved to be the most efficient means for solving problems in contact mechanics [22,23]. In this paper, we provide an alternative to numerical methods, namely, an entropy-based procedure, to interpret and solve the contact forces of elastic bodies, focusing mainly on the normal direction, i.e., on frictionless contact mechanics. The elastic bodies discretized by finite elements are considered as an environment, each potential contact node (or node pair, sic passim) along with the normalized contact force on it is considered as a system, and all potential contact nodes along with their normalized contact forces are considered as a canonical ensemble, with the normalized contact forces representing the microstates of the contact nodes. Using the maximum entropy principle, the relationship between the normalized contact forces and the displacements can be constructed. The displacements of the elastic body can be treated as the temperature source for the non-isolated environment. Given this formulation, we present an iterative procedure that can then solve a series of isolated ensembles for finding the contact forces, with the monotonicity of the potential energy used as a termination condition.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, a short introduction to entropy formulation in statistical physics is presented and entropy-based formulations for contact forces are derived. Section 3 presents an iterative procedure for the contact forces along with a detailed interpretation of the maximum entropy principle and the minimum potential energy principle. In Section 4, some examples are analyzed to verify the correctness and performance of the iterative procedure, and the final section presents the papers conclusions.Let us define an ensemble as consisting of m systems or particles, where the probability of system i occupying a microstate is pi. A canonical ensemble is an ensemble defined by the probabilityp={p1,p2,…,pm}Tthat characterizes the microstates of a system in equilibrium with an environment at temperature T. Maximizing the Gibbs entropyS=−κpTlnpsubject to the normalization condition1Tp=1and an expectation value of energy〈E〉=eTpis equivalent to finding the stationery condition of the following Lagrangian function:(1)L(p,γ,δ)=−κpTlnp+γ(eTp−〈E〉)+δ(1Tp−1),where κ is a coefficient related to the ensemble, γ and δ are Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the two constraints, namely, the normalization condition and the expectation, respectively, ande={e1,e2,…,em}Tis the energy of the particles. In this paper, we follow the convention of denoting matrices or vectors with bold letters and logarithmic functions or exponential functions in compact forms, e.g.,1={1,…,1}T,lnp={lnp1,…,lnpm}T,exp(p)={exp(p1),…,exp(pm)}T. Letting the differential of Eq. (1) with respect topbe zero, that is,(2)−κlnp−κ1+γe+δ1=0,we can expresspin terms ofeas follows:(3)p=exp(δκ1−1+γκe)=exp(δκ−1)exp(γκe).Using the normalization condition1Tp=1, we then obtain(4)p=exp(γκe)Z,where Z is the system partition function, a sum over the microstates of the system,(5)Z=1Texp(γκe).The relationship between the entropy S, system energy E, and temperature T can be captured as1T=∂S∂E, and so for this case of a non-isolated system, we have(6)1T=∂S∂〈E〉.Now let us use it to eliminate the Lagrange multiplier γ. Substitutinglnp=γκe−lnZ1into the entropy S, we have(7)S=−γ〈E〉+κlnZ,and given(8)∂lnZ∂γ=1κZeTexp(γκe)=1κpTe=1κ〈E〉,the following equation holds:(9)∂S∂〈E〉=−γ−(〈E〉−κ∂lnZ∂γ)∂γ∂〈E〉=−γ.Therefore, the relationship betweenp, E and T is as follows:(10)p=exp(−1κTe)1Texp(−1κTe).The probability is obtained by maximizing the entropy for a system, and it has been proved that the entropy for a system is simply1mof the entropy of the ensemble, so maximizing the entropy of the ensemble will also produce the same results as Eq. (10). More details on entropy in statistical physics can be found in [4] and its references.Let us consider an elastic structure of two bodies coming into contact; see Fig. 1. The boundary of the elastic bodies consists of the displacement boundary Γv, the external loads boundary Γt, and the potential contact boundary Γc. The elastic bodies are discretized by finite elements, and the finite element nodes are separated into two groups: one includes the potential contact nodes on the potential contact boundary, and the other includes the nodes on the rest of the body. We consider the contact part as a canonical ensemble, as in statistical physics. Table 1presents a comparison of entropy in statistical physics and in contact mechanics.Analogously to the derivation in Section 2.1, we write the entropy in the formS=−ρλTlnλ, and the Lagrangian function for the elastic contact problem is(11)L(λ,α,β)=−ρλTlnλ+αλTd(u)+β(1Tλ−1),where α and β are Lagrange multipliers,d(u)is the function of displacement related to the potential contact nodes, andλis the vector of normalized contact forces on the potential contact nodes – which therefore satisfies1Tλ=1. According to the stationary condition of the Lagrangian function with respect toλ, we have(12)−ρlnλ−ρ1+αd(u)+β1=0,and thus we obtain(13)λ=exp(αρd(u))1Texp(αρd(u)).The next step is to find the Lagrange multiplier α. In statistical physics, the Lagrange multiplier γ is eliminated by using the relation∂S∂〈E〉=1T, which relates the energy to the temperature. However, in elastic contact problems, the energy in the ensemble we have just defined is the work done by the contact forces, which are related to the displacement of the elastic body. Since the work here concerns the displacement, we can eliminate the Lagrange multiplier α by using the principle of the minimum potential energy of the structure. In the finite element analysis of the displacement of a structure with a contact condition, the principle of minimum potential energy is given by(14)minu∈Uπ(u),withπ(u)=12uTKu−cTuandU={u∈Rn|d(u)∈Rm,d(u)≤0}, whereK∈Rn×nis a positive definite stiffness matrix, n gives the degrees of freedom, andc∈Rnis the vector combining the body force and the external force. The corresponding Lagrangian function for the principle of minimum potential energy is(15)L(u,λ,α)=π(u)+αλTd(u).We can see thatαλis the Lagrange multiplier vector to the constraintd(u), and1Tαλ=α1Tλ=α, so α is the total sum of the Lagrange multipliers. Sinceλ=αλαis the normalized Lagrange multiplier, α is therefore the total sum of contact forces on the potential contact nodes andλis the normalized contact forces. By differentiating it partially with respect to u, we obtain the stationary condition(16)Ku−c+α∂d(u)∂uλ=0.Hered(u)is the function of the relative displacement of the potential contact nodes. For node-to-node contact mode processing in finite element analysis, it can take the formd(u)=Au−g, whereA∈Rm×nis the transformation matrix andg∈Rmis the gap between two contact bodies. Therefore, using Eq. (16), we obtain the following equation for the displacement u in terms of c, A, andλ:(17)u=K−1(c−αATλ).As stated above, in the ensemble constructed by the nodes on the potential contact surface, the expectation of energy is the work done by the contact forces, that is,(18)〈E〉=αλTd(u).If there is a non-zero relative displacement between a contact node pair in the normal direction of the contact surface, then the contact force on the contact node pair is zero because there is no contact between the two nodes. If, on the other hand, the displacement is zero, this means that contact occurs between the two nodes and there will be a contact force, and therefore we obtain〈E〉=0. These are referred to as the complementary conditions in contact problems. Takingd(u)=Au−gin node-to-node contact mode and substituting (17) into (18), we have(19)α=λT(AK−1c−g)λTAK−1ATλ.Then, by substituting the right-hand side into (17), the displacement u can be expressed in terms of the normalized contact forceλ, that is,(20)u=K−1c−λT(AK−1c−g)λTAK−1ATλK−1ATλ.Comparing the three Eqs. (10), (13) and (20), we see that in the first equation, the microstate probability p is expressed in terms of the temperature T and particle energy e; in the second equation, the normalized contact forceλis expressed in terms of the total contact force α and the displacement u; and in the third equation, the displacement u is expressed in terms of the normalized contact forceλ.In this section, we will present an iterative procedure for solving the contact forces in contact problems. We are considering the contact problem as a non-isolated system analogous to that in statistical physics, and in the latter, the probability of a particle occupying a microstate changes according to the temperature. Therefore, by analogy in the contact problem, a normalized nodal contact force changes according to the displacement. From Eqs. (13) and (20), we have the relationship between the displacement and the contact force. In (13),λis expressed in terms of the displacement u, but there is also the total force α, which cannot be derived as an explicit equation in terms of the displacement. In Eq. (20), however, the displacement is only expressed in terms of the normalized contact forceλ, that is, there is only one variable,λ, in the right-hand side of the equation. Thus, for constructing an iterative procedure, we should chooseλas an initial value. At the same time, Eqs. (10) and (13) are derived from the principle of maximum entropy, so we can useλ=1m1as an initial value because it is the solution for the maximum entropy, which isρlogm. Substituting the initial value in (19) and (20), we can obtain the total contact force and the displacement, respectively, but this is far from obtaining the true solution for α and u. This is because whenλ=1m1, all nodal contact forces are equal on the potential contact nodes, but this is impossible in contact problems unless the shapes of the elastic bodies, the loads on the bodies, and the sizes of elements related to the potential contact nodes are intentionally designed.If the total contact force α is greater than zero, this means that there is contact between the contact surfaces, while if α is less than or equal to zero, there is no contact. In the case of α being greater than zero, the displacement calculated by (20) usingλ=1m1will lead to a solution far below the minimum potential energy, that is to say, the potential energy calculated in this step will be less than that given by the principle of minimum potential energy, and therefore, when this displacement u is used to calculate a newλ, it will try to drawλup to abide by the principle of minimum of potential energy, just the same as temperature will affect the probability of a particle. The iterative process is simply depicted as(21)λ0→u0⇒λ1→u1⇒λ2→u2⇒λ3→⋯where the procedure represented by→is driven by the principle of minimum potential energy, corresponding to the isolated system in statistical physics, while the procedure represented by⇒is driven by the principle of maximum entropy, which plays the role of connecting two isolated systems (for example,λ0→u0andλ1→u1) to make the procedure as a whole work as a non-isolated system. The procedure is illustrated in Fig. 2. In the figure, S and P represent the entropy and potential energy, respectively. In the first step,λ0=1m1is used to determine α0 andu0using (19) and (20), respectively, then these are used to determineλ1using (13), and then the new α and u are obtained, with the procedure continuing until the termination condition is met.For the termination condition, we check the difference between the norms ofλobtained by two iterations: if the difference is less than or equal to a predefined tolerance value δ, then the procedure is terminated. More detailed iterative procedure is listed as follows:(1)Define the tolerance value δ, and set k=0, calculateλk=1m1;Calculateαk=λkT(AK−1c−g)λkTAK−1AkTλ,uk=K−1(c−αkATλk), andλk+1=exp(αkexp(k)(Auk−g))1Texp(αkexp(k)(Auk−g));If∥λk+1−λk∥is less than or equal to δ, then terminate the iteration, or else setk=k+1, then go to step 2.Another way to specify a termination condition is to check the increase of potential energy [24] . Whenα>0, which means there is contact on the potential contact surfaces, the potential energy calculated in each step should increase; therefore, when it decreases, the procedure should be terminated. This is because under the normalization condition1Tλ=1, the potential energy calculated in each step is always less than the potential energy determined by the solution, so that when the potential energy for the next step is less than in the present step, we know that the solution has been missed and we can use the potential energy in the present step as the solution. A better way to specify a termination condition is by considering both δ and α.As suggested by Li in solving optimization problems [18,19], an arbitrary number ρ should be used to speed up the iteration to convergence. In the present procedure, ρ is defined asexp(−k), where k is the number of iterations. A general theory of convergence for the iterative procedure still needs to find; however, all illustrated 2D examples that we have done, whether listed or not listed in this paper, converge to the solutions. Let us substituteλin (13) into (18):αexp(αρd(u))T1Texp(αρd(u))d(u)=〈E〉Asα>0,d(u)≤0, and〈E〉=0, the above equation can be simplified toexp(αρd(u))Td(u)=0The acceleration obtained by changing the parameter ρ from a large value to a small one in the iteration lies in the fact that with it, we can omit the slack constraint. Takedi(u)<0, which is a slack constraint, as an example. As the optimum is approached, this constraint may in theory be omitted from the problem, since the largerαρis, the more quickly the convergence rate forexp(αρdi(u))di(u)approaches zero, and this acceleration allowsdi(u)<0to be omitted at the optimum. The physical meaning of still needs further study. In the computation experiments, we tested different values of, and in addition toρ=exp(−k), we could only say thatρ=exp(−k)is a reliable choice but not that it is guaranteed to be the best one.In this section, we examine some examples to verify the correctness and efficiency of the entropy-based iterative procedure proposed in the previous section. The examples involve the nodal forces produced from the contact between an elastic body and a rigid foundation and between two elastic bodies. We compare the solutions calculated by the entropy evaluation with the solutions calculated by commercial code [25].Example 1An elastic slab in the state of plane strain is fixed at two ends and pressed on a foundation as shown in Fig. 3. Young׳s modulus of the elastic body isE=2900N/cm2, Poisson׳s ratio is ν=0.4, and the pressure isp=10N/cm2. The dimensions of the structure in centimeters are shown in the figure. There is a gap of0.3cmbetween the elastic body and the foundation. In this example, we will consider two cases to verify the correctness of the iterative procedure: the elastic body makes contact with a rigid foundation and with an elastic foundation. Due to symmetry, only half of the body is used to construct the finite element model.We set the length of the potential contact edge to 5, half the length of the foundation. Fig. 4shows the finite element mesh and 11 potential contact node pairs arranged on the potential contact edges. Figs. 5 and 6show the results of contact forces on the potential contact nodes for the cases of a rigid foundation and an elastic foundation, respectively. The numbers on the lines represent the iteration number, and the square marks show the reference solution produced by the commercial code. (To make the figure concise, the iteration numbers are not shown for the results of node 1 and node 11.) In the case of the rigid foundation, the initial value ofλis set to1m, that is,λ0=111, and 8 iterations of the iteration procedure (21) are executed to calculate the solutions before the termination condition is met. Tables 2 and 3give the results of the entropy, the total nodal contact force α, and the potential energy PE in each iteration for the two cases.The initial valueλ0that is used to generate α0 and the displacementu0is obtained using the maximum entropy in the situation of an ideal state of the canonical ensemble. We can see from the tables thatα0<0, which means that there will be no contact occurring on the potential contact surfaces even though all normalized nodal contact forces are set to111, an impossible situation. In the next iteration, which is a non-isolated procedure with the minimum potential energy, a new normalized nodal contact forceλ1is produced. From the tables, we can see that in the first three iterations all values of α are less than zero, so there is no contact occurring in these steps. We can also see that the potential energy PE decreases in the first three steps, which is because there is no contact and, given the principle of minimum potential energy, the potential energy calculated in each step will approach the minimum potential energy from above.When there finally is contact, α becomes greater than zero, and the potential energy increases in the last five steps until the termination condition is met. The mathematical meaning of the non-isolated procedure from u toλ, i.e., Eq. (13), is that it is filtering out the entries that are satisfied by the global minimum of potential energy from the vector of the displacement function,d(u). This makes the global minimum of potential energy violate the inequalityd(u)≤0, and because1Tλis 1, the potential energy in each iteration is always approaching the solution from below. The principle of maximum entropy and the principle of minimum potential energy form a min-max duality problem similar to that in mathematical programming.From the two tables, we can also see that the entropy is always decreasing as the iteration numbers increase. As the maximum entropy is used as an initial value, the entropy should be smaller in the following iterations. If there is no way to stop the iterations, the entropy will decrease to zero monotonically as the parameter ρ becomes smaller and smaller. This shows one characteristic of entropy as commonly associated with the degree of order or disorder of a physical system. We may assume that the normalized nodal contact forces are in a state of disorder at the beginning of the iteration procedure, and then as the iterations are carried out, the normalized nodal contact forces gradually move to a state of order.In this example, the results for two cases show that the iterative procedure can solve the problems without any difficulty, as only 8 iterations are needed to meet the convergence criterion and all solutions are almost identical to the solutions provided by the commercial code.Example 2An elastic cylinder that is in the state of plane strain comes to contact with a foundation as shown in Fig. 7. Young׳s modulus of the elastic body isE=2900N/cm2, Poisson׳s ratio is ν=0.4, and a point forcep=80N/cmis applied at the top of the cylinder. The dimensions of the structure in centimeters are shown in the figure. We will also consider two cases for this example: the foundation is a rigid body, or it is an elastic body. Again, due to symmetry, only half of the body is used to construct the finite element model.Fig. 8shows the finite element mesh and the potential contact node pairs on the potential contact edges. The potential contact length is set to 2.85cm in the x direction, and 11 node pairs are arranged on the potential contact edges.Figs. 9 and 10show the results of contact forces on the potential contact nodes or node pairs for the cases of a rigid foundation and an elastic foundation, respectively. Six and five iterations, respectively, are needed to calculate the solutions for the two cases. Tables 4 and 5give the results of the entropy, the total nodal contact force α, and the potential energy PE in each iteration for the two cases. As there is no gap between the contact body and the foundation, the total contact force is greater than zero, and it is always 80N for all iterations. This is because only one point force 80N is applied to the finite element node at the top of the cylinder, and the iterative procedure shows a clear illustration of the characteristic of one point force application in finite element analysis for the contact problem.As discussed in Example 1,α>0makes the potential energy PE increase in the iterative procedure. What happens in Example 2 is different, however, from what happened in Example 1, where we hadα<0in the first three steps. In Example 2, even though the initial values are set to111, which is also impossible in this case as the contact body is a cylinder, contact does occur because there is no gap between the contact body and the foundation, so α is always greater than zero. The entropy keeps decreasing monotonically with the increasing number of iterations, behaving in the same manner as in Example 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an idea related to entropy in statistical physics is used to evaluate the contact forces in the continuum mechanics of elastic structures. Although entropy has been used in many fields, this is to the best of our knowledge the first research that uses it to solve contact forces with a definite physical meaning, and not only as a useful mathematical formalism. The finite element model of the elastic bodies is considered as a non-isolated environment in which each potential contact node along with its related information (such as the normalized contact force) is considered as a system, the normalized contact force on a potential contact node is considered as a microstate, and all systems of the potential contact nodes are considered as an ensemble.Using this formulation, an iterative solution procedure is then presented, one that is so simple that only a few additional lines of codes are needed in an existing finite element program. The results of the iterative solution procedure for two examples show that it solves the final microstates of the potential contact nodes efficiently and that all related results, such as entropy, total contact force, and potential energy, converge monotonically. As the number of iterations increases, entropy decreases and potential energy – on the condition of contact occurring, i.e.,α>0– increases, which illustrates the entropy associated with an elastic structure׳s changing from disorder to order as it comes into contact with a foundation.Future work can enrich the research on using entropy in contact mechanics. Examples include further exploring the meaning of statistical physics in contact mechanics from the viewpoint of physics, finding an adaptive parameter ρ to speed up the iterations and improve the accuracy of the iterative procedure from a computational viewpoint, and extending the procedure to solve more complex contact problems.