@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis and design of cold-formed dimpled steel columns using Finite Element techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
FE analysis is established to simulate cold-formed dimpled steel columns.Buckling and ultimate strength of dimpled steel columns were investigated.FE predicted column strength values correlated well with experimental results.Design for buckling and ultimate strength of dimpled columns was developed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dimpled steel,Finite Element Analysis,Plastic strain,Buckling,Ultimate load,Design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dimpled steel products are produced from the combination of an innovative dimpling process and a traditional forming process such as cold-roll forming or press-braking. The wider use of cold-formed dimpled steel members has promoted considerable interest in the local instability and strength of these members. Of particular interest is their buckling behaviour and ultimate strength capacity in columns under compressive loading. However, the dimpling process produces cold-formed sections with a complex ‘dimpled’ surface topography and the ‘dimpled’ material is non-uniformly work hardened through the entire thickness. Owing to these complex issues, there are no existing analytical and design methods to calculate the buckling strength of dimpled products and validate against physical measurements. This paper presents the analysis of the compressive behaviour of cold-formed channel and lipped channel dimpled steel columns using Finite Element techniques. True stress–strain data obtained from physical tests were incorporated into nonlinear simulations of dimpled steel columns. It was found that the predicted buckling and ultimate loads correlated well with the experimental results. Based on the validated Finite Element results for different geometries, standard design formulae for determining buckling and ultimate loads of channel and lipped channel dimpled columns were developed. It is demonstrated that the Finite Element Analysis can therefore be used to analyse and design cold-formed dimpled steel columns.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dimpled steel strips are cold-roll formed from plain steel strips by the UltraSTEEL® process developed by Hadley Industries plc [1]. The process uses a pair of rolls with rows of specially shaped teeth that form the dimple shapes from both sides of the plain sheet [2]. The dimpled strip is then progressively formed into a desired shape by passing through a series of cold-rolled forming rolls, arranged in tandem, or by press braking. It has been proven through physical tests and numerical simulations that the strength of dimpled specimens was significantly greater than plain specimens originating from the same coil material, and this enhancement is a result of the cold work applied to the material during the dimpling process [2–6].Dimpled steel products are increasingly used in a wide range of light building construction. They include wall studs, framing and roofing members, corrugated panels, vineyard posts, windows and door reinforcement and many other products. Amongst them, channel shaped products are the most common and widely used as compression and bracing members in such applications. The wider use of cold-formed dimpled steel members has promoted considerable interest in the local instability and strength of these members. Of particular interest is their buckling behaviour and ultimate strength capacity. However, design criteria for compressive strength of such cold-formed dimpled steel members have not been available. In recent years, the dimpled section innovation has begun to take greater advantage of manufacturing technology, and began to seriously push the requirements for design methods to be available.In a recent study [7], semi-empirical expressions for determining buckling and ultimate strengths of component plate elements of dimpled channel columns were formulated based on experimental data. This study focused upon determining the strength of the flange and web individually from dimpled column tests using the plate buckling coefficient, and subsequently obtaining the section capacity from these strengths. This, however, is inconvenient as the plate buckling coefficient did not take into consideration the interaction of section components including the flanges and web; therefore the strength ought to be determined at section level. Owing to the complex surface topography and the material which is highly nonlinear through the entire thickness, analytical methods are incapable of solving the post-buckling of dimpled steel members. Numerical methods such as Finite Element (FE) analysis, however, have been shown to be suitable for solving the complex and interrelated nonlinear changes in contact, geometry and material properties that occur in the process and section forming of dimpled steel products [5,6]. This enables the development of an efficient FE model to represent buckling and post-buckling of dimpled steel products. In recent studies [2,5] compression tests of cold-formed dimpled steel columns of different geometries were conducted and they enable the simulation results to be validated against the test results. The validated FE results can be then used to establish design formulae for cold-formed dimpled columns.In this paper, FE simulations of the compressive behaviour of cold-formed dimpled steel channel and lipped channel columns were presented. This includes a summary of the simplified approach to practically represent the dimpling process and resultant dimpled section which was earlier proposed by Nguyen et al. [5]. Simulations of plain steel columns having the same nominal dimensions and material taken from the same coil used to produce dimpled columns were also carried out in order to evaluate effects of the dimpling process on the strength of dimpled columns and to further justify the FE simulations. The test programme reported previously [2,7,8] were summarised and results were used to validate the performance of the FE simulations. The FE analysis was then proposed as an alternative and complementary method to the design of cold-formed dimpled steel columns. Their results on buckling and ultimate loads for a range of different column geometries were utilised to develop design formulae for channel and lipped channel dimpled steel column.A compressive axial force was applied to the column specimen by using a calibrated 200-kN capacity test rig. The column specimen was placed in the test rig and was loaded at a constant rate of 0.11mm/min. Special electrical strain gauges were used to measure the axial strains of the dimpled specimens; the critical buckling load was determined from strain gauge readings. Displacement transducers (LVDTs) were used to determine the axial shortening and out-of-plane displacements of plain and dimpled specimens. They were utilised to determine the critical buckling load for all dimpled specimens. A detailed test programme that related to the arrangement of strain gauges and LVDTs, specimen calibration, measurements, test setup, support end conditions, alignment procedure, instruments for determining buckling load and test procedure was described in [2]. The tests provided buckling and ultimate loads and failure modes for the channel and lipped channel dimpled columns. The column specimens were selected for a range of different geometries (lengths and cross sections) and fabricated by both cold-rolled forming and press-braking. In addition to column compression tests, tensile tests of the column material were also conducted to determine the material properties. The data of plain and dimpled column specimens taken from [2,7,8] were used in FE simulations. The measured test section dimensions and yield loads were summarised inTable 1 and the results are presented inTable 2.Different groups of specimens were selected to take into account the variation in the steel material and geometric dimensions. The specimens were organised into 15 groups of bf/bw ratios ranging from 0.28 to 1.95, in which bf is the width of the flange b excluding the corner radius and bw is the width of the section d excluding the corner radii. Each group contains four plain and four dimpled specimens but only the average data is presented in Tables 1 and 2 (the plain and dimpled specimens originated from the same coil of material, fabricating by the same forming method and having the same nominal dimensions). Test groups 1 and 5–8 contain only plain specimens. The column specimens were labelled, a plain specimen label starts with the letter ‘P’ whilst a dimpled specimen starts with the letter ‘U’. For example, a channel specimen labelled as U-T1.0F50.8W101.6L500 is described as follows: U: Dimpled specimen; T: Thickness, 1.0: Nominal plate thickness (mm); F: Flange, 50.8: Nominal flange width (mm); W: Web, 101.6: Nominal web height (mm); L: Length, 500: Nominal column length (mm). For lipped channel column specimens as shown in the test groups 15 and 16, E is the nominal lip length in mm.The material properties of plain and dimpled steel in each group of specimens were determined from tensile tests. The test specimens were prepared according to the appropriate British Standard (BS 1639:1964). They had the ‘dog bone’ shape, cut from the centre of the web/flange plates in the longitudinal direction of the finished column specimens. For the plain specimens, the initial cross sectional area was calculated from the width and thickness, measured using a micrometre and vernier callipers. For the dimpled specimens, the cross sectional areas along the dimpled specimen were measured using a microscope. Three cross sectional areas along the dimpled specimen were measured using a microscope.Fig. 1 shows a dimpled sheet specimen and three typical cross sections: Section 1–1 across the dimple peaks, Section 2–2 across the dimple valleys and Section 3–3 is between Sections 1–1 and 2–2. The average of these cross sectional areas was deemed to be the initial cross sectional area. The stress was calculated using the measured force divided by the initial cross sectional area and the strain was obtained from the extensometer measurements. The resulting engineering stress–strain curves were plotted and the yield stress was obtained at a strain level of 0.2%. The yield stress data can be interpreted from the yield load data in Table 1 while full details of the tensile test data are provided in [2,7,8].Finite Element simulations were conducted using Marc (MSC Software, version 2012) to simulate the UltraSTEEL® dimpling process and compression tests of dimpled channel and lipped channel columns. The simplified approach [5] was used to practically represent dimpled columns. This approach can be summarised in the following steps: (i) simulating a simplified dimpling process that deform a flat steel plate into a dimple, (ii) use this generic dimple geometry to generate dimpled strip, (iii) simulating the cold forming process that develop the dimpled strip into a desired dimpled column (iv) simulating the dimpled column subject to compression test. The step (iii) of forming the dimpled strips into a dimpled column is shown inFig. 2; it includes the following steps: the plain sheet was deformed into the dimple as shown in Fig. 2(a). The dimple geometry was then used as a 3-D generic part to generate dimpled sheets or sections. Generally, 3-D solid elements are used to model the flat steel strip and subsequently the dimpled columns. However, a dimpled column model in this study contains more than 10 million 3-D elements, making it impractical to process at this stage. Therefore shell element approach is adopted instead of 3-D element approach. Based on the 3-D dimple geometry, shell elements were generated on the central plane of the dimple, having the strip thickness and presented as a ‘generic dimple element’ as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). The press-braking process to form section corner from the dimpled strip was then simulated by deforming the generic dimple elements into ‘corner dimple element’, i.e. of 90° bend angle, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The first length unit of the column was then generated by combining the generic dimple elements and corner dimple elements to form the column section, as shown in Fig. 2(d). Finally, the whole column was created in duplication the length unit for the whole column length as illustrate in Fig. 2(e). It should be noted that only the geometry of the dimple is transferred from the dimpling process in step (i) whilst material properties of the dimple is given from a separate tensile test on a dimpled steel sample.The simulations of plain steel products were carried out in parallel with dimpled steel products in order to further evaluate the FE results and effects of the dimpling process. In these simulations, the material properties of the sheet steel were obtained from physical tensile tests. A parametric study was carried out to investigate the effects of several parameters to the reliability of the FE model and results. Based on this investigation, a set of appropriate parameters were selected as presented [6].Geometric and material nonlinearity that occurred within the model were taken into account, thereby effectively modelling large strains and rotations. An elastic–plastic material model was used for the sheet steel. The material has Young׳s modulus E of 205GPa and Poisson׳s ratio of 0.3. The input of the material stress–strain data in the form of true stress (σtrue) versus true plastic strain(etruep)is required. The true stress and true plastic strain were converted from the engineering stress (σnom) and engineering strain (εnom) as follows:(1)σtrue=σnom(1+εnom)(2)εtruep=ln(1+εnom)−σnom/EThe engineering stress and strain data of the plain and dimpled steel was obtained from the tensile tests as explained in Section 2. Typical engineering stress–strain curves of plain and dimpled steel of test specimens in the test group 4 of Table 1 are shown inFig. 3.Details of Finite Element simulations are described here through channel column specimens in the test group 4 and lipped channel column specimens in the test group 16 of Table 1. In this example, the channel column specimens had nominal dimensions: length of 500mm, thickness of 1.00mm, flange width of 50.80mm, web width of 101.60mm and corner radius of 1.30mm (specimens P-T1.0F50.8W101.6L500 and U-T1.0F50.8W101.6L500). The lipped channel column specimens had a length of 500mm, thickness of 2.00mm, lip width of 14.00mm, flange width of 50.60mm, web width of 100.60mm and corner radius of 4.00mm (specimens P-T2.0F50.6W100.6E14.0L500 and U-T2.0F50.6W100.6E14.0L500).Fig. 4 illustrates the column specimens generated from the generic dimpled elements and the model setup including boundary conditions at the column ends.The simulations were carried out on channel and lipped channel column specimens, fixed at both ends. In the column test simulations, all stresses and strains were set to zero at the beginning of the analysis. The dimpled channel column was modelled using 472,500 elements while the dimpled lipped channel column was modelled using 578,250 elements; they are four-node, thin-shell elements with global displacements and rotations as degrees of freedom (element type 139). Load was applied on the top end of the column using the displacement-controlled method. The loading point was at a reference node that connects to a set of tied nodes at the end of the column, as shown in Fig. 4. The link between the reference node and the tied nodes was based on a rigid link connection, only unrestrained in loading direction. The displacement was increased in successive increments until the column failed. A full Newton-Raphson method was used for the iterative procedure and an implicit, static analysis was employed.Simulations of the column compression test were undertaken in two steps. In the first step, a linear elastic buckling analysis was performed on the perfect column to obtain its buckling mode shapes (eigenvalues). In the second step, a nonlinear post-buckling analysis was carried out to predict the column behaviour and ultimate load capacity. The buckling shapes derived in the first step were used as initial geometric imperfections of the column specimen. In these simulations, the lowest buckling modes were used to generate the imperfections because they are usually the critical buckling modes, and they were similar to the modes observed in tests (for example, FE first buckling modes were comparable with experimental ones, as shown in Figs. 7 and 8).The mode and degree of initial imperfections were selected as suggested in [5]. The degree of initial imperfection was specified as the maximum amplitude of the buckling mode shape and there were several ways to determine it. According to EN 1993-1-5: 2006, Annex C, Section C.5 [9], the geometric imperfection values applied to finite element models have to be a/200 (a is the web width) for local buckling. Schafer and Pekoz [10] suggested for type 1 local imperfection: d1≈0.006w, and for type 2 local imperfection: d2≈t; where type 1 is the maximum local imperfection in a stiffened element (w/t<200, t<3mm); type 2 is the maximum local imperfection in an unstiffened element (w/t<100, t<3mm); w is the width and t is the thickness. The imperfection values were also defined in terms of thickness, such that [11] used the imperfection values 0.15t and 0.64t and Chou et al. [12] tested 0.10t, 0.50t and 1.00t. These values were used in FE modelling and the results were compared with the test results. It was found that 0.10t imperfection value produced the best agreement with the test result in terms of buckling and ultimate loads; therefore, the imperfection value of 0.10t was adopted in this study.The design of dimpled channel and lipped channel columns was developed on the results of FE buckling and ultimate loads as described in Section 4. For channel columns, FE results were obtained from column models which replicated all the column specimens physically tested as presented in Table 1. For lipped channel columns, tested column specimens in the test group 15 and 16 in Table 1 were modelled. Other lipped channel columns were developed from available channel columns of test groups 2–14 by adding a corner and a lip of 9mm to their flanges׳ end. Some additional simulations were carried out to obtain broad simulation results for ultimate loads; they included simulating channel columns in the test group 14 and lipped channel columns in the test group 11 with two different sets of yield stresses.Buckling of column specimens was derived on the complete section using the FE buckling results. Therefore the buckling coefficient k was calculated from the following equation [13]:(3)k=12Pcr(1−ν2)(bw/t)2/π2EAwhere Pcr is the critical buckling load; A is the area of the section; E is Young׳s modulus; ν is Poisson׳s ratio; bw is the width of the section, and t is the thickness of the section. The column geometries and dimensions are presented in Table 1 and full details can be found in [2,7,8].Based on the FE results for buckling and ultimate loads, expressions of k versus bf/bw and PmL/Py versus (Py/Pcr)1/2 of the dimpled channel and lipped channel columns were formulated using regression analysis; where Pcr is the critical buckling load; PmL is the ultimate load and Py is the yield load. These expressions are used to develop a design procedure using FE analysis.Results of Finite Element simulations of channel column specimens in the test group 4 and lipped channel column specimens in the test group 16 of Table 1 are presented first. Results of all simulated columns are presented in Table 2 and Figs. 10 and 11.Fig. 5 shows the comparison between the experimental and FE load–axial displacement curves for plain and dimpled channel columns. The experimental curves were also plotted for comparison. The FE ultimate loads were in excellent agreement with experimental results, with a maximum difference of 1% and 3% for the plain and dimpled channel columns, respectively. The comparison between the experimental and FE load–axial displacement curves for plain and dimpled lipped channel columns are illustrated inFig. 6. The FE and experimental values for ultimate loads were close, with a maximum difference of 1% and 5% for the plain and dimpled lipped channel columns, respectively.Generally, the FE predicted values for both channel and lipped channel columns were in good agreement with the experimental values, with a maximum difference of 10%. During the initial stage of loading, all the curves show a linear relationship between the load and axial-displacement (end-shortening). The initial stiffness and behaviour predicted by the simulation are in very good agreement with the experimental results for both plain and dimpled specimens. When the column buckled, the column entered the post-buckling range where there is a nonlinear relationship between the load and axial-displacement. The axial stiffness gradually reduced until the ultimate load was reached. After that point, the load decreased significantly but the column specimens still exhibit some load bearing capacity until it failed. It can be seen that the experimental curves had smaller loads in post-peak behaviour than the FE ones. Lesser load could be due to some degree of imperfection that occurred during failure, which is difficult to measure and apply in FE modelling.Fig. 7 shows the buckling and failed mode shapes of the dimpled channel column in comparison with the experimental shapes.Fig. 8 shows the failed mode shapes of the plain and dimpled lipped channel columns, in which the experimental shapes were also illustrated. It can be seen that the buckling and failed modes predicted by FE models are very similar to the experimental modes for both plain and dimpled column specimens. This further confirms the validation of the FE simulations.As the load increases it was observed that wavelike deflections appeared along the length of the flanges and webs of the column specimens, as shown in Figs. 7 and 8. These column specimens clearly exhibited ‘local buckling’ and due to this local collapse, they failed at maximum loads which had lower magnitudes than yield loads. Fig. 8 shows that the plain and dimpled column specimens had similar failure modes; they developed the same plastic mechanism in failure, in the form of lip-disc mechanisms [14]. As an example, the stress distributions and deformed shapes at buckling, ultimate load and failure of channel column are shown inFig. 9. It can be seen that when the column is buckled, there is a development of out-of-plane deflections in the flanges and web and the compressive stresses in each component redistribute and become concentrated at the edges of the corners. When the stresses at corners reach the maximum stresses, the column fails. These are in excellent agreement to the ‘effective width’ design concept which states that the stresses after buckling are mainly concentrated in the region near the folded edges of the section.For a broader validation, results of FE buckling load Pcr_FE and ultimate load PmL_FE of channel column specimens presented in Table 1 and comparison with experimental results are presented in Table 2. Compared to the plain column specimens from the same groups, the buckling and ultimate loads were increased by 9–33% and 8–26% in the dimpled column specimens, respectively. The significant increase in the strengths of dimpled columns is a result of the cold work applied to the material during the dimpling process.The elastic buckling loads predicted by the FE simulation were compared with the test results (the mean values are presented) as shown in column (7) of Table 2. The FE and experimental values were similar, with a maximum difference of 16% and 23% for test groups 4–8 and 10–16, respectively; however, the FE values were significantly greater than the experimental ones and the difference was great as 34% and 37% for test groups 1–3 and 9, respectively. The FE ultimate loads were compared with the experimental ultimate loads, as shown in column (8) of Table 2. The FE simulations provided conservative predictions of the experimental results, with a maximum difference of 5% for test groups 4–8, 15%, 16% and 11% for test groups 10–14; however, the FE ultimate values underestimated the experimental values and the difference was great as 51% and 21% for test groups 1–3 and 9, respectively. It was noted that for the specimens in test groups 1–3 and 9, the theoretical local buckling loads were even greater than the full section yield loads. The main reason for this could be the fact that these columns buckled in inelastic region while the FE local buckling loads were evaluated by means of elastic analysis.The buckling coefficient k (determined from Eq. (3)) for channel and lipped channel columns were plotted against the section geometric ratio bf/bw, and two-line regressions were formulated using the least square method, as shown inFig. 10. Also, expressions of PmL/Py versus (Py/Pcr)1/2 were established using power function fits using the least square method, as illustrated in Fig. 11; they are used for determining the ultimate strength of channel and lipped channel columns.The correlation curves and the FE results were obtained with an excellent agreement for the buckling coefficient data (the regression coefficient r2=0.94–0.97) and good agreement for the ultimate load data (the regression coefficient r2=077–0.81). As the FE ultimate load data spread widely for both dimpled channel and lipped channel columns in the region of (Py/Pcr)1/2<1 as illustrated inFig. 11, only a fair fitting was achieved for the fit between regression lines and FE data (r2=077–0.81). This mainly happened with data of the specimens in test groups 1–3 and 9 where the critical buckling loads predicted by FE analysis were even greater than the full section yield loads. The reason could be due to the fact that the FE buckling loads were determined using elastic analysis while these columns actually buckled in inelastic region, as explained earlier in Section 5. Therefore the use of the fitting models for predicting ultimate loads in this region might not gain a great level of accuracy.All the design formulae can be summarised as follows:For the dimpled channel sections:(4a)k=−8.5735(bf/bw)+8.3419bf/bw≤0.82(4b)k=−1.042(bf/bw)+2.4044bf/bw>0.82For the dimpled lipped channel sections:(5a)k=−6.2817(bf/bw)+8.7679bf/bw≤0.94(5b)k=−1.3788(bf/bw)+4.2144bf/bw>0.94For the dimpled channel sections:(6)PmL/Py=0.729(Pcr/Py)0.35For the dimpled lipped channel sections:(7)PmL/Py=0.744(Pcr/Py)0.17

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
