@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A ghost particle-based coupling approach for the combined finite-discrete element method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of a novel coupling approach for the combined finite-discrete element method by means of ghost particles.A novel one-step back strategy is proposed to overcome the incompatibility of DoFs between FE nodes and DE particles.Demonstrated effectiveness of the proposed coupling approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Combined finite-discrete element method,Coupling approach,Ghost particle,Multiscale modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The combined finite-discrete element method takes the advantages of both the finite element (FE) method and the discrete element (DE) method, but a coupling approach is required for effective combination of the two methods. In this paper, a novel coupling approach is proposed by means of ghost particles. The entire domain is decomposed into a FE- and a DE-subdomain, and ghost particles are constructed inside the interface FE domain to connect with the DE domain in a consistent interaction manner as the DE method. A novel one-step back strategy is proposed to overcome the incompatibility of degree of freedoms between FE nodes and DE particles from a numerical sense. The coupling approach is very simple to implement and its effectiveness is validated by numerical examples.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The conventional finite element (FE) method has some limitations in numerical modelling of brittle fracture problems since it is based on the continuum mechanics, and special treatments have to be employed, such as the extended finite element method [1,2] and cohesive zone methods [3,4]. In contrast, the discrete element (DE) method is able to capture the discontinuous nature of materials, but it is not as computationally efficient as the FE method. In order to take the advantages of the FE- and the DE-method while avoiding their drawbacks, a combination of both, termed as the combined finite-discrete element method, has been proposed by Munjiza et al. [5–7] and applied to the modelling of geomaterials for various purposes [8,9].Essentially, the combination of the two methods can be achieved by the interaction of either contacting or coupling. The contacting interaction is more suitable for the contact occurring among different pieces from one object when fragmentations take place [10], and between two or more different media [11,12]. The coupling interaction is more applicable for the connection between different subdomains of an entire domain, which is decomposed for efficient computation and the better characterisation of interest zone via the so-called multiscale modelling. The coupling approaches used along with the combined finite-discrete element method are generally classified into the overlapping coupling method [13–16] and the interface coupling method [17–22]. For the former, compatibility condition is required to be satisfied in an overlapping domain [23], where the total energy is a linear mixing of energies from both FEs and DEs; while only the compatibility condition at the interface needs to be satisfied for the latter. The overlapping coupling approach is more accurate for the wave propagation problems, but for the problems with insignificant dynamic effect, the great simplicity makes the interface coupling approach more favourable.In this work, a ghost particle-based approach is proposed to couple the continuum with discrete elements at the interface for the combined finite-discrete element method. The computational domain is decomposed into a FE domain and a DE domain by an interface. The two domains are connected by the interface interaction between physical particles and ghost particles which are constructed at the boundary FEs. This approach is conceived from the extension of atomistic-continuum coupling [24,25], in which ghost atoms are used to coincide with the FE nodes in the transition region (harsh mesh requirement), and the number of coincidence layers is dependent on the cut-off radius of atomistic potential. For the present approach, however, only one layer of ghost particles is required because the interaction of DEs only takes place between adjacent particles. Furthermore, to overcome the difficulties of meshing, the strictly coincident condition is relaxed by introducing ghost particles, whose positions are determined by the conventional interpolation of nodal coordinates of FEs. The application of this ‘ghost’ concept can also been found in [26–28], but the interaction formulations between physical particles and ghost particles differ.The constraint of interface compatibility between the FE domain and the DE domain is enforced by the interaction between ghost particles and DE particles, which is substantially different from the conventional constraint-enforcement strategies, e.g., the penalty method and the Lagrange multiplier method. The penalty method, as used in [18,21,29–31], is easy to implement. However, this method is only able to achieve an approximate solution and the selection of penalty stiffness is notorious and problem-dependent; furthermore, the large penalty stiffness can lead to unstable computation system and reduced time-step size. In contrast, the Lagrange multiplier method [13–16,32–34] gives an exact solution but can introduce extra degree of freedoms (DoFs) into the computation system, leading to a complicated implementation and an inefficient computation. The present ghost particle-based approach, however, exploits a consistent interaction manner without the use of a penalty method or a Lagrange multiplier method as the DE method can couple two different domains, which makes its implementation quite straightforward.Another contribution of the present work is to propose a novel strategy to overcome the incompatibility issue of the DoFs between FE nodes and DE particles. It is well known that for three-dimensional problems, each node of FE hexahedrons is of three translational DoFs, but in addition to the three translational DoFs, each DE particle has three more rotational DoFs. The DoF incompatibility therefore remains a problem to the correct treatment of the moment (resulting from coupling force) in the coupling system; that is, DE particles can naturally take that moment into account while FE nodes cannot. Regarding this incompatibility issue, most works [13,16,18–20,32] did not propose proper treatment but ignored it, despite Jebahi et al. [15] and Li et al. [14] claimed this could be corrected implicitly by their proposed methods. One explicit solution to this issue is linking rotation to the antisymmetric part of the displacement gradient of continuum [27,33]. This treatment, however, introduces much more computation operations into the system [14]. Another strategy to tackle this issue resorts to the micropolar elasticity [35], which is able to account for local rotation in continuum domain. In order to address this incompatibility issue associated with the classical elasticity theory, we propose a one-step back strategy, by which the moment effect can be taken into account and takes effect one time-step behind.The ultimate goal of this coupling approach is to be applied to the modelling of fracture problems, but before doing so, an important and indispensable step is to validate its effectiveness prior to the initiation of fractures. This paper is therefore confined to the development and validation of a coupling approach, without exploration and investigation into fracture mechanics. The governing equations and the DE model will be briefly formulated in next section. Afterwards, the development of the proposed coupling approach is presented in detail, followed by numerical validations. Some conclusions are drawn at last.The governing equations for FEs and DEs are briefly described first, followed by an introduction of a DE connective model, which is used to discretise the domain of practical interest.An entire domain, subject to prescribed displacement at the Dirichlet boundaryΓuand prescribed tractions at the Neumann boundaryΓσ, is divided into a continuum subdomainΩcand a discrete subdomainΩdas shown inFig. 1. The interface between these two subdomains is defined asΓI=∂Ωc∩∂Ωd.For the continuum subdomain, linear FE hexahedrons are used for spatial discretization and the equation of motion for FE nodes (with a subscriptI) is given as(1)mIv̇I+fIint=fIres+fIcouwheremIis the nodal mass which is derived based on the lumped mass strategy [36];vIis the nodal velocity vector;fIintis the internal nodal force vector;fIresis the resultant force vector consisting of external tractions and/or damping force;fIcouis the coupling force vector resulting from the interaction with the discrete subdomain.The discrete subdomain is discretised by spherical rigid DE particles and the equation of motion for DE particles (with a subscriptd) is expressed as follows(2){mdv̇d=fdres+fdcouIdω̇d=md+r×fdcouwheremdis the mass of the particle;vdis the translational velocity vector of the particle in a global coordinate frame;fdresis the resultant force vector applied to the particle due to (a) external traction, (b) body force, (c) internal force when the DE connective model is used and (d) damping force (linearly proportional to the velocity) to dissipate kinetic energy for computational purpose;fdcouis the coupling force vector exerted on the particle resulting from the interaction with the continuum subdomain;Idis the moment of inertia of the particle;ωdis the angular velocity vector of the particle in the local coordinate frame which is embedded into the centroid of the particle;mdis the resultant moment vector applied to the particle due to the aforementioned forcesfdres;ris the moment arm of the coupling force.It is apparent from Eq. (1) that three translational DoFs are considered for each FE node (in three dimensions), however, three more rotational DoFs are taken into account for each DE particle in addition to the three translational ones as seen in Eq. (2). This implies that the FE method can be more computationally efficient than the DE method when considering the same elements in the computational system.Two models, the connective model [37,38] and the contact model [12,39], are widely used in the DE method. The DE connective method is favourable for modelling elastic-brittle materials, such as glass [40], because this model is able to be conveniently switched to the contact model. As the DE connective model is capable of modelling the response of materials that are initially continuous but eventually cracked [37], this model is employed herein to represent the elastic continuum used in the domain of particular interest. It is worth noting that, in most DE connective models, all DE particles have the same geometrical shape and size for easy characterisation of material properties.A number of DE connective models have been reported, of which the unit cell is either in hexagonal structure [37,38,41,42] or in cubic structure [38,43,44]. Among them, the model proposed by Yu [44] is employed because of its computational accuracy and cubic structure. This particular structure can result in flat boundaries with the DE model, which is practically very desirable for domain decomposition of coupling models as the burden of pre-processing can be effectively eased.The unit cell structure of this model is shown inFig. 2(a). It is apparent that this model is composed of 27 spherical particles of the same size which are located in a cubic structure. The central particle of this model is connected to 26 neighbouring particles, which can be categorized into three groups according to their distances to the central one as depicted by different numbers in Fig. 2(b). The interaction forcefbetween any two adjacent particles is calculated based on their relative displacementdand spring stiffnessK(see Fig. 2c) as follows(3)f=Kdwhere forcef=[fnfsft]T,d=[dndsdt]TandKis given as follows(4)K=[kn000ks000kt]Inside each pair as shown in Fig. 2(c), there are one orthogonal (kn) and two tangential (ksandkt) linear springs invisibly connecting them. Their stiffness are determined based on the energy equivalence between the one stored in the springs and that in solid elasticity, as given by [44](5){kn1=kn2=2Er5(1−2ν)ks1=kt1=ks2=kt2=2Er(1−4ν)5(1−2ν)(1+ν)kn3=ks3=kt3=0whereE,νandrare Young׳s modulus, Poisson’s ratio and the radius of DE particles, respectively.In the DE connective model, DE particles stay elastically connected, and thus the search for neighbouring contact does not need to perform at every time step. In fact, it only performs once at the initial stage of computing. It is worth noting that the interaction mechanism in this model is based on the tension and compression of springs, which introduce gaps and overlaps between interacting pair. As this DE model is usually used for small deformation problems, these gaps and overlaps are usually very slight. More importantly, these material separations and overlapping may seem non-physical from the micro point of view, but from the view of macro response of elastic materials, these gaps and overlaps are just the source activating material response.The proposed coupling approach is to transform the interaction between the FE domain and the DE domain into the interaction between ghost particles and boundary DE particles; hence the first important thing is to construct ghost particles in the FE domain, which will be illustrated in the Section 3.1. As ghost particles stick to their natural coordinates of corresponding isoparametric FEs, the determination of natural coordinates is indispensable and will be detailed in Section 3.2. The interaction between ghost particles and DE particles is described in an incremental form in Section 3.3, with a one-step back strategy proposed to overcome the DoF incompatibility issue.For the simplicity of formulations, the domain is decomposed into two subdomains as shown inFig. 3, where the region of particular interest, such as the impact zone or the area where fractures probably initiates, is discretised by DE particles, whereas the other region is discretised by FEs. Because of the unique advantage of the aforementioned DE model, i.e., being flat on boundary surfaces, the flat interface can be exploited for the decomposition of a three-dimensional domain. Note that the flat interface used in domain decomposition represents a class of coupling problems and can be seen from previous works [20,21,26,31,45,46] as well; also an additional benefit from employing this is the easy pre-processing of models. To avoid possible fractures occurring in the continuum region, the DE region has to be sufficiently large to cover the interest zone. For better characterisation of fracture patterns, the radius of DE particles is usually set much smaller than the size of FE hexahedrons. It is worth noting that every DE particle is of six DoFs (three translational and three rotational DoF) but each FE node has only three translational DoFs. Therefore, compared to a model fully discretised by DE particles on the entire domain, the coupling model is able to significantly reduce DoFs for the computation system. The reduction of DoFs can save computation time and this will be explicitly shown via a numerical example in Section 4.Ghost particles are located in the FE region as shown in Fig. 3 and the significance of them is to transform the interaction between the FE region and the DE region into the interaction between ghost particles and DE particles. Since the interaction of DE particles is of a contact type, only one layer of ghost particles is required to be constructed in the FE region (see Fig. 3). Furthermore, as particles use smaller element size than the FE-size for better characterisation as mentioned earlier, it is reasonable to construct ghost particles only in the boundary FEs. In a sense, ghost particles can be viewed as an extension of DE particles into the FE region, thus the size and location of them are required to be consistent with those of the DE particles, which have a special spatial arrangement as depicted in Fig. 2. To be more specific on ghost particles, each of them has a virtual radius of the same size as that of the DE particles. Note that this virtual radius only needs to be used once to determine their physical locations in the initial configuration. Because of the flat interface, the physical coordinates of ghost particles can be easily determined by(6)xg=xd−2rnwhere, as shown inFig. 4,xgandxdare the physical position vectors of the ghost particles and DE particles, respectively, andnis an outward unit normal vector of the interface. Note that the subscriptgdenotes ghost particles.Because of the physical proximity between ghost particles and boundary DE particles, the responses of them are consistent in terms of deformation. Also, as a virtual part of the corresponding FE region, ghost particles have the same kinematic response as that of the boundary FEs when subject to loading or under deformation. Therefore, to take these compatibility conditions into account, it is reasonable to assume that the ghost particles are attached to the material coordinates of their corresponding isoparametric FEs at all time, which was also implied by Xiao and Belytschko [23] and Li et al. [14] as shape functions used in their works only relate to material coordinates and are time-invariant. It is worth noting that for a Lagrangian mesh, the mapping between material coordinates and natural coordinates is one-to-one, and thus the natural coordinates can be considered as surrogate material coordinates [36]. This means that the determination of natural coordinates is of significance and the details will be given in next subsection.The computation of interaction between ghost particles and DE particles (see Fig. 3) takes the same form as that used in the DE model, which has been shown in Eq. (3). On the one hand, this interaction connects the FE region and the DE region, and on the other hand, as this computation manner is based on the tension and compression of springs, the gaps and overlaps between two separate regions will be introduced. However, since the interaction mechanism is in a consistent manner as the DE model, the introduced gaps and overlaps are slight and more importantly, consistent with those as produced by the DE model.Note that in a real computation, each ghost particle only needs to record its rotational velocity, which can be used to overcome the incompatibility issue of DoFs between FE nodes and DE particles. This will be presented in details in Section 3.3.As mentioned earlier, ghost particles stick to their natural coordinates of the corresponding isoparametric FEs. The physical coordinates of ghost particles can be obtained from Eq. (6), but their natural coordinates are unknown. Hence the determination of natural coordinates is the focus herein.For a given pointxlocated inside a hexahedron element, the physical coordinate(x,y,z)of that point can be expressed by the interpolation from nodal coordinates and their associated shape functionsN(ξ,η,ζ)as follows(7)x=x(ξ,η,ζ)=∑I=18NI(ξ,η,ζ)xIThe shape functions are specifically given as(8)NI=18(1+ξIξ)(1+ηIη)(1+ζIζ)where the natural coordinate for each nodeIis shown inTable 1.It is worth noting that Eq. (7) indicates the mapping from natural coordinates to physical coordinates (shown inFig. 5); however, its inverse mapping from physical coordinates to natural coordinates, i.e.,ξ=ξ(x,y,z), is generally impossible to be explicitly expressed [36]. Note that, to simplify notations, here we use position vectors to denote specific coordinates, i.e.,x=(x,y,z)andξ=(ξ,η,ζ). Therefore, to specifically determine natural coordinates, an alternative numerical approach [47] based on Taylor series is employed.The position vector of physical coordinates as seen in Eq. (7) is expanded aroundxo=(xo,yo,zo)with a linear approximation(9)x≈xo+∂x(ξo,ηo,ζo)∂ξ(ξ−ξo)where the Jacobian matrixJ=∂x/∂ξis specifically expressed as(10)J=[∂x∂ξ∂x∂η∂x∂ζ∂y∂ξ∂y∂η∂y∂ζ∂z∂ξ∂z∂η∂z∂ζ]andξois the corresponding natural coordinates ofxo, i.e.,xo=x(ξo,ηo,ζo).Rearranging Eqs. (9) and (10), an iterative form of natural coordinates can be expressed as follows(11)ξk+1≈ξk+Jk−1(x−xk)(k=0,1,2⋯)wherexk=x(ξk,ηk,ζk). The iteration ends with theL2error norm in a position less than a user-specified toleranceε(e.g.,10−7), i.e.,(12)L2=‖xk−x‖2‖x‖2<εAs the natural coordinates only need to be determined once at the initial configuration, the computation time on this numerical iteration is negligible.For illustrative purpose, a typical pair of a ghost particle and a DE particle is depicted inFig. 6, which is shown in two dimensions but the real implementations are in three dimensions. To simplify illustration, only the coupling interaction between them is considered, i.e., boundary conditions and the interaction with other DE particles are not taken into account.At timetn, the rotational velocity of the ghost particle is given asωgn; the translational velocities of FE nodes are given asvIn; the rotational and translational velocities of the DE particle are given asωdnandvdn, respectively; the relative displacement between the ghost particle and DE particle is given asdn. Therefore, the coupling interaction forcefn(fn=−fgn=fdn, acting at the pointcas shown in Fig. 6) between these two particles can be obtained by resorting to Eq. (3), and the momentmncan be readily calculated by(13)mn=−mgn=mdn=rn×fnThis interaction force can be distributed into each FE node as follows(14)fIn=NIfgnHowever, the moment imposing on the ghost particle cannot be distributed into FE nodes because of the incompatibility of DoFs between the DE particle (six DoFs) and FE nodes (three DoFs each). This incompatibility issue was ignored in a number of works [13,16,18–20,32]. As to be demonstrated via numerical examples in the next section, the absence of rotational DoFs will lead to substantial error on computation results. Therefore, in this paper we propose a one-step back strategy to numerically overcome this incompatibility problem and the essence of this strategy is to let the moment obtained at current time take effect one time step behind. To do so, the virtual rotational motion of ghost particles is computed and used to acquire the relative velocity of a pair at the point of action (c, in this case), although it physically does not make much sense to evaluate the motion of non-existing objects.As the central difference method is used for explicit time integration, the velocities of the ghost particle, the FE nodes and the DE particle attn+1/2can be respectively updated by(15)ωgn+1/2=ωgn+12∆tn+1mgn/Ig(16)vIn+1/2=vIn+12∆tn+1fIn/mI(17)ωdn+1/2=ωdn+12∆tn+1mdn/Idand(18)vdn+1/2=vdn+12∆tn+1fdn/mdwhere the same magnitude of the moment of inertia of the DE particle applies to the ghost particle, i.e.,Ig=Id;mIandmdare nodal mass and DE particle’s mass, respectively; and∆tn+1is the size of time step fromtntotn+1.The relative velocity,v¯cn+1/2, between counterparts of a pair at the point of action is expressed as(19)v¯cn+1/2=vc(d)n+1/2−vc(g)n+1/2in which,(20)vc(d)n+1/2=vdn+1/2+ωdn+1/2×rdnand(21)vc(g)n+1/2=∑I=18NIvIn+1/2+ωgn+1/2×rgnTherefore, the incremental relative displacementΔdn+1, can be obtained by(22)Δdn+1=∆tn+1v¯cn+1/2and the total relative displacement attn+1is updated as(23)dn+1=dn+Δdn+1With this relative displacement attn+1obtained, the interaction forcefn+1and the resulting momentmn+1can be readily obtained similarly as attnwith the use of Eqs. (3) and (13), respectively, and then the velocities attn+1of the ghost particle, the FE nodes and the DE particle are respectively updated as follows(24)ωgn+1=ωgn+1/2+12∆tn+1mgn+1/Ig(25)vIn+1=vIn+1/2+12∆tn+1fIn+1/mI(26)ωdn+1=ωdn+1/2+12∆tn+1mdn+1/Idand(27)vdn+1=vdn+1/2+12∆tn+1fdn+1/mdNote that a boundary DE particle is possible in coupling interaction with multiple ghost particles, and the spring stiffness in-between is determined according to their relative spatial arrangement. For instance, the DE particle 2 is in interaction with the ghost particles 5, 6 and 7 as shown in Fig. 3, and the first group of spring stiffness (see Fig. 2(b) and Eq. (5)) applies to the interaction between particles 2 and 6 and the second group of spring stiffness applies to the interaction between particles 2 and 5 or 7. The interaction among the ghost particles are not taken into account since they belong to a virtual part of the continuum and the energy stemming from this interaction has already been included in the continuum strain energy. In contrast, the interaction among boundary particles is routinely done with the use of Eq. (3) as they are a part of physical DE particles.It is not difficult to observe that the interaction between ghost particles and physical particles, on one hand, couples continuum with DEs, and on the other hand, provides a natural boundary condition for the boundary DE particles, which is a desirable trait.The proposed coupling approach is implemented in an explicit code named as CDFP [21,48]. To validate this approach in terms of computational accuracy and efficiency, two numerical examples are employed.An elastic cantilever beam with one end fixed and the other subject to an end-loadingP=1N(as shown inFig. 7) is employed since its analytical solution of deflection can be obtained. The beam is of a square cross-section (shown in Fig. 7(b)) with lengthL=20mm, widthW=2mmand heightH=2mm. The elastic material properties are: mass densityρ=0.001g/mm3, Young׳s modulusE=1000MPaand Poisson׳s ratioν=0.2. The analytical deflection at the free end of the beam can be obtained byδana=PL3/3EI, where the area moment of inertia is given byI=WH3/12.To validate the proposed coupling approach, the middle range of the beam is discretised by DE particles and the remainder by FE hexahedrons as shown in Fig. 7(a), where the size of the DE region isLDE=6mmif without explicit statement. Note that the aforementioned DE connective model (in Section 2.2) is applied in the DE region with tension and compression springs at contact, and this region is also with elastic materials as mentioned above and constrained to be elastic in the present work. A loading with loading curve as depicted in Fig. 7(c) is applied. As considering the point load on FE nodes tends to excite zero energy mode on FEs if the reduced integration strategy is used (even with hourglass control), and fully integration strategy tends to cause slight volumetric locking on this bending problem even the material is not fully incompressible, the selective-reduced integration strategy [36] which is capable of sorting out these issues is therefore chosen for this numerical problem.Several aspects of the proposed approach, such as the computational accuracy (in both quasi-static and dynamic conditions), computational efficiency and the significance of the proposed one-step back strategy, are investigated in details and are shown next. It should be mentioned that a dynamic relaxation strategy [49] of imposing an appropriate damping to nodal and particle velocities is employed to acquire a quasi-static solution from an explicit time-integration code.To study the size ratio between FEs and DEs, a total number of five models with different mesh sizes are taken into account. Different mesh patterns as viewed from the cross-section A-A (shown in Fig. 7(a)) can be seen fromFig. 8. For all five models, DE particles keep the same size of radius, 0.1mm, and FEs have the same mesh size of 0.5mm along length and width directions but vary along height direction, so that various layers can be found in Fig. 8(a–e). A typical example of a four-layer model which shows specific locations of DE particles is depicted in Fig. 8(f). Note that a quasi-static condition by means of damping is concerned here.The computed deflection (δ) at the free end from the five models are displayed inTable 2, and it can be seen that all results are very close to the analytical solution,δana. The error is evaluated by(δ−δana)/δanaand also displayed in the table, from which the good computational accuracy can be observed. One deficiency is with the increasing number of FE layers along height direction, the results tend to be close to a certain value which is slightly below the analytical value. This is probably because of the integration strategy of the FEs employed or insufficient number of the DE particles used. Nonetheless, the agreement between the computed results and the analytical one indicates the good accuracy of the proposed coupling approach. Furthermore, the results in this table show that the proposed approach is not sensitive to the size ratio between FEs and DEs. Note that the result computed from the model of two FE-layers is slightly with larger error, which is because of the insufficiency of elements along height direction.As the size of DE particles are generally less than that of the FE hexahedrons and each DE particle has three more DoFs than a FE node, reducing the size of the DE region is of importance to save computation time. With the increasing size of the DE range as seen inFig. 9, i.e.,LDEchanges from 2mm to 12mm, the number of DoFs as well as the computation time rises dramatically. The contribution to this rising is due to the significantly increased proportion of the DoFs of DE particles, which is evident as observed fromFig. 10. Therefore, it can be confirmed that a coupling model is more computationally efficient than a pure DE model, indicating a coupling model with a minimal range of DE domain is of more practical importance to save computation time.This example is employed to verify the proposed one-step back strategy. As mentioned earlier, this strategy is used to enforce rotation effect one time step behind. For comparative study with or without applying this strategy, a typical coupling model, which is composed of a four-layer FE component as seen in Fig. 8(b) and a series of DE models with varying radius (seeTable 3), is adopted. As can be seen from Table 3, it is evident that the models with rotation effect are able to produce better results than those without rotation effect. For the models without applying the one-step back strategy, their results seem be slowly close to the analytical value with diminishing radius, but, evidently, they are hardly comparative to their counterparts which are all pretty close toδana. Also, it should be mentioned that for a smaller size of DEs, a smaller size of time step has to be adopted to keep explicit time integration stable, leading to a foreseeably increased computation time. The models which apply the proposed strategy are, in contrast, almost insensitive to the DE radius in terms of their computed results; hence a smaller DE radius is not required and better computational efficiency can be guaranteed.Dynamic responses of this cantilever beam can be achieved with damping vanishing. Time-history of displacement (Fig. 11) and velocity (Fig. 12) of a selected node at the free end is plotted against the results computed by a FE model, when the entire beam is discretised by FE hexahedrons. As seen from these two figures, excellent agreements can be observed between the results computed from the coupling model and the FE model.To further demonstrate the computational accuracy of the proposed coupling approach, a ball-plane impact model as depicted inFig. 13 is employed. The centre of a plane with a fixed boundary condition is subjected to the impact from a ball with an initial velocity. The sizes and material properties of the ball and the plane can also be found from Fig. 13, and note that the DE region is with the same thickness of the FE region. For validation purpose, the ball is discretised by FE hexahedrons but the plane is discretised by DE particles or FE hexahedrons or a mixture of both; therefore, three different models, i.e., a DE model, a FE model and a coupling model (depicted in Fig. 13), are made and used to model this problem.For the DE model and the coupling model, the contact treatment between the FE ball and the DE plane is addressed by the strategy as proposed by Chen et al. [12], while the contact treatment between the FE ball and the FE plane as in FE model is resolved by the approach developed by Chen et al. [50]. For all three models, the same size of time step is used and no damping is enforced; besides, the reduced integration strategy with hourglass control is employed.The contact force histories produced from the three models are plotted and compared inFig. 14, and they are in good agreement. Besides, the displacement histories of a central particle or a node of the plane along the loading direction can be seen inFig. 15, and it is obvious that they agree with each other well. Moreover, the displacement distributions of the three models at two time instants of 0.942ms and 2.022ms are compared inFig. 16, and a good agreement can be observed. Note that those two time instants are chosen because at those instants the selected particle or node reaches its lowest and highest positions, respectively.A novel approach is proposed in this paper to couple a continuum domain with a discrete domain by means of ghost particles. The ghost particles are constructed in the continuum domain and connect with DE particles. The introduction of ghost particles transforms the interaction between different domains into the interaction between ghost particles and DE particles, which enables a consistent manner for the solution of both the DE domain and the coupling system. Moreover, this continuity of solution makes the implementation straightforward. To find the attaching point of ghost particles in their corresponding FEs, an iterative strategy for inverse mapping from physical coordinates to natural coordinates is employed. To numerically address the incompatibility issue of DoFs, a one-step back strategy is proposed. This coupling approach is applied to a cantilever beam model and a ball-plane impact model, and its effectiveness in terms of computational accuracy and efficiency is demonstrated.It is worthwhile to note that the coupling force is based on the spring’s interaction (traction boundary condition) rather than the constraint of displacements between different domains (displacement boundary condition). The coupling scheme is consistent with the DE method and the coupling interaction is essentially triggered by the slight overlaps and gaps between domain boundaries. In this regard, the present coupling approach can be thought as a special penalty method with the use of the optimal stiffness that is directly related to and entirely determined by material properties in each interaction pair.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
