@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling of the stiffness evolution of truss core structures damaged by plastic buckling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Post-buckling beam stiffness is mainly driven by its geometry.Material parameters determine the amount of residual damage in the buckle beam.The percentage of stiffness decrease is an order of magnitude higher compared to the percentage of initial damage.A simple analytical model for prediction of buckled beam stiffness is proposed.Proposed model is able to predict degradation of the stiffness of pyramidal truss core.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Beam theory,Plastic buckling,Finite element,Beam-columns,Truss-cored laminates,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A finite element study based on 1D beam element model is performed in order to investigate the mechanical behavior of an elasto-plastic beam loaded in axial compression over its buckling limit. The mode of loading is related to the damage of truss-cored beams in truss-cored laminates. The analysis takes into account the effects of geometry and material properties. The results of the FEM analysis are used for developing a simple mechanical model based on the basic Euler–Bernoulli beam theory and accounts for the beam compressibility. The model uses phenomenological functions containing parameters related to the basic material and geometrical properties. The presented model is developed in the form of closed solution which does not require complex numerical methods or extensive parametric studies. Predictions of the compressive stiffness degradation of truss-cored composites are made with the proposed model and compared with the results of FEM simulations. The error of the stiffness prediction with respect to the FEM results is within 10% over a 5 fold range of stiffness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Composite structures with a truss core are possible candidates for lightweight applications as they provide a high stiffness/density ratio. Extensive studies of such materials have demonstrated their ability to fill the gaps in material properties space [1,2]. The truss-cored laminates provide particularly good performance because they belong to the group of stretch dominated structures which avoid bending dominated failure [3,4]. Many studies have focused on optimizing the design of ideal truss-cored structures for different loading types [5–8]. Less is known about how the performance of these structures changes when plastic ‘damage’ is introduced. Such deformation can occur as the result of an accident or as an intentional shape change during manufacturing. The example of ‘damage’ during the compression and bending of the truss-cored composite laminates is illustrated inFig. 1. With deformation, the stiffness degrades because buckled struts undergo bending dominated deformation and the performance approaches that of stochastic structures such as foam-cored structures [9]. The evolution of the stiffness degradation was reported in [10] but it has not been analyzed in any detail. Understanding the rate of this degradation is the objective of the present study.The damaged (bended) struts in the truss core are dominantly loaded in bending, therefore the problem of their stiffness degradation can be analyzed using theories of beam bending [11]. The problem is geometrically non-linear. It was first examined for a linear elastic bar and its solution relies on elliptic integrals. The typical example is the cantilever beam solved by Bisshopp and Drucker [12]. An overview of other linear elastic problems solved using elliptic integrals can be found in the book by Frisch-Fay [13].The main limitation is that the elliptic integrals can be analytically solved only in some special cases. Wider application of these type of solutions as well as the development of new ones occurred with the application of numerical methods such as the Runge–Kutta method [14], numerical integration [15] and weighted residual solutions [16]. Subsequently, efforts have been made to account for non-linear material behavior [17–21]. Elasto-plastic material solutions have been proposed in several studies (e.g. [22–24]). Again, numerical methods are necessary. Examples of practical applications of curved beam theory include composite materials like non-woven felt [25] and Hybrid Stainless Steel Assembly (HSSA) sheets [26].The objective of the present study is to offer a simple alternative solution that can be applied to the case of an elasto-plastic curved beam which has been ‘damaged’ by previous compressive loading over its plastic buckling limit. The properties of the elasto-plastic beam are investigated using FEM simulations and the output is then used in the model derivation.This paper is organized as follows: the next section describes the geometrical and material properties of the modeled beams and verifies the FEM model. The third section contains the derivation of the model. The fourth section contains the evaluation of the results of FEM simulations of a single beam and the truss-core and their comparison with the model predictions. The paper is concluded in Sections 5 and 6.A finite element analysis is performed to obtain information about the stiffness and the mechanical response of an ideal and damaged beam during buckling under the compressive loading. The influence of the beam aspect ratio, initial damage and material properties are investigated. The FEM simulations were performed using large displacement analysis in the commercial ABAQUS code. A convergence study was performed in order to design a suitable FEM model which provides sufficient level of accuracy together with low computation costs. The convergence was tested on 6 different meshes. Two were based on 1D quadratic beam elements with density of 50 and 100 elements per beam length. The remaining four meshes were made with 3D quadratic brick elements. The mesh densities given by the number of elements along the cross-section and length are: 3×3×50; 3×3×100; 5×5×50; 5×5×100. Elastic solutions provided by 1D and 3D FEM models were compared to each other and to the Euler theoretical solution.Fig. 2 illustrates the comparison of reaction force (a) and beam midpoint ‘sideways’ deflection (b). Reaction force and imposed axial strain are normalized by Euler theory predictions. Fig. 2 shows that all models provide very similar predictions of the reaction force and the deflection. There is notable difference in the prediction of the initial deflection for the beam model with 100 elements. The reason for this was not investigated in detail as the 50 element model agrees very well with the 3D model predictions. Because the present study is not focused on the local distributions of the variables, the 1D model with 50 elements was chosen as it provides sufficient accuracy with low computational cost.The geometry employed for the main simulations is a simple beam with a square cross-section and fixed ends. A compression is implemented into the model by way of a prescribed displacement of one beam end in the axial (x) direction. Damage occurs through a multistep simulation. The beam is initially loaded over the buckling limit to a certain level of the compressive strain (max 10% i.e. lUL≥0.9l0). The displacement boundary condition is suppressed in the second step, to allow elastic relaxation to occur. The resulting buckled beam is then used in further FE analysis of the performance during a second loading step. The boundary conditions and the simulation steps are illustrated inFig. 3. The validity of the FE model is limited to beams with an aspect ratio a/l0<1/10. Therefore, the cross-section dimensions are chosen to fit this requirement. The dimensions of the beams are shown inTable 1.The basic idealized hardening curve is taken from tensile tests of an AA 5083 aluminum alloy. Young׳s modulus values are chosen to cover the range of light metals (magnesium–aluminum) which show promise for applications in the truss structure composites. The input for the FE code requires stress vs. plastic strain data. Other materials in the set are simply produced by calculation of the new stress values for given plastic strain εplusing the equation:σ(εpl)=σY+m(σex(εpl)−σYex), where ‘ex’ denotes the experimentally measured values. Using Eq. (12) different materials are created to capture the effect of Young׳s modulus, yield stress and hardening on the beam buckling response. The parameters are summarized inTable 2 and the stress–strain curves are shown inFig. 4a.In order to achieve a buckling instability in the FE simulations, it is necessary to introduce initial geometrical perturbations into the perfect initial geometry. These perturbations follow the shape of the first buckling mode and help to develop the corresponding buckling shape and achieve the numerical stability of the simulation. The amplitude of these perturbations must be carefully chosen to minimize any artificial influence on the results. An amplitude of 0.02a is chosen in the present case. The perturbations cause the beam to be loaded in bending from the very beginning. Therefore, its maximum ‘sideways’ deflection increases even before it reaches the buckling point. The effect is illustrated in Fig. 4b. The plot shows evolution of normalized deflection (D/a) with increasing axial strain (εUL) normalized by the elastic buckling strain obtained from Euler theory (εB). The beam deflection increases from the start and the sharp change in slope signifies the plastic buckling limit.Analysis of the results of simulations using elasto-plastic material reveals that predictions of post-buckling behavior are affected by the magnitude of the deflection at the point of plastic buckling. The larger the deflection at the plastic buckling limit is, the smaller and more unrealistic is the strength of the beam during post-buckling behavior. Based on this analysis, a limit for simulation validity is set to D/a≤0.03 for simulations using elasto-plastic material (horizontal dashed line in Fig. 4b). All simulations in which the normalized deflection D/a at the plastic buckling limit exceeds 0.03 are disqualified from further analysis. This is the case for combination of a=10mm with E=43,000MPa (solid and dash-dotted black curves in Fig. 4b), therefore an increased Young׳s modulus E=73,000MPa is used for the simulations with this cross-section.A simple model for estimation of the stiffness of a buckled beam under the compressive loading is proposed. Its derivation is based on the results of the FEM simulations and it is explained in the following section. The model uses the basic Euler–Bernoulli theory of bending which is limited to small deformations. This restriction affects the model so its validity is set to a maximum of 10% of initial damage.The general definition of the stiffness can be written as(1)K=ΔFΔUwhere ΔF is the increment of the force caused by the increment of the displacement ΔUin the case of the kinematic boundary conditions. The displacement is measured in the beam axial direction in our case. The stiffness definition for the beam can be modified into modulus form to allow direct comparison with material Young׳s modulus. The corresponding relation is(2)Ebeam=l0AKwhere l0 is the initial length and A is the cross-sectional area of the beam. The problem is based on the estimate of the value of the force increment for given axial displacement increment.Let us consider a beam with fixed ends and cosine buckling shape with ‘sideways’ midpoint deflection D. The moment along the beam produced by the compressive force F applied at the end is shown inFig. 5a and it can be expressed by the equation(3)M(x)=FD2cos(2πlCx).This moment distribution can be approximated by the one produced by a central force FBapplied at the beam midpoint in the transverse direction (see Fig. 5b). The corresponding equation for this moment distribution for the interval (0, lc/2) is(4)MB(x)=−FB2x+FBlC8.These distributions are prescribed directly over the beam length lCinstead of the axial length lU. Such a simplification avoids the need to introduce a relation between lCand lUwhich would complicate the equations. However, this assumption is obviously valid only for small deformations. Integration of the moment equations over lCgives the total value of the moment(5)MT=FDlC/πMBT=FBlC2/16It is now assumed that the same total moment values cause the same beam deflection increment in the middle. According to the Euler–Bernoulli theory, the following expressions can be written:(6)ΔD=ΔDB=FBlC3192EI(7)F=FBlCπ16D=12πEIDlC2ΔD.If the initial force is 0 then ΔF=F. The validity of Eq. (7) was tested by a comparison with the results of the finite element simulations. The beam deflection D, deflection increment ∆Dand the beam length lCwas taken from the FE analysis and put into Eq. (7). The resulting force F was compared with the one given by the FE analysis (FFEM). The ratio of these forces is shown in Fig. 3c with respect to the deflection D. The difference is less than 15% within the proposed range of validity. Large discrepancy at smaller deflection is caused by the dominance of beam compression over bending. This discrepancy is diminished in the estimates of D and ΔDin the further development of the model. The solution which includes a real cosine shape of the buckled beam leads to elliptic integrals which, in general, cannot be solved analytically. Therefore the shape of the beam is approximated by an arc as shown inFig. 6a. This simplification allows derivation of relatively simple relations between the deflection D, the axial length lUand the total length lCof the beam. The following relation can be written for the geometry shown in Fig. 6b(8)lU4R=sin(lC4R).The first two terms of a Taylor expansion for the sine function provides(9)sin(lC4R)≈lC4R−16lC364R3.Substituting these terms into Eq. (8) gives the solution for the radius R and consequently for the deflection D(10)R=14lC36(lC−lU)(11)D=2(R−R2−(lU/4)2).The arc approximation underestimates the deflection compared to the real cosine shape with the same axial and the total beam length, but the difference is within 10% for our considered range of damage. It is usually more convenient to replace the absolute values of the lengths by the relative measure of the strain in the corresponding directions. Therefore these strains are introduced related to the initial unloaded beam length l0 as(12)εU=(lU−l0)/l0εC=(lC−l0)/l0where εUand εCare the axial and the compressive strain respectively. The expressions for the radius R and the deflection D can now be rewritten as(13)R=l04(1+εC)36(εC−εU)(14)D=2(R−R2−((1+εU)l0/4)2).The first part of the model describes the behavior of the initially straight beam during its first loading. Therefore an extra index ‘L’ is added to the strain variables but their definition remains unchanged from to the previous description. While the axial strain εULis easy to calculate from the distance of the beam end points, the compressive strain depends on the beam geometry (length, cross-section, deflection) and the material properties (Young׳s modulus, yield stress, hardening). In order to get an explicit calculation of D, it is most suitable to express the compressive strain as a function of the axial strain. Normalization by the elastic buckling strain εBresults in a collapse of the curves for the different beam geometries as illustrated inFig. 7a. The elastic buckling strain depends only on the beam geometry and its boundary conditions and it can be expressed as(15)εB=π2IA(kl0)2where I is the second moment of inertia of the cross section and k is the constant related to the boundary conditions and in our case of fixed ends is equal to 0.5.Each curve in Fig. 7a can be divided into three regions. The first region describes the elastic compression of the straight beam as the strain level is below yielding and buckling. This is characterized by εCL=εUL. The second region starts at the yielding point (εCL=εUL=εY=σY/E) and continues to εUL=2.15εBwhere εCL=εB. The value 2.15 is obtained from analysis of the FE results and is characteristic for a given geometry and boundary conditions. The third region consequently contains values εUL>2.15 and εCL>εB. The model is therefore divided into the same intervals and the phenomenological functions are defined as follows:For the first region εUL/εB≤εY/εB(16)εCLεB=εULεBFor the second region εUL/εB>εY/εBand εUL/εB≤2.15(17)εCLεB=εY/εB−1εY/εB−2.15(εULεB−εYεB)+εYεBFor the third region εUL/εB>2.15(18)εCLεB=18εULεB−2.15+[2.15(εY/εB−2.15)8(εY/εB−1)]2−2.15(εY/εB−2.15)64(εY/εB−1)+1.These expressions are the result of an application of the simple functions which are able to follow FEM data. Selected function must closely fit an evolution of the compressive strain especially at the beginning of buckling (second region) as the force F and stiffness K are sensitive to its value in this region. Therefore, a function type ofy=ax+bwhich intersects points [εY/εB; εY/εB] and [2.15; 1] was chosen for the second region. The function for the third region is a type ofy=1/8x+c+dwhere the condition of fitting is to have the same tangent at point [2.15; 1] as the function for the second region. This condition ensures a smooth transition of stiffness values at the region boundary. Sensitivity of the force and stiffness to the compressive strain is significantly smaller in this region, therefore a match between the function and the FEM data does not need to be as precise as in the second region. Despite their complex appearance, the proposed functions contain only four parameters which can be easily obtained from the material and the geometrical properties.Eqs. (12)–(18) describe the evolution of the deflection with respect to the axial strain of the originally straight beam during buckling. However, the primary objective is to calculate the stiffness of the beam which was damaged by previous loading beyond its buckling limit. In order to describe the relation between the compressive and the axial strain for the damaged beam, an elastic relaxation term must be added into the model. Such relaxation occurs when the initial load is removed and the beam is returned to the unloaded state with some residual damage. An extra index ‘R’ is added to distinguish the strain values after the elastic relaxation. An estimate of such relaxation is based on the calculation of the strain profile through the beam cross-section. The procedure is depicted inFig. 8. According to the Euler beam theory, the strain through the cross-section can be expressed as(19)ε(v)=1R(v−a2)+εCL.Thus, the following expression can be written for particular locations:ε(0)=−(a/2R)+εCL,ε(a)=(a/2R)+εCLand position of zero strain isv0=(a/2)−RεCL.The elastic relaxation is calculated using material tensile data by the equation(20)εE(0)=σ(|ε(0)|)EandεE(a)=σ(|ε(a)|)E.The overall strain at the cross section boundaries after the relaxation is then calculated as(21)εR(0)=ε(0)+εE(0)andεR(a)=ε(a)+εE(a)Two different cases can occur with respect to the value of v0. If v0>a (Fig. 7a), the whole cross-section is under the compression and the value of the relaxed compressive strain is obtained as(22)εCR=εR(0)+εR(a)2and new tangent of the relaxed strain is(23)tR=εR(a)−εR(0)a.If v0≤a, then there is the assumption of the unchanged location of the zero strain in the cross-section during the relaxation. Therefore only εE(0) at the compressive side is taken into account for the calculation of the relaxed compressive strain (see Fig. 7b). The relaxed compressive strain can be expressed as(24)εCR=εR(0)(1−a2v0)and the tangent of the relaxed strain is(25)tR=−εR(0)v0.The relaxed axial strain can be calculated using Eq. (13) and the assumption of R=1/tRby the following expression:(26)εUR=εCR−(1+εCR)396(l0tR)2.The problem with the calculation of the relaxed strain values is such that it works easily in the direction from the compressive strain to the axial strain. However in reality the axial strain is usually known and the compressive strain must be calculated. Inversion of the problem does not provide an explicit solution therefore a ‘discretization’ procedure needs to be introduced to overcome this problem.This procedure is based on the creation of an a priori set of discrete values(εUL(1),εUL(2),...,εUL(n))within the required range. Introducing these values into the model gives the corresponding sets for εCL, εCRand εUR. These sets describe the relations between the axial and the compressive strain for given beam geometry and the material properties for the ideal and the damaged beam. Having the measured values of the axial strain εU, the compressive strain εCcan be estimated from the expressions(27)εC=εCL(i+1)−εCL(i)εUL(i+1)−εUL(i)(εU−εUL(i))+εCL(i)and for the initially ideal beam and(28)εC=εCR(i+1)−εCR(i)εUR(i+1)−εUR(i)(εU−εUR(i))+εCR(i)for the initially damaged beam. The indices i+1 and i denote the interval in which the value of εUis placed. Number of points in the a priori sets is not limited so the ‘discretization’ can represent the original curves very precisely. The measured values of εUare then inserted into the discretized model and the corresponding values of εCare calculated. Both values are then used in calculation of the corresponding beam deflection D which can be input into Eq. (7).The last remaining parameter is the increment of the displacement ΔDin the middle of the beam with respect to the increment of the displacement of the beam ends ΔU. The relation between these two variables can be expressed using the ratio D/a for given damaged beam, where D is calculated by the model and a is known from the beam geometry. The relation between ΔD/ΔUvs. D/a is shown in Fig. 7b. Each curve reaches its maximum at the point D/a=0.8 which is also the dividing point for the fitting curves which are expressed asfor D/a≤0.8(29)ΔDΔU=0.1288l0a[10.64(Da−0.8)2−1]and for D/a>0.8(30)ΔDΔU=[47.68(al0−0.1)2+0.483](Da−0.8)−0.1288l0aThe presented model can be used for prediction of stiffness evolution of pyramidal truss-cored laminates. The following equations are applied for core stiffness calculations. The compressive vertical force for pyramidal core cell is calculated as:(31)FTC=4Fsinθand the vertical displacement increment as(32)ΔTC=ΔUsinθwhere F is the axial force in one strut, θ is the actual inclination angle of the strut and ∆Uis the axial displacement increment. The stiffness of the truss-cored laminates is defined as(33)ETC=h0ATCΔFTCΔTCwhere h0 and ATCare initial core height and core cell area respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An FEM study was conducted to evaluate the compressive stiffness of a beam which was damaged by previous compressive loading over the plastic buckling limit. The evolution of the stiffness with level of the initial damage has been analyzed. An analytical approximation was developed based on the FEM results and applied to an example of the truss core. The conclusions of the study are:•Plasticity generally increases the beam deflection but materials with low yield stress and high hardening rate helps to minimize its effect.The material properties influence predominantly the elastic relaxation after the initial loading and determine the amount of residual damage in the buckled beam. Materials with high yield stress and hardening rate minimize the amount of residual damage.The stiffness of the beam decreases rapidly with the initial damage. The percentage of stiffness decrease is an order of magnitude higher compared to the percentage of initial damage. For example a beam with aspect ratio about 1/12 needs 3% of initial damage to decrease the stiffness by 50%.The proposed analytical model predicts the stiffness of the damaged beam with an error less than 10% within its interval of validity (initial axial damage <10%).The proposed model is able to predict the stiffness degradation of damaged truss core with an error less than 15%.The proposed model is able to fulfill the need for the simple tool for prediction of the properties of damaged beam structures. It can be further extended for the different boundary conditions or the different cross-section geometry however its application range should be kept close to the small deformation limit due to its apparent simplicity.