@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Infection risk in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with etanercept or adalimumab

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A head-to-head cohort study involving a nationwide population has been performed.Etanercept users have higher risk of infection than adalimumab users.Infection-free survival is significantly lower in etanercept users.The difference of infection risk is significant in subgroup analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Etanercept,Adalimumab,Rheumatoid arthritis,Infection,Tumor necrosis factor-α antagonist,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesTo compare the risk of infection for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients who took etanercept or adalimumab medication in a nationwide population.MethodsRA patients who took etanercept or adalimumab were identified in the Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database. The composite outcome of serious infections, including hospitalization for infection, reception of an antimicrobial injection, and tuberculosis were followed for 365 days. A Kaplan–Meier survival curve with a log-rank test and Cox proportional hazards regression were used to compare risks of infection between the two cohorts of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists users. Hazard ratios (HRs) were obtained and adjusted with propensity scores and clinical factors. Sensitivity analyses and subgroup analyses were also performed.ResultsIn total, 1660 incident etanercept users and 484 incident adalimumab users were eligible for the analysis. The unadjusted HR for infection of the etanercept users was significantly higher than that of the adalimumab users (HR: 1.93; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.09–3.42; p=0.024). The HRs were 2.04 (95% CI: 1.14–3.65; p=0.016) and 2.02 (95% CI: 1.13–3.61; p=0.018) after adjusting for propensity scores and for propensity scores in addition to clinical factors, respectively. The subgroup analyses revealed that HRs for composite infection was significantly higher in patient subgroups of older age, female, as well as patients who did not have DM, COPD, and hospitalization history at the baseline.ConclusionIn this head-to-head cohort study involving a nationwide population of patients with RA, etanercept users demonstrated a higher risk of infection than adalimumab users. Results of this study suggest the possible existence of an intra-class difference in infection risk among TNF-α antagonists.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pharmacovigilance risk assessment and management are important with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists, a new group of biological agents for treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and autoimmune diseases. In May 2008, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a safety alert regarding adding infection and tuberculosis (TB) to the black box warning for etanercept. Despite infection becomes the leading cause of death in RA patients [1], clinical outcomes and benefits of these biological agents are still attracting use by clinicians. Determining how to implement an effective medication risk management plan, an apparently better strategy than total withdrawal of TNF-α antagonists from the market, requires understanding the infection risks of these agents.Conflicting data were found on the association between the infection risks and TNF-α antagonists. Clinical trials with limited sample size were insufficient to compare the infection risk among TNF-α antagonists [2–6]. Several observational studies have provided evidence that TNF-α antagonists are associated with an increased risk of infection. Two large cohort studies from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs health system [7] and Swedish registers [8], respectively, demonstrated that risk of hospitalization due to infection was significantly higher for patients who took TNF-α antagonists. The British Society for Rheumatology Biologics Register also showed that the risk of serious infection during the “at- risk” windows could be as high as 4.6-fold [9] at the first 90 days of TNF-α antagonists therapy, and could be lowered to 1.8-fold during the first 6 months [10]. However, results of several other cohort studies of TNF-α antagonists did not show an increase in risk of infection [11–15].It is even more unclear that which TNF-α antagonist is safer. A cohort study showed that adalimumab and etanercept were of similar level of infection risk [7]. Grijalva et al. also reported that the risk of adalimumab causing serious infections insignificantly differed from that of etanercept [11]. However, a case-control study reported that adalimumab was associated with 6.4- fold higher risk for non-tuberculosis opportunistic infections than etanercept [16]. Another registry-based prospective cohort study from van Dartel and colleagues reported that the risk for serious infection of adalimumab was 1.83-fold higher than that of etanercept [17]. These studies used different outcome definition, study design and follow-up period. Therefore the results were significantly different with large variation in the odd ratios.This observational study aimed to compare the risk of infection between adalimumab and etanercept, the two TNF-α antagonists marketed in Taiwan, using Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD). The direct head-to-head comparison was performed to investigate tuberculosis and infections associated with TNF-α antagonists in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. This study was prompted by the need of awareness on the difference in risk of infection between TNF-α antagonists, and on which patient population could benefit the most from the specific medication.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This head-to-head cohort study using a nationwide claim database of patients with RA demonstrated that etanercept users had a higher risk of infection than adalimumab users. Although no robust conclusion could be draw by a single cohort study, this study suggests the possible existence of an intra-class difference in infection risks between these two TNF-α antagonists. Moreover, the background incidence of infectious diseases may differ among nations. Further research efforts are warranted to investigate the association between biologics use and various mortality and morbidity outcome variables of infection.The authors declare that no competing interest exists.