@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation into a robust finite element model for composite materials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Beams lack required stiffnesses to model the behavior of composite materials.Double orthotropic-shell model captured observed experimental flexure behavior.Modified rule of mixtures was explored to determine accurate material properties.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fiber-reinforced composites,Laminates,Mechanical properties,Finite element analysis (FEA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Two models for completing structural analyses of cured fabric-reinforced composites that link back to a forming simulation are investigated. The objective of each model is to seamlessly use the predicted geometries of the textile plies to generate a finite element model of the cured structure. The first is a beam-shell model, where beam elements represent the fibers and shell elements represent the matrix. The beams are imported directly from the forming model to capture the deformed fabric geometry. The second approach is a double-orthotropic shell model where two shells, each representing a set of fibers, i.e. warp or weft, are superimposed. The material orientation in each shell is aligned with the respective fiber directions. To investigate the capabilities of the models for unidirectional-fiber reinforced composite plates with multiple fiber orientations and loading configurations, the two models are compared to classical laminate theory (CLT). To explore the models׳ ability to represent a plain-weave textile reinforced composite plate with various shear angles in the fabric reinforcements, the two proposed models are compared to experimental data. The double orthotropic shell model is found to be a better option for linking the mechanical behavior of the formed composite back to the simulation of the manufacturing process than the beam-shell model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Composite materials are attractive for their high specific strength and high specific stiffness properties as compared to traditional metals [1–3]. While composites have the potential to create fuel-efficient vehicles, automotive companies are reluctant to replace metals with composites due to the higher costs and longer production cycle times [4] and the lack of reliable models for predicting the response of these materials during a crash situation. Researchers are currently investigating ways to reduce cycle times by automating the forming process through manufacturing techniques such as thermoforming of textile-reinforced composites [5–8], thereby making the composite manufacturing process to be competitive with metal forming cycle times. Complementary research is being pursued to develop simulation models of these automated composite manufacturing processes [8–18]. These models can be used to guide the design of the manufacturing process (e.g. selection of textiles, size and shape of the textile blanks, induced in-plane tension to reduce wrinkling) and can provide a direct link to build a high-fidelity model of the cured composite structure which can subsequently be used for structural analyses (e.g. stiffness, vibration and crash). Before such models can be widely accepted for use by industry, they must first be shown to provide credible predictions for structural performance.Finite element modeling provides one option for a virtual design tool that can link the output of a simulation of the manufacturing process to a structural model of the composite component. Such a tool provides composite designers with the ability to model the manufacturing process, to identify if and where defects may manifest and to assess whether they will have a significant detrimental effect on the structural integrity of the part. By identifying unfavorable features of substantial influence, efforts can be focused on removing critical defects from the part instead of the overwhelming task of attempting to create a completely defect-free structure [19].This paper will review existing design tools that can potentially link the manufacturing process to the resulting stiffness and quality of the composite part. In addition, two new modeling techniques will be introduced: the beam-shell model and the double orthotropic-shell model. Each of these models will address shortcomings that exist in current technologies by including the ability to represent the reinforcement fabric that has sheared during manufacturing. The feasibility of each model will be examined in a numerical study. Both structural modeling approaches will be compared to classical laminate theory (CLT) for a hypothetical unidirectional fiber-reinforced composite. The models will be assessed for a range of typical fiber orientations. Currently, there is no universally-accepted modeling technique for woven fabric-reinforced composites. Therefore, both modeling schemes will be compared to experimental data for a woven-fabric reinforced composite. The pros and cons of each model are reported.The existing modeling techniques for fiber-reinforced composites will be reviewed. Methods for modeling unidirectional fiber reinforced composites are well established but generally do not account for deformations of the fibers during manufacturing. Woven-fabric reinforced composites are not as easily modeled as non-crimp fabric reinforced composites. Current techniques are presented and the existing shortcomings are discussed.The popular method for the modeling of unidirectional fiber-reinforced composite materials is Classical Lamination Theory (CLT), which is the universally accepted analytical approach [2]. Commercially available finite element packages, such as Abaqus, ANSYS, and LS-DYNA, have composite layup features with material properties formulated using CLT. This feature allows the user to define multiple layers with multiple materials, orientations, and layer thicknesses [20,21]. Programs such as CATIA and FiberSIM can interface with these FEA platforms to offer designers the ability to include fabric reorientation due to manufacturing processes in their analyses. These interfacing programs use a fishnet algorithm to predict how the fabric will deform to conform to the shape of the mold. Once the deformation of the fabric has been predicted by the interface, the fiber orientations are fed into the composite layup feature of an associated finite element package. While such software offer a quick solution for capturing variations in effective fiber orientations within each ply as it conforms to the tool geometry, the fishnet algorithm is limited in its ability to simulate the forming process. For example, effects due to boundary conditions are not considered by the fishnet algorithm. Therefore, two simulations performed on the same geometry with different binder pressures would yield the same results. Additionally, the fishnet algorithm does not consider the mechanical behavior of the fabric. Consequently, the simulations are unable to capture manufacturing defects such as in-plane and out-of-plane buckling that can be incurred during the forming process [11]. Therefore, these models would not be able to study the relationship between the processing parameters and the formation of manufacturing defects. Without knowing if and where defects occurred, their subsequent influence on structural performance could not be explored. Thus, users should limit the use of fishnet-based programs to geometries with gentle smooth surfaces. For more complex geometries, the fabric deformation needs to contain not only the kinematics (as are captured by fishnet algorithms) but also consider the mechanical behavior of the specific fabrics.The modeling of woven fabrics does not lend itself directly to a CLT analysis because a single ply of woven fabric contains two sets of fiber orientations (warp and weft) within the same plane. While CLT is commonly used to analyze laminates with multiple fiber orientations, the plies within the laminate are considered to be discrete unidirectional fiber layers. Analytical models exist that attempt to capture the woven mechanical behavior using CLT derivations such as the “mosaic” model, the fiber undulation model, and the bridging model [22,23]. Other models use a micromechanical approach to homogenize the fabric repeating unit cell and derive orthotropic properties of the composite [16,24]. However, once the fabric has sheared, it is no longer an orthotropic material as the warp and the weft tows reorient from their initial mutually perpendicular configurations as is shown inFig. 1. This shearing poses an additional challenge to modeling the behavior of a woven-fabric reinforced composite.While modeling strategies exist to represent woven-fabric reinforced composites, these models always assume that the tows are mutually perpendicular. However, for a woven fabric to conform to a compound-curvature surface, the tows must become non-orthogonal. Thus, such an orthogonality assumption compromises the solution for any composite with a compound-curvature surface. The two techniques examined in this paper offer the ability to model a composite in which the fiber tows have sheared and are no longer mutually perpendicular.Brief descriptions of the methodologies used for the beam-shell model and the double orthotropic-shell model are presented in the following sections.The beam-shell model is a discrete mesoscopic finite element model. The model employs a mixed-mesh unit cell approach to represent a woven-textile, as shown inFig. 2. The unit cell of the fabric is represented by a two-dimensional shell element (S4) surrounded by four one-dimensional beam elements (B31). The beam elements represent the tensile and flexural behaviors of fiber tows, while shell elements capture the shear behavior of the fabric.This methodology has been implemented in Abaqus/Explicit [8,12,15,25] and successfully used to model the forming of composite structures. The discrete modeling of the fibers by the beam elements provides for the automatic tracking of the change in the orientations of the primary load paths within the composite system during the manufacturing process where the fabric shears to accommodate compound-curvature features in the tooling.Mitchell et al. proposed a method to extend the use of the beam-shell model to the structural behavior of the final part in Abaqus/Standard [26]. This model uses the deformed mesh resulting from the forming simulation to represent the cured composite. It has the ability to link the output from the simulation of the forming process to the structural properties and formed geometry (including any defects such as wrinkling and folds in the fabric) of the final part. The beam elements continue to represent the fiber tows while the shell elements represent the matrix material in the cured part. A method for discretizing the stiffness contribution of individual constituents was developed previously [26]. For a flat composite plate reinforced by a 0/90 textile, the model demonstrated the ability to correlate well with experimental data for the quasi-static flexural behavior and the modal response of the tested plates.The double orthotropic-shell (DOS) methodology utilizes the standard orthotropic shells within Abaqus/Standard. By discretizing the woven fabric into the separate warp and weft contributions, the fabric can be described as two unidirectional plies occupying the same physical space without the limitation of mutually perpendicular warp and weft tows. Once this discretization has been made, a traditional CLT approach can be used to describe each of the unidirectional contributions to the overall behavior. This approach is illustrated inFig. 3 for the case of the tows being perpendicular.The behavior of the composite attributed to the fibers in the warp direction is represented by one set of shell elements while the behavior of the composite attributed to the fibers in the weft direction is represented by a coincident set of shell elements. By treating each set of fibers as a unidirectional lamina, in-plane shear can be represented as discrete fiber rotations.The material properties implemented in the double orthotropic-shell model are the orthotropic material properties for each effective unidirectional lamina. Both material sets will occupy the entire volume defined by the model dimensions. In reality, each element only contributes to a portion of the total volume, similar to the representation of a composite by the mosaic model. This concept is illustrated inFig. 4(a) and (b). The mosaic (M) model represents the warp and weft as alternating discrete entities as seen in Fig. 4(c), while the double orthotropic-shell model represents two elements with discrete material properties in the same volume.Both models must represent the same material properties for an orthotropic material. Considering the entries in the ABD matrix of CLT, the mosaic (M) and double-orthotropic shell (DOS) approaches require:(1.1)AijM=AijDOS(1.2)BijM=BijDOS(1.3)DijM=DijDOS.The ABD constants can be evaluated for (1) the warp material and (2) the weft material by integrating over the thickness. The material properties implemented in the double orthotropic-shell model are indicated by an asterisk as they will not be the same as the material properties implemented in the mosaic model:(2.1)∫0t2Q¯ij1dz+∫−t20Q¯ij2dz=∫−t2t2Q¯ij1*dz+∫−t2t2Q¯ij2*dz(2.2)∫0t2Q¯ij1zdz+∫−t20Q¯ij2zdz=∫−t2t2Q¯ij1*zdz+∫−t2t2Q¯ij2*zdz(2.3)∫0t2Q¯ij1z2dz+∫−t20Q¯ij2z2dz=∫−t2t2Q¯ij1*z2dz+∫−t2t2Q¯ij2*z2dzEvaluating Eqs. (2.1)–(2.3) over the thickness of the material results in:(3.1)12tQ¯ij1+12tQ¯ij2=tQ¯ij1*+tQ¯ij2*(3.2)18t2Q¯ij1+18t2Q¯ij2=0+0(3.3)124t3Q¯ij1+124t3Q¯ij2=112t3Q¯ij1*+112t3Q¯ij2*Eq. (3.2) indicates that the material must be symmetric, i.e. Bij=0. While the mosaic model depicted in Fig. 4(a) does not represent a symmetric layup, the mosaic model is comprised of small units of alternating cells shown in Fig. 4(c) averaging to a symmetric lamina. Similarly, a plain-weave fabric is also considered a symmetric about the centerline.Eqs. (3.1) and (3.3) can be simplified:(4.1)12t(Q¯ij1+Q¯ij2)=t(Q¯ij1*+Q¯ij2*)(4.2)12t3(Q¯ij1+Q¯ij2)=t3(Q¯ij1*+Q¯ij2*)indicating that the sum of the properties implemented into the double orthotropic-shell model must be half of the sum of the properties represented in the mosaic model. Each reduced stiffness constant Qijis directly proportional to either the longitudinal modulus, E1, the transverse modulus, E2, or the shear modulus, G. Therefore, by dividing these properties in half when implementing them into the double orthotropic-shell model, the material will be represented properly.Numerical analyses were performed to explore how well each of the two proposed models could accurately capture the mechanical behavior of a cured fiber-reinforced composite material. The first analysis used each model to represent a unidirectional-fiber reinforced composite. The results were compared to the globally accepted CLT solution, and both models were expected to correlate well. For the models to offer a global solution over all configurations, they must demonstrate the ability to capture the same behavior as predicted by CLT analyses. In the second analysis, the models were utilized to represent a woven-fabric reinforced composite. Because there is no universally accepted solution for woven-fabric reinforced composites, the trends demonstrated by these models were compared to published experimental data [27].A qualitative analysis was performed using the three modeling techniques for a hypothetical 35% fiber-volume fraction unidirectional fiberglass-reinforced polypropylene composite plate. The material properties are given inTable 1. Each model was configured to represent a unidirectional-fiber reinforced material.For the beam-shell model, the weft set of beam elements was deleted from the mesh to provide a model of a unidirectional-fiber reinforced composite. Similarly, the weft set of shell elements was deleted from the double orthotropic-shell mesh, resulting in a standard orthotropic shell model defined by the composite layup feature within Abaqus/Standard.The properties implemented into the beam-shell model were determined by the material definition of the discrete constituents. Because the models for this comparison were only being loaded in-plane, the shape of the beam cross-sections was not a critical factor as long as the area of the fiber tow was properly represented. Therefore, the beam elements utilized a rectangular profile (3.5mm×0.10mm) with the same height as the shell elements (0.10mm). The shell elements occupied the entire volume of the composite plate, but the matrix only occupies 65% of the material volume in the physical composite plate. To compensate for this effective matrix volume, the modulus of the polypropylene matrix for use in the model was scaled to 65% of its total value. The orthotropic material properties were calculated using the rule of mixtures [2] and were implemented into the CLT analysis and the orthotropic shell model.The second qualitative study was performed to examine how well each of the models represented the mechanical behavior of a woven-fabric reinforced composite. The woven-fabric models were built to replicate the experimental dimensions of Twintex® plates manufactured with prescribed in-plane shear angles. A schematic of the yarn orientations is given inFig. 5. The models included the re-orientated warp yarns and the observed change in thickness as a function of in-plane shear angle, as reported inTable 2.The material properties were taken from the Twintex® manufacturer׳s specifications [28]. The fabric is comprised of 35% E-glass and 65% polypropylene by volume. The tensile modulus along the fiber direction was reported as 26.5MPa. A simple rule-of-mixtures calculation based on an assumed glass modulus of 70GPa implies that the polypropylene should have a modulus of 3GPa. A summary of the calculated material properties is given inTable 3.The material properties implemented into the double orthotropic-shell model for E1, E2, and G12 were half of the values given in Table 3 as indicated by Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2). Additionally, a parametric study was performed on the material inputs E2 and G12 as the rule of mixtures generally under-predicts these properties due to the iso-stress assumption inherent to the equations [2,29–32]. The modified rule of mixtures, introduced by Halpin [29], was considered with various partitioning factors (η). This parametric study, varying η, was performed to gain insight to the effect of the material properties have on the behavior of the model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Two methodologies to model the behavior of woven-fabric reinforced composites were presented. The goal of both models was to create a design tool that could be used to link the deformation of the fabric resulting from the manufacturing process (i.e. fiber reorientations and manufacturing defects) to the structural behavior of the cured part.The beam-shell model is an extension of an existing forming methodology. A discrete mesh was used to represent the individual constituents of the composite: beam elements represented the fiber tows while shell elements represented the matrix. This methodology has been shown previously to work well to predict the mechanical behavior of a fabric during a forming process. However, for the cured composite modeling approaches considered in the current research, the model did not follow the expected trends for change in stiffness as the fibers were rotated away from the loading direction. This discrepancy was explained by the beam theory simplifications inherent in formulation of the beam element. For example, beam elements do not have either lateral stiffness or shear stiffness. However, the fiber reinforcements within the composite do contribute to the overall lateral stiffness and shear stiffness of the composite; thus, the lack of these properties in the beam compromises the quality of the solution. Scaling factors were used to increase the modulus of the resin to compensate for the beam elements simplifications. While this scaling was a feasible solution for a simple load (loading in x-direction, loading in y-direction, or shear), different scaling factors were required for different loading conditions. This discrepancy indicated that the beam-shell model would not perform correctly under complex loading conditions and could not be used as a universal solution to model woven-fabric reinforced composites.The methodology behind the double orthotropic-shell model was to discretize the contributions of the warp and weft yarns from the behavior of the overall composite. This ideology simplifies the woven fabric into two sets of unidirectional fibers that occupy the same physical space. Therefore, each set of fibers can be defined by orthotropic material properties and can be allowed to rotate independently of one another. This methodology generally predicted the same trends as those seen experimentally. A parametric study was performed to understand the influence of the material properties that are not easily predicted by the rule of mixtures: the shear modulus G12 and the transverse modulus E2. These factors were determined to significantly affect the trends demonstrated by the double orthotropic-shell model for composites reinforced by fabrics with high shear angles. Therefore, it is important to quantify these properties experimentally to create an accurate model. The double orthotropic-shell model demonstrates very promising potential, and a method for discretizing the overall behavior of the composite into discrete orthotropic materials should be developed.