@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Geometric design consideration for controlled fragmentation of metallic shells

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider designs for the controlled fragmentation of metal cylindrical shells.The best performing designs were shown to commonly possess the following features:They each have notch or groove depths greater than half of the shell thickness.They each have notch spacing within a range approximately the shell thickness.They each have shell thicknesses many times smaller than the shell radius.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Controlled fragmentation,Natural fragmentation,CTH simulations,Geometric consideration,Johnson–Cook failure model,Explosive loading,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Geometric designs for the controlled fragmentation of metal cylindrical shells have been considered via CTH hydrocode simulations. Fragmentation is controlled by engineering notches on the interior of the shells. Design parameters considered include the shell radius, thickness, and the depth and spacing of interior notches. A large number of shell designs were analyzed and their effectiveness on the controlled fragmentation categorized. The best overall controlled fragmentation designs exhibit full and complete fragment breakup as prescribed along the system of interior notches without any of the individual fragments naturally fragmenting throughout their thicknesses. For the combination of the Composition C-4 explosive and the 4340 steel, the best performing designs were shown to commonly possess the following characteristics: (1) they each have notch or groove depths greater than half of the shell thickness, (2) they each have notch or groove spacing within a range that is approximately the same as the shell thickness, and (3) they each have shell thicknesses many times smaller than the shell radius.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The explosive fragmentation of metal cylinders is of particular interest to weapons system designers as they seek to understand the physics of fragmentation and better harness its power. Effectiveness of a weapon system is directly related to the amount of energy and mass that can be deposited onto a target. Whereas blast energy alone dissipates considerably in proportion to the distance from detonation, the casing material absorbs kinetic energy, fragments, and propels those fragments over a greater distance to a target (Held [1]). Cylinders are often used because of their ease of manufacture and loading with explosive fills, the development of rifled gun tubes, aerodynamic qualities, and ease of integration into missile or rocket airframes (Kennedy [2]). Fragmentation effects are now incorporated to some extent into nearly all types of weapons ranging from hand grenades and artillery shells to rockets and missiles (Beetle and Schwartz [3], Lloyd [4]). Although the study of this topic was originally rooted in the experimental and statistical realms, fragmentation can now be approached from the theoretical and computational perspectives thanks to research performed and technological advances made within the last century.The design of a weapon must meet the performance requirements while being constrained in terms of weight, physical dimensions, and integration into a missile airframe. Cost is always an important design consideration but is mentioned only briefly and qualitatively in this paper. The velocity of the fragments produced also contributes to overall effectiveness, however, that depends highly on the choice of explosive and materials and that is not the focus of this effort. Also a factor considered in design but not addressed to a great extent within this study is manufacturability. The primary attention is placed on efficient use of mass and the geometric design considerations that affect the fragmentation characteristics.Given a fixed amount of fragmenting mass available from a cylindrical shell, the designer must find a balance between having fragments of sufficient size to be damaging to a specified target and generating enough fragments to have sufficiently high probability of hit (PHit) against the target. Average fragment mass and the number of fragments are, by definition, inversely proportional quantities (Mott [5,6]). Both fragment mass and quantity can be predicted and accounted for in designing for the best possible weapon effectiveness against a target.Sufficient performance can sometimes be achieved by allowing the cylindrical shell to fragment naturally. Natural fragmentation was well described by Mott and later by others as having a fragment mass and number distribution that now bears his name. Simply stated, the Mott distribution generally predicts a small number of large fragments and a large number of small fragments. Sometimes the naturally fragmenting design produces an adequate number of fragments large enough to be effective against a particular target. If that is the situation, it likely then represents the cheapest and easiest design to manufacture. However, there is typically a threshold below which fragments of a certain mass are ineffective against the desired target for any range of velocities. If this threshold is high enough within the natural fragmentation distribution of the design it can lead to a substantial decrease in PHitof effective fragments on the target. This can correspond to a considerable amount of available fragmenting mass that is wasted and could possibly be converted into more effective fragments.In the case of ineffective fragment masses and numbers the designer needs to prescribe the breakup, thus controlling the fragmentation distribution to achieve the desired level of performance. There are various methods available to the designer for attaining a fragment distribution of sufficient mass and number to increase effectiveness against a given target. Several of these are discussed in the paper, but the focus of this research is on the use of a series of internal grooves or notches that act as stress raisers. When the design is explosively detonated, these stress raisers form points of failure within the cylindrical shell that then lead to a more optimized fragment distribution (Lloyd [4]). Extremely small fragments cannot be eliminated completely but can be reduced in favor of the more effective fragments.The purpose of this research is to evaluate the geometric designs for controlled fragmentation of metal shells using internal notches (grooves). Specifically examined is the relationship of the overall shell dimensions, notch spacing, and notch depth and whether natural or controlled fragmentation prevails in a given design. The premise is that for a shell design of a given thickness there are some upper and lower limits on both the spacing and depth of the notching beyond which the controlled fragmentation ceases to be effective and natural fragmentation begins. That is, if the grooves are too close together the entire shell may simply naturally fragment and result in multiples of the desired fragments remaining intact. Similar results may occur if they are not deep enough in the shell thickness. It is as if the grooves have little or no effect at all. Likewise, if the grooves are spaced too far apart the desired fragment may naturally fragment within itself and lead to insufficient individual fragment masses. This groove still has some effect, but the design is not fully optimized to yield the desired fragmentation distribution.The paper proceeds as follows. A review of fundamentals of natural and controlled fragmentations and Mott׳s theory of statistical fragment distribution is given in Section 2. A brief description of the CTH hydrocode was first given in Section 3, followed by numerical analysis of controlled fragmentation problem of interest and numerical results. The paper ends in Section 4 with a summary and some conclusions reached in this study and recommendations for further study.The goal in designing the fragmentation of a metallic cylinder is to generate fragments which have sufficient mass, velocity, and spatial distribution to be effective against a specified target. A desired fragmentation may be achieved naturally or through the use of specific design features. Various design parameters exist which contribute to the fragmentation characterization and thus to the effectiveness. These include the cylinder dimensions—length, diameter, thickness—as well as properties such as molecular grain size, toughness, brittleness or ductility, explosive fill, and confinement (Lloyd [4]). The processes of both fragmentation methods are discussed in this section.The cylindrical shell subjected to natural fragmentation is simply absent of any design features intended to alter the fragment distribution resulting from detonation of the high-explosive contained within the case. The primary design choices involved are overall dimensions of the shell, shell material, and explosive. Essentially, this method includes no extra manufacturing or materials processing steps beyond that which is required to produce the metal cylinder and fill it with explosive.Lloyd [4] describes the basic process of natural fragmentation in four steps. Upon detonation of the explosive the internal pressure builds and the case begins to expand. After continued reaction of the explosive and expansion of the gaseous products the shell material develops fractures on its outer surface in a matter of microseconds. These fractures then grow towards the inner surface of the casing and begin to allow the gaseous products from the detonation to escape. Finally, as the fracture process completes, fragments are liberated and ejected from the gas cloud. The entire event takes on the order of tens of microseconds to occur.In the early days of the study of this subject, it was common to simply build and explosively test a shell casing design to determine its fragmentation distribution. While testing is still important, a strict trial-and-error design approach can be both costly and time consuming. It became increasingly necessary to be able to predict the resulting fragment distribution for a shell design to determine its sufficiency.The beginning work to develop a model for natural fragmentation was the theoretical predictions of Mott [5,6]. His contributions form the basis for this entire field. His assumptions correspond to Lloyd׳s description of the process discussed previously. The fragmentation itself is described as “the tearing apart of a rapidly expanding tube when the material of the tube reaches the limit of its ductility” [6]. The event was considered instantaneous as the time of the event is much smaller than a characteristic time based on the strain rate in the material. Mott proposed that the average fragment size depended on the scatter in values for the reduction in area at which tensile failure occurs—effectively the strain at failure. He derived a characteristic fragment length,x0, based on the scatter in the strain at fracture of the material, γ(1)x0=2σyργ1ε̇whereσyis the flow (yield) stress of the case material (material was idealized as perfectly plastic with a constant flow stress), ρ is the density of the case, andε̇=v/r, withvand r being, respectively, the radial velocity and the radius of the case at fracture, is the strain rate (in the hoop direction). According to Mott [6], the majority of fragment lengths occur in the range ofx0–2x0, with an average of about1.5x0.There was a need to relate the mass of the fragments to the length. Mott and Linfoot [5] examined what fragmentation data was available to them and found a substantial number of fragments retained original surfaces from both the outside and inside of the shell casing. These are sometimes termed “platelet” fragments in modern context. They concluded that the length parameter was proportional to the square root of the mass for these type fragments and developed the fragment probability density distribution(2)f(m)=12μ(mμ)−1/2e−(m/μ)1/2.where the characteristic mass μ is a scale parameter [5]. The Weibull distribution for the fragment mass is now commonly referred to as the Mott distribution and the parameter μ the Mott parameter.Gurney and Sarmousakis [7] developed an alternative expression for the Mott parameter for use in “thin-walled” casings. Lloyd [4] presented Mott׳s distribution with a more direct means of calculating the characteristic mass μ. The number of fragments with a mass larger than m is [4](3)N(m)=M02μe−(m/μ)1/2whereM0is the total mass of the case, and the Mott parameter μ can be determined from the geometry of the case and the type of explosive used(4)μ=B2t5/3Di2/3[1+(t/Di)]2.The constant B is experimentally determined for the particular explosive being used; t andDiare, respectively, the thickness and inner diameter of the casing. In Eq. (3)M0/(2μ)represents the total number of fragments, thus 2μ is the average mass of fragments.The more recent theory of dynamic fragmentation developed by Grady and Kipp [8,9] are based on the consideration of energies. The major difference between the fragmentation theory of Grady and Kipp and the statistical fragmentation theory of Mott is the assumption in Mott that the dissipation of energy during the fracture process was not significant and the process would be instantaneous [9]. Kipp and Grady [8] proposed that the energy dissipation was important and that there is some resulting delay time in the fracture process. Their formulation is based on the one-dimensional Mott fragmenting ring development and includes both fracture resistance and time history. (An improvement upon the Kipp and Grady model was made by Drugan [18].)Instead of an instantaneous fracture event, Kipp and Grady [8] proposed a fracture resistance that decreases from the flow stress of the material to zero as a crack-opening-displacement parameter, y, increases from zero to some critical value, yc. The fracture resistance can be considered a material property and estimated from other material properties. In the dimensions of fracture toughness, Kc, an expression for fragmentation toughness, Kfcan be defined in terms of fracture resistance,Γ, and Young׳s modulus, E, asKf=2EΓ. The fragmentation toughness is not necessarily related to the fracture toughness for metals, but approximatingKf≈Kcis reasonable in the absence of other material data. The resulting equation for nominal fragment length Kipp and Grady [8] arrived at is expressed in terms of the fracture resistance, material density, and strain rate(5)x0=(24Γρε̇2)1/3Experimental data exist which compare well with features of both the statistical and energy-based approaches to modeling natural fragmentation. Magnetically-driven rings of uranium-6% niobium alloy (U6Nb) were fragmented and the resulting distribution examined. Fracture spacing was consistent with the Mott statistical theory, however, evidence of the strain rate and time dependence consistent with energy-based theory was also observed (Grady [9]).The controlled fragmentation of the cylindrical shell occurs when the designer introduces some features that seek to alter the characterization of the natural fragment distribution in some way. The addition of these design features adds some extra manufacturing and processing to the production steps. Otherwise, the controlled fragmentation event itself occurs quite similarly to the natural fragmentation event and along the same timeline described previously. The design features for controlling fragmentation fall into four main categories: external casing grooves or external geometry, localized casing embrittlement, explosive shaping, and internal grooves or notching (Held [1]). The focus of this paper is on the use of internal grooves.Internal grooves in the casing material are one of the most widely used methods for controlling the fragmentation pattern. Also referred to as a shear control method, it uses the stress concentrations within the casing to induce shear bands and eventually fracture at the prescribed location [4].Internal groove designs do not suffer from the same release wave effects and inconsistencies in break up as the external groove designs [1]. They do not require specialized manufacturing processes like the embrittlement techniques, nor do they remove explosive weight as in the explosive shaping method. A relatively small amount of available fragmenting mass is sacrificed for the internal grooves in order to achieve the desired mass distribution. There is still increased cost and manufacturing considerations involved with this design when compared to a naturally fragmenting casing, but it is similar to that of external grooves and less than that of the other methods.It is well agreed upon [1,4] that there are seven significant parameters which govern the fragment break up when using internal grooves: (1) Material properties of the casing. (2) Grid geometry of the grooves. (3) Cross section and depth of the grid elements or grooves. (4) Orientation of the detonation front. (5) Properties of the explosive. (6) Presence of material between explosive and casing material or any similar design features and (7) Manufacturing process of forming the grooves. We now discuss each of these.The material properties of the metal casing are most significant in achieving proper fragmentation characteristics. The current design method (using internal grooves) attempts to activate the primary failure in shear, thus it follows that it is most effective when used on more ductile metals rather than brittle ones [1]. A general guideline for experimentally determining the suitability of a material for this application is to examine its natural fragmentation characteristics. If the shell naturally fractures primarily in a shear mode, as do more ductile metals, then it is a good choice for using internal grooves. If it fractures in a tensile mode, as do more brittle materials, it may not be appropriate for this type design (as failure due to tensile fracture may be strongly affected by the fluctuation in the material properties, such as fracture toughness, and the defects contained in the material).The grid pattern of the internal grooves is typically designed for diamond-shaped fragments [1]. Configurations with constant spacing in the groove pattern are designed to produce all fragments of the same size. However, other configurations are possible. Grooves in the longitudinal direction only produce more rod-like fragments. Diamond grids can also be designed to produce non-uniform mass distributions of fragments by altering the spacing of the grooves. Bi-modal and tri-modal fragment mass distributions are not uncommon. These asymmetries in the grid pattern may produce less than satisfactory fragments. The shear trajectories can intersect at differing locations throughout the casing producing additional asymmetries in cylinder breakup [1]. However, the benefits of different sizes of fragments may outweigh the risks of introducing more uncertainty into the fragmentation process. This non-uniformity may be advantageous when seeking to use a single design against a range of potential targets which are susceptible to different distinct masses of fragment.The grid geometry should also take advantage of the maximum strain that exists in the cylindrical casing at the time of detonation [1]. Similar to results from the static analysis of pressure vessels, during the detonation event the maximum strain occurs in the circumferential direction while the longitudinal strain is significantly less. It follows that the grooves need to be oriented in such a way that the maximum strain acts to pull them apart and initiate failure. At some point the angle of the diamond shape has to develop a balance between being small enough for the most effective control and yet large enough to achieve fragments of a sufficient mass. A 60° angle (with respect to the shell axis) accomplishes this balance and has been commonly used [1].There are geometric limitations on the spacing of these groove patterns to achieve the preferred fragmentation characteristics. The required spacing limits of the grooves are primarily a function of the cylinder׳s thickness, overall geometry—namely radius, and material properties—primarily ductility. The desired fragment sizes have some upper and lower bounds within which this control mechanism will best perform as intended [1]. Multiples of the scored fragments may remain intact if the spacing of the grid is too small. Meanwhile at the other limiting extreme, the scored fragment may naturally fragment within itself if the spacing of the grid is too large. Rather than this behavior having discrete points at which the undesirable effects occur, it has transition zones at both ends of the extreme [1]. In between these limits there exists some potential range of fragment sizes which can be effectively achieved for the particular design. A typical starting point of design iterations for the grid spacing size to be used is the casing thickness.The cross-sectional profile of the notch also impacts the fragmentation characteristics. Sometimes termed precision or semi-precision shear control, whether or not the groove has a symmetrical profile affects the activation of shear trajectories throughout the cylindrical case [1]. Symmetrical groove profiles, used in semi-precision control, initiate two primary shear fracture trajectories from the root of the notch. Asymmetrical groove profiles—precision control—initiate one primary and one secondary trajectory.Semi-precision control, in addition to the larger, primary fragments, tends to form smaller, secondary fragments from the casing material between the fracture trajectories and exterior to the notch [4]. This secondary fragment may not always be of sufficient mass to be effective against a particular target, thus it is potentially an inefficient use of the available fragmenting mass. Precision control tends to support fracture along the primary trajectory and as a result provides for the formation of the primary fragment without as many occurrences of the secondary fragment. This leads to a more predictable, narrower mass distribution of fragments.The profiles, especially in the case of asymmetric grooves, should be oriented to take advantage of the direction of the impinging detonation front [1]. If the explosive charge is initiated at the aft end of the cylinder, as is typical, the grooves need to be such that the removed material side is toward the forward end of the cylinder. In this configuration the detonation front passes by the grooves and tends to activate the primary shear trajectories within the casing. Reversing that layout tends to activate the secondary shear trajectories through the casing resulting in the potential small, ineffective fragment sizes. This directional orientation effect is much less significant for the symmetric groove design because, regardless of the detonation front׳s direction of travel, the activation of both primary fracture trajectories is equally likely.The type of explosive used has a lesser degree of impact on the fragmentation characteristics. The primary quality of the explosive that does contribute to changes is how rapidly the maximum detonation pressure is achieved (also known as brisance [1]). Brisance can also be considered as the measure of shattering power of an explosive (Rinehart and Pearson [10]). Generally, higher brisance leads to an increased number of the fracture trajectories that are activated within the casing material. This is not always desirable because all of the fractures may not be in the optimal directions for proper fragment formation. The use of internal grooves—shear control—has been experimentally proven viable for a range of commonly used military explosives such as Composition C-3, Composition C-4, Composition B, and Octol among others. Design changes in the other parameters involved in this method have more significant impact on fragmentation characteristics than the explosive type [1].Buffer materials between the explosive and fragmenting casing can have considerable effect on the overall fragmentation. Once again, this is due to changes in the number of fracture trajectories activated upon detonation [1]. The presence of such material normally reduces the amount of activated trajectories and can be a desirable design feature to include especially if required by the explosive manufacturing process. Likewise, the manufacturing process as a whole can affect the fragmentation characteristics through the effects of the various machining, casting, or forging processes. There may be localized changes in material properties and microstructure occurring near the grooves but these, too, are insignificant in comparison to the other design parameters for this controlled fragmentation method [1].The effects of various geometric parameters on the controlled fragmentation were investigated in the current work by numerical simulations using the CTH hydrocode. CTH is an Eulerian hydrodynamic code (hydrocode) developed and maintained by Sandia National Laboratories (McGlaun et al. [11]). Eulerian hydrocodes employ a computational mesh that is fixed in space and allows material to flow through the mesh. CTH uses a two-step solution process to integrate the conservation equations through time: a Lagrangian step and a remapping step (Moore [12]). In the Lagrangian step, the mesh deforms to follow the motion of the material as the conservation equations are solved for the particular time step. No mass flows across the cell boundaries at this point. The remap step then takes these newly distorted cells and remaps them back onto the Eulerian mesh. CTH incorporates interface tracking algorithms to prevent the distortion and breakup of material interfaces within the mesh. It includes several options for the equation of state, constitutive model, and failure and porosity model for different materials and applications. This analysis takes the approach of using realistic materials and the typical design trade space that a weapons engineer would have available to begin a controlled fragmentation design. The material choices, the models used in CTH, and the geometric design parameters considered are discussed below. Following that are selected graphical results of the study and a summary of the entire analysis performed.The high-explosive selected for this analysis is Composition C-4. It is commonly available and used in the explosives industry. It has material properties well-defined and implemented within CTH and, as previously discussed (in Section 2.2.5), has been experimentally shown to be effective when used in interior groove controlled fragmentation applications.The casing material chosen for this analysis is 4340 steel. It is a commonly available steel alloy and was used in the experiments that provided a portion of the data which contributed to the development of both the constitutive and fracture models discussed below (Johnson and Cook, [13,14]). 4340 steel is also a standard material in CTH, having its properties well-defined for use in the hydrocode. Material properties for 4340 steel used in this work are given inTable 1.The Johnson–Cook constitutive model was used within CTH for this analysis. It was developed from experimental data with the intent for use in computational analysis of impulsive loading conditions such as explosive detonation. The model was designed to incorporate effects from strain hardening, strain-rate hardening, and thermal softening of materials. Their model expresses the flow (yield) stress of the material as [13](6)σ¯=[A+Bεn][1+Clnε̇⁎][1−T⁎m]whereσ¯is the flow (yield) stressεis the equivalent plastic strain, given bydε=(2/3)dεijpdεijp, A, B, n, C and m are material constants. The dimensionless plastic strain rate isε̇⁎=ε̇/ε̇0withε̇0=1/sec.T⁎is the homologous temperature defined asT⁎=(T−Troom)/(Tm−Troom)whereTroomis the room or ambient temperature and Tmis the melting temperature of the material.The first bracketed portion of Eq. (6) represents strain-hardening; the constant A is the yield stress; the constants B and n introduce the effects of strain hardening in the material. The constant C represents strain rate effects, and constant m accounts for thermal softening. The constitutive model constants for 4340 steel used in this work are shown inTable 2.The Johnson–Cook fracture model was also used in CTH for this analysis. It is a cumulative damage model that relates the fracture strain of a material as a function of pressure, strain rate, temperature, and equivalent stress. The damage/failure portion of their fracture model is described as [14](7)D=∑ΔεεfwhereΔεis the equivalent plastic strain increment,εfis the fracture strain, and fracture occurs at D=1. The fracture strain is given by [14](8)εf=[D1+D2exp(D3σ⁎)][1+D4lnε̇⁎][1+D5T⁎]whereD1…D5are the model constants, the dimensionless plastic strain rate and homologous temperature are as defined previously, and the dimensionless pressure–stress ratioσ⁎=σm/σ¯, andσmis the average of the three normal stresses, or the negative pressure. The constantsD1…D5for 4340 steel considered in this work are listed inTable 3.The Johnson–Cook fracture model within CTH provides the ability to apply a Weibull statistical distribution function to the initial failure strain of cells containing that material. This capability provides for non-deterministic failure results which are more realistic due to the inherent heterogeneity of many commonly used engineering materials (Meyer and Brannon [15]). The initial failure strain,ε0f, is equal toD1+D2model constants. The fracture strain in Eq. (8) is then rearranged as(9)εf=[ε0f+D2[exp(D3σ⁎)−1]][1+D4lnε̇⁎][1+D5T⁎].The range of values forε0fis controlled by the input of a Weibull modulus. Increasing the value of the Weibull modulus provides a narrower range of initial failure strains while decreasing it results in a wider range. A value of 12 was chosen for the Weibull modulus for use in this analysis. That is within the range used for metals in other analyses involving high velocity impacts (Sorensen et al. [16]). The natural fragmentation simulations performed for this paper resulted in negligible change in the failure regions of the shell when the Weibull modulus was increased beyond 10.The repeatability of the simulation was also verified through changing the random number generator seed of the Weibull distribution for a sample case. Change in the failure locations was observed when the seed value was altered. Repeated simulation runs of the sample case using the same seed value yielded identical results, as expected. The CTH built-in random number seed for the Johnson–Cook fracture model was used for all of the hydrocode simulations.In modeling nonlinear response of a continuum, it is customary to decompose the stress and strain tensors into volumetric (hydrostatic) and deviatoric parts. The deviatoric response of the metal considered in this paper (4340 Steel), including failure (fracture), was modeled by Johnson–Cook models, as discussed in Eqs. (6) and (7). The volumetric response of the material, i.e., the relationship between the pressure and the volumetric strain in the material, is called the equation of state (EOS) of the material. The SESAME tabular EOS data set within CTH was used in this work. It is a library of EOS tables developed specifically for use in hydrocodes. It is designed to encompass more complicated EOS beyond that of the primary analytical models and includes melting, solid–solid phase transitions, and chemical reaction processes (Crawford [17]). It is recommended for general purpose use as it is frequently updated and revised by the CTH development team [12].Analysis was performed on radial cross sections of cylindrical shells with a range of size (radius and thickness). We limited our analyses to the cases where the length of the shell is much greater than the diameter so that the shell may be reasonably approximated as in the state of plane strain. End effects and any directional effects caused by end-detonation of the explosive were not addressed here. The Composition C-4 was detonated in the center point of the shell at a radius of two centimeters—just larger than the size of its critical radius needed to sustain reaction.The two-dimensional Eulerian mesh was applied with a 1mm resolution in the directions of a Cartesian coordinate X and Y in the cross sectional plane, with the origin taken at the center of the shell, as shown inFig. 1. This resolution was chosen to balance simulation time with the need to properly resolve the smallest design features. Further decreasing the mesh size in both directions to 0.5mm was tried for a sample case. Increasing the number of computational cells by a factor of 4 led to a similar increase in the simulation time required with little observable change in the result. The run matrix of shell dimensions and notch designs are shown inTable 4.The radii and thicknesses of the cylindrical shells were selected to cover a wide array of actual applications of controlled fragmentation designs. The notch depths were selected such that almost no material is removed on the low end of the range up to almost the entire shell thickness of material is removed on the high end.The numbers of equally-spaced notches were selected to encompass a range of realistic fragment numbers for designs of this scale. The CTH input text file format required each notch of material to be deleted individually within the 2-D mesh grid. In order to create a separate input file for each possible design combination to be analyzed it became necessary to create a spreadsheet to calculate the notch locations based upon their respective angular locations instead of their circumferential spacing. As such, the circumferential spacing between notches—the dimension of the prescribed fragment—increases as the shell radius increases for the same number of notches. The notches themselves used the asymmetric design discussed in previous sections in which the material is removed from only one side. This resulting triangular notch of material deleted from the shell was defined by the triangle vertices׳ coordinates within CTH. Care was taken not to overlap the adjacent notches and to always maintain contact between the explosive and the shell when using the spreadsheet to perform these calculations. Because of this, it was not possible to use all of the notch depths with the larger number of notch configurations for the some of the smaller radii shells.The data output from CTH are contour plots of the scalar damage variable from the Johnson–Cook fracture model. The contour scale follows the visible color spectrum to illustrate material damage of the shell in the model. A value of one is red and zero is blue. Once the contour plot reaches D=1 completely through the shell at a given location—it accumulates sufficient fracture strain—the material is considered to have failed naturally and would then be subject to natural fragmentation effects.Each design case is categorized based upon the effectiveness of the notch configuration׳s capability to control the fragmentation as desired. The designs were classified according to three general levels of effectiveness: (1) little or no effect—natural fragmentation dominates. (2) Partial or incomplete—portions of the shell exhibit controlled fragmentation, or the shell fails naturally despite some considerable influence of the notches. (3) Full or almost complete—controlled fragmentation dominates.An example of little to no controlled fragmentation effects is shown inFigs. 1 and 2. The locations of the 18 notches are illustrated by dashed lines on the shell pre-detonation in Fig. 1. The notches are distinguishable in Fig. 2 but the casing failed naturally throughout its thickness in many locations and results in natural fragmentation effects. While this could still potentially generate sufficiently sized fragments, it represents a poor controlled fragmentation design overall and would have achieved similar results by relying on the natural fragmentation of the same size shell.Examples of partial or incomplete controlled fragmentation are shown inFigs. 3 and 4. They both show that the notches have a pronounced effect on the shell as it expands. Nevertheless, the material has already failed throughout the thickness of the shell in many locations in Fig. 3 and everywhere in Fig. 4. These represent poor controlled fragmentation designs because each has some or all of the desired fragments subjected to natural fragmentation. Despite the system of notches having some effects on the casing breakup in both situations, these designs should be further optimized in order to properly fragment as prescribed.Examples of complete controlled fragmentation are shown inFigs. 5 and 6. The notches have the desired effectiveness in Fig. 5 as each of the fragments has broken apart and none of them have reached the point of fracture within itself. This represents a good controlled fragmentation design. The less-optimized design is illustrated in Fig. 6. While the notches have considerable effect on the shell, all of the fragments consist of a significant portion that has already failed naturally. Even though this design is considered complete controlled fragmentation because the fragments have not failed entirely throughout the shell thickness, it is not an efficient use of the available fragmenting mass.A summary plot of these results is shown inFig. 7 where the notch spacing is plotted as a function of the notch depth divided by shell thickness. The controlled fragmentation effectiveness for each design configuration is illustrated as red for “none”, yellow for “partial,” or green for “complete”.For the combination of the explosive and the case material considered in this work the controlled fragmentation effectiveness of the designs analyzed appears to be most dependent upon the notch depth. With few exceptions, the best design cases all have notch depths greater than half of the shell thicknesses.The other significant design parameter observed from these results is the spacing of the notches. The best designs generally have shell thicknesses in the same range as the notch spacing. This effective range of spacing tends to increase as the shell radius increases. As the spacing between notches decreases below the shell thickness the controlled fragmentation effects also decrease. This tends to yield incomplete breakup like that in Fig. 3 or an inefficient yet complete breakup like that in Fig. 6. When the notch spacing is significantly larger than the shell thickness, the controlled fragmentation has little or no presence, and the fragments fail naturally within themselves. Of the designs with incomplete or no controlled fragmentation, the ones of smaller radius tend to perform similarly to that illustrated in Fig. 4. Those with larger radii tended to perform more as illustrated in Fig. 1 or Fig. 2.Geometric designs for the controlled fragmentation of cylindrical shells have been modeled using the CTH hydrocode. Design parameters studied include the shell radius, thickness, and the depth and spacing of interior grooves or notches. A large number of individual shell designs were analyzed and the effectiveness of their controlled fragmentation features was observed and cataloged.The best overall controlled fragmentation designs exhibit full and complete fragment breakup as prescribed along the system of interior grooves or notches without any of the individual fragments naturally fragmenting throughout their thicknesses. For the combination of the Composition C-4 explosive and the 4340 steel shell encompassing the range of the geometries analyzed, the best performing designs commonly possess the following characteristics: (1) the notch or groove depths greater than half of the shell thickness; (2) the notch or groove spacing within a range that is approximately the same as the shell thickness; (3) the shell thicknesses many times smaller than the shell radius. These results are believed to be useful to the designer of controlled fragmentations.Further exploration of this design problem is both possible and reasonable to consider. The current models analyzed in CTH could be easily changed to evaluate different combinations of high explosives and metal shell materials. Use of this type of analysis to aid in materials selection should be done early in the design process.Additional iterations on the design parameters considered in this study could be performed in two-dimensional analysis to further optimize the number and spacing of notches required for proper controlled fragmentation of the shells of various size. The time and effort necessary to create and run an adequate quantity of these models are still practical to conduct at this point in the design process. Once a best 2-D design is reached, a 3-D model should be created and simulated in the hydrocode. This entails a considerable increase in time, effort, and complexity to perform such an analysis. However, given the true three-dimensional nature of the problem, it is prudent to commit the resources necessary to investigate a very limited number of 3-D models. The selected design should also have a prototype manufactured and tested. Full-scale explosive testing can be both costly and time consuming but is necessary for final confirmation of the acceptability of the design.In conclusion, two-dimensional hydrocode simulation is both a useful and practical tool with which to investigate controlled fragmentation problems. Its efficiency in analyzing various geometric design parameters can make it a significant part of the design process of fragmenting shells.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
