@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new algorithm for automatic vascular mapping of DCE-MRI of the breast: Clinical application of a potential new biomarker

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A validated algorithm quantifies breast vascularity through vascular maps (AVM).Breast DCE-MR exams are analyzed before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC).Responders and non-responders show difference in vascularity before and after NAC.AVMs may represent a reliable method to evaluate pathologic response after NAC.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
DCE-MRI,Breast cancer,Vessel-detection algorithm,Automatic vascular maps,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveVascularity evaluation on breast dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) has a potential diagnostic value, but it represents a time consuming procedure, affected by intra- and inter-observer variability. This study tests the application of a recently published method to reproducibly quantify breast vascularity, and evaluates if the vascular volume of cancer-bearing breast, calculated from automatic vascular maps (AVMs), may correlate with pathologic tumor response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC).MethodsTwenty-four patients with unilateral locally advanced breast cancer underwent DCE-MRI before and after NAC, 8 responders and 16 non-responders. A validated algorithm, based on multiscale 3D Hessian matrix analysis, provided AVMs and allowed the calculation of vessel volume before the initiation and after the last NAC cycle for each breast. For cancer bearing breast, the difference in vascular volume before and after NAC was compared in responders and non-responders using the Wilcoxon two-sample test. A radiologist evaluated the vascularity on the subtracted images (first enhanced minus unenhanced), before and after treatment, assigning a vascular score for each breast, according to the number of vessels with length ≥30mm and maximal transverse diameter ≥2mm. The same evaluation was repeated with the support of the simultaneous visualization of the AVMs. The two evaluations were compared in terms of mean number of vessels and mean vascular score per breast, in responders and non-responders, by use of Wilcoxon two sample test. For all the analysis, the statistical significance level was set at 0.05.ResultsFor breasts harboring the cancer, evidence of a difference in vascular volume before and after NAC for responders (median=1.71cc) and non-responders (median=0.41cc) was found (p=0.003). A significant difference was also found in the number of vessels (p=0.03) and vascular score (p=0.02) before or after NAC, according to the evaluation supported by the AVMs.ConclusionsThe encouraging, although preliminary, results of this study suggest the use of AVMs as new biomarker to evaluate the pathologic response after NAC, but also support their application in other breast DCE-MRI vessel analysis that are waiting for a reliable quantification method.Solid tumors rely on blood vessels to obtain necessary nutrient and oxygen, and new vessels also offer path way for tumor expansion. Therefore, the assessment of tumor vascularity may provide useful information to characterize underlying malignancy and monitor vascular abnormalities [1]. In the past decade, microvessel density represented the most commonly used prognostic indicator for tumor vascularization in a wide range of cancers, although its quantification remained unreliable because of the lack of sufficient morphological and functional information of blood vessels, and it could be only assessed after the surgical resection of the primary tumor [1]. A better alternative to study tumor vasculature may be derived from non-invasive imaging techniques, such as contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), and more recently, B-mode and Doppler ultrasound (US). With varied types of cancer, there is no general agreement as to which established imaging method is most suitable for determining features of tumor blood vessels [1].Breast DCE-MRI has emerged as the most sensitive technique for the detection and diagnosis of breast lesions and numerous studies have confirmed the superior performance of MRI compared with mammography and ultrasound (US), leading to its recommendation for several indications, such as in the surveillance of women with high risk of breast cancer and in the clinical workup of patients with carcinoma unknown primary (CUP) syndrome [2,3]. Moreover, MRI showed advantages over conventional imaging modalities in monitoring the tumor response to neoadjuvant treatments [4], also because of its capability to detect changes in vascularity due to chemotherapeutic agents, including anti-angiogenics [5,6]. MRI has the potential to tailor surgical planning of patients with breast cancer, although its impact on clinical outcomes is still on debate. In addition, some reports suggest that preoperative breast MRI in women with newly diagnosed cancer could potentially increase the rate of unnecessary biopsies and surgery [2]. Recent studies aimed to increase the specificity of breast DCE-MRI by adding a vessel analysis to the standard morphologic and kinetic criteria, therefore exploring the diagnostic value of vascularity [7–9]. During the past decade, this research issue has been approached in two ways: first, whole-breast vascularity, and second, local vascularity, that is, vessels adjacent to and feeding a lesion or lesions [9]. The evaluation of this information is already allowed, since the visualization of bilateral vascular maps is intrinsically integrated into a standard breast DCE-MRI study without an increase in acquisition time or the administration of additional contrast material [9,10]. However, vascularity is not usually considered by radiologists, mainly because evaluating and counting vessels using multiple views may be time consuming and a standardized quantification method of breast vessels does not exist [10]. Several studies have tried to address the automatic detection and extraction of the breast vascularity to improve the work-flow of radiologists [1,11,12], but only one of them has been conceived to work on DCE-MRI [13]. However, the last method, proposed by Lin et al. and based on wavelet transform and the Hessian matrix, is affected by some limitations. Indeed, it relies on a preliminary manual interaction while breast lesions are excluded by placing a square box over the lesion, and it has been tested on patients with relatively large lesions, large vessels, and no motion artifacts on subtracted images. Regarding the evaluation of the vascularity in the clinical practice, the unique quantitative approach existing has been introduced by Sardanelli et al. [7] and it is based on the number of vessels per breast, with length of 30mm or greater and maximal transverse diameter of 2mm or greater. This method was used by a recent study [10] to assess the variation in whole-breast vascular maps on DCE-MRI after anthracycline- and taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) in patients with locally advanced breast cancer (LABC), showing a correlation between changes in breast vascular maps and pathologic tumor response. However, the authors highlight some limitations of the Sardanelli score system, as also recognized by other authors [14], such as difficulties in counting branching vessels, and time-consuming procedure to define if a vessel should or should not be counted. The development of a highly reproducible method to extract vascular maps and to quantify vessels within the breast has been therefore encouraged [9,10]. In 2012, our group developed a novel fully automatic Hessian-matrix method able to overcome the limitations of Lin et al. approach [15]. The aim of the present study is to test the application of our recently published method to reproducibly quantify breast vascularity, and to evaluate if the vascular volume of cancer-bearing breast, calculated from automatic vascular maps (AVMs), may correlate with pathologic tumor response after NAC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The application of a validated algorithm for automatic vessel extraction on DCE-MRI of the breast is proposed to support breast vascularity evaluation, recently investigated as a potential DCE-MRI descriptor correlated with cancer diagnosis and with the effect of NAC. In particular, the method provides a standardized vascular mapping, its quantification based on vessel volume, overcoming the low reproducibility of current approaches based on human visual assessment. Taking into account the preliminary nature of the results here presented, the vessel volume difference of cancer-bearing breast after NAC demonstrated a correlation with pathologic tumor response.F.S. received research grants from and is on the speakers’ bureau for Bracco Imaging Group and Bayer Pharma AG; L.M. was a blinded reader for Bayer Schering Pharma, was a speaker for Bracco Imaging Group. For the remaining authors, none were declared.