@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A reduced fastener model using Multi-Connected Rigid Surfaces for the prediction of both local stress field and load distribution between fasteners

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A finite element model of bolt is proposed to reduce time calculation of fastened joints.Different deformation modes of bolt are analysed to justify model construction.The bolt is represented by rigid surfaces linked with elastic connectors.The proposed model provide high-precision load distribution and local stress field.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bolted joint,Composite material,Finite elements,Rigid surface,Connector,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes the development of a reduced model of a fastener using Multi-Connected Rigid Surfaces (MCRS). The stiffness of the connectors is determined, based on a physical approach, considering different deformation modes of the bolt. The reduced model is constructed and identified from a numerical simulation of a single lap reference joint under tensile load, with the adherent parts and bolts represented by 3-D solid elements. A single simulation with a given clearance, axial preload and friction coefficient is used to identify equivalent stiffnesses. The reduced model is then compared with the 3-D solid elements model in a two-fastener configuration for different values of clearance, preload and friction coefficient. The comparison covers overall response in terms of stiffness and load distribution between fasteners, local response in terms of stress fields and calculation times. Results show that the reduced model proposed here is able to reduce calculation times while still providing a good estimate of the mechanical quantities needed for the study and dimensioning of multi-fastener joints.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Because of the costs and delays incurred in experimental studies, numerical simulation is an essential tool when designing assembled structures. The design of fastened joints is based on making a good estimate of the distribution of loads between fasteners. This load distribution depends on the stiffness of the fastener, the stiffness of the parts, the way in which external forces are introduced, and also clearances and geometrical defects. Note that by stiffness of the fastener, we refer to the ratio of the load borne by the fastener to the relative displacement, one against the other, of the parts adjacent to the fastener. Depending on whether the load is transmitted by adherence or by fastener pin-hole contact, this stiffness will be very different. In the former case (load transmitted by adherence), the role of the axial preload is fundamental; in the latter case (load transmitted by contact), the presence of clearance results in contact occur gradually and hence stiffness evolves. For a composite structure joint, the two modes of load transfer combine since the material is unable to bear a high preload due to its low resistance in the out-of-plane direction. In addition, the materials in contact tend to be damaged as a result of bearing stresses, which also leads to a change in stiffness. Generally, with a single lap joint, the rotation of the parts caused by the secondary bending moment is directed by the bending stiffness of the fastener heads. This is an important phenomenon since it gives rise to a non-uniform distribution of contact pressure between the pin and the two holes.The quantity and complexity of the phenomena involved lead us naturally to model the fastened joints using a refined mesh of 3-D solid elements. This type of model was developed in order to study the effect of the friction coefficient [1], clearance [2], location error [3] or preload [4]. As well as predicting load distribution between the fasteners, these models also provide accurate results for the stress fields in the high gradient regions around the hole. They are also known for their ability to take material non-linearities into account, such as damage [2,5,6]. Several modes of degradation can be introduced, such as delamination, matrix cracking or fibre failure. Despite these performances, models using 3-D solid elements are still very costly in terms of calculation time and they require specifically adapted calculation strategies, notably parallel computing by domain decomposition to process assemblies with several dozen fasteners or to carry out parametric studies on several hundred configurations [7,8].Thus in order to deal with assemblies with a very large number of fasteners, or to carry out extensive parametric studies, analytical or semi-analytical models have been developed. The 1-D models proposed in the literature can predict load distribution between fasteners in a wide variety of configurations: bolted [3,9–12] or bolted/bonded [13], with clearance and location errors [3], taking into account loss of stiffness due to bearing damage [3,9,13,14]. However, these models are limited to one-dimensional plane geometries and loadings.Several approaches have been developed in recent years to simplify the way fasteners are represented in finite element models. The first consists of representing each fastener by a special connection element, available in most finite element analysis software packages, which links a single node from each adherent part, potentially incorporating various non-linear behaviours [15–17]. In this case, the holes and the contacts are not represented. This is a very interesting approach in terms of calculation time, but it requires a specific identification procedure to include the role of clearance, friction and material non-linearities overall in the behaviour of the connector. Moreover, the stress field around the fasteners is not represented, and thus macroscopic failure criteria must be used for the assembled parts [18,19].Gray et al. [20] have modelled the adherent part with shell elements and the bolts with two rigid cylindrical surfaces connected by a beam exhibiting elastic behaviour. The heads were replaced by coupling the movement of the beam ends with the adherent parts. The model is validated for a single lap joint with one bolt and three bolts, including clearance and preload. The problem with these approaches remains the identification of the equivalent stiffnesses associated with the connection elements. A simple estimate of shear stiffness can be made using various analytical models to be found in the literature [21,22], but the values obtained can vary by a factor of 1 to 5.In this paper, a reduced model of a fastener using Multi-Connected Rigid Surfaces (MCRS) is proposed. The number of rigid surfaces and the stiffnesses introduced between them were selected by analysing deformation modes of the fastener in a single-lap configuration obtained from a reference model made up of 3-D solid elements. From this decomposition, 4 rigid surfaces and 4 stiffnesses were defined. The procedure for identifying these equivalent stiffnesses is also based on the 3-D reference model in a fixed configuration (clearance, friction coefficient, preload). The efficiency of the model was assessed on the basis of global criteria (at the scale of the joint) and local criteria (at the scale of the materials). The validity domain of the identification was studied by varying the clearance, friction coefficient and preload.In this section, an analysis of deformation modes of the fastener is proposed and in particular the relative movement between the functional surfaces of the fastener. Studies referred to in the bibliography [1,3,21,23] show that deformations in the bolt can be decomposed into 4 main modes: tension and bending along the fastener pin axis, shearing of the pin and bearing–compression of the contact semi-cylinders. A finite element model where the fastener is represented by 3-D solid elements is proposed to extract quantitatively these different deformation modes. This analysis is used as a basis for building and identifying the reduced model.The reference configuration used to study deformation modes in the fastener is a single lap joint made of aluminium/composite material with two bolts, as shown inFig. 1. The composite material is a carbon fibre laminate with unidirectional ply and a thermoset matrix T700GC/M21. The stacking sequence for the composite adherent is [90/0/−45/+45/0]sand ply-thickness is 0.25mm. The second adherent part assembled is made of aluminium alloy 2024. The two steel bolts, diameter 6.35mm, are fixed with a radial clearance of 10µm and axial preload of 3500N generating an average contact pressure under the head of about 75MPa. All material properties are listed inTable 1.The model created with Abaqus code uses 3-D solid elements with reduced integration (C3D8R). The threaded junction between the nut and the screw is not modelled. The bolt is therefore represented as a single part. The flexibility resulting from the threaded junction between the nut and bolt is therefore neglected in the reference model and hence in identifying stiffnesses in the MCRS model. According to the literature, this flexibility can be estimated analytically and thus incorporated afterwards into the MCRS model [23,24]. Preload is modelled by initial penetration of 15µm of each head into the adherent parts giving an intended axial preload of 3500N. A contact algorithm using the penalty method with a friction coefficient of 0.1 is also introduced to model contact between the bolts and the adherent parts. Deformation modes in the bolt are analysed with a tensile load of about 15kN, which corresponds to the initiation of bearing damage obtained experimentally.A section S of a bolt is defined as a set of nodes having initially the same coordinate Z. To represent the kinematics of the bolt, for each section S, initially written S0 with centre M0, we define a least-squares plane P from actual position of the nodes of section S. In the event of uniaxial loading alongX→, plane P remains perpendicular to plane (XZ). An orthonormal coordinate system(M,t→,y→,n→)can then be assigned to each deformed section, as shown inFig. 2. M is defined as the intersection of plane P and the curve representing the deflected shape of the bolt axis. For the centre section O (O being the intersection of the axis of the bolt in its deformed state and the overlap plane of the joint) the associated coordinate system is written(O,x→,y→,z→).In order to obtain a displacement field that can be exploited to analyse the different deformation modes in the bolt, a rigid body field displacement was subtracted from the calculated displacement field so that coordinate system(O,x→,y→,z→)and(O0,X→,Y→,Z→)coincide. A column matrix of small displacements [D] is then defined to represent the displacements of translations uxand uz, and also rotationθy=(x→,t→)for each section, as shown in Fig. 2:(1)[D]=[uxuzθy].Specific points on the bolt are defined in plane (XZ) as shown inFig. 3a. To take the deformation of the heads into account and to represent properly the movement of the functional surfaces that make up the surfaces under the head, the sections centred on A and B are divided into “Pin” section (exponent P) and “Head” section (exponent H) as shown in Fig. 3b.Since the rigid-body field displacement has been subtracted, displacements and rotations in the bolt are weak. Thus components ux, uzand θyare representative of the deformation modes in the bolt. Displacement uzrepresents strains along the bolt axis, the rotation of sections θyis the result of bending strains andduxdz−θyrepresents the shear slip of the sections.The graph inFig. 4a showing change in θyas a function of the position on z-axis shows a slight rotation of all sections from the initial state (θymax≈0.12°, or 0.0021rad). However, there is a steep slope close to the ends of the pin and a significant deviation between sectionsSA,BHandSA,BPis observed. The graph in Fig. 4b showing change in uzas a function of the position on z-axis also shows a wide deviation in axial displacements between sectionsSA,BHandSA,BP. These results are due mainly to the deformation of the bolt heads from pressure applied by the adherent parts.Results show that angle θyremains small along the pin, compared withdux/dz. Displacement uxand the deflected shape of the axis (AB) are therefore mainly the result of shear strain.Fig. 5 shows the deflected shape (AB) of the axis of the pin, also the deflected shape (CD) and (EF) of its two contact lines in the loading plane (XZ) which accumulate both shear and compression strains in the pin in areas of contact with the adherent parts.The proportion of displacements caused by shear loading and bearing–compression depends for the most part on the geometry of the bolt. The shorter the bolt in relation to its diameter, the greater the compression strains in relation to shear strains. Note also that during transverse loading, the adherents are subjected to shear deformation due to tangential frictional forces in the overlap surface. If adherent material stiffnesses are lower than the fastener stiffness and bolt-hole clearance is low, contact can be established between the pin and adherents near the overlap plane before sliding. That point and the effects of bending in the adherent parts tend to concentrate the contact pressure near the overlap plane as shown in Fig. 5. Moreover, on comparing the deflected shape of (CD) and (EF) it can be seen that the orientation of the composite plies affects the regularity of the displacement field because of the variation in stiffness of the material adjacent to the contact.Gray and McCarthy [20] modelled fasteners with two rigid surfaces connected by an elastic beam in order to account for shear and bending deformation. This model therefore overlooks the deformation induced by bearing–compression.The purpose behind reducing the model is to do away with the 3-D elements of the bolt, which represent a large proportion of the number of degrees of freedom in the joint. The idea is to use a limited number of rigid surfaces to represent the functional surfaces of the bolt and connect them elastically. For the deformation mode generating a rotation located at the pin–head junctions, it is natural to propose a division along the planes passing throughAandBaccompanied by transverse rotational stiffness alongx→andy→. The two rigid surfaces modelling the bolt heads are writtenRS1HandRS2Hrespectively. For the other deformation modes (axial onz→, shear between the normal planesz→and compression at the contact points) as the strains are not localised, the division is not a natural one. Concerning the axial deformation onz→, the aim of the model is to predict relative displacement alongz→of the surfaces under the heads as a function of the normal load borne by the bolt alongz→. A single division associated with stiffness in translation is therefore proposed. The decision to place the division in the centre sectionOwas an arbitrary one. Concerning shearing between the normal planesz→and compression at the contact points, the aim of the model is to predict the relative transversal displacement of the section portions in contact as a function of the transverse forces alongx→andy→. Normally, a model of this kind should be discretised alongz→. However, as the ultimate aim is to use the reduced model of the bolt with an adherent part model using continuum shell elements, it seems judicious to divide the pin into 2 cylindrical rigid surfacesRS1PandRS2Pin order to maintain some coherence between the kinematics of the bolt model and that of the adherents. It is worth noting that since in the MCRS model, shear deformations, bearing–compression and bending deformations are gathered and concentrated in a single section (pin section which is in the overlap plane), the sliding of the pin section due to shear and associated rotations according to fastener axis are not explicitly represented, but only the global relative displacement of two contact surfaces. The geometry and the relative displacements permitted in the different parts of the MCRS are shown inFig. 6a.Stiffnesses and constraints are introduced into Abaqus by 2-node connector element with 3-D behaviour (CONN3D2). They enable the master nodes of each rigid surface to be linked and introduce stiffnesses according to certain degrees of freedom. As the bolt is axisymmetric, the same stiffnesses are used in directionsx→andy→. Abaqus proposes a variety of usual links in its connector element library [25]. The connector C0 is an assembly of two connectors ALIGN and CARTESIAN. The ALIGN connector ensures that the directions of the local coordinate system for the two rigid surfaces remain parallel. The CARTESIAN connector defines 3 translational stiffnesses (Kn,Ktx,Kty). Connector C1 (and C2 respectively) of the UJOINT type allows for two possible rotations with rotational stiffnessesK1xandK1y(K2xandK2yrespectively) and thus blocks the other degrees of freedom. These different stiffnesses are presented in Fig. 6b.The purpose of the connectors introduced into the MCRS model is to transmit forces and moments and to position the rigid surfaces in the joint. The division that was decided on and described in Section 3.1 results in the kinematic behaviour of sectionsSAHandSBHbeing used to determine stiffnessKnand two rotational stiffnessesK1yandK2y. The displacement vectors associated with these two surfaces are defined as follows:(2)[D1]=[ux1uz1θy1]and[D2]=[ux2uz2θy2]For stiffnessKn, as displacementuzcumulates for the most part in the bolt heads (see Fig. 4b), the representative forceFn, which connector C0 must transmit, is defined as the mean of the axial forces, writtenFz1andFz2transmitted by sectionsSAPandSBPof the 3-D model, as shown inFig. 7a. Equivalent axial displacementUnis the difference in the axial translational displacements of the heads. We therefore obtain(3)Kn=FnUn=12|Fz1+Fz2uz2−uz1|For the transverse rotational stiffnesses, the equivalent angle of rotationΘ1ybetween the rigid surface of the headRS1Hand that of the pinRS1Pis equal toθy1, the rotational component of the displacement vector[D1]. The equivalent momentM1yis the external moment applied by the adherents to the heads and obtained directly from the 3-D model on sectionSAHas shown in Fig. 7b. The same process is applied to determineΘ2ywhich represents the equivalent angle of rotation between the rigid surface of the headRS2Hand the surface of the pinRS2P. We therefore obtain(4)K1y=|M1yΘ1y|=|M1yθy1|(5)K2y=|M2yΘ2y|=|M2yθy2|In principle, the above definitions of stiffnesses Kn,K1yandK2ycan be computed for each level of applied load. Numerical results show that during the sliding phase and clearance recovery, contact pressure under the bolt head is distributed uniformly. Once pin-hole contact is established, contact pressure under the head on the opposite side of pin-hole contact tends to increase because of the rotation of the heads, thus generating a greater strain on the heads. As a result, the equivalent tension stiffness Kndecreases with the load applied (Kn=368kN/mm for a load of 1kN and Kn=243kN/mm for a load of 15kN).K1yandK2yare less impacted. As when analysing the deformation modes of the fastener, the load selected to identify stiffnesses is equal to 15kN, which corresponds to the initiation of bearing damage obtained experimentally.The method we propose here to determine shear/bearing–compression stiffness is based on an energy approach, given the difficulty in estimating displacements and the equivalent forces applied to the functional surfaces modelling the pin in the same way as the transverse rotational and translational alongz→stiffnesses.As only stiffnessKtx=Ktyhas not yet been identified, we search for the value of this stiffness that will equal the strain energy of the bolt calculated with the 3-D model and the sum of the strain energies for all the connectors in the MCRS model. As shown inFig. 8a, the strain energy associated with transverse stiffnessKtxrepresents about 85% of the total strain energy of the bolt at a load level of 15kN (joint displacement equal to 0.7mm). Deducing the value ofKtxfrom the intersection of the graph shown in Fig. 8b representing the change in strain energy estimated with the MCRS model and the level of strain energy calculated with the 3-D model at a load of 15kN is therefore a reliable approach. Stiffnesses identified for each connector are listed inTable 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
