@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Accurate solutions of wave propagation problems under impact loading by the standard, spectral and isogeometric high-order finite elements. Comparative study of accuracy of different space-discretization techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Accurate solutions to impact problems with the spectral and isogeometric elements.The linear elements with reduced dispersion are very computationally efficient.Time increments should be much smaller than the stability limit at large times.The size of time increments at the filtering stage can serve as a measure of accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Elastic and acoustics waves,Finite elements,Spectral elements,Isogeometric elements,Accuracy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For the first time, accurate numerical solutions to impact problems have been obtained with the standard, spectral, and isogeometric high-order finite elements. Spurious high-frequency oscillations appearing in numerical results are quantified and filtered out by the two-stage time-integration approach. We also use the 1-D impact problem with a simple analytical solution for the comparison of accuracy of the different space-discretization techniques used for transient acoustics and elastodynamics problems. The numerical results show the computational efficiency of the linear finite elements with reduced dispersion compared with other space-discretization techniques used for elastodynamics with implicit and explicit time-integration methods. We also show that for all space-discretization methods considered (except the linear finite elements with the lumped mass matrix), very small time increments which are much smaller than stability limit should be used in basic computations at large observation times. We should note that the size of time increments used at the filtering stage and calculated according to the special formulas defines the range of actual frequencies and can be used as a quantitative measure for the comparison and prediction of the accuracy of different space-discretization techniques. We also show that the new findings are valid in the multidimensional case.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are many different space-discretization approaches used for the solution of transient acoustics and elastodynamics problems within the semi-discrete formulations. For these formulations, first a space-discretization method is applied to the corresponding system of partial differential equations and reduces it to a system of ordinary differential equations in time that has the following form:(1)MU¨+CU̇+KU=R,whereM,C, andKare the mass, damping, and stiffness matrices, respectively,Uis the vector of the nodal displacement,Ris the vector of the nodal load. In this paper, we will consider the space-discretization based on the standard low- and high-order finite elements (e.g., see [1–3] and others), the linear and quadratic finite elements with reduced dispersion (e.g., see [4–10] and others), the spectral elements (e.g., see [11–15] and others) and the isogeometric elements (e.g., see [16–19] and others). Of course, there are many other space-discretization methods that can be used for elastodynamics problems such as the boundary element method (e.g., see [20]), different meshless methods (e.g., see [21–26]), the smoothed FEM (e.g., see [27,28]) and many others. The selection of the space discretization methods used in this paper is explained by their popularity as well as by the availability of the corresponding computer codes. For example, the standard high-order finite elements are implemented in the commercial finite-element code “COMSOL”, the spectral low- and high-order elements are implemented into the code “SEMLAB” (see the website “http://www.gps.caltech.edu/~ampuero/software.html”), the isogeometric elements are implemented into the code “IGAFEM” (see the website “http://sourceforge.net/ projects/cmcodes/”); we implemented the linear and quadratic finite elements with reduced dispersion into the finite element code “FEAP”; see [3].The application of time-integration methods to Eq. (1) yields the numerical solutions of transient acoustics or elastodynamics problems. These numerical results contain the space- and time-discretization errors. In the present paper, first we will study the space-discretization error introduced by different space-discretization techniques. In order to exclude the time-discretization error, we will select very small time increments at which the numerical solutions are practically independent of the size of time increments and are close to the exact solution of Eq. (1). It is known that the space-discretization error for elastodynamics problems is related to “the pollution effect” (e.g., see [29–31]) and the numerical dispersion error. Therefore, the analytical study of the numerical dispersion error is very often used in the literature for the comparison of different space-discretization techniques; e.g., see [6–9,32–36] and many others. We should mention that the analytical study of the dispersion error is difficult for high-order space-discretization methods. Moreover, the analysis of the dispersion error based on the Helmholtz equation does not consider the effect of the observation time and time increments on the accuracy of transient elastodynamics problems; however, this effect is very significant (see Section 3 below). In contrast to the study of the numerical dispersion error for the selected frequency in the Helmholtz equation, in many cases we are interested in the combined effect of a range of frequencies on the accuracy of numerical results obtained by different space-discretization techniques. This analysis can be done by the comparison of the accuracy of numerical solutions of the benchmark elastodynamics problems for which a wide range of frequencies is excited simultaneously. There is a very limited number of such benchmark elastodynamics problems with known analytical solutions. The issue is also due to the presence of spurious high-frequency oscillations in numerical solutions for transient acoustics and elastodynamics problems that makes numerical results very inaccurate. Despite a large number of publications related to the treatment of spurious oscillations, this issue has not been resolved in the literature. We would like to mention few recent papers [37–40] dealing with the reduction of spurious oscillations for elastodynamics problems for the linear and quadratic finite elements. However, even for the standard low-order finite elements, the techniques in [37–40] cannot remove all spurious oscillations and may yield inaccurate results at long-term integration. We should mention that it is difficult to predict and estimate the amplitudes of the spurious oscillations which are excited by the initial and boundary conditions and which depend also on the observation time (e.g., for the same space mesh, the amplitudes of spurious oscillations can become much larger with the increase in the observation time; see Section 3 below). For example, due to the spurious oscillations we have not seen in the literature the accurate numerical solutions of elastodynamics problems at impact loading (or high-frequency loading) for the spectral and isogeometric elements as well as for the standard high-order finite elements. We will resolve this issue by the application of the two-stage time-integration approach recently developed in our papers; e.g., see [5,41,42] and will show that this approach can be effectively used with any space-discretization method.In the present study, first we accurately solve the 1-D impact elastodynamics problem by the application of the two-stage time-integration technique consisting of the stage of basic computations and the filtering stage. The 1-D impact problem has the following important features: (a) all low- and high-frequencies of the semi-discrete system, Eq. (1), are excited for this problem and (b) the problem has a very simple analytical solution and, therefore, the comparison of the accuracy of the numerical solutions to this problem is easy when the spurious oscillations are removed. In Section 2 we shortly introduce different space-discretization techniques such as the standard low- and high-order finite elements, the spectral elements, the isogeometric elements and the linear and quadratic finite elements with reduced dispersion. Then, in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 we accurately solve the 1-D impact problem using different space-discretization methods as well as the implicit and explicit time-integration methods with very small time increments in basic computations. Using the accurate numerical solutions to the 1-D impact problem, we compare the accuracy of different space-discretization techniques. We also show that the size of time increments used for the filtering of spurious oscillations at the filtering stage of the two-stage time-integration technique can be used as a quantitative measure for the comparison and prediction of the accuracy of different space-discretization approaches. In Section 3.3 we analyze the effect of the size of time increments used in basic computations on the accuracy of numerical solutions obtained with different space-discretization techniques. According to our results, the typical statement in finite element textbooks, that for explicit methods a time increment should be close to the stability limit (e.g., see [1,43]), is not true, because the size of a time increment should depend on the observation time and should be much smaller than the stability limit at large observation times. In Section 4 we solve a 2-D transient acoustics problem and show that the findings of the paper are also valid in the multidimensional case. The recently developed two-stage time-integration approach with the stage of basic computations and the filtering stage is shortly summarized in the Appendix.We would also like to emphasize that despite a large number of different space-discretization techniques for elastodynamics problems, it is very often unclear what the best technique is. There are many factors that can affect the selection of the best method such as accuracy, computation costs, the simplicity of implementation and many others. In this paper we also estimate the computational efficiency of different space-discretization techniques for elastodynamics. We compare their computational costs for the solution of the 1-D impact problem at the same accuracy. Because for this problem all frequencies of the structure are excited and affect the accuracy, we believe that the solution to this problem can serve as the performance benchmark for different space-discretization techniques for elastodynamics.The application of a space-discretization method to elastodynamics problems leads to the semi-discrete equations (1). Formally, for the space-discretization techniques considered in the paper, the calculation of the mass and stiffness matrices can be represented by the classical finite element equations as follows:(2)M=∑eMe,K=∑eKewhere the global massMand stiffnessKmatrices have a banded structure (the dimensions of these matrices for different space-discretization techniques will be discussed below in Section 3) and are obtained by the summation of the corresponding local (element) matricesMeandKe:(3)Me=ρA∫−11NT(s)N(s)det(J(s))ds≈ρA∑i=1m1wiNT(αMi)N(αMi)det(J(αMi)),(4)Ke=A∫−11E[∂N∂x(s)]T[∂N∂x(s)]det(J)ds≈∑i=1m2AEwi[∂N∂x(αKi)]T[∂N∂x(αKi)]det(J(αKi))Here, Eqs. (3) and (4) are given for the 1-D case, E is Young׳s modulus,ρis the density, A is the cross-sectional area of an element,Nand∂N/∂xare the shape matrix and its derivative with respect to the physical coordinate x; s is the parametric coordinate (−1≤s≤1for each element);αMiandαKiare the coordinates of integration points in the parametric space for the integration rule used; wiare the weights for the selected integration rule; m1 and m2 are the numbers of integration points for the numerical integration of the mass and stiffness matrices (generally, different integration rules and the number of integration points can be used for the numerical integration of these matrices). The elements of the shape matrixNin Eq. (3) are the polynomial shape functions for all space-discretization techniques considered in the paper. For example, the standard low- and high-order finite elements are based on the uniform spacing of internal nodes within the element and the Lagrange polynomials pj(s) of degree N (j=1,2,…,NwhereN+1is the number of nodes in an element).For the spectral high-order elements withN≥3(there is no difference between the standard finite elements and the spectral elements forN≤2), the Lagrange polynomials pj(s) of degree N and the non-uniform spacing of internal nodes within the element are used; the coordinates sk(sk∈[−1,1]withk=1,2,…,N+1) of the nodes in the parametric space are the Gauss–Lobatto–Legendre points which are the (N + 1) roots of the following equation:(5)(1−sk2)pN′(sk)=0,wherepN′(s)is the derivative of the Legendre polynomial of degree N; e.g., see [15]. It can also be shown that the application of the Gauss–Lobatto–Legendre integration rule withN+1integration points yields an approximate value of the mass matrix in Eq. (3) for the spectral elements and this approximate mass matrix is diagonal for any order of an element (e.g., see [15]).In contrast to the standard finite elements and the spectral elements based on the piecewise-polynomial approximation of a numerical solution in the 1-D space (the derivatives of this solution are discontinuous across the element boundaries), the isogeometric elements allow the continuous derivatives of the numerical solution across the element boundaries. The shape functions for the isogeometric elements are based on the polynomial B-splines in the 1-D case; e.g., see [16–19].The semi-discrete equations for the linear and quadratic finite elements with reduced dispersion can be easily obtained by the use of the global consistentMconsand lumpedMlumpmass matrices for the standard finite elements. For implicit time integration methods, the mass matrixMin Eq. (1) should be replaced in this case by a weighted average mass matrixM=Mlumpγ+Mcons(1−γ)whereγ=0.5(see [6,10,44]) for the linear elements andγ=2/3(see [10]) for the quadratic elements. For explicit time-integration methods and the linear elements with reduced dispersion, Eq. (1) can be modified as follows:(6)MlumpU¨+M[Mlump]−1KU=M[Mlump]−1RwhereM=Mlumpγ+Mcons(1−γ)withγ=(3−τ¯2)/2and the Courant numberτ¯=coΔt/dx(Δtis the size of a time increment, dx is the size of a linear finite element,co=E/ρis the wave velocity); see [4].The computational efficiency of a numerical technique for elastodynamics depends on the type (implicit or explicit) of a time-integration method used. Therefore, we will separately compare the numerical techniques with the diagonal mass matrices and explicit time-integration methods (they do not require the solution of a system of algebraic equations) and the numerical techniques with the non-diagonal mass matrices and implicit time-integration methods (they include the solution of a system of algebraic equations). To summarize, we will accurately solve wave propagation problems and compare the accuracy of the following space-discretization techniques:•Standard finite elements from the 1st to the 5th order with the consistent mass matrix and implicit time integration methods.Isogeometric elements of the 2nd and 3rd orders with the consistent mass matrix and implicit time integration methods.Linear and quadratic finite elements with reduced dispersion with the averaged mass matrix and implicit time integration methods.Spectral elements from the 1st to the 10th order with the lumped mass matrix and explicit time integration methods.Linear finite elements with reduced dispersion with the diagonal mass matrix (see Eq. (6)) and explicit time integration methods.Here, we will accurate solve the 1-D impact problem and will compare the computational efficiency of the different space-discretization techniques for elastodynamics (listed in Section 2). The exact solution of the semi-discrete equations (Eq. (1)) for the 1-D impact problem contains spurious high-frequency oscillations in velocities and stresses; see [41,42,45] and the numerical results after basic computations presented below. Therefore, the two-stage time-integration procedure with the basic computations and the filtering stage (that has been recently developed in our papers [5,42,46] and shortly summarized in the Appendix) is used to obtain accurate and non-oscillatory numerical solutions. For the results presented in this section, we use the implicit trapezoidal rule (for the techniques with the non-diagonal mass matrix) and the explicit central difference method (for the techniques with the diagonal mass matrix) for the time integration in basic computations. In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, very small time increments will be applied for the implicit and explicit methods in basic computations. For very small time increments, the error in time is much smaller than the space-discretization error and can be neglected (in this case the numerical solution in basic computations is close to the exact solution of the semi-discrete equations (1)) and is independent of a time-integration method used). In Section 3.3 we will numerically study the effect of the size of time increments in the basic computations on the accuracy of the results obtained by different space-discretization techniques.Below, the impact of an elastic bar of the length L=4 and the cross section A=1 against a rigid wall is considered in the 1-D case (see Fig. 1). Young׳s modulus is chosen to be E=1 and the density to beρ=1. The following boundary conditions are applied: the displacementu(0,t)=t(which corresponds to the velocityv(0,t)=v0=1) andu(4,t)=0(which corresponds to the velocityv(4,t)=0). Initial displacements and velocities are zero; i.e.,u(x,0)=v(x,0)=0. The analytical solution to this problem for time0≤t≤Lρ/E=4includes the continuous variation of displacementsua(x,t)=t−xfort≥xandua(x,t)=0fort≤x, and the piecewise constant variation of velocities and stressesva(x,t)=−σa(x,t)=1fort≥xandva(x,t)=σa(x,t)=0fort≤x(at the interface x=t, jumps in stresses and velocities occur). For time4≤t≤8the solution is similar to that for0≤t≤4with the difference that the elastic wave reflects from the right end and propagates to the left. For time8≤t≤12the solution is the same as for time0≤t≤4and so on. In order to compare the results at short- and long-term integrations, the observation times are chosen to beT=2;18;98;194. At these observation times, the exact distributions of the velocities and stresses along the bar are the same and correspond to the location of the wave front in the middle of the bar.Here, we will solve the 1-D impact problem using the standard low- and high-order finite elements (up to the 5th-order), the isogeometric 2nd- and 3rd-order elements, and the linear and quadratic elements with reduced dispersion. For all these space-discretization methods, the non-diagonal mass matrices and the implicit trapezoidal rule with very small time increments in basic computations are used. Uniform meshes with 101 degrees of freedom (dof) are used for all types of elements (except the standard 3rd-order elements with 100dof); see Figs. 2–12. In addition to these meshes, we also use uniform meshes with 201 and 251dof for the linear elements with reduced dispersion; see Figs. 11 and 12. For the isogeometric elements we use uniformly spaced control points as suggested in [18]. Figs. 2–9 show the numerical solutions for the velocity at different observation times. All space-discretization methods yield spurious oscillations after basic computations and the amplitudes of these oscillations increase with the increase in the observation time; see Figs. 2a,b–9a,b. The slope of the wave front in the basic computations is steeper for short observation times and is more diffusive for large observation times. The filtering stage removes the spurious oscillations. However, despite the same analytical solutions at the selected observation times, the numerical results after the filtering stage are more accurate for short observation times than those for large observation times; see Figs. 2c,d–9c,d. Because the error in time is very small in these calculations and can be neglected, the difference in the numerical results for the same space-discretization method at different observation times is due to the space-discretization error (which is also related to the dispersion error). This difference is smaller for higher-order elements compared with lower-order elements (the dispersion error for higher-order elements is smaller). Fig. 10 compares the numerical results after the filtering stage for the linear and quadratic elements with reduced dispersion at different observation times. As can be seen from Fig. 10, the linear elements are more accurate at the short observation time T=2 (see curves 2 and 3 in (a)) and yield approximately the same results as the quadratic elements at the intermediate time T=18 (see curves 4 and 5 in (a)). At the large observation times T=98 and T=194, the quadratic elements with reduced dispersion are more accurate than the linear elements with reduced dispersion (see curves 2–5 in (b)). It is interesting to note that for the numerical results in Fig. 10, the time discretization error is small (due to very small time increments) and can be neglected, as well as the order of the dispersion error is smaller for the quadratic elements compared with that for the linear elements with reduced dispersion (see [10] and the Remark below). This means that the order of the dispersion error is not the only factor describing the space-discretization error in Fig. 10. Comparing the linear and quadratic elements with reduced dispersion in Fig. 10 we can conclude that the effect of the dispersion error becomes more significant at large observation times.RemarkFor very small time increments, the time-discretization error can be neglected and the dispersion error can be determined using the Helmholtz equation. For example, the leading term in the dispersion error in this case is (see 10):Ω3(2γ−1)/24,Ω5(3γ−2)/2880,Ω7(4γ−3)/604,800for the linear, quadratic and cubic elements whereγ=0for the standard finite elements andγ=1for the spectral finite elements (see below Section 3.2 for the numerical examples) as well asΩ5/480,32Ω7/2,419,200andΩ9/31,752,000for the linear, quadratic and cubic elements with reduced dispersion whereΩ=ωhwith frequencyωand the element size h.Fig. 11 compares the numerical results for the standard low- and high-order finite elements at time T=18. As can be seen, at the same number of dof, the increase in the order of the standard finite elements leads to the increase in accuracy. This increase is significant from the transition from the 1st-order to the 2nd-order finite elements (see curves 2 and 3 in Fig. 11a,b) and is much smaller from the transition from the 2nd- to the 3rd-order finite elements and so on (see curves 3–5 in Fig. 11a,b). At the same number of dof, the calculations with higher-order elements lead to a greater computation cost (e.g., due to a greater bandwidth of the finite-element matrices for higher-order elements). Therefore, the estimation of the computation cost at the same accuracy is necessary in order to select an optimal space-discretization strategy: to use the standard high-order elements or to use the standard low-order elements with a larger number of dof (mesh refinement).Figs. 11 and 12 compare the accuracy of different space-discretization techniques at times T=18 and T=194. For all types of elements we have sparse matrices described by the bandwidth b. As can be seen, at the same numbern1=101of dof, the isogeometric 3rd-order elements (curves 6) yield the most accurate results (compared with the standard 5th-order elements or the linear elements with reduced dispersion). The results with the standard 3rd-order elements are close to those obtained by the linear elements with reduced dispersion andn1=101dof (see curves 2 and 4 in Fig. 11c,d). However, the results at time T=18 obtained by the linear elements with reduced dispersion withn2=201dof (with the bandwidthb2=3) are close to those for the isogeometric 3rd-order elements withn1=101dof (with the bandwidthb1=7) and are even slightly more accurate; see curves 3 and 6 in Fig. 12a. Implicit time-integration methods with the considered space-discretization techniques include a solution of a system of algebraic equations with the computation cost proportional to nb2 for the matrix factorization and to nb for the back substitution (n is the number of dof, b is the bandwidth andnâª¢;b). For 1-D uniform meshes, we haven1/n2≈0.5andb1/b2=7/3. This means at the same accuracy at time T=18, the linear elements with reduced dispersion and 201dof require much less computation time compared with the isogeometric 3rd-order elements with 101dof. We should mention that for the same accuracy, the difference in the computation time between the isogeometric 3rd-order elements and the linear elements with reduced dispersion depends on the observation time. Despite the fact that the isogeometric elements become more accurate at larger observation time compared with other space-discretization techniques (see Fig. 12b), even at the large observation time T=194, the linear elements with reduced dispersion are still more computationally efficient than the isogeometric elements. For example, the results obtained at time T=194 by the linear elements with reduced dispersion for 251dof are slightly more accurate and require less computation time compared with the isogeometric 3rd-order elements with 101dof; see curves 4 and 6 in Fig. 12b. Similarly it can be shown that the linear elements with reduced dispersion are more computationally efficient than the quadratic elements with reduced dispersion even at large computation times presented in Fig. 10b. For example our numerical results show that at the time T=194,130linear elements (n1=131dof and the bandwidthb1=3) with reduced dispersion yields approximately the same results as 100 quadratic elements (n2=101dof and the bandwidthb2=5) with reduced dispersion; see curve 5 in Fig. 10b. This means that at the same accuracy the linear elements with reduced dispersion require less computation time compared with the quadratic elements with reduced dispersion as explained above.In this section we will solve the 1-D impact problem using the spectral elements (up to the 10th-order) and the linear elements with reduced dispersion. For all these space-discretization methods, the diagonal mass matrices and the explicit central-difference method with very small time increments are used. As we mentioned before, the spectral 1st- and 2nd-order elements coincide with the standard finite elements of the same orders. Uniform meshes with 101dof are used for all types of elements (except the spectral 3rd-order elements with 100dof); see Figs. 13–17. In addition to these meshes, we also use uniform meshes with 201, 301 and 401dof for the linear elements with reduced dispersion; see Fig. 19. Figs. 13–17 show the numerical solutions for the velocity at different observation times. As can be seen, qualitatively the results for the spectral low- and high-order elements with the diagonal mass matrix are similar to those for the standard elements with the non-diagonal mass matrix (see the previous Section 3.2). Similar results we observe for the elements with reduced dispersion used with the non-diagonal (Fig. 8) and diagonal (Fig. 18) mass matrices. Fig. 19a,b shows that at the same number 101 of dof, the increase in the order of the spectral elements improves the accuracy; see curves 3–7. At the same number of dof, the linear elements with reduced dispersion are slightly more accurate than the standard 2nd-order elements with the lumped mass matrix; see curves 2 and 4 in Fig. 19a,b. Fig. 19c,d also shows that the linear elements with reduced dispersion and 201dof are more accurate than the spectral 5th-order elements with 101dof at time T=18 and are slightly less accurate than the spectral 5th-order elements with 101dof at the large observation time T=194; see curves 2 and 6. Similarly, the linear elements with reduced dispersion and 301dof are more accurate than the spectral 10th-order elements with 101dof at time T=18 and yield practically the same accuracy as the spectral 10th-order elements with 101dof at the large observation time T=194; see curves 3 and 7.For the explicit time integration, the computations are often implemented on the level of elements without the calculation of the global mass and stiffness matrices. Therefore, the computation cost in this case is related to the multiplication of the local effective stiffness matrix by a non-zero vector and is proportional tondof2nelwhere ndofis the number of dof of one element and nelis the number of elements. For example,ndof2nel=112×10=1210for the spectral 10th-order elements with 101dof andndof2nel=22×300=1200for the linear elements with reduced dispersion and 301dof; i.e., the computational costs are approximately the same in this case. However, we can reduce the computational cost for the linear elements with reduced dispersion by the use of the following procedure. Let us combine every 30 linear elements (e.g., staring from the left end of the bar) into one superelement. In this case we will obtainnel=10superelements. The computation cost fornel=10superelements isndofbnel=31×3×10=930wherendof=31is the number of dof of one superelement and b=3 is the bandwidth of the effective stiffness matrix of one superelement consisting of 30 linear elements with reduced dispersion. This means that at the same or better accuracy (e.g, see curves 3 and 7 in Fig. 19c,d at the observation times T=18 and T=194), the linear elements with reduced dispersion and 301dof require less computation time and are more computationally efficient compared with the spectral 10th-order elements with 101dof at times T=18 and T=194.In order to compare the accuracy of the numerical results obtained with the different space-discretization techniques as well as with the implicit and explicit time-integration methods, Fig. 19c,d also includes the numerical solutions obtained by the isogeometric 3rd-order elements (the non-diagonal mass matrix) with 101dof. As can be seen, the accuracy of the isogeometric 3rd-order elements at time T=18 and T=194 is close to that of the spectral 10th-order elements at the same number of dof; see curves 5 and 7.It is interesting to note that the size of time increments at the filtering stage calculated according to the formulas Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) from the Appendix indirectly defines the range of actual frequencies included into the numerical solutions after the filtering stage (because spurious high-frequencies are damped out at the filtering stage) and can be used for the comparison of the accuracy of different space-discretization techniques; see our papers [4,42,44]. If at the selected observation time T the time increment at the filtering stage for one space-discretization technique is smaller than that for another space-discretization technique then the former technique yields more accurate results at time T than the latter technique (if time increments are close to each other then the techniques include the same ranges of actual frequencies and yield approximately the same results). This is similar to the modal decomposition method for which the increase in the range of actual frequencies leads to the increase in the accuracy of numerical results. This also means that Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) allow the quantitative comparison of the accuracy of different space-discretization techniques. For example, according to Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2), we use the following time increments for the filtering stage at time T=18:Δt1=0.0405,Δt2=0.0235,Δt3=0.0171andΔt4=0.0137for the linear elements with reduced dispersion (the diagonal mass matrix) with 101dof, 201dof, 301dof and 401dof, respectively;Δt5=0.0448for the standard quadratic elements (the diagonal mass matrix) with 101dof;Δt6=0.0222for the spectral 10th-order elements (the diagonal mass matrix) with 101dof;Δt7=0.0188for the isogeometric 3rd-order elements (the consistent mass matrix) with 101dof. At the large observation time T=194, we have the following time increments for the filtering stage:Δt1=0.0679,Δt2=0.0395,Δt3=0.0288andΔt4=0.0230for the linear elements with reduced dispersion (the diagonal mass matrix) with 101dof, 201dof, 301dof and 401dof, respectively;Δt5=0.0695for the standard quadratic elements (the diagonal mass matrix) with 101dof;Δt6=0.0266for the spectral 10th-order elements (the diagonal mass matrix) with 101dof;Δt7=0.0269for the isogeometric 3rd-order elements (the consistent mass matrix) with 101dof. Comparing these time increments at the same observation time, we can compare the accuracy of the numerical results discussed above. For example, at times T=18 and T=194, the time incrementsΔt6andΔt7are close to each other and the corresponding space-discretization techniques yield approximately the same accuracy; see curves 5 and 7 in Fig. 19c,d (similar results we have for the time incrementsΔt1andΔt5; see curves 2 and 4 in Fig. 19a,b). We also have thatΔt3<Δt6at time T=18 andΔt3>Δt6at time T=194 (see curves 3 and 7 in Fig. 19c,d and the comparison of the spectral elements and the linear elements with reduced dispersion described above in this section). It can be also seen thatΔt4has the smallest value among all presented time increments and the corresponding linear elements with reduced dispersion and 401dof yield the most accurate results; see curves 4 in Fig. 19c,d.In this section we will analyze the effect of a time increment in basic computations on the accuracy of the numerical results obtained by the isogeometric elements (used with the implicit time-integration method) and by the spectral high-order elements (used with the explicit time-integration method). We will show that very small time increments for these techniques yield more accurate results. Uniform meshes with 101dof are used. Because implicit time-integration methods can be used with any size of time increments, then we will usedt¯=0.04as the largest time increment for the isogeometric elements. This time incrementdt¯=0.04corresponds to the stability limit of the standard linear finite elements with the lumped mass matrix at the same number 101 of dof. For the spectral high-order elements with the lumped mass matrix we estimate the stability limit dtstfrom numerical experiments and then use the time increments that are close and smaller than the stability limit. Figs. 20–28show the effect of time increments on the accuracy of numerical results for the isogeometric 3rd-order elements as well for the spectral 3rd- and 10th-order elements. As can be seen, the results significantly depend on the observation time and the size of time increments in basic computations. In all cases, the decrease in the size of time increments in basic computations leads to the increase in the accuracy. We should also note that for the same elements, smaller time increments should be used at a larger observation time in order to get accurate results. However, in order to decrease the computation cost, the size of time increments should be as large as possible. As can be seen from Fig. 20, for the isogeometric 3rd-order elements at time T=2, time increments0.2dt¯yield accurate results (the further time refinement does not significantly increase the accuracy). However, for the same elements, much smaller time increments0.1dt¯and0.03dt¯can be recommended at times T=18 and T=194; respectively (see Figs. 21 and 22).Qualitatively, similar results are obtained for the spectral 3rd- and 10th-order elements in Figs. 23–28. For example, for the short observation time T=2 accurate numerical results for these elements can be obtained at time increments0.95dtstwhich are close to the stability limit (dtst=0.02817anddtst=0.01130for the spectral 3rd-order and 10th-order elements, respectively); see Figs. 23 and 26. However, for larger observation times, the time increments should be significantly decreased; e.g.,0.1dtstat the large observation time T=194 (see Figs. 25 and 28). The results presented here show that small time increments in basic computations that yield a very small error in time should be used. In our paper [47] we have derived an exact, closed-form a-priori global error estimator for 2nd-order time-integration methods and have shown that in order to have the same error in time at different observation times for each mode, the following relationships between time increments dt1 and dt2 used at different observation times T1 and T2 should be metdt1/dt2=T2/T1. This error estimator is in a good agreement with the numerical results obtained above and can be used as follows. At a short observation time T1, the appropriate size dt1 of time increments can be found from numerical experiments (e.g. using the time refinement). Then, for a large observation time T2, the size of time increments can be found with the formuladt2=dt1T1/T2for the 2nd-order time-integration methods (similar formulas have been also derived for high-order time-integration methods; see our papers [42,47]).Remark 1For more accurate space-discretization techniques (e.g., the isogeometric 3rd-order elements or the spectral 10th-order elements) higher-frequencies are resolved more accurately compared with less accurate space-discretization techniques. It is also known that during time integration, at the same time increments the error in time is greater for higher modes. Therefore, more accurate space-discretization techniques require smaller time increments in order to have accurate results at higher modes.Except the 1-D case with the standard linear finite elements and the lumped mass matrix as well as the linear finite elements with reduced dispersion and the lumped mass matrix (which are equivalent at the time increments equal to the stability limit; see our paper [4]), the decrease in the size of time increments in basic computations improves the accuracy of numerical results for all other space-discretization techniques considered in the paper. In the 2-D and 3-D cases, the standard linear finite elements with the lumped mass matrix and the linear finite elements with reduced dispersion and the lumped mass matrix yield accurate results at small time increments (e.g., see our paper [4]). Therefore, we analyze and compare these elements in Section 3.2 at small time increments in order to predict their accuracy in the multi-dimensional cases.Here, we will consider the solution of a 2-D transient acoustic problem described by the scalar wave equation(7)∂2u∂t2−co2∇2u=0,where u is the field variable, cois the wave velocity. The application of the space discretization to Eq. (7) leads to the semi-discrete system, Eq. (1). In this section we will show that the two-stage time integration technique yields accurate numerical results for acoustic wave propagation obtained by different space-discretization techniques in the multidimensional case. Similar to the 1-D case, the size of time increments at the filtering stage for multidimensional problems (see Eq. (A.3) in the Appendix for acoustic problems and our papers [5,42] for elastodynamics problems) indirectly defines the border between the actual frequencies and the spurious high frequencies; i.e., indirectly defines the ranges of actual and spurious frequencies in the multidimensional case. Therefore, it can be used for the comparison and the prediction of accuracy of numerical results obtained by different space-discretization techniques. Because currently we do not have computer codes for all space-discretization techniques in the multidimensional case, here we will show 2-D examples of the application of the two-stage time integration technique to the standard linear and quadratic finite elements as well as to the linear elements with reduced dispersion used with non-diagonal mass matrices.RemarkA detailed study of the dispersion error for the linear elements with reduced dispersion applied to the 2-D acoustics problems is also presented in our paper [48] with the corresponding numerical examples.Let us consider a square plate of length 1×1, see Fig. 29a. The wave velocity is chosen to be co=1. The following boundary conditions are applied:∂u/∂n=0along the boundary AB, EC, CD and AD (∂/∂nis the normal derivative at the boundary); along the part BE of the upper boundary, an impact loading is prescribed in terms of the value of the field variableuBE=t(this corresponds to the instantaneous application of the velocityvBE=1). Zero initial conditions are used; i.e.,u(x,y,0)=v(x,y,0)=0. The observation time is chosen to beT=1.5. During this time the waves travel from the boundary BE to all other boundaries, reflect from them and produce a complicated distribution of the velocity field at timeT=1.5, e.g., see Fig. 29b,c.The problem is solved on uniform meshes with 100×100=10,000 and 300×300=90,000 linear Q4 four-node quadrilateral finite elements and on uniform meshes with 50×50=2500 and 66×66=4356 quadratic Q9 nine-node quadrilateral finite elements. For the linear Q4 elements we use the standard approach with the consistent mass matrix as well as the formulation with reduced dispersion for which the mass and stiffness matrices are calculated using the modified integration rule; see [9] (in the 1-D case this technique coincides with the averaged mass matrix technique used in Section 3). For the quadratic Q9 elements we use the standard formulation with the consistent mass matrix. The trapezoidal rule with very small time increments is used in basic computations for all numerical results. The time increments at the filtering stage are calculated according to Eqs. (A.1)–(A.3) for the linear and quadratic finite elements with the corresponding coefficients a1 and a2 from Table 1. Because we do not know the exact solution to the problem under consideration, the numerical solution after the filtering stage obtained on the fine mesh with 300×300=90,000 linear finite elements with reduced dispersion is considered as a reference solution (we should also mention that the numerical solutions after the filtering stage converge to the unique solution at mesh refinement).The numerical solutions after the stage of basic computations include large spurious high-frequency oscillations even for the results obtained by the linear elements with reduced dispersion; see Fig. 29b. These oscillations are removed from the numerical results at the filtering stage, see Fig. 29c. The spurious oscillations can be better seen when we plot the velocity along the boundary AB; see Fig. 30a–c. Due to these oscillations, the results obtained with the different space-discretization techniques are inaccurate and it is unclear how to compare them. However, after removing the spurious oscillations at the filtering stage, we can compare the numerical results (see curves 1–5 in Fig. 30d) with the reference solution (see curve 6 in Fig. 30d). As can be seen, at the same number of dof (for the meshes with 100×100=10,000 Q4 elements and with 50×50=2500 Q9 elements), the linear elements with reduced dispersion yield the most accurate results (see curve 1 in Fig. 30d). We can also see that the results obtained with the standard 300×300=90,000 Q4 elements, with the standard 66×66=4356 Q9 elements and with 100×100=10,000 Q4 elements with reduced dispersion are approximately the same. This means that at the same accuracy at T=1.5, the linear elements with reduced dispersion reduce the number of dof by a factor of 9 compared with the standard Q4 elements and by a factor of 1.75 compared with the standard Q9 elements (moreover, the matrix bandwidth for Q9 elements is larger than the matrix bandwidth for Q4 elements and this leads to additional computational costs for Q9 elements). Similar to the 1-D case, the results of this comparison can be predicted by the size of time increments used at the filtering stage that indirectly defines the range of actual frequencies used in the numerical results. For example, according to Eqs. (A.1)–(A.3), the following time increments are used at the filtering stage:Δt1=0.00682,Δt2=0.01442,Δt3=0.00836,Δt4=0.00683,Δt5=0.00676for the meshes with 100×100=10,000 Q4 (reduced dispersion), 100×100=10,000 Q4 (standard), 50×50=2500 Q9 (standard), 300×300=90,000 Q4 (standard) and 66×66=4356 Q9 (standard) finite elements, respectively. As indicated in Section 3.2, a smaller size of time increments at the filtering stage corresponds to more accurate results; independent of space-discretization methods used, the same sizes of time increments at the filtering stage approximately correspond to the same accuracy; i.e., the sizesΔti(i=1,2,…,5) predict the accuracy of the numerical results presented in Fig. 30d.RemarkThe examples of the application of the two-stage time-integration approach to the elastodynamics problems can be found in our papers [4,42,44] for some selected space-discretization techniques in the multidimensional case. Similar to Section 4, they show the validity of the results obtained in Section 3 for 2-D and 3-D elastodynamics problems.One issue with numerical solutions of wave propagation problems by different space-discretization techniques is the presence of spurious high-frequency oscillations. The range of spurious high frequencies is different for different space-discretization methods. We have not seen in the literature the numerical approaches that quantify and filter out all spurious oscillations from numerical solutions even solved by the popular space-discretization techniques such as the standard, spectral and isogeometric high-order finite elements. We have resolved this issue by the application of the two-stage time-integration approach recently developed in our papers; e.g., see [5,41,42].Another important result of the paper is related to the comparison of accuracy of different space-discretization techniques used for the solution of transient acoustics and elastodynamics problems. One way to compare the accuracy of these techniques is based on the evaluation of the numerical dispersion error. However, this error is related to a selected mode of the elastodynamics system of and does not prescribe the combined effect of all modes on the accuracy. Moreover, the dispersion error does not estimate the effect of the observation time and time increments on the accuracy of numerical results. Therefore, for the comparison of the accuracy of different techniques, in the paper we solve the 1-D impact problem for which all modes are excited and which has a very simple analytical solution at short and long observation times. We should also mention that because the computational costs of different space-discretization techniques at the same number of dof are different, then it is necessary to compare the efficiency of these techniques by the estimation of the computational costs at the same accuracy. The findings of the paper can be summarized as follows.•The two-stage time-integration technique recently suggested in our papers [5,41,42] yields accurate numerical results for elastodynamics problems solved with different space-discretization approaches. For example, due to the spurious oscillations, we have not seen in the literature the accurate numerical solutions of elastodynamics problems at impact loading (or high-frequency loading) for the spectral and isogeometric elements as well as for the standard high-order finite elements even in the 1-D case. The applicability of the new approach to different space-discretization techniques considered in the paper is based on the fact that for all these techniques, lower frequencies are resolved more accurately than higher frequencies. Then, by the quantification of the inaccurate high frequencies (in terms of the coefficients a1 and a2; see the Appendix) and by their filtering at the filtering stage, we obtain accurate numerical results without the spurious oscillations. The new coefficients a1 and a2 determined in the paper (see the Appendix) define different ranges of the spurious (inaccurate) frequencies for different space-discretization methods and are used for the filtering of the spurious oscillations in numerical solutions of the 1-D as well as multi-dimensional elastodynamics problems (see [42,44,49] for the applications of the two-stage time integration technique to multi-dimensional impact and wave propagation problems).As expected, at the same number of dof, the increase in the order of the standard finite elements, the spectral elements and the isogeometric elements leads to the increase in the accuracy of numerical results (however, the computational costs of higher-order elements are greater than that of lower-order elements at the same dof).Except the known case of the linear elements with the lumped mass matrix, all other space-discretization techniques considered in the paper require small time-increments for time integration at the stage of basic computations. Moreover, the time increments should be decreased with the increase in the observation time. Even if for explicit time-integration methods the time increments close to the stability limit may yield accurate results at a small observation time, the time increments should be significantly decreased with the increase in the observation time. For example, for the 2nd-order time-integration methods, the size of time increments should be inversely proportional to the square root of the observation time (as predicted by the exact time error estimator developed in our paper [47]; the paper [47] also considers the case of high-order time-integration methods). Similar to explicit time-integration methods, comparably small time increments should be used with implicit time-integration methods for the 1-D impact problem. According to our results, the typical statement in finite element textbooks, that for explicit methods a time increment should be close to the stability limit (e.g., see [1,43]) is not true, because the size of a time increment should depend on the observation time and should be much smaller than the stability limit at large observation times.The comparison of the space-discretization techniques based on the non-diagonal mass matrices (used with implicit time-integration methods) shows that at the same number of dof, the isogeometric elements yield more accurate results compared with the standard high-order finite elements and the linear elements with reduced dispersion. However, when we compare the computational costs at the same accuracy, the numerical results show the linear elements with reduced dispersion are more computationally efficient than other space-discretization techniques. We should also mention that compared with the isogeometric 3rd-order elements, the computational efficiency of the linear elements with reduced dispersion decreases with the increase in the observation time.The comparison of the space-discretization techniques based on the diagonal mass matrices (used with explicit time-integration methods) shows that at the same number of dof, the spectral high-order elements yield more accurate results compared with the standard linear and quadratic finite elements and the linear elements with reduced dispersion. However, when we compare the computational costs at the same accuracy, the numerical results show the linear elements with reduced dispersion are more computationally efficient than the spectral high-order elements. We should also mention that compared with the spectral 10th-order elements, the computational efficiency of the linear elements with reduced dispersion decreases with the increase in the observation time.It is interesting to note that the size of time increments at the filtering stage of the two-stage time-integration technique (this size is calculated according to Eqs. (A.1)–(A.3) from the Appendix) defines the range of actual frequencies used in numerical solutions and can serve as a quantitative measure for the comparison and the prediction of the accuracy and the computational efficiency of different space-discretization techniquesnot only for the 1-D problem considered in Section 3 but also for the multidimensional problems (e.g., see Section 4 and our papers [4,42,44]).The estimation and comparison of accuracy of different space-discretization techniques obtained for impact problems (for which all frequencies of the semi-discrete equations are excited) are also valid for any transient acoustics or elastodynamics problem for which only a part of frequencies of the semi-discrete equations is excited; e.g., see [42]. For example, in our paper [42] we showed that the two-stage time-integration approach can be equally applied to wave propagation problems under impact loading as well as under low- and high-frequency loading (the same range of spurious high-frequencies should be filtered independent of applied loading). We also believe that the comparative study of other space-discretization techniques (similar to that considered in the paper) will help us determine the most computationally efficient technique for elastodynamics and acoustics.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
