@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical modelling of the tailored tempering process applied to 22MnB5 sheets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Influence of the phase transformation kinetics was taken into account by implementing in the FEM model phase transformation data.Segmented tools with heated and cooled zones were used to locally control the cooling rate of the blank.Numerical model validation by considering the influence of the transformation plasticity and deformation history on phase transformation kinetics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tailored tempering,Boron steel,Phase transformation kinetics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to enhance the crash characteristics and geometrical accuracy, components hot formed in a fully martensitic state have gained in the last few years more and more importance. However, the very high strength exhibited by these components makes subsequent operations such as cutting difficult due to the high process forces and associated high wear of the cutting tools. Moreover, for some applications, such as B-pillars and other automotive components that may undergo impact loading, it may be desirable to create regions of the part with softer and more ductile microstructures. The novel process called the tailored tempering process allows doing this by suppressing the martensitic transformation in those zones of the sheet located under heated parts of the tools.In the paper, a numerical model of the tailored tempering process was developed, accurately calibrated and validated through a laboratory-scale hot forming process. Using the commercial FE code Forge™ a fully coupled thermo-mechanical-metallurgical model of the process was set up. The influence of the phase transformation kinetics was taken into account by implementing in the model phase transformation data, namely the shift of the TTT curves due to the applied stress and the transformation plasticity coefficients, gained from an extensive dilatometric experimental campaign and analysis. A laboratory-scale hot-formed U-channel was produced using segmented tools with heated and cooled zones so that the cooling rate of the blank can be locally controlled during the hot forming process. The part Vickers hardness distribution and microstructural evolution predicted by FORGE™ were then compared with the experimental results, proving the validation of the numerical model by taking into account the influence of the transformation plasticity and deformation history on the phase transformation kinetics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sheet metal working operations at elevated temperatures have gained in the last few years more and more importance, due to the possibility of producing components characterized by a high strength to mass ratio, with, at the same time, a significant increase of their mechanical properties thanks to the microstructure obtainable at the end of the process. Besides the warm forming of light and ultra-light alloys, whose main objective is to increase the material formability limits, the hot stamping of high strength steel is nowadays quite widely utilized in the automotive industry to produce components such as bumpers and pillars with enhanced crash characteristics and geometrical accuracy due to reduced springback. In the hot stamping process, the blank is heated up above the austenitization temperature, transferred to the press, and simultaneously formed and quenched between cooled dies; the component then presents a fully martensitic microstructure at room temperature. Geiger et al. [1] carried out basic research concerning the material properties of the hot stamping steel 22MnB5. Mori and Okuda [2] showed that heating the sheets reduces the forming load, prevents springback, and greatly improves formability. Karbasian and Tekkaya [3] reviewed the hot stamping process in detail and demonstrated that the use of the hot stamping process of boron steels has steadily increased in recent years and has been widely accepted by the automotive industry.However, because of the high strength exhibited by the hot stamped components, So et al. [4] mentioned that subsequent operations such as cutting are difficult due to the high process forces and associated high wear of the cutting tools and, therefore, cost intensive methods such as laser cutting are necessary. Moreover, hot stamped components exhibit a low ductility, which is crucial regarding the crash-performance in security relevant parts such as the B-pillars. Nowadays, more and more researchers are focussing on the modification of the hot stamping process to manufacture components with functionally optimized mechanical properties leading to a better crash-performance as well as lower cutting forces and wear of the tools. Kolleck et al. [5] presented different approaches to reach local different strength distributions in hot stamped components. Maikranz-Valentin et al. [6] proposed a new type of thermo-mechanical tailored processing based on the application of differential heating and cooling strategies. Bardelcik et al. [7] examined the strength and strain-rate sensitivity of Usibor® 1500P subjected to various cooling rates ranging from 14K/s to 50K/s, which result in as-quenched microstructures ranging from bainite to martensite respectively. This hot stamping process is called the tailored tempering process, and allows the suppression of the martensitic transformation in those zones of the sheet located under heated parts of the tools. The tailored tempering process provides then the possibility of adjusting blank regions with very high strength and regions with enhanced ductility in the same part, with a gradual transition of the properties. The locally differentiated heat field within a tool system can also be achieved by using tool materials characterized by varied thermal conductivity as proposed by Casas et al. [8], structured tool surface by Mori and Okuda [2], integrated partial contact gaps by George et al. [9], and differentiated temperature distribution in the blank by Mori et al. [10]. No matter which methods are used, the adjustment of the local mechanical properties is fulfilled by varying the sheet cooling rate: high cooling rates will induce a fully martensitic phase transformation, whereas low cooling rates will result in the development of different microstructures such as bainite, ferrite, and pearlite that exhibit lower strength but higher ductility. However, the minimum value of the cooling rate assuring a fully martensitic transformation depends on the applied stress and strain levels, and therefore it is mandatory to know the influence of the latter parameters on the sheet steel phase transformation kinetics.Several literature papers witness the importance of the effect of stress or strain on the material transformation kinetics. Barcellona and Palmeri [11] showed that the deformation during quenching of boron steels causes the CCT diagram to shift left or towards lower quenching times, which can lead to the formation of ferrite. Merklein and Svec [12] showed that the CCT diagram shifts towards the left as the material is deformed. Riera et al. [13] emphasized that the deformation modifies the phase transformations of the austenite during continuous cooling. As the level of deformation increases, the austenite becomes more unstable and the hardenability of the material diminishes: the critical cooling rate for the complete martensitic transformation can shift from 27 to 60°C/s with a pre-strain equal to 0.28. The time needed to start the transformation of austenite into ferrite decreases, the bainitic transformation is favoured, and the martensite start temperature is lowered. Turetta et al. [14] evaluated the actual phase transformation kinetics for the material under deformation conditions.The scientific literature reports several studies about the tailored tempering process, but most of them are devoted to experimental studies, and very few propose a numerical model of the process. Svec and Merklein et al. [15] used various die materials with different thermal conductivities to experimentally study the influence of new steel grades for the tools on the heat transfer between the sheet and the tool. Banik et al. [16] produced a B-pillar made of material MBW1500+AS and tested the microhardness distribution to show the validity of the required property distribution by the tailored tempering process. Behrens [17] and Feuser [18] have developed an advanced material model including phase transformation and implemented in the commercial FE-Code LS-DYNA™, but their numerical model cannot reflect the effect of stress on the movement of TTT curves. George et al. [9] developed a numerical model of the tailored tempering process using LS-DYNA™ to predict the part Vickers hardness; the model is able to capture the hardness trend with respect to the heated die temperature; however, the predicted Vickers hardness of the soft region is over-predicted by approximately 28% in comparison to the experimental measurements. This result can be ascribed to the used material model by Åkerström that does not account for the deformation effect on the microstructure prediction. Hippchen [19] has modified the material model ⁎MAT_244 proposed by Åkerström in order to model the kinetics of phase transformation with more accuracy for an indirect hot stamping process. It shows that it is possible to model the incubation time and the rate of decomposition close to the measured decomposition of austenite. Ertürk et al. [20] developed a coupled thermo-mechanical-metallurgical model using the FE code AutoForm-ThermoSolverplus™ accounting for the formation of martensite and bainite and generation of latent heat. The numerically predicted mechanical properties of a B-pillar were compared with the ones obtained from samples cut from a hot-formed B-pillar, showing a satisfactory agreement. However, the measurements were carried out on part locations positions where either no (flat blank) or very little (top of B-pillar) plastic strain raised during the process. Thus, the numerical model proposed by Ertürk et al. [20] does not show a complete ability in taking into account the effect of the deformation history on the phase transformation kinetics.In this paper, a fully coupled thermo-mechanical-metallurgical numerical model of the tailored tempering process was developed using the commercial FE code FORGE™. The model was calibrated by implementing accurate material data, with particular regard to phase transformation kinetics as a function of the applied stress. The material data were obtained through an extensive experimental campaign conducted at the Metal Forming labs of DII-Univ. of Padova. The numerical model was then validated thanks to a laboratory-scale tailored tempering process conducted at Shandong Jianzhu University to produce a U-channel part, using segmented tools with heated and cooled zones allowing the local control of the blank cooling rate during the hot forming process. The part Vickers hardness distribution and microstructural evolution predicted by FORGE™ were compared with the experimental results, proving the validation of the numerical model by taking into account the influence of the applied stress on the phase transformation kinetics.A novel experimental apparatus for sheet metal forming testing at elevated temperature was developed at the Shandong Jianzhu University enabling the conduction of physical simulation experiments of the tailored tempering process applied to a U-channel part. The experimental apparatus comprises an external furnace, where the steel blanks are heated above the austenitization temperature, a 500kN hydraulic forming press with a maximum punch velocity of 40mm/s, segmented forming tools with local heating and cooling zones, and a temperature acquisition system, including a heat controller, a temperature acquisition device, and thermocouples to measure both the blank and the lower die thermal field (Fig. 1 on the left). The blank material is the 22MnB5 boron steel, provided in 1.6mm thick sheets. Since the blanks were not coated, a nitrogen atmosphere was supplied during heating to prevent excessive oxidation. The metal blanks were austenitized at 950°C in the furnace for 3min, and then transferred to the press in less than 5s, where they were deformed by moving the punch at 40mm/s (formed parts in Fig. 1 on the right). Afterwards, the deformed blanks were kept between the dies for further 10s to allow complete quenching. The heated zones of the tools were heated up either to 300°C or 450°C through cartridge heaters, while the cooled zones were kept at nearly room temperature thanks to internal circulation of chilled water (Fig. 2). An air gap of 2mm was implemented between the heated and cooled die zones in order to insulate the two halves of the tools. The experimental and numerical results will show that the air gap can create a sufficiently high thermal gradient between the two die sets. Two thermocouples were embedded into the lower die, 1mm beneath the contact surface in order to monitor the thermal field of the heated and cooled zones of the tools. Another thermocouple with silky glass in order to avoid the saturation phenomenon at high temperature was spot-welded on the surface of sheet in order to monitor the evolution of the sheet temperature during the process.The experimental apparatus, designed and setup with the above described features, enables to carry out tailored tempering experiments reproducing in a controlled environment variations of the process parameters that are likely to affect the microstructure and the resulting mechanical properties of the formed part at room temperature.The 22MnB5 phase transformation kinetics was analyzed by evaluating the shift of the boron steel TTT curves as well as the transformation plasticity coefficient of the different phases as a function of the applied stress.A modified version of the experimental apparatus presented by Merklein et al. [21] was used to evaluate the 22MnB5 phase transformation kinetics as a function of the applied stress. The apparatus consists of a 50kN MTS™ hydraulic testing machine, a frontal inductor connected to a 30kW inductive heating system, and a modified axial extensometer accounting for the specimen deformation due to phase transformation (Fig. 3). The specimen was heated up above the austenitization temperature with the frontal inductor, and the temperature was controlled through a K-type thermocouple spot-welded onto the middle of its surface. A compressed air nozzle assured very fast cooling rates of the specimen to the testing temperature from the austenitization one. The air-cooled MTS™ 632.53 high temperature axial extensometer was properly adapted to act as a dilatometer by reducing the distance between the extension rods to 11mm where a uniform temperature distribution was assured by the inductor head.In order to accurately evaluate the transformation plasticity strain for each phase transformation occurring to 22MnB5 from austenitization to room temperature, the testing procedure suggested by Taleb [22] was adapted to the experimental equipment configuration previously described. The adopted testing procedure consists of two cycles (Fig. 4). In the first cycle, the tensile specimen was subjected to a free dilatometric test, consisting in austenitization at 900°C, holding in temperature for 3min and then cooling down until room temperature; the cooling rate was chosen according to CCT curves to obtain the desired microstructure. Then, the transformation plasticity test was carried out by superimposing a mechanical cycle to the thermal one, applying a load just before the onset of the phase transformation to investigate.The total strain can be calculated as(1)εtot=εth+εel+εp+εtp+εvpwhereεtotis the total strain, whileεth,εel,εp,εtp, andεvpare, respectively, the thermal, elastic, plastic, transformation plasticity, and viscoplastic components of the strain.Some assumptions permit to simplify the calculation by neglecting some contributions in (1). If the applied stress external to the growing-up phase is lower than the yield stress of the weaker phase present at the beginning of the structural transformation, it can be supposed that the classic plastic strainεpis negligible. As regardsεvp, it seems important to underline that viscoplasticity is a very complex phenomenon, which depends both on the temperature at which the load is applied and on its duration; moreover its contribution can be hardly quantified. In any case, the viscoplastic strain can also be neglected if the stress is applied in the range where creep phenomena are less significant.Finally, the transformation plasticity strain can be estimated as(2)εtp=εtot−εth−εelwhereεtotandεthare deduced from the dilatometric tests, whileεelcan be calculated through the Hooke's law.According to Somani et al. [23], the model expressing the transformation plasticity strain as a function of the applied stress is(3)εtp=kg(Z)σwhere k is called the transformation plasticity coefficient, σ is the applied stress, and Z is the volume proportion of the product phase. Since the transformation plasticity strain is a deformation induced by a transformation under an applied stress, it is zero when Z=0 and maximum when Z=1. Therefore, the function g(Z) is generally normalized by consideringg(0)=0andg(1)=1. The Eq. (3) can be written as follows, where the function g(Z) is equal to 1 when the transformation is complete:(4)k=εtpg(Z)σThe thermal strain is deducted from the free dilatometric test by assuming a linear mixture rule of the phases mixture (α+γ).(5)εth=α(T−Tα)+(1−Z)Δε12Tαwith(6)α=Zα2+(1−Z)α1where Z is the sum of the volume proportions of the α phase, α2 is the expansion coefficient depending on the temperature, which is assumed to be the same for all the α phases, α1 is the expansion coefficient of the γ phase, depending on the temperature, and α is the expansion coefficient of the mixture, again depending on the temperature. In Eq. (5),Δε12Tαis the difference of the thermal strains between the α and γ phases at the α phase reference temperatureTα.Tαis set equal to 25°C in the test conditions.By merging Eqs. (5) and (6), the expression for Z is given by(7)Z=εth−α1(T−Tα)−Δε12Tα(α2−α1)(T−Tα)−Δε12Tαwhere the parameters α2, α1 andΔε12Tαare deduced from the free dilatometric test.Eq. (7) can be applied to diffusive transformations (ferrite, pearlite and bainite), whereas, for non-diffusive transformations (martensite), Z can be expressed as(8)Z=1−e[c(Ms−T)]where c is a kinetic parameter whose value can be considered equal to 0.011 which was suggested by Åkerström and Oldenburg [24].The testing parameters were chosen according to the experimental plan shown inTable. 1.The tests were performed on 22MnB5 specimen machined according to the ISO 10130 recommendations. In the following, the bainitic transformation was chosen as an example to illustrate the described testing procedure. The cooling rate was chosen in order to maximize the percentage of transformed bainitic phase and the applied load was chosen to be inferior to the yield stress of the weaker phase present at the loading temperature. The resulting stress-free dilatometric measurement is shown inFig. 5. The bainitic transformation starts at about 680°C and it appears to finish at about 530°C, while the ferritic and martensitic transformations does not appear in the curve. It can be remarked that the initial and the final parts of the curve are not coincident due to the different specific volume of the microstructures at two conditions.The thermal parameters can be obtained from the stress-free dilatometric curve and are summarized inTable. 2, where AC1 and AC3 identify the start and the end of the γ transformation, Bsand Bfrepresent the limit of the bainitic transformation, andΔε12is the thermal strain due to the different microstructure.The thermal cycle previously described was used in the tests with the applied stress and it was estimated that the most appropriate temperature for the load application of bainitic transformation was about 700°C. The procedure followed in the experiments comprised the specimen heating from room temperature up to 900°C with a heating rate of 10°C/s, soaking at 900°C for 3min, cooling from 900°C with a cooling rate of 10°C/s, application of a constant load during cooling starting from 700°C. The applied stresses are summarized in Table 1. The corresponding loads to be applied were easily calculated as the section dimensions of the specimen were known. Also in this case the stress was applied before the onset of phase transformation in order to avoid any influence on the kinetics of phase transformation during loading. The curves representing the axial strain as a function of the temperature obtained from the tests with applied stress are presented inFig. 6.The calculation of the transformation plasticity strain was performed starting from the results obtained from the dilatometric measurements as indicated in the procedure in [22]. For all the testing conditions, the strain vs. temperature curves were cut and aligned at 685°C, being the differences arising in the strain due to the elastic and creep components of the total strain. All the data were filtered in order to eliminate noise and the calculations were made on them.Accordingly, the evolution of the transformation plasticity strainεtpas a function of the applied stress was calculated and reported inTable 3; the corresponding values are plotted in Fig. 6.It can be seen inFig. 7 that for the bainitic transformation, the transformation plasticity strain increases with the applied stress and exhibits an almost linear trend with respect to the applied stress.Similarly, the evolution of the coefficient k as a function of the applied stress was calculated and reported inTable 4; the corresponding values are plotted inFig. 8.For the ferritic/pearlitic and martensitic phases, the calculations were similar to those presented for the bainite. The total amount of transformation plasticity strain corresponds to the maximum value of strain obtained from test at the end of the transformation. The average value ofεtpand transformation plasticity coefficients according to (4) were calculated for the different stresses in the plateau zone and their dependence from the applied stress was calculated for the different phases inTable 5. It can be remarked that the transformation plasticity strain and transformation plasticity coefficients increase with the applied stress and a linear trend is exhibited with respect to it.The hot stamping of quenchenable high strength steels is a non-isothermal sheet metal forming process, in which the final part is produced by combining both the forming and the hardening stages in a single step into continuous-cooled dies. Thus, information given by CCT and TTT diagrams usually found in literature cannot be useful, as these diagrams are obtained through stress-free experiments, while the hot stamping stress state during deformation may modify the phase transformation kinetics. The experimental apparatus described in Section 3.1 was used to perform phase transformation tests in order to identify the shift of the 22MnB5 TTT curves due to the applied stress. The influence of the applied stress on the ferritic and bainitic phase transformation kinetics was studied in the same range of temperatures typical of the industrial hot stamping process.The testing procedure consists in the specimen austenitization at 900°C for 3min, cooling down to the testing temperature by applying a cooling rate of 100°C/s in order to assure the test starting in fully austenitic conditions, application of the load at specific temperature for all the testing conditions, and finally the specimen maintenance at the testing temperature still loaded.Table 6 shows the experimental plan of the phase transformation tests carried out to determine the shift of the TTT diagram for the steel 22MnB5 caused by the applied stress.An example of the thermo-mechanical reference cycles for the bainitic transformation kinetics investigation is shown inFig. 9. When the testing temperature is 600°C, then the load is applied at 700°C, whereas in case of testing at 500°C, the load is applied at 600°C. The testing temperature of 500°C was chosen since at 600°C, which corresponds to the nose of the bainitic curve, the time interval before the transformation onset was too limited to evaluate the shift phenomenon with an acceptable accuracy.The thermal parameters applied in the phase transformation tests are reported inTable 7 for the bainitic phase transformation.The values of stresses chosen for the experimental campaign are shown in Table 5, where the last values (112MPa and 140MPa) correspond to a plastic deformation induced in the specimen.The axial strains vs. time curves obtained from the dilatometric analyses are displayed inFig. 10: they show and prove the significant influence of applied stresses on the bainitic phase transformation kinetics at 500°C and 600°C. The shift of the TTT curves has been evaluated with a good accuracy at 500°C, at which temperature the material exhibits a behavior similar to the ferritic transformation. It shows that the higher the applied load is the earlier the phase transformation onset is anticipated.Table 8 summarizes the results in terms of shift of the phase transformation onset for the three testing temperatures and four levels of the applied stress.The coupled thermo-mechanical-metallurgical numerical model of the tailored tempering process was developed in the framework of the implicit FE code FORGE™, which permits the coupling of thermal, mechanical and microstructural events.The microstructural evolution during cooling is represented through the material TTT diagrams. The FORGE™ module uses information of specific material TTT curves along with thermal and elastic parameters, information about volume change for phase transformations and phases expansion parameters. Johnson [25] proposed Johnson–Mehl–Avrami equation to be applied for evaluating volume fractions of ferrite, pearlite and bainite. Koistien and Marburger [26] described the equation of the non-diffusion type transformation as the function of temperature.Each phase expands and contracts depending on the temperature. A global thermal expansion coefficient for the material is obtained through a mixture law and the global phase transformation enthalpy is locally calculated from a mix of each phase transformation enthalpy as a function of the temperature.The dependence of the phase transformation kinetics from the stress state arising in the part is captured by the following equation:(11)D=t0−tt0where t0 is the initial transformation time, t is the modified transformation time. The parameter D is defined as a function of the equivalent stress using a point to point or a polynomial law.The transformation plasticity coefficient as a function of the applied stress was also implemented in the model for all the phases in which austenite may transform during cooling, namely ferrite, bainite and martensite.A numerical model replicating the tailored tempering process described in Section 2 was developed. The symmetry of the case study model was taken into account to significantly reduce the computation time. A sketch of the FE model of the blank and tools assembly is shown inFig. 11, where both the cooled and heated zones of the tools are represented as deformable bodies.The elastic and plastic properties of the different phases in which the 22MnB5 may transform during cooling were implemented in the material file of the FORGE™ TTT database module according to Bariani et al. [27]. The 22MnB5 TTT diagram shown inFig. 12 was obtained from a series of isothermal quenching experiments by He et al. [28]. The transformation start/finish times as well as the times for intermediate fractions of transformation (10%, 90%) for the different phases were updated following the experimental results. Material properties, such as thermal expansion, phase transformation expansion, Young's modulus, were all implemented by using a mix law approach; each property was calibrated based on experimental results (as example, the density, specific heat and thermal conductivity of all phases as a function of the temperature are shown inFig. 13). A Coulomb law was used to describe friction between the sheet and the punch, implementing a friction coefficient equal to 0.4. The latent heat for the decomposition of austenite into ferrite, pearlite and bainite was implemented equal to 590000kJ/m3, and for the decomposition into martensite equal to 640,000kJ/m3 according to Åkerström and Oldenburg [24]. The heat transfer coefficient between the blank and tooling is a critical parameter that ultimately determines the cooling rate of the blank and thus the part final microstructure and mechanical properties. The heat transfer coefficient (HTC) as a function of the contact pressure (p) can be linearly fitted as HTC=53.4p+1316 [W/m2K] according to the work of Lechler et al. [29]. The heat transfer with the environment was defined as a function of the temperature as reported in Åkerström and Oldenburg [24].Fig. 14 shows the contour plots of the distribution of the different phases in which austenite transforms when the heated zones of the tools are heated up to 450°C. It is worth to note that the phase distribution on the part formed under the heated zone is anomalous, since the ferrite and pearlite are not uniformly distributed under the tool heated zones far away from the air gap. This behavior can be attributed to the thermal expansion of the heated zones of the dies: as the dies are heated to high temperature, a significant change in height of the heated portion of the die with respect to the cooled part of the die can be noticed; as the tooling is about to close, the heated portions will first come into contact, whereas the cooled portions will still present some clearance in between. When the die is fully closed and the tonnage is applied, the hydraulic cylinder forces the die to slide and slightly rotate until contact is made between the cooled surfaces. This reduction in the contact pressure in the heated zones far away from the air gap will reduce the heat transfer and softer phases such as ferrite and pearlite will transform. Since there is a vertical wall on the component, it will reduce the heat transfer and result in non-uniformly distributed mechanical properties. The poor thermal contact between the vertical wall of the component and the tooling caused a significant reduction in cooling rate, which accelerated the formation of a softer microstructure.Nevertheless, Fig. 14(a) shows that the FE model predicts significant amounts of ferrite in the final microstructure, whereas, the only other numerical model of the tailored tempering process available in the scientific literature to the authors' knowledge, the one in George et al. [9], is not able to predict the formation of ferrite, showing predicted hardness values significantly higher than the experimental ones. Fig. 14(d) shows that under the cooled regions of the tools almost 100% of martensite transforms and can be verified by the Vickers hardness distribution inFig. 15.The results of the physical and numerical simulations were compared in order to prove the reliability of the calibrated FE model implemented to simulate the tailored tempering process. After the components were formed, small samples were cut from the components to measure the Vickers hardness and make microstructural observations. Microstructural analysis was carried out at six locations of the part: three in the cooled region (A, B, C), and three in the heated one (D, E, F) (Fig. 16a). Hardness measurements were taken along three lines across the air gap: one at the part bottom (L1), one at the side wall (L2), and the last at the top face (L3). Elements at locations P1, P2 and P3 along the three lines across the air gap belong to the cooled region of the U-channel part, whereas elements at locations P4, P5 and P6 belong to the heated region (Fig. 16b). The temperature at locations P1 and P4 was monitored and recorded by the two thermocouples embedded into the die (see Section 2).For the two experiments with a nominal temperature of the heated zone of the tools equal to 300°C and 450°C, the measured and computed temperature curves at locations P1 and P4 are shown inFig. 17. The numerically calculated temperature distribution agrees well with the experimental results for both the locations.The microstructures of the part formed under the heated dies at 450°C are shown inFig. 18. The specimens extracted from the formed parts are in locations A, B and C in the cooled region, and in locations D, E and F in the heated region (see Fig. 16a). Micrographs in Fig. 18(a–c) exhibit the packets of parallel lath crystals that are characteristic of martensite: a martensite phase transformation occurs under the cooled portions of the tools characterized by a high quench rate. Due to the heat transfer resistance, the cooling rate of elements at locations D and F is less than the critical cooling rate of martensitic phase transformation, allowing the transformation of austenite into bainite at these locations. The microstructure of the location E shows a multiphase condition, made of a mixture of ferrite, pearlite and bainite, which is quite different from locations D and F having similar temperature evolution history. This may be due to the large plastic deformation (values of effective strain between 0.25 and 0.45) and consequently stress that it is experienced by the side wall of the part where the point E is located. On the other hand, at locations D and F, plastic deformation is negligible (both are less than 0.07). Thus it is important to consider the shift of TTT curves with respect to the applied stress or the effect of deformation strain on the movement of CCT diagram in the FE model in order to obtain accurate simulation results in terms of phase formation.The simulation results in Fig. 14 show that the predicted phase fraction of the elements D and F belonging to the soft zone and of the elements A, B and C belonging to the hard zone after tailored tempering is 100% bainite and 100% martensite, respectively, which agrees well with the microstructures shown in Fig. 18. The predicted phase distribution at element E in Fig. 14 is a mixture of ferrite, pearlite and bainite, which again is in good agreement with the microstructure shown in Fig. 18. However, the numerical results show a microstructure composed of 33% ferrite, 4% pearlite, and 63% bainite, whereas the experimental microstructure presents a marginal amount of bainite with respect to the other phases. Therefore, the predicted fraction of bainite at location E is overestimated, proving that there is still room to improve the thermo-mechanical-metallurgical model of the tailored tempering process carried out on boron steel sheets.Fig. 19 shows the comparison between the experimental and numerical Vickers hardness in the case of the tool heating to 450°C. The agreement between experimental and numerical results in the cooled and heated zones of the part is in general satisfactory. The average percentage of deviation is less than 10%.Fig. 20 shows the comparison between the experimental and numerical Vickers hardness profiles along the lines L1, L2 and L3 across the transition zone in the case of the tool heating to 450°C. The trends of the experimental and simulated profiles in the cooled zone of the part are very similar, with acceptable differences (average deviation of 9%). The only exception is represented by a maximum difference of 50HV along line L3; however, the experimental value of 450HV represents a fully martensitic microstructure, as predicted by the numerical model.In the heated zone of the part, the experimental hardness values range from 225 to 250HV, indicative of a mixed microstructure of ferrite and pearlite and a bainite-dominant microstructure, respectively. Along the lines L1 and L2, the numerically predicted hardness values are slightly underestimated, but satisfactory. As regards the hardness profile along line L3, the maximum deviation between numerical and experimental data is again about 50HV: the numerical hardness is overestimated compared to the experimental one, but still within the range of values typical of bainite.The width of the transition zone between the heated and the cooled portions of the part is defined as the distance between the fully soft and fully hardened microstructure. The numerical transition widths along the lines L1, L2 and L3 as indicated in the Fig. 20 are in the order of magnitude of 10mm, and they agree well with the experimental measurements. When the air gap between the heated and cooled portions of the dies equals 2mm, the transition width is very short. It can be seen that there is a sharp hardness transition between the hardened and softened zones, which is beneficial for the part crash performances, correctly predicted by the numerical simulation. Therefore, it is confirmed that the use of an air gap between the heated and cooled regions of the tools, as small as 2mm in width, is sufficient to thermally insulate the two halves of the tooling and provide a sharp hardness transition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A fully coupled thermo-mechanical-metallurgical model of the tailored tempering process has been presented in the paper. The application case refers to the hot stamping of 22MnB5 U-channel parts by using segmented tools that can guarantee the tailored tempering in different zones of the part according to the different applied cooling rates. The numerical model of the process was developed within the FE code Forge™ and was accurately calibrated in terms of phase transformation kinetics, namely the phase transformation plasticity and shift of TTT curves as a function of applied stress. Data about the phase transformation kinetics were obtained through an experimental campaign carried out on a testing apparatus that can replicate the thermo-mechanical cycles of the process and record the phase transformation onset by means of an axial extensometer adapted to work as a dilatometer. The validation of the numerical model was conducted by comparing the experimental and numerical results with regard to the obtained phase proportion and Vickers hardness in the different heated and cooled zones of the part. The presented results show in general a satisfactory agreement between experimental and numerical results, also across the transition zone, proving the reliability of the numerical model. Furthermore, the experimental results proved the capability of controlling the part final properties by tailored tempering, assuring a sharp hardness change between the heated and cooled zones.