@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spatial-based skin detection using discriminative skin-presence features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The skin probability maps are refined using discriminative features (DSPFs).Spatial analysis of skin pixels is more successful when performed in DSPF skin maps.The textural features are extracted from skin maps rather than from the grayscale.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Skin detection,Skin segmentation,Textural features,Linear discriminant analysis,Distance transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we propose a new method for skin detection in color images which consists in spatial analysis using the introduced texture-based discriminative skin-presence features. Color-based skin detection has been widely explored and many skin color modeling techniques were developed so far. However, efficacy of the pixel-wise classification is limited due to an overlap between the skin and non-skin pixels reported in many color spaces. To increase the discriminating power of the skin classification schemes, textural and spatial features are often exploited for skin modeling. Our contribution lies in using the proposed discriminative feature space as a domain for spatial analysis of skin pixels. Contrary to existing approaches, we extract the textural features from the skin probability maps rather than from the luminance channel. Presented experimental study confirms that the proposed method outperforms alternative skin detection techniques, which also involve analysis of textural and spatial features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The goal of skin detection is to determine whether a given video sequence, an image, a region or a pixel presents the human skin. The applications are of a wide range and significance, including gesture recognition and human–computer interaction (Bilal et al., 2012; Radlak and Smolka, 2012; Nalepa et al., 2014), objectionable content filtering (Lee et al., 2007), image retrieval (Kruppa et al., 2002), image coding using regions of interest (Chen et al., 2003), and many more.Skin detection is a challenging problem that has been extensively studied over the years, but no satisfactory solution has been proposed so far. The existing techniques are based on the premise that the skin color can be effectively modeled in various color spaces, which in turn allows for segmenting the skin regions. Although the color features constitute the primary source of information for skin detection, the effectiveness of color-based classification is limited due to a significant overlap between the skin and non-skin pixels that appears in all of the popularly used color spaces. Skin color depends on a number of individual factors, and also intra-personal differences may be substantial, mainly because of variations in lighting conditions. Furthermore, the background objects often possess skin-like color, which results in observing false positive errors in the segmentation outcome.It has been reported that the discriminating power of skin detectors can be improved by employing additional features extracted from the texture or relying on spatial analysis of pixels classified as skin. Basically, the skin regions are usually smooth and form consistent areas, in contrast to many background objects that contain pixels of color values similar or identical to the skin. Also, skin detection errors can be reduced if a color model is adapted to a particular scene or an individual, for example based on detected facial or hand regions.In this paper we explore how to exploit the textural features to establish a suitable propagation domain for the spatial analysis of the skin pixels. The proposed method is based on the discriminative features extracted from skin probability maps, obtained using a conventional Bayesian classifier (Jones and Rehg, 2002). This is in contrast to alternative texture-based techniques which rely on the texture of grayscale images. During our research we identified that the discriminating power of the textural features is definitely higher if they are extracted from the skin probability maps rather than from the luminance channel. This approach was not investigated in alternative studies.Here, we introduce the discriminative skin-presence features (DSPFs), derived from the discriminative textural features (DTFs) described in our earlier works on skin detection (Kawulok, 2012) and image colorization (Kawulok et al., 2012). The differences between the DTFs and the DSPFs, discussed later in Section 4, allow for the computation time reduction and efficacy improvement. The most important contribution of this work lies in using the DSPF space as a domain for propagating the “skinness”, which allows for a substantial increase of the detection rate.First, we transform the skin probability map using the DSPF space, and then apply the spatial analysis in the transformed skin map. For the spatial analysis we adapted an algorithm based on the distance transform in a combined domain (DTCD) of hue, luminance and skin probability, developed during our earlier study (Kawulok, 2013). Originally, the DTCD algorithm operates in raw skin probability maps, but here it has been adapted to perform the propagation in the DSPF space. The proposed method was compared with another approach proposed by Jiang et al. (2007), who also exploit the textural features, which is followed by the spatial analysis. Not only do the results indicate that our method outperforms the alternative algorithms, but also the gain attributed to the spatial analysis is larger than in case of processing raw skin probability maps.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 an overview of existing skin detection methods is presented with particular attention given to the texture-based methods. Section 3 describes the existing algorithms which form the background for the proposed method. Our contribution to the skin detection is described in Section 4. The results of experimental validation are reported and discussed in Section 5, and finally our research is concluded in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a new method that substantially improves the skin detection outcome has been proposed. This was achieved by exploiting the discriminative features extracted from the skin probability maps, and using them in our spatial analysis scheme. The presented experimental results proved that our method achieves much better results comparing with current state-of-the-art approaches.A potential drawback of the presented method lies in a validation-based approach towards selecting the basic features prior to learning the DSPF space. Our ongoing research is focused on adapting the feature selection schemes to optimize the type of the features used, as well as the scales at which they should be computed. Finally, our plan is to propose a parallel implementation of the proposed method, which would make it applicable in real-time systems.