@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of intestinal wall abnormalities and ischemia by modeling spatial uncertainty in computed tomography imaging findings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An original work on automated identification of bowel ischemia is reported.The computerized detection can greatly assist surgeons in emergency medicine.Testing on clinical data shows the potential application of the proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intestinal abnormalities,Intestinal ischemia,Computed tomography,Indicator kriging,Fuzzy entropy,Pattern classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Intestinal abnormalities and ischemia are medical conditions in which inflammation and injury of the intestine are caused by inadequate blood supply. Acute ischemia of the small bowel can be life-threatening. Computed tomography (CT) is currently a gold standard for the diagnosis of acute intestinal ischemia in the emergency department. However, the assessment of the diagnostic performance of CT findings in the detection of intestinal abnormalities and ischemia has been a difficult task for both radiologists and surgeons. Little effort has been found in developing computerized systems for the automated identification of these types of complex gastrointestinal disorders. In this paper, a geostatistical mapping of spatial uncertainty in CT scans is introduced for medical image feature extraction, which can be effectively applied for diagnostic detection of intestinal abnormalities and ischemia from control patterns. Experimental results obtained from the analysis of clinical data suggest the usefulness of the proposed uncertainty mapping model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Intestinal abnormalities and ischemia are medical conditions of a restriction in blood supply to the bowel, blocking oxygen and glucose needed for cellular metabolism to keep tissues alive. There are many types of bowel disorders and such conditions are not only uncomfortable, but can also lead to further health complications when left untreated. Intestinal ischemia can either affect the small or large (colon) intestine, or even both. As a consequence, intestinal ischemia caused by the inadequate blood flow can result in pain and can permanently damage the intestine. Sudden loss of blood flow to the intestine can cause acute intestinal ischemia that is a medical emergency, life-threatening, and requires immediate surgery. Intestinal ischemia that develops over time (chronic) requires treatment because it can become acute, or lead to severe weight loss and malnutrition [1–3]. Typical symptoms of acute intestinal ischemia are sudden abdominal pain, forceful bowel movements, swollen abdomen, nausea or vomiting or both, and fever. Intestinal ischemia can be divided into two categories: colon ischemia (ischemic colitis) and acute mesenteric ischemia [3]. Colon ischemia occurs when blood supply to the colon is inadequate and this is the most common type of intestinal ischemia. Colon ischemia usually affects adults over the age of 60 years old, but may occur at any age. Acute mesenteric ischemia affects the small intestine. Acute mesenteric ischemia occurs abruptly and blood clot is its most common cause that can result from congestive heart failure, irregular heartbeats, or a heart attack [3].Several different invasive methods are used to detect abnormalities of the small intestine. A tissue specimen can be obtained by using an endoscope (a flexible viewing tube), or by using a thin tube with a small cutting instrument at the end; while several similar types of capsules are used for tissue collection [4–6]. Abdominal CT scanning is the current gold standard for the non-invasive clinical assessment of intestinal abnormalities and ischemia in emergency care. This imaging method uses X-rays to obtain the visual information of the cross-sectional (axial) areas of the part of the body between the thorax and the pelvis. Given the increasing use of CT as a screening technique for patients because of the growing confidence in this imaging technology; in many cases, surgeons are confused with the differential diagnosis of small-bowel abnormalities and ischemia on CT scans [7]. In fact, medical experts not only find it difficult to visually detect abnormalities based on CT findings of the bowels, it is still a challenge for surgeons to evaluate the similarities and differences in the CT appearances between healthy subjects and patients in other complex disorders such as pulmonary disease, which needs the incorporation of computer methods to provide pattern-recognition approaches to enhance the interpretation of imaging findings [8–10]. In general, the radiological findings of mesenteric ischemia have different course in case of different etiology. In particular, bowel wall thinning is typical but difficult to recognize so diagnosis may be hard. The prompt recognition of each condition is essential to ensure a successful treatment [11]. Therefore, the reliable detection of intestinal abnormalities and ischemia on CT findings is important for surgical decision making.Most computer-aided methods for the analysis of medical images involve segmentation, registration, and feature extraction. To be effective, these computer tools need to meet the clinical relevance as well as the methodological feasibility with respect to image processing, data analysis, and pattern recognition to solve real-world medical problems. For the study of medical imaging, there are various imaging modalities, such as PET, MRI, CT and X-ray, which can belong to either structural or functional imaging, depending on the type of information provided by the image. Given that radiologists are trained in producing medical images, these experts but do not always have the background in the relevant area of medicine to interpret the images with confidence [12]. As advanced diagnostic imaging is rapidly pervading into therapeutic medicine, so there is an urgent need for hospitals and medical institutions world-wide to have possibilities to perform examinations with the aide of computerized pattern recognition technology. Such a computer-aided tool should have the capacity to automatically identify normal anatomical and physiological appearances on an image and the variations of these appearances, which may be identified as indicators of pathology [13].Medical images are intrinsically characterized with structures of spatial patterns with respect to the size, shape, and arrangement of their components. These sub-image structures are often visual features of surfaces, whose properties can be appropriately described by spatial statistics. For automated pattern classification of medical images, advanced methods for feature extraction are important because they help select concise and discriminative properties of raw-image objects while eliminate redundancy existing in a large amount of information contained in the image [14,15]. This feature extraction process is usually specific for a certain type of disease and is derived from the findings obtained by medical experts [16]. Based on the extracted features, classifiers or machine-learning algorithms can be trained with these samples to carry out the diagnostic identification of unknown objects in terms of specificity and sensitivity. This study is also concerned with the extraction of an effective feature of medical images, representing its texture. This is because the definition of texture mostly fits well into the description of appearances of medical images, which can be used to distinguish complex diseased from normal patterns. In fact, texture analysis is very helpful for the classification of different regions of interest in medical images. It is an increasingly on-going field of research which reports applications ranging from the extraction of anatomical structures and lesions to the recognition of pathological tissues from healthy ones in different organs [17–19].Based on the motivation of developing an effective algorithm for the detection of intestinal abnormalities and ischemia, a new application of a geostatistical mapping of spatial uncertainty in images for automated pattern identification of the intestinal disorders is introduced herein. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the material and methods. Section 3 presents results together with discussions. Finally, Section 4 is the conclusion of the findings.CT scans were obtained from patients who had surgery because of the peritonitis with the suspicion of the bowel ischemia except for one control patient who was admitted in our unit for other reason. The patients were diagnosed by physical examination, blood tests and CT scans. Important physical findings of peritonitis were the muscular defense and rebound tenderness. The lactic acidosis elevation suggested the bowel ischemia in the blood test. If the renal function of the patient was normal, intravenous contrast (IV) was used to enhance the CT. The CT finding was read by the attending radiologist. The CT patterns of the black and gray attenuation in the intestine were indicators of bowel ischemia. After the diagnosis of peritonitis with bowel ischemia, the emergency surgery was carried out. If the bowel was necrotic (of dead body tissue), it was resected.Eleven subjects were included in this study: eight patients of ischemia, one benign and two control subjects. Four ischemic patients had surgery. The ischemic bowels were resected in eight patients because of the necrosis of the small bowels. One patient had surgery without the bowel colectomy (procedure of removing the colon). The two control subjects include a 17-year-old male, who had his whole body CT scanned due to other injury and his abdominal CT was normal; and a 30-year-old male, who was a trauma patient, had his liver and his lung injured, and his intestine was healthy. In the ischemic cohort, the 80-year-old (Patient 1) and 87-year-old (Patient 2) female patients had small-bowel resection because of small-bowel ischemia, the 76-year-old male (Patient 3) had his descending colon resected because of colon ischemia, the 81-year-old female underwent a small bowel resection because of the necrosis of the small bowel (Patient 4), the 65-year-old male (Patient 5) has the partial resection of his small bowel and subtotal resection of the large bowel because of the necrosis of the terminal ileum and large bowel, the 79-year-old female (Patient 6) had the subtotal resection of the small bowel and right hemicolectomy (the ascending colon and half of the transverse colon) because of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) thrombosis, another 65-year-old male (Patient 7) had the sigmoid colon resection because of the necrotic ischemic colitis, and the 53-year-old male (Patient 8) had the left hemicolectomy (from mid of the transverse colon to the rectum). The benign subject is the 76-year-old female who underwent surgery without bowel resection.The CT and operation findings of the subjects were compared. This retrospective study was approved by the patients’ informed consents, which waived approval by our institutional review board. Fig. 1shows typical intravenous contrast-enhanced CT scans of a control (30-year-old male), benign, Patient 6 (female), and Patient 8 (male), respectively.Image patterns about the CT diagnosis of intestinal abnormalities and ischemia have been explored by medical researchers [20,7,21], which can be utilized for computerized extraction of features of the regions of interests in the CT images. In particular, five attenuation patterns described in [20] were adopted in this study to train computer methods for automated detection of the disease. These patterns include white, gray, water halo sign, fat halo sign, and black[20]. The interpretations of these five attenuation patterns are as follows. The white attenuation pattern describes the contrast material enhancement affecting the thickened bowel wall. The gray attenuation pattern is the sign of a thickened bowel wall with limited enhancement. This pattern of gray attenuation is often used to differentiate between benign and malignant disease. The water halo sign indicates stratification within a thickened bowel wall that consists of thickened layers. The fat halo sign presents a three-layered target sign of thickened bowel in which the middle layer has a fatty attenuation, referring to Crohn disease in the small intestine and inflammatory bowel diseases in the colon. The black attenuation pattern, which particularly shows air trapped between the bowel walls, indicates ischemia. Fig. 2shows typical results of the automated searching for the regions of interest in CT scans of the five subjects, which are difficult to distinguish one from another by shape or boundary but its textural appearance. In fact, texture in images can be recognized by visual observation but it is very difficult to define [22]. A typical definition of texture is “A region in an image has a constant texture if a set of local statistics or other local properties of the picture function are constant, slowly varying, or approximately periodic.” [23]. Recently, geostatistics, which can be used as a mathematical tool for modeling spatial uncertainty to quantify texture, has been reported [15,24]. Therefore, developing a novel method for extracting texture in medical images is a technical motivation of this paper, in addition to addressing the need for the computerized analysis of a medical imaging problem presented for the first time.A statistical technique for modeling spatial uncertainty is the method of indicator kriging [25,26], which estimates the cumulative distribution function (CDF) to characterize the probability of occurrence of fu. This CDF can be defined as [25](1)F(u;T)=P(fu≤T)where T is a threshold or cutoff value taken on by fu.Given the available information of n-neighboring data, the conditional CDF is expressed as(2)F[(u;T)|n]=P[(fu≤T)|n]where n is the number of neighboring data of u, which influence the likelihood of fu≤T.The indicator kriging builds the CDF at each fubased on the behavior and correlation structure of indicator transformed data points in the neighborhood. It then estimates the probability that the estimate is less than the threshold value. An indicator I(u;T) which takes on values according to the indicator transform of fugiven a threshold T, is defined as(3)I(u;T)=1fu≤T0fu>T.The CDF according to the indicator expressed in Eq. (3) can be estimated using the ordinary kriging [26] as follows.(4)Fˆ[(u;T)|n]=∑i=1nwi(u;T)I(ui;T)wherewi(u;T)are ordinary kriging weights which can be optimally determined by the ordinary kriging system [26]:(5)Gw=gwhere G is the square and symmetrical matrix that represents the spatial covariances between the known neighboring values fiin the image, i=1, …, n, i≠u; w is the vector of kriging weights; and g is the vector representing the spatial covariance between fuand fi, i=1, …, n. These terms are mathematically expressed as [26]G=γ11γ12⋯γ1n1··⋯····⋯····⋯··γn1γn2⋯γnn111⋯10where γ12 is the semi-variance of f1 and f2.w=[w1w2⋯wn−λ]Twherew1,…,wnare called the kriging weights, λ is a Lagrange multiplier, and∑i=1nwi=1.g=[γu1γu2⋯γun1]Twhere γunis the semi-variogram value of fuand fn, which is presented subsequently.Given that G−1 exists, the kriging weights can be obtained by solving:(6)w=G−1g.The variogram function, denoted as 2γ(h), is a spatial autocorrelation function that represents the degree of spatial continuity of a regionalized variable [27]. The semi-variogram, denoted as γ(h), of an image whose pixel intensity is f(x, y) can be defined by [27](7)γ(h)=12∫x∫y[f(x,y)−f(x+h,y+h)]2dxdywhere h is the lag, which is the spatial interval between any two values being compared. Here the lag is the spatial interval between the pixel at (x, y) and the pixel at (x+h, y+h).The integral expressed in Eq. (7) can be approximated by the experimental semi-variogram as follows [27](8)γ(h)=12N(h)∑(u,v)|huv=hN(h)(fu−fv)2where N(h) is the number of pairs that fuandfvare separated by the lag h.Based on the mapping of the spatial uncertainty in an image using the indicator kriging, each pixel of the image can be represented with a conditional probability given by the indicator kriging. In other words, the image can now be represented as a matrix of probabilities. To quantify a measure of uncertainty, these probabilities need to be transformed into entropy. It should be noted that each probability in either each row or column of the matrix is a conditional CDF that reflects the spatial uncertainty of the corresponding image intensity not exceeding a threshold. A possible way to integrate these multiple probabilities into a single measure of uncertainty is by the use of the fuzzy entropy [28], in which these probabilities are considered as the membership grades of an image being subject to a fuzzy content. In fact, fuzzy information has been proved that it can be uniquely decomposed into a weighted disjunction of non-fuzzy sources of information [29,30]. The fuzzy entropy applied here is defined as a “measure of the degree of fuzziness” or entropy of a generalized set [28], and mathematically expressed as(9)Ei(A)=Di(A)+Di(Ac),where Ei(A) is the fuzzy entropy of the fuzzy set A taken at row i of the matrix, Acis the complement of A, and Di(A) is defined as(10)Di(A)=−∑jμA(uij)logμj(uij),where μA(uij) is the indicator-kriging probability of pixel uij.The entropy of the total image, denoted as H(A), is computed as the sum of all fuzzy entropy values of the image rows:(11)H(A)=∑iEi(A).Having introduced the indicator kriging for mapping the spatial uncertainty in images and its fuzzy entropy, the issue here is how the threshold T can be determined. One possible solution is to use a threshold image segmentation method to obtain T for each region of interest (ROI) and then obtain the minimum and maximum values of T. The results are the entropy values of an image for each threshold and these entropies can be integrated using a fusion scheme, which is described in the following section.In order to combine multiple pieces of evidence about the uncertainty degrees of the images obtained from the indicator kriging with different threshold values, these sources of uncertainty need to be integrated into a scalar value so that it can also be included with other scalar features for pattern classification. Here we present a fusion scheme, which can combine the thresholded entropy values into a conditional probability, as follows.Let P(W|Y) and P(W|Z) be the conditional probabilistic distributions that model the uncertainty of some target variable W, given two information sources Y and Z, respectively. The interest is how these two sources of information can be combined into a fusion model probability, which is P(W|Y, Z). The determination of this combined conditional probability is often very difficult because it would require a rich data set for checking or adjusting the accuracy of observations about the target variable, and such data sets are often not available [31].A simple and general model for the combination of probabilities has been developed and applied in this study, namely, the permanence-of-ratios-based fusion [32,33]. Based on the well-proven paradigm for the approximation of the permanence of ratios, this fusion operator asserts that the rates or ratios of increments are typically more stable than the increments themselves and assumes conditional independence between the different sources of information [32]. In other words, if P(W) is the prior probability of the occurrence of class W; P(W|Y) and P(W|Z) are the probabilities of the occurrence of class W given the knowledge provided by Y and Z, respectively; the approach based on the notion of the permanence of ratios allows the information sources Y and Z to be incrementally and conditionally dependent, and its fusion scheme gives the updated probability as follows [32]:(12)P(W|Y,Z)=11+x=aa+bc∈[0,1]where a, b, c, and x are taken as the logistic-type ratio of marginal probabilities of W, Y after W occurring, Z after W occurring, and Y and Z after W occurring, respectively:a=1−P(W)P(W),b=1−P(W|Y)P(W|Y),c=1−P(W|Z)P(W|Z),x=1−P(W|Y,Z)P(W|Y,Z).In this study, P(W) is assumed to be equal among the occurrences of all classes. Let Y and Z are the information sources obtained from the geostatistics and its uncertainty is measured with a fuzzy entropy about class W, respectively; then P(W|Y)=exp[−H(A)] and P(W|Z)=exp[−H(B)].For the general combination of M events Em, m=1, …, M, the conditional probability provided by a successive (n−1) permanence of ratios can be calculated as [32](13)P(W|Em,m=1,…,M)=11+z∈[0,1],wherez=∏mMemdM−1≥0,d=1−P(W)P(W),andem=1−P(W|Em)P(W|Em),m=1,…,M.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
