@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Growth plate stress distribution implications during bone development: A simple framework computational approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Growth plate characteristics affect SOC development.Mechanical environment within growth plate varies according to epiphyseal ossification state.Mechanical stimuli may affect similarly growth plate and epiphyseal ossification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Epiphyseal stress distribution,Long bone development,Mechanical stimulus,Growth plate,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mechanical stimuli play a significant role in the process of long bone development as evidenced by clinical observations and in vivo studies. Up to now approaches to understand stimuli characteristics have been limited to the first stages of epiphyseal development. Furthermore, growth plate mechanical behavior has not been widely studied. In order to better understand mechanical influences on bone growth, we used Carter and Wong biomechanical approximation to analyze growth plate mechanical behavior, and explore stress patterns for different morphological stages of the growth plate. To the best of our knowledge this work is the first attempt to study stress distribution on growth plate during different possible stages of bone development, from gestation to adolescence. Stress distribution analysis on the epiphysis and growth plate was performed using axisymmetric (3D) finite element analysis in a simplified generic epiphyseal geometry using a linear elastic model as the first approximation. We took into account different growth plate locations, morphologies and widths, as well as different epiphyseal developmental stages. We found stress distribution during bone development established osteogenic index patterns that seem to influence locally epiphyseal structures growth and coincide with growth plate histological arrangement.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Long bone embryological development is a complex process that derives from mesenchymal cells that condense and then differentiate into chondrocytes to form a cartilaginous mold. The ossification process starts with establishment of the primary ossification center (POC) in the central part of the future bone or diaphysis [1]. The cartilaginous mold enlarges at both ends of the diaphysis establishing the epiphysis [2]. Toward the end of gestation the secondary ossification center (SOC) forms in the central part of the epiphysis, followed by radial growth until a completely ossified epiphysis is attained [3]. Thus, developmentally long bone epiphyses can first be completely cartilaginous, followed by SOC formation, ending with a completely ossified epiphysis at different stages of human development: gestation, child-hood, and puberty [1–3].In the appendicular skeleton cartilage growth tissue remains between the diaphysis and epiphysis in a region identified as the growth plate. Histologically the growth plate is arranged in three zones: reserve, proliferative, and hypertrophic [1,4,5]. This zone is responsible for longitudinal growth and characteristic shape acquisition. Other growth plate characteristics, such as location within the bone, morphology, and width, change according to bone type and age [6]. This is illustrated in the work published by Kandzierski et al. evidencing that the growth plate morphology of a proximal femoral epiphysis can resemble a concave meniscus at the age of four. With increasing age, at seven the growth plate becomes straight, as a ridged non-uniform line. Last, the growth plate assumes the form of an arch at the beginning of puberty [5–10]. In addition, growth plate's width also changes through life, with a wider growth plate during early stages and diminishing progressively until its disappearance toward the end of adolescence [8,11,12]. These changes are controlled by several factors including genetic, biochemical, and mechanical [13]. The latter has been widely recognized as a regulator of growth rate, modifying cell populations in proliferative and hypertrophic states as well as matrix synthesis as evidenced by in vivo and in vitro studies [14–17].Various theoretical approaches have been performed in order to understand mechanical regulation. Approaches range from stress distribution analysis within the developing tissue [18–22], to more complex models that integrate biochemical and mechanical factors [23–25]. All of them have only considered events occurring in the epiphysis, not taking into account growth plate characteristics or behavior. Furthermore, up to now stress distribution on the epiphysis and growth plate through different stages of bone development has not been studied.Using an axisymmetric (3D) finite element analysis we devised a bone with generic geometry to explore stress distribution on the growth plate during different stages of epiphyseal ossification. The aim of this work was to shed light on stress distribution within the growth plate during different stages of epiphyseal ossification, and establish the effect of growth plate morphology on epiphyseal stress distribution and vice versa. Results derived from this work will help elucidate mechanical events taking place within the growth plate and epiphysis during long bone growth. Additionally, the information generated may be useful to formulate hypotheses regarding mechanical influences on biological events taking place in normal and pathological bone growth scenarios.To understand long bone mechanical behavior at different growth stages we performed a computational analysis using linear elastic model solved by fine element analysis (FEA). For numerical analysis a set of partial differential equations was implemented using Fortran (Formula Translating System, New York, USA) programming language. Equation solving and results visualization were performed using ABAQUS v 6.1. and TECPLOT 360 (Tecplot Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA), respectively.A 3D axisymmetric model of a generic bone was designed (Fig. 1), taking into account that several human long bones epiphysis have a similar shape during early embryological stages such as the proximal femur head, with bone's longitudinal length of 25mm and epiphyseal radius of 10mm (Fig. 1A). For simplification the same morphology was maintained for latter developmental stages. The model included four regions: diaphysis, growth plate, Ranvier's grooves, and epiphysis (Fig. 1A). In addition, different combinations between growth plate morphologies and secondary ossification centers were evaluated: straight, concave, convex and irregular morphologies (Fig. 1B–D). Here a linear elastic model is used, although cartilage is a highly hydrated tissue, since it is based on Carter's model which does not consider fluid flow velocity in contrast to other approximations reported in the literature [26,27]. Furthermore, the load applied was static and constant. Linear elastic models have proven to be as reliable as poro-elastic constitutive models for cartilage stress distribution analysis in previous reports, thus here we the former considering its simplicity for a first approximation to growth plate mechanical environment [28]. Material properties for each zone are described in Table 1. For simulations elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio in different tissues were as follows: diaphysis was designated as trabecular bone, Ranvier's grooves, a mechanical support structure, as fibrous tissue, and growth plate as cartilage.Although there is a drastic change in material properties between growth plate region and diaphysis, analyses were performed in order to evaluate the impact of material transition in stress distribution. For such purposes, a transition zone was created between growth plate and diaphysis. This zone generates a gradual change of material properties from cartilage (top) to bone (bottom); the transition in material properties was given by:ETRANSITIONZONE=EGROTHPLATE+ΔEΔy(y−yGROTHPLATE)whereΔE=EBONE−EGROTHPLATEAnd Δy is the transition zone width and y any point within the transition zone. E is the young modulus of that zone.The proof of concept was performed using a straight growth plate. These analyses showed a minor impact of material change on growth plate stress distribution, as such, a similar pattern was observed with or without a transition zone. Some changes in diaphyseal stress pattern were observed, however since this zone is already ossified, stress distribution in such zone is not relevant for the purposes of this study (Supplementary Fig. 1).Long bone epiphyses were identified at three different stages resembling chronological bone development: first completely cartilaginous (case 1), SOC formation (case 2), and completely ossified epiphysis (case 3). For case 2, SOC size and shape was designed individually for all conditions tested based on high osteogenic index (OI) areas obtained in case 1 simulations as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2(see Section 2.3 for further information); thus SOC geometry varies in size and shape, including circles and differently oriented ellipses as shown in Supplementary Fig. 3. For case 3, it was used the same morphology as for case 1, but epiphysis was considered as trabecular bone instead cartilage (Fig. 1 and Table 1).Four growth plate morphologies were simulated for each of the aforementioned cases: straight, concave, convex, and irregular. Additionally, different widths and location of the growth plate were modeled trying to resemble the conditions of different bones as shown in Fig. 1. Three growth plate width sizes were used (W1: thin, W2: medium, W3: thick, corresponding to 0.125, 0.25 and 0.5mm respectively). Last, three locations within the epiphysis (L1: low, L2: middle, L3: high) were simulated for each morphology (Fig. 1B–D). To construct different locations, configuration L2 was used as reference and L1 and L3 were achieved by moving the growth plate to upper or lower L2 edge, respectively.A total of 36 morphologies were used for simulations. For meshing, conventional quadrilateral elements were used. Convergence analysis showed an optimum element size of 0.01 meshing length units (Supplementary Fig. 4). The number of element varied among morphologies ranging from approximately 16.000 to 20.000.For the model, Y axis was taken as symmetry axis; additionally zero displacement constraints for Y axis at the lower edge of the geometry was established. Loads were applied on the upper arch. In order to be able of doing unitary comparisons, the load applied in the simulation corresponds to a pressure of 1MPa (Fig. 2A) similar to tests made in [21,30].Simulation results were analyzed in terms of octahedral normal stress (P) and octahedral shear stress (S). According to studies developed by Carter and Wong cartilage formation resulted from octahedral normal stress, and bone was the result of octahedral shear stress [18]. They defined a numerical relation for P and S, named osteogenic index (OI) as an indicator of mechanical stimuli influence on the ossification process given by:(1)OI=S+kPwhere k is an empirical constant that was tested with values between 0.2 and 2 (Supplementary Fig. 5). However for all simulations k=0.5 was used, since this value closely resembles a biological setting as described by Carter et al., where a region of low OI in the articular cartilage region is observed and high values of OI for the predicted area of secondary ossification center, which was clearly distinguished within the epiphyses [18].OI is a scalar parameter integrating the competing effects of octahedral normal stress and octahedral shear stress. The OI can be used to predict which regions of a cartilaginous skeletal element are likely to ossify first (high OI values) and which are likely to remain cartilaginous (low OI values)[18]. Taking this into account, OI distribution was analyzed only in cartilaginous structures within the model that include epiphysis (only for cases 1 and 2) and growth plate.In order to characterize mechanical environment within the growth plate for all conditions simulated OI distribution was determined in the horizontal plane using sections named Path H1, H2 and H3 (Fig. 2B).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Several computational approaches have explored the mechanical environment in developing bones prior to SOC onset, establishing possible associations between mechanical stimulus and biological responses [18–22,25,28,30]. However, few studies have addressed such aspects for the growth plate or explored changes during development. In fact, to the best of our knowledge this study is the first approach to understand stress distribution on epiphysis and growth plate during different long bone developmental stages. This work is based on Carter et al. [18] scalar parameter integrating octahedral normal stress and octahedral shear stress to predict the ossification process. Contrasting to previous works that focused mainly on SOC development, here Carter's approximation was applied for analyzing growth plate mechanical behavior in different bone development stages, in order to explore possible correspondence between stress patterns and morphological characteristics of the growth plate. As one the main finding of the study, we observed a mechanical stress gradient that seems to correlate with histological arrangement of the growth plate. As such, prior to complete epiphyseal ossification OI patterns coincide with growth plate histological organization (reserve, proliferative, hypertrophic) which may be involved in stimulating longitudinal bone growth. Additionally, it was observed that complete epiphyseal ossification has an impact on growth plate stress distribution favoring its maintenance rather than ossification. Furthermore, our results suggests that mechanical stimuli may play a decisive role on epiphyseal development as well as growth plate ossification, in particular during early stages of development, in agreement with the increasing in vivo and in vitro evidence regarding mechanical effect on long bone development [14,17,31].Results for cartilaginous epiphysis (case 1), which resembles embryological development (second trimester) up to the first year of life in humans [5,6,10], agree with those presented by Carter et al. under similar loading conditions and constrains. Epiphyseal areas with considerable OI values allow predicting SOC localization and morphology [18]. Based on our results for case 1, SOC appearance is predicted in the epiphyseal central zone despite growth plate location, morphology and width (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 2–3).Furthermore, according to our results future SOC characteristics depend mainly on growth plate location (Fig. 3). A similar pattern is observed during development for the appendicular skeleton. In bones such as the femur which presents a medially located growth plate, SOC develops as a rounded structure (corresponding to L2 simulation). Whereas in bones such as the radius, with a growth plate located near the loading area (corresponding to L3 simulation) SOC acquires a flattened shape [6]. In addition, we observed decreased OI value in the SOC region for a growth plate located near the loading area (L3). For this particular growth plate localization we suggest low OI values could be associated with a mechanical stimulus that may result in delayed SOC apparition. Biologically, such events occur in bones such as the radius and hand and feet phalanges, in which ossification occurs after the first year of life [6].With SOC appearance, our results show a non-uniform stress redistribution that lead to higher OI values laterally rather than vertically, resulting in an ovoid growth trend (Fig. 4). Such results seem to resemble SOC growth pattern for bones such as the distal femur [6,9]. Additionally, as for case 1, OI values and distribution seem to be affected mainly by growth plate localization (Supplementary Fig. 3).In sum, cases 1 and 2 simulation results suggest that SOC development was only affected by changes in growth plate location (Fig. 2). For all cases simulated SOC was predicted to appear in the epiphyseal central zone, similar to in vivo SOC development in most human bones [6]. However, it is well known that SOC number and morphology varies among different skeletal elements [6]. Previous studies have suggested other factors can affect SOC appearance and shape such as epiphyseal contour and load localization [18,22]. In this study such conditions were constant (round epiphyseal shape – central load). Thus, additional studies are required to evaluate together growth plate location and epiphyseal shape for specific cases to understand how their interactions might affect epiphyseal development [18].Carter and Wong proposed OI as a mechanical stimulation indicator for ossification. As such, high OI values may be related to increased ossification velocity [18]. Since long bone growth results from ossification within the growth plate, we suggest OI values in this structure can be an indicator of expected growth rate. Within the growth plate OI values were affected by all variables studied: localization, morphology, and width (Figs. 5 and 7. Supplementary Figs. 7–9) with lower (L1) thick (W3) growth plate achieving the maximum value. The characteristics above mentioned are comparable to histological findings during embryological stages for lower limb bones in humans and other mammals. In such cases growth plate is wider and present high growth rates [5,32]. Taking this into account, it is possible to suggest that mechanical stimulus may contribute to the increased growth rate in that period.Additionally we obtained a decreasing trend in OI values from the epiphyseal to the diaphyseal end of the growth plate. Our results evidenced OI peak values in the reserve zone (Figs. 5–7), with OI values comparable to those observed in the epiphysis. The reserve zone is in charge of providing cells to the proliferative zone assuring growth process continuity [33]. Moreover, it has been proposed that resting chondrocytes may synthesize biochemical factors, responsible for growth orientation and inhibition of hypertrophy in the proliferative zone. These events favor growth plate histological organization in distinct zones [33–36].Based on the observed changes in OI values among the areas corresponding to reserve, proliferation, and hypertrophic zones we suggest that mechanical stimulus could be associated with triggering changes in cellular behavior. As such, high OI values in the reserve zone may be stimulating cells to start to proliferate or synthesize biochemical factors or both, particularly in early stages of development (cases 1 and 2). Mechanical regulation can be acting as an epigenetic regulator of protein synthesis (29).Reports in the literature show an association between mechanical stimulus and differentiation process as well as synthesis of morphogens [17,37–40]. Furthermore, octahedral normal stress has been reported to linearly increase chondrocyte membrane lipid packing and lipid desaturase gene expression (36). It is well documented membrane biochemical properties modulate signal transduction [41]. Therefore, we suggest, for a completely cartilaginous epiphysis as well as an epiphysis with SOC, the mechanical load observed as a high OI value in the reserve zone, could be a contributing factor to biochemical changes initiated by these cells.The final stage of epiphyseal development results in a completely ossified structure (case 3) this occurring during late infancy. The results obtained for this case show low OI values in the growth plate central region increasing toward Ranvier's grooves (Figs. 5 and 6C), comparable to those obtained by Piszczatowski [42]. Such low central values, according to Carter and Wong, may be interpreted as a mechanical stimulus favoring cartilage preservation rather than promoting ossification [18]. On the other hand, toward Ranvier's grooves high OI values suggest active ossification. The above mentioned OI behavior may lead to disbalanced growth forcing the growth plate to achieve a convex morphology.In this study we performed stress distribution analysis for all combinations among the variables considered (growth plate geometry, location, width and epiphyseal ossification state). This allowed an approximation to the growth plate situation for a wide range of long bones; that is the case for proximal femur head. The results from simulations performed in this study were compared with human bone development events reported by Kandzierski et al., 2012, demonstrated epiphyseal growth plate changes during femur development from image studies (Fig. 9)[8,9]. In our simulation regions with high OI values (similar to those observed in epiphysis) predict high ossification rates. According to this, for example, results for concave L3W2-case 2, irregular L3W2-case 3, and convex L3W1-case 3 growth plates resemble the trend observed for the proximal femur at 4, 7 and 12 years of age respectively (Fig. 9). Thus, evidencing correspondence between stress patterns and morphological characteristics. However, it is important to take into account that some of the morphologies evaluated do not correspond to physiological states, for example width growth plates and complete ossified epiphysis.The results obtained are highly influenced by the unique load scheme considered, thus it is important to consider that in vivo each bone has specific loading characteristics that are related to bone interactions with muscles, ligaments and other bones. Taking this into account, even though here we observed a trend that correlate with some biological findings, to derive more accurate biological conclusions particularized simulations for specific bones should be performed.This work constitutes an initial approach to mechanical environment during different stages of long bone development. For this reason to better analyze the net impact of growth plate morphology on epiphyseal stress distribution and vice versa, the computer model was established based on several simplifications regarding epiphyseal geometry, loading conditions and the model used for mechanical behavior analysis. Despite such limitations, the model used revealed important information related to epiphyseal and growth plate stress distribution and the ossification process. Biological relevance of our findings should be confirmed through bone specific models that take into account poroelasticity and interstitial fluid flow [26,27]. Furthermore multiscale models that include cell and extracellular matrix behavior could be informative. However, such specific analyses are out of the scope of the present work, but should be the main focus of future studies.In conclusion, this simple initial framework pointed out an evolving mechanical environment within growth plate through different developmental stages. Furthermore, at each stage, a heterogeneous stress distribution pattern was evidenced within growth plate which may have biological implications. Results from this study may be useful for understanding general mechanisms underlying mechanical influence on bone development, helping to direct future research on growth plate biomechanics and to formulate hypotheses regarding bone pathologies resulting from genetic or acquired conditions. Nonetheless, further work is needed to consider factors such as epiphyseal shape, loading conditions, and growth plate morphology in specific bones.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.10.007.The following are the supplementary data to this article: