@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Feature selection and classification methodology for the detection of knee-joint disorders

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed RQA, ApEn, SampEn and wavelet based energy as feature extraction techniques.We have proposed feature selection algorithm to extract the most significant and relevant features.We have used LS-SVM and random forest as classifiers.Performance among feature selection algorithms are compared.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vibroarthographic signal,Biomedical signal processing,Feature selection,Apriori algorithm,Genetic algorithm,Wavelets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Vibroarthographic (VAG) signals emitted from the knee joint disorder provides an early diagnostic tool. The nonstationary and nonlinear nature of VAG signal makes an important aspect for feature extraction. In this work, we investigate VAG signals by proposing a wavelet based decomposition. The VAG signals are decomposed into sub-band signals of different frequencies. Nonlinear features such as recurrence quantification analysis (RQA), approximate entropy (ApEn) and sample entropy (SampEn) are extracted as features of VAG signal. A total of twenty-four features form a vector to characterize a VAG signal. Two feature selection (FS) techniques, apriori algorithm and genetic algorithm (GA) selects six and four features as the most significant features. Least square support vector machines (LS-SVM) and random forest are proposed as classifiers to evaluate the performance of FS techniques. Results indicate that the classification accuracy was more prominent with features selected from FS algorithms. Results convey that LS-SVM using the apriori algorithm gives the highest accuracy of 94.31% with false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.0892. The proposed work also provided better classification accuracy than those reported in the previous studies which gave an accuracy of 88%. This work can enhance the performance of existing technology for accurately distinguishing normal and abnormal VAG signals. And the proposed methodology could provide an effective non-invasive diagnostic tool for knee joint disorders.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The human knee joint is one of the most complicated and largest joints in a human body. It not only provides flexible movements but also sustains the weight of the body and withstands pressure loads during routine/sports activities. These activities could lead to softening of the articular cartilage, tendons and ligaments of the kneecap which leads to substantial injuries and various kinds of knee joint disorders [1]. This has lead to exploring the early diagnosis of the knee joint disorders. Both, invasive and non-invasive procedures are available for the evaluation of the knee joint. Imaging techniques such as MRI, fMRI, Computer Tomography (CT) offer non-invasive detection but fail to provide an earlier diagnosis [2]. Whereas a semi-invasive technique such as Arthroscopy, offer considerable information about the diagnosis. But a conventional Arthroscopy would not be feasible for a patient's repetitive or periodic checkups. Both of these procedures, are cost ineffective and are inefficient for a routine physician's checkups. Their inability to showcase the dynamic characteristic is one of the major disadvantages of these procedures [3]. These limitations lead us to explore for an alternative low-cost non-invasive detection of knee joint disorders.During the active movements of the legs such as the flexion and extension, the vibration or auditory signals emits from the mid-patella are called Vibroarthographic (VAG) signals [4]. VAG signals are characterized by nonlinearity and nonstationary. The analysis of VAG signals could provide an early diagnostic tool for detecting knee joint disorders. The parameters computed from the VAG signal as features could provide a discriminant characteristic. Various signal processing techniques for feature extraction and classification have been carried out in the previous literature [5,6]. The techniques based on the time domain, frequency domain, time-frequency and nonlinear signal processing have been proposed for the analysis of VAG signal [4,7]. Recent works include an analysis of VAG signal by fractional analysis using power spectral analysis by Rangagayan [8]. The classification technique has been carried out using the k-nearest neighbor method. Wang Yu et al. have recently carried out the work by representation of fluctuation feature using kernel density modeling [9]. The literature review revealed that improvisation in signal processing technique would improve the feature extraction and classification techniques. This, in turn, could aid the medical experts to make accurate decisions on knee joint disorders. Therefore, to build an effective diagnostic system, it is essential to have effective distinct feature extraction techniques and a highly accurate classification algorithm. Hence, we propose an effective feature extraction and classification technique for the diagnosis of knee joint disorder by analysis of VAG signals.In the recent studies, it has been concluded that wavelet decomposition based sub-bands signals may render substantial information about neuronal activities, especially in the case of EEG signals [10]. The study concluded that EEG signals are complex for analysis and could not differentiate between seizure and non-seizure signals effectively. These distinctions were quite visible in the sub-band signals obtained from wavelet decomposition of EEG signals. Hence, we propose a novel technique of wavelet decomposition for the analysis of VAG signals. With respect to nonlinearity and nonstationary nature of VAG signal, we propose three nonlinear features specified as recurrence quantification analysis (RQA), approximate entropy (ApEn) and sample entropy (SampEn). These three features are extracted from each of the sub-bands signals which are obtained from the wavelet decomposition of the main VAG signal. Wavelet based energy is also considered in this study. Once these features are extracted, a classifier technique is used for the decision-making stage of VAG signal.A feature selection algorithm has also been proposed in order to identify the most stable, significant and discriminate features. Different techniques have been utilized for improving the accuracy of the classifier by discarding redundant and irrelevant features. These techniques have been employed in the domain of medical imaging, biomedical signals and power-quality disturbance evaluations. Techniques used for feature selection in the previous studies include the sequential forward selection method [11], wrapper method [12]and sequential backward feature selection method [13]. In our study, the K nearest neighbor based apriori algorithm and genetic algorithm has been used for selecting the most stable and significant features from the extracted features. The feature sets obtained by feature selection algorithms are given as input to two different classifiers, i.e., LS-SVM and random forest. Classification results are compared between the two feature selection algorithm. Hence, we propose a novel technique for feature extraction based on wavelet decomposition. Feature selection algorithms have been proposed in order to select the most significant, relevant and stable features. The selected features are then fed to the classifier as input in order to compare the performance. With the aim of improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the classification accuracy for knee joint disorders using VAG signals, a Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) system based on LS-SVM and random forest is introduced.The article is organized as follows: Section 2 includes methodology adopted for the study that includes the feature extraction techniques, feature selection algorithms and classification methods. Section 3 shows the results obtained after computing feature extraction and classification. Section 4 concludes with the detailed discussion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
