@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A consensus approach for estimating the predictive accuracy of dynamic models in biology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method for quantifying the quality of predictions in dynamic models.The approach helps in deciding which additional measurements are more useful.Meta-parameters are used for accelerating parameter estimation and reducing the risk of over-fitting.An ensemble of models is built, and consensus among their predictions is used as an indication of reliability.The method is demonstrated on a metabolic model of Chinese Hamster Ovary cells (CHO).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Systems biology,Metabolic engineering,Cell line engineering,Dynamic modelling,Ensemble modelling,Consensus,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mathematical models that predict the complex dynamic behaviour of cellular networks are fundamental in systems biology, and provide an important basis for biomedical and biotechnological applications. However, obtaining reliable predictions from large-scale dynamic models is commonly a challenging task due to lack of identifiability. The present work addresses this challenge by presenting a methodology for obtaining high-confidence predictions from dynamic models using time-series data. First, to preserve the complex behaviour of the network while reducing the number of estimated parameters, model parameters are combined in sets of meta-parameters, which are obtained from correlations between biochemical reaction rates and between concentrations of the chemical species. Next, an ensemble of models with different parameterizations is constructed and calibrated. Finally, the ensemble is used for assessing the reliability of model predictions by defining a measure of convergence of model outputs (consensus) that is used as an indicator of confidence. We report results of computational tests carried out on a metabolic model of Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells, which are used for recombinant protein production. Using noisy simulated data, we find that the aggregated ensemble predictions are on average more accurate than the predictions of individual ensemble models. Furthermore, ensemble predictions with high consensus are statistically more accurate than ensemble predictions with large variance. The procedure provides quantitative estimates of the confidence in model predictions and enables the analysis of sufficiently complex networks as required for practical applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mathematical modelling is a fundamental task in systems and computational biology [1], with important applications in biomedicine [2–5]. Among other features, models allow monitoring the state of unmeasured variables and making predictions about system behaviour for a larger number and broader variety of conditions than can be efficiently tested in experiments [6]. The construction and calibration of models of large, complex dynamic systems is a particularly challenging task. Uncertainties appear at different stages of the process, limiting the confidence in the resulting predictions [7,8]. Shortage of experimental data can easily lead to poor identifiability. As an example, consider a well-known result from nonlinear systems theory which states that, to identify a model described by differential equations containing r parameters, 2r+1 experimental measures may be enough [9]. This result assumes exact, noise-free measurements; however, in practice there will always be errors in the data, hence the 2r+1 figure represents a lower bound. When the number of parameters is larger than what can be actually determined from data, the calibration procedure can sometimes—when allowed by the model structure—yield a perfect fit between model predictions and measurements. However, there is a danger of overfitting in this situation, i.e., the model is being trained to fit in detail the noise contained in the data instead of actually learning the system dynamics. This problem entails the risk that model predictions will be wrong for altered experimental conditions.The problem of dealing with uncertainty in cellular network modelling was reviewed in [10]. In that review, the use of ensembles—sets of models with different structures and/or parameter values—was considered as a powerful and generally applicable approach for reducing prediction errors. However, it was also acknowledged that the concept has not sufficiently matured yet. Indeed, ensemble modelling approaches have been recently applied to a variety of problems, ranging from climate prediction [11] to impact of vaccines [12]. An early example of the use of an ensemble approach in biological models was presented in [13], which was limited to ensembles of topologies of Boolean networks. Tran et al. [14] extended the approach to the dynamic case, building an ensemble of metabolic models that reached the same steady state and applying it to the central carbon metabolism of Escherichia coli. A related application was presented in [15]. For a review of metabolic ensemble modelling see [16].The use of the consensus as an indication of the reliability of the predictions was explored by Bever [17], who computed time-dependent probability distributions of protein concentrations in artificial gene regulatory networks and introduced the concept of consensus sensitivity, finding that consensus among ensemble models was a good indicator of high-confidence predictions. Recently, further steps were taken with the introduction of the concept of “core prediction”: a property that must be fulfilled if the model structure is to explain the data, even if the individual parameters are not accurately identified [18].The present paper deals with the problem of evaluating and, if possible, increasing the confidence in the predictions made by kinetic metabolic models. It is assumed that the model structure—the topology of the metabolic network—is known. Actually, this assumption is not a requirement of the proposed methodology, which may be applied to ensembles of models with different topologies. However, in the present work the uncertainty in the predictions is due only to uncertainty in the parameter values. To overcome uncertainty, an ensemble of models with different parameterizations is built. As a preceding step to improve identifiability and to reduce overfitting, the initial model parameters are grouped into modules of meta-parameters, which are used during calibration. Then a measure of consensus among model outcomes is introduced, which is used to quantify the confidence in the predicted metabolite concentrations. A schematic depiction of the methodology is shown in Fig. 1.We note that, while a consensus approach was proposed in [17], it used different measures than the ones we introduce here, and it was applied to toy models consisting of 3 or 4 genes. The present methodology includes entirely new features such as the use of meta-parameters, and it is tested on a medium-size network including 34 metabolites. We also remark that, unlike the approach presented in [18], we do not intend to characterize the model's core predictions, but instead to give estimates of the confidence in the predictions. Finally, we note that a preliminary version of this work [19] was presented at the PACBB’14 conference. This new version has been extensively rewritten, including new figures and results, which have been calculated with a new dissensus measure that enables a more sensitive discrimination of larger and smaller prediction errors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a method for making high-quality predictions in large-scale dynamic models. The method introduces two computational techniques, which we have referred to as the meta-parameter approach and the consensus approach. Its use has been demonstrated on a biotechnological application, a batch process for recombinant protein production in Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells. After building a metabolic model of CHO cells, we reduced the number of its parameters by applying the meta-parameter approach without reducing the model structure. This decreased the risk of over-fitting and accelerated the parameter estimation procedure, which produced an ensemble of models with different parameterizations. This ensemble was used as a basis for application of the consensus approach, whose core idea is to consider the coincidence among predictions of the models in the ensemble as an indication of the reliability of these predictions. Using a measure of the relative distance between the average prediction of all models and the true value, the procedure quantifies the degree of confidence in the predictions of the time evolution of each of the state variables (which can be e.g. metabolite concentrations, as in the example application). This quantitative indication can be used to decide where it is most efficient to make an additional measurement effort, that is, which state variables should be actually measured and for which we can rely on the model simulations. In summary, it has been shown how the combination of the meta-parameter approach and of the consensus approach can be a valuable tool for improving the identifiability and applicability of complex dynamic models.