@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Process modeling of cavity molded composite flex beams

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integrated cure and flow processes have been modeled.Process modeling of cavity molding process for composite flex-beams is new.Level set method has been used to model the flow behavior.Flex-beam manufacturing has been analyzed as non-isothermal prepreg-press process.Exothermic behavior of resin has been validated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Process modeling,Cavity molding,Composite flex beam,Cure kinetics,Flow modeling,Non-isothermal prepreg-press,Level-set method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Continuous fiber reinforced composite materials are extensively being used in helicopter dynamic structures. Preimpregnated fibers or prepregs are used to produce high quality composite rotor yokes/flex beams. One process in particular known as cavity molding, is frequently used to process high quality thick composite details with exceptionally precise dimensions by using a platen press to apply heat and pressure to rigid tooling and thereby entice the prepreg within to cure into the shape of the confines of an internal cavity. The objective of the research described here is to develop a mathematical model for glass/epoxy prepreg which simulates the resin flow, heat transfer, consolidation and curing of cavity-molded flex beams which varies significantly with location. An enhanced understanding of the mechanisms involved will help significantly improve the cost-effectivity of molding process development. The current work is focused on process modeling of composite flex beams which are manufactured by cavity molding. The cure kinetics of such parts is particularly difficult to model because tool/part geometries are complex. The combined effects of heat transferred by the tool and heat spontaneously generated by the reacting thermoset during cure results in significant gradients of resin advancement throughout the part. The temperature spikes that result from internally-generated exothermic heat cannot be quickly dissipated because of the low thermal conductivity of composite. Various governing equations are presented here that describe the resin cure kinetics, thermal energy balance and flow during the process. A general-purpose, finite-element package with multiphysics capabilities is used for simulating the non-isothermal prepreg-press process, the degrees of cure and temperature field distribution at different cross-sections.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composites are generally preferred over metals in high performance structural components because of: (1) superior fatigue performance, (2) high specific strengths and stiffnesses, (3) low weight, and (4) excellent resistance to corrosion. Prepregs avoid drawbacks from processes based on injection, by reducing risk of entrapment, optimal resultant fiber volume fractions, weight saving, improved fatigue performance, reduced manufacturing complexity and time. Because of these advantages, prepreg based FRP composites are widely used for the manufacture of lightweight aircraft and rotorcraft parts. However, usage of FRP composites in these applications is typically restricted to thin components and thick (>25mm) composites are seldom made from these materials [1] because of the complexities associated with design and manufacturing. The curing of precatalyzed thermosetting resins is typically accompanied by exotherm and heat buildup during the exothermic reaction of thermoset resin based FRP composites can cause internal stresses to build-up and result in structural defects in thick composite structures. These issues are particularly significant to rotorcraft applications.Various manufacturing techniques can be used to produce high quality finished products from prepregs. Cavity molding is one such process that can be used to facilitate the manufacture of thick composite parts. Cavity molding is very similar to prepreg compression molding process and can become particularly attractive to situations where conventional processes encounter difficulties associated with high resin viscosities. Large scale, intricate shape parts with widely varying cross-sections can be manufactured using the cavity molding process but numerous issues will be encountered when attempting to manufacture thick composites using this process. For instance, during the exotherm, a large amount of heat is generated at the center of the thick-walled thermosetting composite but because of the low thermal conductivity of the fiber and the resin and high mass to surface area ratios, this heat cannot be quickly dissipated from the center of thick composite part. Manufacture of composite parts with widely varying cross-sections typically poses numerous other difficulties that can result in premature curing, degradation in the thin cross-sections and incomplete curing in thick counter parts.Investigation of the various phenomena occurring during composite curing gives a better understanding of these processes. Phenomena of particular importance include volumetric changes, microcracking, residual stresses and the effects of incomplete polymerization. Research in these areas can be very complex hence the current study has been limited to the investigation of the extent of cure and temperature distribution at various regions of the part during curing. Development of an adequate understanding of these phenomena requires a precise understanding of how the crosslinking of the thermosetting resin is affected by the processing conditions. Experimental investigations of the cure and rheology of the composites can be effective for understanding how a manufacturing process can result in highest quality components but this empirical approach can be very complex to set-up and time consuming to execute. Numerical modeling and simulations are much more cost effective alternatives to in-situ empirical trials for iteratively studying such processes. The current work involves numerical simulation of the cure and rheology of composites manufactured using cavity molding processes that can be particularly useful for the industrial manufacturer of thick composites.Several researchers have worked on the modeling and simulation of composite curing process and rheology. Balvers et al. [1] set-up a generally applicable thermo-chemical model, determined cure dependent material properties of a thermoset resin and studied thermo-chemical behavior. Klunker et al. [2,3] developed and implemented a model to simulate flow in deformable porous media. Such models have also been applied to a non-isothermal prepreg-press process to predict the process behavior and thereby simplify the process design. The effect of varying specific heat capacity has also been investigated. Klunker et al. [4] worked on flow simulation of vacuum assisted resin infusion process that considered permeability to be an important parameter in the process and varying with the fiber volume content. A compaction model has been developed and implemented using the Arbitrary-Lagrangian–Eulerian-Method taking the distribution medium into consideration. Karkanas et al. [5] developed an analytical procedure for modeling the cure kinetics of a commercial epoxy resin for resin transfer molding application taking diffusion limitation effects into consideration. Sorrentino et al. [6,7] worked on modeling the cure kinetics of thick-walled composites with variable thicknesses. Ng et al. [8] measured the degree of cure, heat of reaction of viscosity of commercial resins and developed an analytical procedure to predict the kinetics of cure and rheology.The compaction behavior of laminates was conventionally assumed to be resin dominant. However, with processes resulting in high fiber volume fractions in composite laminates, the elastic deformation behavior of preimpregnated fibers is significant in estimating accurate results. Gutowski et al. [9] were the first to consider this behavior in developing a comprehensive compaction model. Young [10] has studied the effects of compacting forces and cure cycles on the degree of consolidation. The author has developed a numerical model to simulate the consolidation and cure process of thick laminated composites. The compacting pressure was observed to be an important factor affecting the final degree of consolidation. Oh and Lee [11] have simulated temperature distribution, degree of cure, resin pressure, and time for full consolidation in thick glass/epoxy composites using three-dimensional finite element analysis. The authors have validated the developed numerical models with experimental results. Costa and Sousa [12] have developed a three-dimensional numerical model to simulate the resin flow, heat transfer, and consolidation dependent upon the compacting pressure in thick composite laminates during autoclave processing.The focus of the present work is to develop two-dimensional cure and flow models for flex beam composite parts manufactured using the cavity molding process. Development of cure and flow models for industry specific flex beam composite parts is new and has not been investigated earlier. Cure kinetic model that is more applicable to epoxy resin used in this study, is suggested. Coupled finite element simulations are performed to predict resin flow and prepreg compaction as pressure is applied to the prepreg during cure and the resultant temperature distributions and degrees of cure at various cross-sections. In Section 2, theoretical background on the modeling of cure kinetics and rheology, and various governing equations are presented. The set-up of this numerical model is discussed in Section 3 and results are discussed in Section 4 followed by conclusions.The objective of this research is to model and simulate two-dimensional cure and flow behavior during the manufacturing of composite flex beam parts. A thermo-chemical model will be constructed to simulate the cure behavior of flex beams. For modeling flow behavior, rheology models that are both temperature and time dependent will be used. The cure and flow processes occur simultaneously and so a coupled model that considers both effects will be developed and implemented.Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the methodology used in modeling the coupled cure and flow behaviors.The inputs to the thermo-chemical model are the cure profile, temperature dependent specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity and density. The outputs from the thermo-chemical model are the temperature distribution and degree of cure of the flex beam part. The rheology model uses a temperature-dependent viscosity which calculates viscosity of the resin as a function of the temperature output from the thermo-chemical model. Overall, the coupled model calculates the cure consolidation and flow behavior of a composite flex beam. The sub-sections below detail the theoretical background of these cure and flow models.This cure kinetics study of composite flex beams models the thermo-chemical behavior during the cure process which can be investigated experimentally or numerically. Several experimental techniques are available to investigate the extent of cure reaction and rate of reaction of the thermoset resins [1]. Differential Scanning Calorimetry and infrared spectroscopy are widely used to investigate the kinetics of cure. Numerical modeling of the cure behavior simulates the real-time cavity molding process for manufacturing the flex beams and thereby investigates the major concerns associated with the curing process. The current work is limited to numerical modeling of the cure behavior.In the thermal portion of the thermo-chemical model, the energy balance equation is solved for the temperature distribution of the flex beam part. The governing equation used for solving the energy balance is a Local Thermal Equilibrium (LTE) model as given by [13](1)ρccp,c∂T∂t+ρmcp,m(V→⋅∇T)=∇⋅kc∇T+vmρmHu∂α∂twhereρcis the density of the composite,cp,cthe specific heat of the composite,Tthe temperature distribution,kcthe thermal conductivity of the composite,αis the degree of cure,ρmthe density of the resin,cp,mthe specific heat of the resin,Vthe velocity of the resin,Huthe heat of reaction, andvmthe volume fraction of resin.The second term on the right-hand side in the above equation defines how heat flux is generated within the flex beam. The first term on the right-hand side is a conduction term. The second term on left-hand side represents the convection due to motion of the thermoset resin. Eq. (1) is a generic tensor equation for energy balance. The current analysis is two-dimensional, considering only one of the in-plane directions and the through-thickness direction. Accordingly, Eq. (1) can be applied to a two-dimensional equation given by(2)ρccp,c∂T∂t+ρmcp,m(V→⋅(∂2T∂x2+∂2T∂y2))=kc(∂2T∂x2+∂2T∂y2)+vmρmHu∂α∂tThe laminate can be assumed to be a macroscopically homogeneous medium if both the fiber and resin are in thermal equilibrium. This assumption permits the use of rule of mixtures and thus can be applied to both volumetric heat capacity (ρccp,c) and in-plane thermal conductivity (kcl).(3)ρccp,c=vmρmcp,m+(1−vm)ρfcp,f(4)kcl=vmkm+(1−vm)kfThe subscriptsfandmin Eqs. (3) and (4) represent the thermo-physical property of fiber and matrix respectively. The thermal conductivity in Eqs. (2) and (4) is valid only for the longitudinal direction of the composite part. The through-thickness thermal conductivity (kct) is calculated using the following Springer–Tsai model [14]:(5)kctkm=(1−2vfπ)+1B[π−41−(B2vf/π)]tan−11−(B2vf/π)1+Bvf/πB=2(kmkf−1)Overall, the output from the thermal energy model predicts the temperature distribution of the composite flex beam part manufactured using the cavity molding process.Various kinetic models have been proposed for the chemical analysis of thermoset resins based on the complexity of the reactions involved. If the curing of thermoset resin involves no autocatalytic reaction, the kinetic model as defined in Eq. (6) is used. A simple nth order equation is used if no complex reaction is involved [15]. If the curing process involves autocatalytic effects, kinetic model as defined by Eq. (7) is used [16]. For more complex kinetic modeling, a combination of Eqs. (6) and (7) as defined in Eq. (8) is used [17,18].(6)dαdt=k(1−α)n(7)dαdt=kαm(1−α)n(8)dαdt=(k1+k2αm)(1−α)n(9)ki(T)=Aiexp(−EiRT)wherekiis the pre-exponential coefficients,αthe degree of cure,Aithe pre-exponential factor of ith reaction,Rthe universal gas constant,m,nthe reaction orders,dα/dtthe rate of degree of cure,Eithe activation energy, andTthe temperature.In the current work, a slightly modified version of Eqs. (8) and (10) is used to model the kinetics of cure of the thermoset resin.(10)dαdt=k1(1−α)n1+k2αm(1−α)n2where,m,n1,andn2are the reaction ordersIn the processing of flex beam composite parts using cavity molding process, the behavior of the thermosetting resin during the compaction of the glass/epoxy prepreg can be best described as a non-isothermal squeeze flow. The consolidation process involves two phenomena: (a) viscous resin flow in the fiber network, and (b) elastic deformation of fiber network. In the direction transverse to laminate plane, the applied pressure ‘P’ on the prepreg lay-up is balanced by the average resin pressure ‘P¯r’ and the average effective stress ‘σ’ in the fiber network [9–12].(11)P=P¯r+σDuring the initial application of consolidation load, the fibers carry no load and the resin pressure equals to applied pressure. However, as the applied pressure increases, excess resin squeezes out and fiber volume fraction increases accordingly. Also, multiple fiber–fiber contacts are established which allows fibers to support partial load. With increased fiber volume fractions, the load shared by the fiber network increases. As the resin starts to cure followed by increased viscosity, the load shared by fiber network increases drastically until it reaches a point where the entire load is shared by itself. Neglecting this effect will result in an inaccurate description of compaction behavior.The viscous resin flow in porous media is best described by Darcy's law. A relationship between the volume averaged velocity and pressure field in saturated porous media is defined using Darcy's law as shown below:(12)u=(−Sμ)∇Prwhereuis the volume averaged velocity of the thermoset resin,Pthe pressure field in saturated porous media,Sthe preform permeability, andμthe viscosity of the resin.In the current research, a temperature and degree of cure dependent viscosity model is used for the numerical simulation [8].(13)μ=μ∞exp(URT+K1α2+K2α)In Eq. (13),μ∞is a constant,Uis the activation energy for viscosity andK1andK2are constants independent of temperature. The constantsK1,K2,μ∞andU/RTare obtained from the polynomial least square curve fit ofln(μ)vs.α. Gutowski et al. [9] have developed a general relationship between the resin pressure and fiber volume fraction by combining Darcy's law with appropriate expressions for fiber and resin continuity. Accordingly, the spatial variation of resin pressure distribution model is given by(14)SxxVf∂2Pr∂x2+SyyVf∂2Pr∂y2+1V02∂∂z(VfSzz∂Pr∂z)=μ∂∂t(1−Vf)VfwhereSiiis the permeabilities for respective axes,Vfthe fiber volume fraction,Prthe resin pressure, andV0the initial fiber volume fraction.For the two-dimensional flow model, the resin pressure field is a function ofxandz(thickness direction) axes only. This reduces Eq. (14) to(15)SxxVf∂2Pr∂x2+1V02∂∂z(VfSzz∂Pr∂z)=μ∂∂t(1−Vf)VfEq. (15) is used to model the resin pressure distribution in the flex beam domain, and thus the viscous resin flow. The variation of permeabilities ‘Sii’ with fiber volume fraction can be described by Carman–Kozeny equation as follows:(16)Sxx=rf24kxx(1−Vf)3Vf2(17)Szz=rf24kzz'((Va'/Vf)−1)3((Va'/Vf)+1)wherekxxis the Carman–Kozeny constant for longitudinal flow,kzz'the modified Carman–Kozeny constant for transverse flow,rfthe fiber radius, andVa'the fiber volume fraction at which transverse flow is not permitted.The second phenomenon in the consolidation process is the elastic deformation of fiber network. Gutowski et al. [9] have developed an expression for transverse stiffness of fiber network as a function of fiber volume fraction. They have assumed that the transverse stiffness of fiber network is governed by bending beam behavior of fibers between multiple fiber–fiber contacts. The expression for transverse stiffness is given by(18)σ=As(Vf/V0)−1((Va/Vf)−1)4whereσis the transverse stiffness of fiber network,V0the initial fiber volume fraction,Asthe spring constant, andVathe maximum attainable fiber volume fraction.In-order to model the squeeze of excess resin from orifice of cavity mold, a two-phase laminar flow using level set method is implemented. The level set method simulates the volume fraction of the two-phases present in the model. In the current work, the two phases are thermoset resin and air (outside the orifice). The volume fraction output from level set method determines the volume fraction of resin remaining in the mold and that of excess resin squeezed out. The level set method is governed by the following equation:(19)∂ϕ∂t+u⋅∇ϕ=γ∇⋅(ε∇ϕ−ϕ(1−ϕ)∇ϕ|∇ϕ|)whereϕis the level set function,γthe amount of reinitialization,uthe velocity of the resin, andεthe thickness of the interface.In level set method, one of the fluid phases assumesϕ=1 and the other fluid takesϕ=0 at the start of analysis. The interface between the two phases takesϕ=0.5. The interface thickness parameter,ε, is initialized to half the characteristic mesh size in the interface region. A suitable value for reinitialization parameter,γ, is the maximum velocity magnitude occurring in the model. The level set function,ϕ, is used to smooth the density and viscosity jump across the interface by setting the following formulation:(20)ρ=ρair+(ρresin−ρair)ϕ(21)μ=μair+(μresin−μair)ϕIn this section the various inputs to the cure and flow models and the boundary conditions are explained. This involves the cure profile of the thermosetting resin and the material parameters for the numerical simulation.The recommended cure cycle is shown inFig. 2. The prepreg is preheated to 120°C. The temperature is held at 120°C for 60min. The cavity mold is then heated from 120°C to 160°C at a heating ramp rate of 2°C/min. The temperature is held at 160°C for 75min followed by a post-cure at 180°C for 120min. The heating ramp rate used is 1°C/min. This is followed by a rapid cool-down of the mold.The various material properties required for the numerical simulation include: the thermo-physical properties, parameters extracted from DSC experiments, constants for the cure kinetic models, and temperature and degree of cure dependent viscosity.Table 1 gives the thermo-physical properties required for numerical simulation. The parameterV0refers to initial fiber volume fraction, andkcl,kctdenote thermal conductivities of the composite in longitudinal and through-thickness directions respectively.Table 2 shows the kinetic parameters used for the modeling the kinetics of cure. ParametersA1andA2are the pre-exponential factors,E1andE2are the activation energies,m,n1,andn2are the reaction orders, andΔHis the ultimate heat of reaction. The parameters required for the flow behavior during the manufacturing of flex beam parts are shown inTable 3. In Table 3,K1andK2are constants independent of temperature,μ∞is a constant,Uis the activation energy for viscosity, andSxx,Szzdenote preform permeabilities in longitudinal and through-thickness directions respectively.The boundary conditions for finite element model of cavity molding process are shown inFig. 3.The recommended cure cycle is applied on both the top and bottom platens. A displacement profile at constant rate is applied on to top platen. No slip boundary conditions are applied on the boundary interface between the platen and flex beam domain. The flex beam domain is also selected as the heat source of exothermic reaction. The boundary between the two-phases, flex beam domain with resin flow and external air phase, is given by interface boundary condition. A pressure point constraint with zero pressure is applied in the external air domain as shown in Fig. 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Cavity molding is a composite manufacturing process similar to compression molding that is suitable for fabrication of high tolerance thick composite parts from thermosetting prepregs and composite flex beams are manufactured using this process. In the current work, cure and flow processes associated with the cavity molding process have been simulated using a two-dimemensional finite element model. Theoretical background to cure kinetics and rheology are detailed and suitable numerical models for kinetics of cure, thermal energy model, and flow model are presented. The developed two-dimensional finite element model could simulate coupled cure and flow behaviors. The temperature distribution and degree of cure of flex beam part have been calculated during the cure cycle. Uneven curing of various cross-sections of the flex beam part has been observed. The center (thick cross-section) of the flex beam part is observed to hold the heat for a longer time which can embrittle the resin. The numerical results presented for temperature distribution of flex beam have been validated with existing results from literature. In the rheology study, the viscous flow of resin in porous fiber network and the prepreg compaction have been analyzed. The variation of preform permeabilities and compaction pressure with fiber volume fraction has been simulated. The squeeze-out of the excess resin from the orifice during the prepreg-press process has been simulated using a level set method.