@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal spatiotemporal reduced order modeling of the viscous Burgers equation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate an optimal spatiotemporal reduced order modeling framework.The viscous Burgers equation serves as a test problem.Models are developed to account for the effects of unresolved spatiotemporal scales.Model construction is simplified through a number of observed statistical properties.Results indicate an ability to improve the reliability of under-resolved simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiscale modeling,Subgrid-scale dynamics,Optimal prediction,Burgers equation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The one-dimensional viscous Burgers equation with a time-periodic inflow boundary condition is investigated within the context of a newly developed optimal spatiotemporal reduced order modeling (OPSTROM) framework. Flow simulations are carried out with a conventional finite-difference scheme, and are expedited by coarsening the computational grid in space and time. The OPSTROM framework is used to maintain reliable predictions for the flow by constructing interactive subgrid-scale models to account for the effects due to unresolved spatial and temporal scales. Model construction is data-driven, and is based upon principles of mean-square error minimization, conditional expectations and stochastic estimation. The results indicate a need to model both subgrid spatial and temporal scales in order to improve the accuracy of under-resolved simulations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems, the range of scales to be represented in a simulation is determined by the space–time computational grid and the accuracy of the discretization scheme. Often the analyst aims to predict only large-scale quantities of interest [1,2]. For many systems, however, it may be necessary to resolve small-scale quantities below the threshold of interest due to significant coupling between multiscale spatiotemporal structures [3]. Hence, with a standard discretization scheme, a highly refined computational grid may be required to obtain reliable predictions. A so-called fully resolved simulation (FRS) renders the most accurate solution with respect to the scales considered relevant.The computational expense required to conduct a FRS can be prohibitive. For instance, when a large number of degrees of freedom (DOFs) are used in a simulation, the required memory can exceed available resources and the simulation time can become excessive. These challenges can, in principle, be overcome by developing a reduced order model (ROM) in space and/or time [4]. The primary objective of a ROM is to predict macroscale behavior as accurately as possible with a reduced computational burden. From a mathematical perspective, a ROM often involves the expansion of a problem field into a set of known basis vectors whose unknown coefficients are found using either a Ritz or weighted residual method. Normal mode analysis (NMA) for solid mechanics is perhaps the most well-known example in which the basis vectors are functions of space. The harmonic balance (HB) approach [5,6] is a classic example of constructing a ROM with basis vectors that are functions of time. Many of the ROMs fundamental to the fields of aerodynamics and aeroelasticity are based upon Volterra series [7] and proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) [8]. The common theme with all ROMs is that they provide affordable simulations by resolving fewer scales than a FRS. As such, we suggest that any simulation method should be considered as a ROM if it fails to provide the resolution of a FRS. This includes discretization schemes based upon finite-difference (FD), finite-element (FE), finite-volume (FV), and spectral methods.The origin of errors intrinsic to any ROM can be traced back to the unresolved (subgrid-scale) dynamics and their interactions with the resolved dynamics. Macroscale quantities in a nonlinear system are coupled with the microscale quantities [1]. Without proper knowledge about the subgrid-scale dynamics and their interactions with the resolved dynamics, the discretized governing equations cannot be solved accurately [2]. This sort of issue is known throughout the physics literature as the closure problem. In a standard ROM, closure is implicitly neglected as the subgrid-scale dynamics, and their statistical moments are effectively set to zero. For many applications, neglecting closure can lead to intolerable discretization errors.In the fluids community, a simulation that completely resolves all relevant spatial and temporal scales in a turbulent flow governed by the Navier–Stokes equations is said to be a direct numerical simulation (DNS) [9]. Conceptually equivalent to a FRS, the expense required for a DNS is often prohibitive. As an alternative, the numerical method known as large-eddy simulation (LES) [10,11] is formulated to resolve only the large-scale motions in a turbulent flow, whereas the Kolmogorov microscales [12], which are most expensive to resolve, are modeled in some form. With the LES approach, subgrid-scale models are designed to provide closure by accounting for the effects due to unresolved spatial scales. Out of all the subgrid-scale models developed for LES, the ones proposed by Smagorinsky [13,14] are perhaps the most widely known. A wealth of information on various other types of subgrid-scale models can be found throughout the fluids literature [15–17].In a special variant of LES known as optimal LES (OLES) [18–22], model construction is data-driven and based upon the optimal prediction formalism [23–29] such that the mean-square error is minimized between the subgrid-scale models and the quantities for which they are designed to replace. The OLES approach can be used to expedite numerical simulations for turbulent flows (by coarsening the computational grid in the spatial domain) while maintaining reliable predictions for the quantities of interest (by preserving the underlying spatial statistical structure). Previous OLES models have been appraised for their ability to account for the effects due to subgrid-scale convection and diffusion terms, which arise due to the use of coarse spatial grids [18–22]. It should be emphasized, however, that in OLES and all other known LES models to date, only the effects due to subgrid spatial scales are addressed. Valid or not, all time scales are assumed to be fully resolved. As such, OLES models are able to improve the accuracy of predictions for multi-point in space, but only single-point in time statistics of turbulent flows. This limitation may perhaps be the reason why some state of the art LES models are unable to accurately predict the evolution of certain flow structures [34,35]. Nevertheless, the basic principles behind OLES can be applied to any nonlinear dynamical system in addition to turbulent flows. As such, we consider OLES to be a specialized form of optimal spatial reduced order modeling (OPSROM).Beyond OLES and OPSROM, the authors have suggested in previous works [36–39] that a significant amount of computational savings can be achieved by coarsening the temporal grid while maintaining reliable predictions for the quantities of interest (by preserving the underlying temporal statistical structure). To this end, we recently proposed the optimal temporal reduced order modeling (OPTROM) framework [36,37]. Unlike OLES and OPSROM, the OPTROM approach is formulated to account for the effects of unresolved time scales. As a proof of concept, under-resolved time-marching and time-spectral simulations were carried out for the canonical Duffing [36] and van der Pol [37] oscillators. When subgrid-scale models were included in the simulations, errors were typically reduced by one to two orders of magnitude for a given resolution. Since the Duffing and van der Pol oscillators contain no spatial dependence, there was no need to address subgrid spatial scales.The newly developed optimal spatiotemporal reduced order modeling (OPSTROM) framework [38,39] is formulated to enable fast and reliable analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems by accounting for the combined effects due to unresolved spatial scales (as in OLES or OPSROM) and unresolved temporal scales (as in OPTROM). Several key features distinguish the OPSTROM framework from other multiscale models [1–3]:•Effects due to unresolved spatial and temporal scales are accounted for.Subgrid-scale dynamics are derived using filters tailored to the ROM.Subgrid-scale models are designed to interact with the resolved scales.Model construction is data-driven, and is based upon principles of mean-square error minimization, conditional expectations and stochastic estimation.By construction, the subgrid-scale models are consistent with the underlying spatiotemporal statistical structure of the nonlinear dynamical system.The primary objective of this paper is to investigate application of the OPSTROM framework for a model problem in nonlinear wave propagation. We consider the one-dimensional form of the viscous Burgers equation [41,42] under the influence of time-periodic disturbances. From this problem, we aim to learn as much as we can about modeling the subgrid-scale dynamics due to local acceleration, convection and diffusion. Throughout the years, Burgers equation has become a popular testbed for CFD algorithms due to its relative simplicity and close resemblance to the Navier–Stokes [41–46]. For example, in order to test the numerical properties of a time-spectral method, Maple and his colleagues [47] explored solutions to Burgers equation for a set of time-periodic BCs.Perhaps most relevant to this current paper are the works of Das and Moser [48] and Bernstein [49]. Das and Moser [48] developed OLES models for the forced Burgers equation. Bernstein [49] used an optimal prediction framework with memory (non-Markovian effects) for the unforced Burgers equation with slowly dissipating shocks. When constructing their subgrid-scale models, both Bernstein [49] and Das and Moser [48] considered the effects of subgrid-scale convection and diffusion due to the use of a coarse spatial grid. When included in the simulations, their models were found to improve predictions for the velocity and energy spectra. To the authors' knowledge, however, the effects of subgrid-scale accelerations due to the use of a coarse temporal grid have not been investigated for the viscous Burgers flow. In this paper, we will develop spatial and temporal subgrid-scale models to account for the combined effects due to unresolved spatial and temporal scales.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we outline the numerical method used to investigate the viscous Burgers flow within the context of the OPSTROM framework. Then, in Section 3, we characterize the subgrid-scale dynamics for the viscous Burgers flow and construct subgrid-scale models based upon the optimal prediction formalism. With these subgrid-scale models, we will investigate the performance of several optimal ROM variants (standard ROM, OPTROM, OPSROM or OPSTROM) for simulation of the viscous Burgers flow with a conventional finite-difference scheme and a coarse computational grid in both space and time. Concluding remarks are offered in Section 4.In this section, we present the nonlinear partial differential equation (PDE) which governs a viscous Burgers flow in one spatial dimension. Large-amplitude disturbances will be applied in the form of a time-periodic boundary condition (BC). The governing PDE for the viscous Burgers flow will then be modified for under-resolved simulation with the OPSTROM framework by deriving models for the subgrid-scale dynamics, both in continuous and discrete form. The modified PDE will be discretized for FRS and ROM simulations with conventional finite-difference schemes in both space and time.The one-dimensional viscous Burgers equation is a parabolic PDE for modeling nonlinear wave propagation with diffusion. The evolution of velocity fieldu(x,t)is governed by(1)∂u∂t+u∂u∂x=ν∂2u∂x2,where the first term represents the local acceleration, the second term nonlinear convection, and the third term diffusion due to viscosity, ν. Independent variables in (1) are the time, t, and spatial location, x, in the domain[0,L]. When the viscous term in (1) is neglected, the result is a hyperbolic PDE capable of producing shock discontinuities. Retaining the viscous term results in parabolic behavior.Large-amplitude flow disturbances are implemented via a Dirichlet-type BC at the x=0 inflow location. At the x=L outflow location, we specify a transparent (or non-reflective [50]) Neumann-type BC:(2)u(0,t)=U(1+sin(2πft)),∂u(L,t)∂x=0,whereUrepresents the disturbance amplitude andf=2π/ωis the disturbance frequency. For a sufficiently small spatial grid with spacingΔx, the transparent BC at x=L is not felt upstream and has negligible effect on the flow [50].Nondimensionalizing the system in (1) and (2) will enable us to investigate the flow in a generic manner. We proceed by lettingUrepresent the characteristic velocity and L represent the characteristic length. By nondimensionalizing the variables(3)u^=uU,x^=xL,t^=UtL,and introducing the Reynolds number, Re, and Strouhal number, St, as(4)Re=ULν,St=fLU,we can rewrite the Burgers equation in the following nondimensional form (dropping theu^,x^andt^notation in favor of u, x and t for convenience):(5)∂u∂t+u∂u∂x=1Re∂2u∂x2.The nondimensional BCs at x=0 and x=1 become(6)u(0,t)=1+sin(2π·St·t),∂u(1,t)∂x=0.We presume that it may be necessary or convenient to discretize the governing equations with a coarse computational grid in both space and time, and as a result, significant discretization errors may occur. If statistical information is known a priori about the subgrid-scale dynamics and their interactions with the resolved dynamics, it can be used to improve the accuracy of the solution. Such a method will be outlined in the following sections. First, we demonstrate the manner in which subgrid-scale dynamics arise in the governing equations using basic filtering concepts.Under-resolved solutions can be considered filtered representations of the true solution, u, as depicted in Fig. 1. Similar to what is done for LES of turbulent flows, the true signal u can be decomposed into filteredu˜and residualu^components(7)u(x,t)=u˜(x,t)+u^(x,t).The filtering operation used to obtainu˜can be represented as an integral transform in space and time(8)u˜(x,t)=∬G(x′,t′)u(x−x′,t−t′)dx′dt′.The amount of information contained inu˜is generally less than that contained in u. Such irreversible loss of information introduces an intrinsic error, which serves as a lower bound for any ROM. The kernel G can take on any form. For certain discretization schemes, G can be split into spatial and temporal kernels, Gxand Gt, such that the filtering operation in (8) is a two-step process.To produceu˜with any ROM, each term in the governing PDE (5) must be filtered with the chosenG(x′,t′). Doing so effectively separates the coarse quantities from the subgrid-scale quantities. This filtering operation can also be viewed as a non-invertible mapping from an infinite-dimensional solution space to a finite-dimensional space [51]. The modified governing PDE becomes(9)∂u∂t˜+u∂u∂x˜=1Re∂2u∂x2˜.We can rewrite (9) in terms ofu˜by introducing the residual field, τ, which accounts for the commutation errors associated with the filtering operator:(10)∂u˜∂t+u˜∂u˜∂x=1Re∂2u˜∂x2+τ(u,u˜,x,t)τ(u,u˜,x,t)=α(u,u˜,x,t)+γ(u,u˜,x,t)α(u,u˜,x,t)=∂u˜∂t−∂u∂t˜γ(u,u˜,x,t)=(u˜∂u˜∂x−u∂u∂x˜)+1Re(∂2u∂x2˜−∂2u˜∂x2).The system in (10) represents the modified PDE for the viscous Burgers flow. We refer to the total residual field τ as the subgrid-scale dynamics term [36–39]. The α component contains subgrid time scales and is referred to as the subgrid-scale acceleration term, whereas the γ component contains subgrid spatial scales and is referred to as the (mass-normalized) subgrid-scale force term. To align with the fluids literature [11], we refer to the individual components of γ as the subgrid-scale convection and diffusion terms, respectively. The subgrid-scale acceleration term has historically been neglected in previous works on OLES [48,49]. In this work, we consider the standard ROM, OPTROM, OPSROM and OPSTROM variants. The effect of filtering the Neumann-type BC is ignored.It should be noted at this point that standard ROMs ignore the residual terms in (10). Closure is neglected as the following equations are solved for instead:(11)∂u˜∂t+u˜∂u˜∂x≅1Re∂2u˜∂x2.While for some applications the solution to (11) may be acceptable, for others the solution to (11) may lead to intolerable errors, especially if the problem contains many interacting scales. When the residual terms in (10) are truncated, the filtering operation used to construct the ROM is no longer consistent with the filter relating u tou˜.If the exact expression forτis known, the filtered solutionu˜can be obtained by solving the modified PDEs in (10). For most systems, however, it is not feasible [27] to derive an exact expression forτdue to its functional dependence on the true solution, u. Our approach is to evolve a simpler form of the governing equations instead of the true form in (10) by removing the functional dependence ofτon u. This can be done by modelingτas a function of the filtered solution,u˜. If we letMrepresent the model forτ, we can rewrite (10) as(12)∂u˜∂t+u˜∂u˜∂x≅1Re∂2u˜∂x2+M(u˜,x,t).The next task is to derive a model which best approximates the projection ofτontou˜. Out of all possible representations forM, it can be shown [26,27,30,31] that the mean-square error betweenMandτis minimized when the model takes on the form of a conditional average:(13)M(u˜,x,t)=〈τ(u,u˜,x,t)|ϕ〉,whereϕis the subset ofu˜onto whichτis projected(14)ϕ={u˜(x′,t′):x′∈Ω,0≤t′≤t}.Choosing a model of the form in (13) is the premise of first-order optimal prediction [27]. No other model can be more accurate (in a mean square sense). Note that our selection ofϕin (14) may include any subset ofu˜in the spatial domain,Ω, and any portion of the time history from zero to present time, t. Besides introducing a model and following the mean-square error minimization approach [26,27], derivation of the result in (13) can also be motivated [28] by choosing to remove the functional dependence ofτon u by simply taking the mean of (10) conditional onu˜.Exact determination of〈τ|ϕ〉is often impractical [28], in which case the closure problem becomes one of estimating〈τ|ϕ〉as accurately as possible. Such models have been developed in previous works [32,33] using principles of stochastic estimation. The premise behind the technique is to assume that〈τ|ϕ〉andu˜are correlated in space and time, respectively. It is possible then to predict〈τ|ϕ〉ifMis chosen to be some function ofu˜. The stronger the correlation (positive or negative), the more accurately one should be able to estimate〈τ|ϕ〉. The most general form of such a model can be written [33] in the form of a Volterra series expansion with respect tou˜. The support for such a model may span the entire spatial domain inΩand may include any portion of the time history from zero to present time. Simpler (and perhaps more useful) approximations can be made with a local estimate such that the model has limited extent in space and time. Such methods will be explored in Section 2.6, whereMwill be projected onto a multivariate power series in terms of discrete values ofu˜. To write such an expansion, the field variables must first be discretized.The modified governing equations in (10) will be discretized in space and time with conventional FD schemes. Spatial discretization into NNspatial DOFs (or nodes) results in a system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs) in time. The semi-discretized components ofu˜can be written asu˜j(t), where the subscript denotes the spatial node with coordinates xj. Temporal discretization results in a system of algebraic equations (nonlinear if implicit) to be solved for at NTtemporal DOFs (or timesteps). The fully discretized components ofu˜becomeu˜jn, where the superscript denotes the timestep tn. Similarly, the remaining field variables in (10) can be written as τjn, αjn, and γjn. The total number of DOFs to be solved for in a simulation isNN×NT.Computational grids (in physical space and time) for the discrete field variables are illustrated in Fig. 2for a FRS and a ROM. Observe that the spacing between neighboring spatial nodes and timesteps for the fully resolved signal (ΔxFRSandΔtFRS) is smaller than the spacing for the coarse signal (ΔxROMandΔtROM). This comes from the notion that ROMs provide less resolution in space and time. Uniform grid parametersΔxandΔtcould also be written asΔxjnandΔtjnto allow for spatial nonuniformity and timestep adaptation.In this study, we employ two discretization schemes: one for fully resolved simulations and the other for reduced order modeling with a coarse computational grid in space and time. Spatial derivatives for both schemes are approximated using second-order accurate central differencing forx∈(0,1)with backward differencing at the x=1 outflow boundary. Time derivatives for the first scheme are approximated with an explicit fourth-order accurate Runge–Kutta scheme. The fully discretized equations of motion are denoted as Runge–Kutta center-space (RKCS) [46]. The explicit RKCS scheme is efficient for fully resolved simulations, but suffers from numerical instability when taking coarse timesteps. In this work, a fine computational grid withΔx=10−4andΔt=10−7will be used for FRS with the RKCS scheme.To allow for a coarse temporal grid (and associated computational savings), we also employ an implicit first-order accurate backward differencing scheme. The fully discretized equations of motion are denoted as backward-time center-space (BTCS) [46]. Standard ROM solutions to (11) with the BTCS scheme can be evolved by(15)ujn+1=ujn+Δt(Rjn+1),whereas OPSROM, OPTROM, and OPSTROM solutions to (10) with the modified BTCS scheme can be evolved by(16)ujn+1=ujn+Δt(Rjn+1+Mjn+1).Our choice of the implicit BTCS scheme is based upon several appealing features such as unconditional stability, provided the iterative root finding scheme used to solve the system is able to converge at each timestep. In order to solve the nonlinear algebraic equations in (15) and (16), we employ a Newton–Raphson (NR) scheme with a numerical Jacobian and a banded matrix solver. A coarse computational grid withΔx=10−2andΔt=10−2will be used for ROM simulations with the BTCS scheme.The filtering operation used to derive the subgrid-scale dynamics can be tailored to the chosen ROM. To demonstrate, we consider a scenario in which the analyst has a priori knowledge of the FRS solution, which we assume to be equivalent to the true solution, u. Any filter may be selected arbitrarily by the analyst in order to produceu˜. One filter in particular, however, would result inu˜being equivalent to the a posteriori result of the ROM if the discretization errors could (hypothetically) be removed. We consider such a filter to be consistent with the ROM, as shown in Fig. 3. The choice of any other filter is said to be inconsistent with the ROM.Finite-difference (FD) schemes produce space–time-limited signals, which have finite support in physical space and infinite support in the Fourier domain [51]. A consistent filter for a ROM based on a FD scheme should produce a signal that coincides with the FRS result at every spatial node and timestep. A comb-type sampling filter [51] should then be applied, in which case the filtered statesu˜jnand fully resolved states ujnare equivalent at coincidental grid points, as depicted in Fig. 3. The subgrid-scale dynamics (αjnand γjn) can then be calculated by applying the FD expressions for∂u/∂t,∂u/∂x, and∂2u/∂x2to the filtered signals. Note that the actual kernel G in (8) need not be known when a comb-type sampling filter is chosen.To illustrate application of a consistent comb-type sampling filter, we first consider the local acceleration term in (10). In this work, a temporal ROM is constructed with a first-order accurate backward FD scheme. The subgrid-scale acceleration in (10) then becomes(17)αjn=uj(tn)−uj(tn−ΔtROM)ΔtROM−uj(tn)−uj(tn−ΔtFRS)ΔtFRS.Since we have chosen a comb-type sampling filter, the first term on the right hand side of (17) is equivalent to∂ujn/∂t+εt, where εtrepresents theO(ΔtROM)discretization errors for the FD scheme. From the definition of a FRS, the second term on the right hand side of (17) is an error-free representation of∂ujn/∂t. The expression for αjnin (17) then becomesαjn=εt. When added to the modified governing equations in (10), αjneliminates all discretization errors associated with the temporal FD scheme. The choice of any other filter for a FD scheme would introduce additional forms of error.Similarly, in this work, a spatial ROM is constructed for the convection and diffusion terms in (10) with a second-order accurate central FD scheme. With a comb-type sampling filter, the subgrid-scale convection and diffusion terms in (10) then become(18)γjn=ujnun(xj+ΔxROM)−un(xj−ΔxROM)2ΔxROM−ujnun(xj+ΔxFRS)−un(xj−ΔxFRS)2ΔxFRS+1Re(un(xj−ΔxFRS)−2un(xj)+un(xj+ΔxFRS)(ΔxFRS)2−un(xj−ΔxROM)−2un(xj)+un(xj+ΔxROM)(ΔxROM)2).Again, since we have chosen a consistent comb-type sampling filter, we haveγjn=−εx, where εxrepresents theO((ΔxROM)2)discretization errors. When added to the modified governing equations in (10), γjneliminates the discretization errors associated with the spatial FD scheme.Other filtering operations are conceivable. Finite-element (FE), finite-volume (FV), and spectral schemes can be treated in a similar manner. Depending on the application, the analyst may consider an inconsistent filter to be appropriate. Regardless of the ROM, the chosen filter should represent the desired a posteriori result when applied to the FRS solution.Discrete subgrid-scale models for〈τ|ϕ〉can be derived using a stochastic estimate with local support in space and time [32,33]. Analogous to a Volterra series, we proceed by expandingMjn, the model at spatial node j and timestep n, in the form of a multi-point power series aboutu˜jn:(19)Mjn≅Ajn+∑ξMN∑μMTBjξnμu˜ξμ+∑ξ,ηMN∑μ,νMTCjξηnμνu˜ξμu˜ην+⋯The subgrid-scale model in (19) involves a constant termAjn, a linear kernelBjξnμand a quadratic kernelCjξηnμν. Higher-order expansions are possible. Information considered useful in the estimate is the filtered states at MNspatial nodes and MTtimesteps. The multi-point spatiotemporal stencil may be taken to be as large or small as desired, as long as the required information is available in the solver.The accuracy of the subgrid-scale model in (19) depends on the estimation coefficients. It can be shown [38] that the mean-square error between the conditional average in (13) and the estimate in (19) is minimized when the following system of stochastic equations are satisfied:(20)〈τjn〉=Ajn+∑ξMN∑μMTBjξnμ〈u˜ξμ〉+∑ξ,ηMN∑μ,νMTCjξηnμν〈u˜ξμu˜ην〉〈τjnu˜ϕλ〉=Aξη〈u˜ϕλ〉+∑ξMN∑μMTBjξnμ〈u˜ξμu˜ϕλ〉+∑ξ,ηMN∑μ,νMTCjξηnμν〈u˜ξμu˜ηνu˜ϕλ〉〈τjnu˜ϕλu˜ψρ〉=Aξη〈u˜ϕλu˜ψρ〉+∑ξMN∑μMTBjξnμ〈u˜ξμu˜ϕλu˜ψρ〉+∑ξ,ηMN∑μ,νMTCjξηnμν〈u˜ξμu˜ηνu˜ϕλu˜ψρ〉.The key feature of the stochastic estimate used here is thatMin (19) can be used to predict any quantity in a system, assuming that the desired quantity is correlated withu˜. For OPSTROM,Mis used to approximate〈τ|ϕ〉. Each of the multi-point statistical moments (or correlations) amongstu˜andτin (20) may be interpreted as inputs required for model construction. These inputs can be evaluated numerically once the true solution is obtained and a filter is chosen for the ROM. The mean operator〈·〉is to be calculated over the spatiotemporal domain of interest. Once the moments are obtained, the estimation coefficients can be found by solving the linear algebraic system of equations in (20).The size of the linear algebraic system in (20) depends on the spatial stencil MN, temporal stencil MT, and the order of the approximation. While it is reasonable to expect that increasing the number of these parameters will lead to a better prediction forτ, the presence of distant and poorly correlated data can sometimes worsen the estimate [19]. Moreover, no guarantees can be made regarding whether or not the equations we obtain in (20) can be solved [28]. Certain models may not be realizable.In general, the subgrid-scale model and its estimation coefficients in (19) may vary as a function of the ICs, BCs, location xk, time t, spatial gridΔxj, temporal gridΔt, and each of the flow parameters, Re and St. This complex functional dependence carries over from the multi-point statistical moments amongst τjnandu˜jnin (20). In theory, a unique subgrid-scale model could be derived for every conceivable set of parameters in a simulation. However, to be useful for large-scale systems with spatiotemporal dependency, we must explore methods to reduce the amount of inputs needed for model construction. In this context, the utility of a subgrid-scale model can be enhanced when the required inputs in (20) display at least some of the following properties: (i) temporal homogeneity, (ii) spatial homogeneity, (iii) ergodicity, and (iv) a functional dependence which can easily be characterized with respect to the system parameters [38,40,52]. Such properties will be explored in the following section when constructing subgrid-scale models for the viscous Burgers flow.Finally, several variants of the optimal ROM framework are conceivable depending on which terms in the subgrid-scale dynamics are deemed important. We refer to these variants as follows: (i) standard ROM, which completely neglects the effects due to subgrid spatial and time scales, (ii) OPTROM, which accounts for the subgrid temporal structure in α, (iii) OPSROM, which accounts for the subgrid spatial structure in γ, and (iv) OPSTROM, which accounts for the complete subgrid spatiotemporal structure in τ. The OPSROM variant is analogous to OLES for turbulent flows [18–22], whereas the OPTROM and OPSTROM variants were first proposed by the authors [36–39]. All four variants will be investigated for the viscous Burgers flow.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
