@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Representing the dwelling stock as 3D generic tiles estimated from average residential density

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A statistical method of forecasting housing stock variability from average densityA unique method for studying the variability of dwellings by type and age bandsThe 3D tile typologies include both dwelling characteristics and the plot sizes.The tiles are useful for estimating the potential for sustainable technologies.The outputs have been validated at against housing survey and footprint data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Urban modelling,Housing survey,Gamma distribution,Dwelling typology,Building-scale technologies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Forecasting the variability of dwellings and residential land is important for estimating the future potential of environmental technologies. This paper presents an innovative method of converting average residential density into a set of one-hectare 3D tiles to represent the dwelling stock. These generic tiles include residential land as well as the dwelling characteristics. The method was based on a detailed analysis of the English House Condition Survey data and density was calculated as the inverse of the plot area per dwelling. This found that when disaggregated by age band, urban morphology and area type, the frequency distribution of plot density per dwelling type can be represented by the gamma distribution. The shape parameter revealed interesting characteristics about the dwelling stock and how this has changed over time. It showed a consistent trend that older dwellings have greater variability in plot density than newer dwellings, and also that apartments and detached dwellings have greater variability in plot density than terraced and semi-detached dwellings. Once calibrated, the shape parameter of the gamma distribution was used to convert the average density per housing type into a frequency distribution of plot density. These were then approximated by systematically selecting a set of generic tiles. These tiles are particularly useful as a medium for multidisciplinary research on decentralized environmental technologies or climate adaptation, which requires this understanding of the variability of dwellings, occupancies and urban space. It thereby links the socioeconomic modeling of city regions with the physical modeling of dwellings and associated infrastructure across the spatial scales. The tiles method has been validated by comparing results against English regional housing survey data and dwelling footprint area data. The next step would be to explore the possibility of generating generic residential area types and adapt the method to other countries that have similar housing survey data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There has been an increasing emphasis on understanding the building stock and how to reduce the consumption of energy and production of waste (Kohler & Hassler, 2002). Much of this research has focused on the buildings themselves and predominantly their energy consumption (Kavgic et al., 2010). This has normally used typologies that correspond with the classification of national housing stock data such as dwelling types, age bands and fabric. Examples include building energy models (Firth, Lomas, & Wright, 2010; Cheng & Steemers, 2011) and studies of the building stock and energy efficiency such as McKenna, Merkel, Fehrenbach, Mehne, and Fichtner (2013); Ballarini, Corgnati, and Corrado (2014);Filogamo, Peri, Rizzo, and Giaccone (2014) and Mata, Sasic Kalagasidis, and Johnsson (2014).However, there is increasing recognition that decentralized supply technologies are also important for helping to meet government environmental targets but uncertainty about whether properties have the space required for installation has been identified as a barrier to implementation (DECC, 2012, Sept. 20th). For example, the dimensions of gardens, roof space or cluster size will affect the feasibility of some technologies such as ground source heat pumps, rainwater harvesting and recycling. Modeling tools have been developed to assess the potential of environmental technologies (Hofierka & Kanuk, 2009; Girardin, Marechal, Dubuis, Calame-Darbellay, & Favrat, 2010; Lukac, Zlaus, Seme, Zalik, & Stumberger, 2013; Makropoulos, Natsis, Liu, Mittas, & Butler, 2008; Robinson et al., 2007) but these detailed simulations for relatively small areas require inputs on future urban form.Planning policies, building regulations and incentive schemes are applied at national or regional level and require a long time scale and considerable investment to take effect. The outcome will depend on urban density, occupancies and whether dwellings are as existing or new build. Urban densities and occupancies will vary spatially within a city region as a result of the socio-economic pressures that drive the property market and shape urban form. Human factors are thought to account for a substantial amount of the variability of energy use in buildings. Yu, Fung, Haghighat, Yoshino, and Morofsky (2011) and Pereira and Assis (2013) showed how the increases over time in household energy consumption are spatially correlated with socio economic changes in income. A forecasting capability is therefore needed at regional scale to test the longer term impacts and cost effectiveness.Regional-scale land use-transport forecasting models can provide a detailed top-down simulation of the supply and demand for land and floor space at the building parcel scale (Abraham, Weidner, Gliebe, Willison, & Hunt, 2005). This included GIS-based micro-scale modeling of floor space types and rental values for land parcels, with floor space categorized according to general building types. This reproduces the spatial layout and overall floor space but does not represent the size and variability of buildings. This reliance on mapping limits the capability to forecast the future urban form. In another example, a regional scale macro-model was linked to an UrbanSim model (Waddell et al., 2003), which simulated neighborhoods as 2.25ha grid cells chosen from a set of 25 development types further defined by a range of residential units and non-residential floor space to create typical contiguous urban areas. These models aim to represent the actual land parcels and this leads to difficulties matching the data sources which makes the models very resource intensive to create and operate over large areas within a macro-modeling framework.Computer graphic simulation methods are available to study built‐form and its potential for sustainable technologies (Meinel, Hecht, & Herold, 2009; Vanegas et al., 2010; Wiginton, Nguyen, & Pearce, 2010; Jacubiec & Reinhart, 2013). They rely on location specific inputs of road networks and user specified attributes of land parcels and building shapes using mapping and aerial imaging. The outputs can be similar in complexity to the actual physical built environment, thus limiting the practical size of study area. An alternative is to use a theoretical simulation of built form. Some are based on metaphors for the urban development process such as (Crompton, 2012) who compared the variability of buildings to the variability of Lego™ pieces. Others such as Tuhus-Dubrow and Krarti (2010) have used optimization methods to estimate the most energy efficient building form. These theoretical approaches are not subject to the livability and commercial constraints that shape actual dimensions and are not empirically validated. Neither the graphic or theoretical simulation methods have the capability to forecast urban densities and occupancies.The most promising approach for linking across the spatial scales is to use a statistical method of representing the variability of land per dwelling. Zhou and Kockelman (2008) recognized the advantages of this approach but were unable to fit a statistical function to their single family residential parcel size data. This is possibly because they were studying only one city and using GIS data instead of housing survey data.The following sections of this paper present a unique method of estimating the variability of dwellings and residential land from the mean residential density. The parametric variability of dwellings and associated land is then represented by systematically selecting a set of discrete one hectare 3D tiles. The final part of the paper validates this ‘tiles’ method and discusses how this enables the modeling of dwellings and environmental technologies to be integrated with a regional forecasting model. This attains the important and previously difficult to achieve objective of linking models across spatial scales.It is expected that this paper will be of interest for spatial modeling and urban simulation, particularly for forecasting the impacts of building scale interventions such as sustainable technologies and climate change mitigation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has presented a new innovative method of analyzing housing survey data to explore the variability of dwellings plot sizes. Housing development in England is largely commercially driven but subject to planning constraints and so land is relatively expensive. The provision and adaptation of the housing stock is therefore responsive to buyer demands and may partly explain why the distributions of plot densities of each dwelling type have a relatively consistent shape that can be approximated by the gamma distribution.Older dwellings were found to have a greater variability in plot size than newer dwellings and the following possible reasons would need further investigation. Dwellings may have become more uniform over time due to a tightening of planning regulations and housing standards, whereas older dwellings are more likely to be the result of property conversion and thereby become more diverse. It is also likely that the variability of plot size per dwelling type is correlated with variability in household income. Greater mobility from widespread car ownership has allowed more social segregation between area types whereas previously neighborhoods had a wider mix of income levels and consequently a wider variation in plot sizes per dwelling type.In reality the density distribution of dwellings does not necessarily follow the gamma distribution on a location specific basis because the built environment is so variable. However, the tile estimates become very similar to the data when aggregated over larger areas. Some alternative distributions were tried but none outperformed the gamma distribution on providing a consistently good fit to the data. The method could in principle be used for the parametric simulation of dwellings and plot sizes but it is more practical for multidisciplinary research to convert the density distributions into discrete predesigned 3D tiles.This tiles method is a useful extension to urban forecasting models by allowing the average density forecast per zone to be converted into a representation of the dwelling stock and residential land. This captures the variability in garden size, roof areas and floorspace that is needed to estimate the likely uptake and performance of decentralized sustainable technologies for energy, water and waste management and provides more accurate estimates than could be achieved using more conventional methods such as dwelling typologies, mean densities, and floor area ratios. The tiles also reflect qualitative aspects, such as garden size, number of party walls and storeys, which may be useful for modeling housing choice. Also, their data on building heights and land cover could be a useful input to the forecasting of urban climate and flood risk.Adding more tile types would increase the accuracy of estimating the dwelling stock. However, this needs to be balanced against the extra work of designing each tile and modeling its building efficiency, demand and supply characteristics. Some extra tiles would need to be added to more accurately represent mixed-use buildings in urban centers such as inner London. The tiles method is being adapted to non-domestic buildings and so it may eventually be possible to combine the domestic, non-domestic and mixed-use tiles within a single estimation process.Further more detailed validation would be useful by land parcel size and if possible by dwelling age bands. The next steps are to adapt the method to other countries that have similar housing survey data and also to explore the possibility of generating larger generic tiles of residential areas.