@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The geography of Twitter topics in London

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
links social media usage with different urban land uses and locations.provides geo-temporal Twitter profiles of behaviour and social attitudes.infers demographic and socio-economic characteristics of Twitter users.profiles Twitter messages with respect to inferred age and gender.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Twitter,Topic modelling,Latent Dirichlet Allocation,Geotemporal,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Social media data are increasingly perceived as alternative sources to public attitude surveys because of the volume of available data that are time-stamped and (sometimes) precisely located. Such data can be mined to provide planners, marketers and researchers with useful information about activities and opinions across time and space. However, in their raw form, textual data are still difficult to analyse coherently and Twitter streams pose particular interpretive challenges because they are restricted to just 140 characters. This paper explores the use of an unsupervised learning algorithm to classify geo-tagged Tweets from Inner London recorded during typical weekdays throughout 2013 into a small number of groups, following extensive text cleaning techniques. Our classification identifies 20 distinctive and interpretive topic groupings, which represent key types of Tweets, from describing activities or informal conversations between users, to the use of check-in applets. Our motivation is to use the classification to demonstrate how the nature of the content posted on Twitter varies according to the characteristics of places and users. Topics and attitudes expressed through Tweets are found to vary substantially across Inner London, and by time of day. Some observed variations in behaviour on Twitter can be attributed to the inferred demographic and socio-economic characteristics of users, but place and local activities can also exert a considerable influence. Overall, the classification was found to provide a valuable framework for investigating the content and coverage of Twitter usage across Inner London.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With a global reach of 500 million Tweets transmitted each day by over 300 million users globally (Twitter, 2015), Twitter could potentially provide a valuable source of social data. Unfortunately the structure of Twitter content is inherently hard to interpret and analyse, not least because the messages are exclusively text strings restricted to just 144 characters. There have been many recent developments in text mining techniques applied to Tweets in order to quantifiably interpret their content. Topic modelling poses as an interesting opportunity to develop a generalised understanding of the dynamics of Twitter usage, and is used here to explore variation in Twitter usage across Inner London. This work provides in turn, a platform for developing a more thorough understanding of the relationship between human activities, user characteristics and behaviour on social media.Roughly 80% of active Twitter users access the service via a mobile telephone (Twitter, 2015), and about 1% of users opt to share their locations based on the coordinates of their devices. It is probable that the nature of posts on Twitter varies systematically according to location, and also the time of day — because of the nature of popular activities, and the loci of activities of individuals that have different social characteristics. Inductive generalisation about the geography of topics on social media can thus contribute to understanding the social dynamics of urban areas. Moreover, the ability to quantify observed social trends across time and space is of great value to retailers and marketers, including out-of-home advertising companies who rent space on digital billboards that can be updated in real-time.In this paper we investigate the differences in observed Tweeting behaviour as users move around the city. Our research seeks to link typical behaviours to observable characteristics, in the broad analytic tradition of geodemographics, which extends from factorial ecology of the 1960s (see Harris, Sleight, & Webber, 2006), to novel nomenclatures based upon data mining (Spielman & Thill, 2008). We hypothesise that the content of Tweets bears an identifiable correspondence with personal characteristics, location, and activity. There is also likely to be a temporal rhythm to such activities. Such variations are unlikely to be picked up in conventional geodemographic classifications, which associate individuals only with night-time residence (see Singleton & Longley, 2015). As such, our motivation is to identify the trends on Twitter during typical weekdays in Inner London using a large sample of geo-tagged Tweets. Our primary aim is to investigate how the key trends in behaviour on Twitter vary across space and time, and also according to different user characteristics. Our unsupervised topic modelling approach produces a readily interpretable classification of Tweets based on the use of words, and we discuss how key Twitter topics vary across the dataset.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The research has demonstrated that although unregulated and non-conventional for quantitative analysis, Twitter data can be harvested into a simple classification which can be useful to planners, marketers and researchers. The findings revealed distinctive traits of Tweets across space and time, and also between Tweeters themselves. It identified the influence of land-use and activity on the content of Tweets which, whilst not surprising in many instances, documents influences that have not been explored on the extensive scale enabled by the methodological approaches presented. Furthermore, the analysis demonstrated that social media data can reveal insights into urban dynamics which are not available from traditional datasets.Based on the sample of geo-tagged Tweets from Inner London, the analysis demonstrated that users do not Tweet evenly across space. Twitter is a means of spreading information, but the type of information and the nature of how it is communicated vary between users. A wide range of individual characteristics are likely to be associated with variations in what is communicated through Twitter, including demographics and socio-economics. As there are no data on the users beyond what is provided from Twitter, it is not possible to measure any of these traits conclusively. However, using novel modelled age and gender estimates from forenames of Twitter users, the research identified key variances in the uses of Twitter based on inferred demographic characteristics. It should be noted that the use of names is an uncertain determinant of identity, however (Longley et al., 2015). It was also possible to infer neighbourhood characteristics of users by estimating probable residential locations from land-use data.This paper has developed an operational classification for georeferenced Tweets from London. The presented Twitter segmentation demonstrates that with a large enough sample of data and robust text cleaning techniques, LDA can suitably segment Tweets. Whilst the Tweets from this study have been restricted to geo-tagged Tweets from Inner London only, the methodological approaches to topic modelling can be applied to any sample of Tweets. In so doing, selection of the optimal number of classes is a subjective process and demographic data may need to be sourced from alternative locations. Moreover, the topic groups from our model can also be applied to other data by utilising the probabilities for each of the words created by the LDA as a look-up file — although it would of course only be possible to assign words which appeared in our modelled data. Furthermore, future research may build upon the associations identified in this paper to develop predictive tools to estimate either land use and activity, or the likely content of social media posts across space and time, and between users.