@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A utility-based suitability framework for integrated local-scale land-use modelling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel multi-sector framework for integrated local-scale land-use modeling.We apply deductive, theory-based and inductive, data-driven methods to describe land-use change.We incorporate hedonic pricing, net present value and statistics-based methods.Utility-based approaches outperform common statistics-based approaches in our Dutch case study.Output from other research methods can be incorporated to describe utility of land for other uses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Land-use modelling,Economic theory,Land suitability,Model validation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Models that simulate land-use patterns often use either inductive, data-driven approaches or deductive, theory-based methods to describe the relative strength of the social, economic and biophysical forces that drive the various sectors in the land system. An integrated framework is proposed here that incorporates both approaches based on a unified assessment for local land suitability following a monetary, utility-based logic. The framework is illustrated with a hedonic pricing analysis of urban land values and a net present value assessment for agricultural production system in combination with statistics-based assessments of land suitability for other sectors.The results show that limited difference exists between the most commonly applied inductive approaches that use either multinomial or binomial logistic regression specifications of suitability. Land-use simulations following the binomial regression based suitability values that were rescaled to bid prices (reflecting relative competitiveness) perform better for all individual land-use types. Performance improves even further when a land value based description of urban bid prices is added to this approach. Interestingly enough the better fitting description of suitability for urban areas also improves the ability of the model to simulate correct locations for business estates and greenhouses.The simulation alternatives that consider the net present values for agricultural types of land use show the relevance of this approach for understanding the spatial distribution of these types of land use. The combined use of urban land values and net present values for agricultural land use in defining land suitability performs best in our validation exercise. The proposed methodology can also be used to incorporate information from other research frameworks that describe the utility of land for different types of use.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Local land-use changes are driven by a wide range of social, economic and biophysical forces. These forces have a different impact on the various societal sectors that influence the land-use system. Urbanisation is typically driven by factors such as economic development, accessibility and spatial planning, agriculture is strongly influenced by general agro-economic and local biophysical conditions, while changes in natural areas generally result from (the presence or lack of) agricultural perspective and policy interventions. Obviously the strength of these forces varies across time and space. Land-use models can be used to better understand the interplay between these forces and provide information on the possible future state of the land system (Verburg, Schot, Dijst, & Veldkamp, 2004). Such models apply a wide range of theories and methods to explain the magnitude and location of change (see, for example, Koomen & Stillwell, 2007, chap. 1). A crucial component in most land-use models is the definition of local suitability of land for various types of use that is normally done by statistical analysis or expert judgement (Lesschen, Verburg, & Staal, 2005; Verburg, Schot et al., 2004). The latter approach is prevalent in multi-criteria evaluation or related analytical hierarchy process applications that rely on structured combinations of many different spatially explicit data sets (Collins, Steinder, & Rushman, 2001; Malczewski, 2004). However, the causal relations that link the underlying decision making processes to the observed changes in land use are generally poorly represented in statistics- and expert-based approaches (Munroe & Muller, 2007). Yet, data-driven inductive approaches are popular because they tend to perform better in reproducing existing spatial patterns (Overmars, Verburg, & Veldkamp, 2007). Overmars et al. argue, however, that a deductive theory-induced approach should be better equipped to understand causal relations and ongoing processes. Attempts to introduce a deductive approach to land-use modelling are relatively scarce and tend to focus on land-use changes that relate to single-sector processes such as agricultural practices (Overmars, De Groot, & Huigen, 2007) or residential development (Ettema, De Jong, Timmermans, & Bakema, 2007, chap. 14). This is due to the fact that reproducing observed land-use patterns (the typical procedure in validating model outcomes) following a deductive approach is much harder in models that simulate multiple land-use change processes (Van Schrojenstein Lantman, Verburg, Bregt, & Geertman, 2011, chap. 3). The preference for using either an inductive or a deductive approach is also related to the disciplinary background of the researchers involved. Geographers usually focus on spatial patterns and typically rely on inductive, data-driven approaches to describe and explain them, whereas economists – that emphasise processes – normally rely on deduction from theoretical principles.We propose an integrated approach that can be used to simulate local land-use changes for multiple societal sectors simultaneously. In fact, we will follow the invitation of Overmars, De Groot et al. (2007) to seek the interaction between inductive and deductive work. Our framework aims to combine the strengths of the available concepts, approaches and techniques of different disciplines such as geography and economics (as advocated by Verburg, Schot et al., 2004). A crucial issue here is to come to a unified assessment framework for land suitability that incorporates the local potential for different types of use (urban, agricultural and natural) based on, for example, market preferences, land use related policy measures and biophysical conditions that change over time.The proposed suitability framework is implemented in an operational land-use model and applied to a challenging case study area where economic processes, planning restrictions and biophysical conditions interact and that is characterised by considerable dynamics in multiple sectors. The Netherlands fulfil these criteria and have the additional advantage that the necessary large amounts of spatial data are available. Especially micro-level data related to land values that have recently become available allow us to pixelise the social as suggested by Geoghegan et al. (1998, chap. 3) and help to reinforce the economic rationale in land-use modelling.To assess the merits of the proposed suitability framework the resulting simulations are compared with model runs based on inductive, statistically inferred land-use suitability definitions. All simulations are performed using the same base data and cover a period for which actual land-use observations exist to allow for a proper validation of model outcomes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
