@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Characterizing urban landscapes using fuzzy sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fuzzy Sets to Characterize Urban Landcover.Fuzzy Urban Index consisting of combinations of rules.Flexible user specified fuzzy inference and mapping platform.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Urban,Fuzzy sets,GIS,Remote sensing,Land cover,Validation,Mapping,Land use,Mapping,Database,Transportation,NDVI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Urbanization is a dominant demographic trend and an important component of global land transformation. More than half of the planet's population now lives in cities, up 30% from 50years ago, and urban areas are gaining 67 million people per year. By 2030, approximately 5 billion people are expected to live in urban areas or 60% of the projected global population of 8.3 billion. Over the next 25years, rural populations are expected to decline, meaning that all population growth will occur in urban areas (UN, 2009). The developed nations have more urbanized populations. In the US, urbanization is growing at an unprecedented rate as many farmlands, wetlands, forests and other natural ecosystems are being transformed into urban landscapes. Yet these radical transformations of urban form and morphology have not led to changes in how we map or characterize urban landscapes. We continue to be grounded in making maps of human land use that reflect large-scale industrial city-regions and suburbanizing zones. In addition, we make maps intermittently while urban changes are happening rapidly. Wu (2014) in his review of urban ecology notes “cities are spatially heterogeneous, complex adaptive systems”. Hence, there is a growing need to implement a methodology for dynamic user-defined urban maps that view cities as spatially heterogeneous systems, the focus of this paper.A variety of disciplines including urban ecology, urban economics, urban geography, urban planning and architecture, urban politics, and urban sociology bring their own unique perspectives to the study of urban systems. Economic, societal, environmental factors are the main variables conventionally used to characterize structure, form, and function of the urban systems. In addition, governance (policy) and flows of people and goods within urban systems provide additional variables to characterize system dynamics, flows, and processes in the urban system. Fig. 1a shows the five major variables used in urban systems studies as well as six boxes representing fields of study pertinent to this paper. Of the six fields, urban geography, urban sociology, and urban design and planning are mature fields of study while urban ecology, and urban metabolism and urban sustainability are newer fields. The mature fields of urban studies are grounded in social sciences (Champion & Hugo, 2005; Florida et al., 2008; Hall et al., 2006; Lefebvre, 2003; Roy, 2009; Sassen, 2000; Scott, 2001; Soja & Kanai, 2007). The focus in these socio-spatial studies is to identify the many social, demographic, political, environmental and other drivers that are currently reshaping the urban world. These disciplines characterize the urbanization, urban growth, urban sprawl, and urban development, using demographic variables such as employment sectors, population distribution and density.In the last few decades, newer fields integrating natural and social sciences have emerged to investigate urban systems and address complex problems. Urban ecology, an offshoot of ecology, is an interdisciplinary field that aims to understand the whole city as an ecosystem comprised of both humans and other living organisms that coexist in human-dominated systems (Wu, 2014). Urban ecology has matured from the study of the ecology in cities to the ecology of cities (Pickett et al., 2008), underscoring the malleability of urban definitions and meanings. Urban sustainability and urban metabolism have emerged as other frameworks. Urban metabolism is “the sum total of the technical and socio-economic processes that occur in cities, resulting in growth, production of energy, and elimination of waste” (Kennedy et al., 2007). This area has seen resurgence in interest in the last decade since it provides measures that are indicative of a city's sustainability. One can track energy and material flows at the building or block scale. Urban metabolism is closely linked to sustainability (Gandy, 2004). Urban sustainability is concerned with the degree to which physical and socioeconomic systems in cities can be developed and maintained in perpetuity. Resilience in urban sustainability studies is often used as a tool or framework to evaluate the capacity of urban systems to adapt to change (Pickett et al., 2004). In these domains, the issue is the difficulty in characterizing complexity of urban system appropriate to the study objectives and study area (Beatley, 2012). Hence characterizing urban system, integrating inputs from natural and human systems, are significant themes in sustainability and metabolism fields.Each disciplinary box has arrows linking it to the factors that can be used to qualify and quantify specific urban concepts. For example, in urban geography, (see top right box in Fig. 1a), urban growth refers to the increase in urban area while urban development broadly refers to the social, cultural, economic and physical development of cities, as well as the underlying causes of these processes. Urbanization is the result of human migration from rural to areas (towns and cities). Urbanization (McCarthy & Knox, 2005) involves a complex set of economic, demographic, social, cultural, technological, and environmental processes that result in an increase in the proportion of the population that lives in towns and cities. Thus, this box is linked to economy, society, environment, and governance. Urbanism (Talen, 2005) (in urban design box) often refers to social character of urban life and is also used to refer to the interaction of inhabitants of urban areas with their built environment. Urbanism can also refer to the degree of urbanization. Urban planning (see lower left box in Fig. 1a), refers to the design and management of the urban environment including the both the natural elements (such as air, water, and soil) as well as human built landscape (Hall & Tewdwr-Jones, 2010). In addition, some terms are used in multiple disciplines. For example, urban sprawl refers to the unplanned and uncontrolled spreading of urban development into rural areas adjoining the edge of a city (Dodson & Gleeson, 2009; Hutchison, 2009). This concept is utilized in urban geography, as well as urban design and planning and urban ecology. Terms such as urban sustainability, metabolism, urbanization, urbanism, and urban sprawl are fuzzy concepts since they cannot be precisely defined and vary across studies. Fuzzy sets provide a method to quantify these concepts and include them in urban studies.Urban characterization is central in the urban context. At the simplest level, the main variables conventionally used to distinguish rural from urban areas are variables such as population size, population density in built-up areas, predominant economic activities, and administrative boundaries in urban geography. In addition, there are user defined classes such as commercial, residential, and suburban. Often, such user defined rules are made in a subjective classification process and not quantitatively articulated or generalized. Given the nature of mapping in the age of geospatial technologies, there is a greater need for better articulation and transparency in rule formulation to characterize urban areas. Another approach to urban characterization is to treat the urban class as a continuous variable to describe urban–rural transition. The gradient framework has been used to test hypotheses on the impacts of urban development on ecological or other processes (Alberti, 2008; Cadenasso et al., 2007). In landscape ecology, urban gradient is derived using landscape composition and spatial heterogeneity (Alberti et al., 2001). Some recent studies such as urban heat island effect (Yuan & Bauer, 2007), sea level changes (Nicholls & Cazenave, 2010), and distribution of urban–suburban temperatures (Stewart & Oke, 2012) analyze differentials along a gradient across urban areas based on land use, specifically urban land use. A more realistic urban gradient could be formulated based on a coupled human–natural system integrating both sets of variables. Our proposed approach integrates inputs in the coupled human–natural system based on fuzzy sets and fuzzy inference system (Fig. 1b).Prior research has described the use of fuzzy sets to derive new measures of urbanization. Abed and Kaysi (2003) define a composite fuzzy index of intensity of urbanization based on integration of three variables related to urban density, land use and activity in Beirut. Heikkila et al. (2002) adopted Kosko's hypercube and developed three metrics to measure extent of urbanization, level of fuzziness, and degree of entropy, to characterize levels of urban membership typical in cities of China, and other Asian countries. Specifically they focus on the issue of characterizing peri-urbanizing (desakota) systems. Fuzzy sets has also be used to model dynamics in urban systems (Dragićević, 2004) as well as in classification of urban land cover at a variety of spatial scales (Chanussot et al., 2006; Islam & Metternicht, 2005; Shackelford & Davis, 2003; Zhang & Foody, 2001). Fuzzy sets have also been used to integrate GIS and remote sensing data in order to identify detailed land use classes in urban areas (Zhan et al., 2000). Fuzzy urban land use classes are based on fuzzy class memberships using fuzzy criteria or rules. Fuzzy membership values can then enable the derivation of uncertainty levels. Thus fuzzy sets offer several advantages in spatial sciences from characterizing urban spatial heterogeneity, modeling urban membership, integrating spatial, spectral and other ancillary information and deriving uncertainty estimates.Expert system (ES) approaches, developed over the last two decades, have classified urban land cover combining remote sensing information with ancillary contextual information in the US and other regional contexts to derive 7–10 urban land cover classes (Choi & Usery, 2004; Stefanov et al., 2001; Wentz et al., 2008). The ultimate goal is to build general expert system of rules that can be used with minimum modifications in other regional contexts. Wentz et al. (2008) demonstrate the practical challenges (including map data) involved in transferring expert system developed in one urban context (Phoenix) to another (New Delhi). More recently, a neural-fuzzy approach for land cover classification was developed that used a fuzzy inference system and a data mining technique to derive land use and land cover (LULC) patterns using remote sensing data (Pimentel et al., 2015).Three broad trends impact measuring, mapping and characterizing urban areas in the 21st century. First, there is an increasing need to integrate both human and natural elements in order to better model and map the coupled human–natural urban system. Second, mapping requires a data-driven approach that easily integrates remote sensing, GIS, and other spatial data for mapping and characterizing urban areas easily at a variety of spatial scales. Third, many applications require participatory user driven mapping, where the user can dynamically define urban classes and produce different urban characterizations by selecting levels and combinations of different inputs unique to fit their study objectives and application domains.Here we propose a fuzzy inference system that addresses the three broad trends described above, applied as a case study in greater Boston, and incorporating metrics in the emerging domains of urban sustainability, ecology, and metabolism.Zadeh (1965) introduced the notion of fuzzy sets to describe ambiguous or partial set membership. Unlike in the conventional (or “crisp”) set theory, sets, in which all elements are constrained to have full membership, the limit of the fuzzy set is not precisely determined. Instead, there is a gradual transition from non-membership of elements in a set, through their partial membership, to membership (Dubois & Prade, 1980). This gradual transition is described by the so-called membership function mA, where A is a set of fuzzy numbers. When urban characterization is treated as a fuzzy concept, the constituent parcels or pixels may exhibit varying degrees of membership from one of being highly urban to somewhat urban to least urban. Fuzzy logic is therefore able to model the world in imprecise terms, similar to how our brains process imprecise or uncertain or vague information, and respond with precise action.We propose a fuzzy sets concept of urban characterization using fuzzy inputs. We use the term urban characterization to denote the multi-faceted nature, extent and magnitude of urban areas in thematic maps. Threshold values are defined to derive the rules of membership for each input, and various combinations of rules offer a greater flexibility to characterize the many facets of the urban areas. Fuzzy sets can harmonize land use and land cover data into one database. In addition, they enable the user to define specific characterizations of urban class using different combinations of the input variables in the database appropriate for the application at hand. The application of the fuzzy set theory to rule-based expert system offers advantages in terms of: (1) representation and processing of uncertain data in the form of fuzzy sets (e.g. a highly vegetated region), and (2) representation of linguistic rules that integrate two or three inputs to define a fuzzy urban characterization class.A fuzzy inference system (FIS) uses fuzzy set theory to map inputs (features in the case of fuzzy classification) to outputs (classes in the case of fuzzy classification). Knowledge is represented by if–then fuzzy rules that consist of two parts: an antecedent part stating conditions on the input variable(s) and a consequent part describing the corresponding values of the output variable(s) (Ross, 1995). For example: IF the level of vegetation density is low, THEN urban index should be high, where the terms ‘level’ and ‘urban index’ are fuzzy variables represented by fuzzy sets (‘high’ and ‘low’).The starting point of constructing a fuzzy system is to obtain a collection of fuzzy if–then rules from experts or from prior research. Fuzzy rules are always written in the following form: if (input1is membership function1) and/or (input2is membership function2) and/or … then (outputnis output membership functionn). In the urban context, if vegetation index is high (input1) and population density (input2) is low then output value of urban membership is low. This process of taking an input such as population density and processing it through a membership function to determine what we mean by “low” urban membership is called fuzzification. The Boolean operators “and”/“or” in the fuzzy rule have to be defined.The fuzzified inputs have to be combined according to the fuzzy rules to establish rule strength. The fuzzified inputs become the antecedents of the fuzzy rules; the fuzzy operator (AND or OR or NOT) is used to obtain a single number that represents the result of the antecedent evaluation. Fuzzy combinations are also referred to as “T-norms”.Fuzzy “or”A∪B=TμAXμXwhere μA is read as “the membership in class A” and μB is read as “the membership in class B″. There are many ways to compute “or”. The two most common are:1.Zadeh Technique — max(μA(x), μB(x)): This technique, named after the inventor of fuzzy set theory simply computes the “or” by taking the maximum of the two (or more) membership values. This is the most common definition of the fuzzy “or”.Product — (μA(x)∗μB(x)): This technique computes the product by multiplying the two membership values.Both techniques have the following two properties:Ta0=T0a=aTa1=T1a=1.Fuzzy “and”A∩B=TμAXμBX1.Zadeh Technique — min(μA(x), μB(x)): This technique, named after the inventor of fuzzy set theory simply computes the “and” by taking the minimum of the two (or more) membership values. This is the most common definition of the fuzzy “or”.Sum minus Product — (μA(x)+μB(x)−uA(x)∗uB(x)): This technique uses the difference between the sum of the two (or more) membership values and the product of the membership values.Both techniques have the following two properties:T00=Ta0=T0a=0Ta1=T1a=a.We use the Sugeno inference system to compute a singleton output. A fuzzy singleton can be defined as a membership function that is a single spike at a particular point while zero elsewhere (Takagi & Sugeno, 1985). The resulting output membership function is a fuzzy set that needs to be defuzzified for mapping the output classes (similar to the input classes). We describe the data and implementation of the fuzzy inference system for our study in the next section.In this paper, we introduce a new database driven approach to characterize urban characterization using fuzzy sets theory. We create a fuzzy inference system (FIS) that is capable of combining different input dataset using pre-defined rules to characterize difference levels of urban characterization in urbanized areas. In this section, we will explain the basis of fuzzy sets concept as well as the fuzzy inference system relevant to this study.The study area is the Boston Metropolitan area, defined as the city of Boston and surrounding suburban neighborhoods, stretching 40miles to the east to west and 30miles north to south. The study area includes six counties — Suffolk, Essex, Middlesex, Norfolk, Plymouth and Worcester counties and encompasses 103 towns including Boston, Revere, Plymouth, Brookline, Cambridge and Newton.We illustrate the flexibility and utility of the Fuzzy Urban Index approach using five inputs selected to best and easily characterize the CHANS framework: (1) land use, (2) population, (3) Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), (4) Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT), and (5) commercial VMT. Population, VMT, and commercial VMT represent the human dimensions while NDVI represents natural systems in the CHANS framework illustrated in Fig. 1a. Land use variable incorporates the feedbacks between both dimensions in the CHANS framework. All of the variables are easily available. Users can incorporate other inputs to characterize the CHANS framework of their study area. For example, variables related to temperature drought, road network, zoning and earthquake risk may be more relevant in the context of urban sustainability study of Los Angeles.The inputs used in this study have varying spatial resolution with the finest being 30m and the coarsest being 250m. The data are integrated into a GIS with a spatial resolution of 250m after preprocessing for geo-registration and projection.Landuse (2005): This layer is a statewide, data layer of land cover/land use, created by the state agency called MassGIS using semi-automated methods, and based on 0.5m resolution digital ortho-imagery captured in April 2005 (see Fig. 2). Urban studies have widely used this land use data consisting of 33 categories. Breunig (2003) used the land use/land cover data from Massachusetts to characterize the growth of residential development as well as examine urban sprawl. The seminal publication of Mass Audubon “Losing Ground” (DeNormandie, 2009) used this data to discuss trends in changes to the natural environment in the different towns of the state. A more recent study by Raciti et al. (2012) used this data to estimate carbon flux.Population Density (2010): This layer is a statewide, data layer of the population density data calculated based on the 2010 census data from MassGIS. The unit of the population density is the number of people per square kilometer derived from the census data about households. Population density increases from west to east in the state. Population density has proved useful in assessing traffic patterns and energy consumption. This population density measure is more reflective of “night based” and weekend population density, and does not capture the daily variation of population density during week days (Janelle & Goodchild, 1983).NDVI (2010): Prior remote sensing studies have used the normalized differential vegetation index, commonly known as NDVI, in studying land use patterns over time. NDVI is calculated, on a per-pixel basis, as the normalized difference between the surface reflectance values of red and near-infrared bands from a remote sensing image. The biophysical interpretation of NDVI is the fraction of absorbed photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), which is an accurate indicator of greenness of the surface and is widely used measure of vegetation. For example, Sexton et al. (2013) studied urban land cover changes using impervious surface from Landsat data for the Washington, D.C.–Baltimore, MD megalopolis from 1984 to 2010. NDVI was estimated to differentiate vegetated from non-vegetated surfaces across urban, suburban, and agricultural land uses.In the present study, two Landsat-5 March images (30m resolution) over Boston study area were downloaded (from USGS) and atmospherically corrected using LEDAPS (Masek et al., 2006) (see Fig. 3). The two images are merged, converted, clipped and resampled to the 250m resolution adopted for the study. NDVI is then calculated using the surface reflectance in red and near-infrared bands of the pre-processed Landsat image.VMT (2010): The Vehicles Miles Traveled (VMT) data is a unique dataset of the odometer readings from annual safety inspections for all private passenger vehicles registered in Metro Boston. The spatial layer is a statewide 250m by 250m grid cell layer developed by MassGIS (Diao, 2010; Diao & Ferreira, 2010). The data and units used in this study are daily miles traveled by passenger vehicles per household that ranges between 0 to over 200miles. (Any cell with more than 200miles traveled per household is reassigned a value of 200 for the purpose of our analysis.) Diao and Ferreira (2010) showed the utility of VMT by examining its relationship to various built-environment and demographic characteristics. This is a unique dataset that could be utilized in the study to capture travel patterns of commuters and the city traffic.CVMT (2010): Commercial Vehicle Miles Traveled (CVMT) can also be used to characterize urban characterization since higher density of CVMT could denote higher urban travel density. (Any cell with more than 500miles traveled is reassigned a value of 500 for the purpose of our analysis.) Studies on the interrelationship between land use and commercial travel are useful in characterizing the economic activity of the region (Badoe & Miller, 2000). Other easily available data such as location of business from sources such as Dunn and Bradstreet and employment statistics from census can also provide commercial activity in the city and may be more relevant than CVMT.We now describe how the general CHANS framework is implemented using fuzzy sets. The general methodology to set up a fuzzy inference system for this study is modified from Knapp (1998). It consists of the following steps: (1) convert the input distributions into fuzzy membership functions, (2) define a set of fuzzy rules, (3) apply rules and estimate rule strength for each set of inputs, (4) aggregate the rule outputs to derive a measure of fuzzy urban characterization, and (5) create thematic fuzzy map labels. Section 2 describes fuzzy inference process in relation to our research. Our output index is called Fuzzy Urban Index (see Fig. 4).The objective of creating fuzzy membership functions is to take the crisp inputs, x1 and y1 (for example vegetation index and population density), and determine the degree to which these inputs belong to each of the appropriate fuzzy sets ranging from 0 to 1. The membership functions could then represent low vegetation index or high population density. For the purpose of this study, the five inputs were fuzzified such that each input has five different linguistic sets — very high, high, medium, low, and very low memberships of each of the five inputs shown in Table 1.We adopted two approaches in defining the membership functions: prior empirical approaches in defining urban classes, and examining the distributional characteristics of different input values to adjust the fuzzy membership intervals.Land use: There are 21 (MassGIS, 2005) urban land use categories in the statewide McConnell land use System including the following classes: Multi-Family Residential, High Density Residential, Medium Density Residential, Low Density Residential, Commercial, Industrial, Urban Institutional and Transportation (see Fig. 2). Appendix A displays the complete categories and its associated empirically derived index (between 0 and 100) to characterize the urban characterization value (see Appendix). A class value of 100 characterizes artificial impervious built area while a class value of 0 represents all natural vegetation in that polygon (Arnold & Gibbons, 1996).Population: The US Census defines a population density value of 1600 per square km to characterize high density. We have adopted this value to describe a fuzzy membership for high population density and added other categories around it using class distributional statistics centered on the mean and deviation around the mean.NDVI: Prior research (Myneni et al., 1995; Weier & Herring, 2000) describes high and low NDVI values in terms of land cover noting that very high NDVI represents high amount of greenness on the surface, while low NDVI represents built areas or water. We have used a membership value of [−1, 0.2] to denote very low NDVI, [0.2, 0.4] for low, [0.4, 0.6] for medium, [0.6, 0.8] for high and [0.8, 1] for very high (Table 1).VMT and CVMT: On the other hand, we used equal intervals to describe VMT membership function. The quality of each resulting map (Fig. 5) made with the input membership function was carefully evaluated by two experts and values adjusted to represent Boston's urban characterization most appropriately. This step was necessary given we wanted to validate the resulting map.While prior urban studies do not explicitly contain rules of urban characterization, (Besussi et al., 2010; Masek et al., 2000; Pickett et al., 2011; Whitehand & Carr, 2001), we used these studies to formulate our rules of urban characterization. Table 2shows a set of 18 simple rules using “AND” fuzzy operator and each rule results in a specific output urban characterization class. We give examples of some prior studies that have examined or used similar rules. For example, Rule 1 states that if NDVI is very high and land use is very low, then urban characterization is very low (Bauer et al., 2004; Carlson & Arthur, 2000), while Rule 7 states that if CVMT is very high and land use is very high, then urban characterization is very high (for example Frank et al., 2000). Some rules in Table 2 show the impact of input combinations on the fuzzy index. Rule 2 shows that a combination of high population density and low VMT can lead to very high degree of urban membership, characteristic of urban city centers. On the other hand, Rule 13 states that low population and high VMT results in low degree of urban characterization, true of suburbs; while Rule 14 states that low memberships of inputs for land use, population, and VMT and a high membership in vegetation index can result in low urban characterization.Table 2 captures the consequences of combining inputs to find the consequent urban characterization class. For example, very high population and very low NDVI results in a very high urban characterization class. The linguistic characteristics are then converted into a fuzzy set between 0 to 1 using an equal interval membership function with 1 representing the highest degree of urban characterization and 0 representing the lowest.In the list of rules used in this study, there are five rules characterizing high urban characterization, four rules for very low urban characterization, and three for low, medium, and very high urban characterization classes respectively. The rules listed in Table 2 must be combined in some manner in order to make a map decision. Thus, each pixel on the map has to be assessed using each of the 18 rules. Typically only 1–3 rules would apply in the context of 1pixel given the distribution of the input membership levels. The fuzzy rules incorporate the inherent mixtures that characterize the urban class in each pixel. More rules can be built that captures the unique spatial context of an urban landscape. The final result is the output class for characterizing the urban characterization. The final map was made using a 3×3 filter to capture the local context and reduce the salt and pepper appearance of the pixels. The local spatial context can help in differentiating these types of outliers, for example a remote building in a rural context and a park in a dense urban neighborhood. In this study, every rule has a weight (a number between 0 and 1). Our two experts had higher confidence ratings for very low and very high membership values while they had the least confidence around medium. Hence, rules utilizing very low and very high membership values have a weight of 1 while low and high membership values have a weight of 0.9, and medium membership values have a weight of 0.8. The selection of weights was tested with various valuations, and the best one was selected based on expert assessment of the resultant maps of Boston in the final step. However, future research should focus on how different weights could simulate different realizations of maps across different user communities and the relationship to the objectives of the study (for example, conservation or urban planning).The resulting output fuzzy set can be defuzzified into distinguishable classes for obtaining a crisp output/class. In our study, the output fuzzy set is divided into five classes using equal interval classification (see Fig. 7). These classes correspond to the five levels of urban characterization (very high, high, medium, low, and very low).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
