@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Getting virtual 3D landscapes out of the lab

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A theoretical discussion on the capabilities of differing types of landscape presentation methodsProposed and implemented landscape visualisation on-demand and on-site from existing virtual 3D landscape modelsUse of smartphones and standard web browsing technologies to access the landscape visualisations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
On-site,Landscape visualisation,On-demand,Smartphone,Mobile,Tablet,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Public participation is an approach for making the landscape planning and design process more inclusive. In recent decades, this approach has been adopted into government policy, for instance as articulated in the European Landscape Convention (Lange & Hehl-Lange, 2011), or in the UK Localism Act (Localism Act, 2011), which aims to devolve decision making powers to a local level, e.g. to neighbourhood planning groups. However, one of the major tasks for public participation in landscape planning and design is the dissemination of the information to the population. Typically, in the Western world, planning departments hold the records pertaining to landscape proposals and distribute this information through formal planning meetings, public displays, or by sending documentation directly to the public. Widely adopted digital connectivity via the Internet has aided this dispersal by providing online access to planning documents through local governmental planning portals. Nevertheless, Warren-Kretzschmar and von Haaren argue that when planners attempt to engage with the public, there can be a disconnection between perceived and actual participation of the public, although this can potentially be overcome through the use of visualisations (Warren-Kretzschmar & Von Haaren, 2014). In comparison to the written or spoken word, visualisations have lower barriers in terms of communicating contents thus helping to improve citizens' understanding and ability to respond towards planning issues.Landscape visualisations are a means to graphically represent the landscape. There is a long tradition of analogue techniques including physical models, sketches and so on. In recent decades, digital representations of landscapes have become more commonplace in the communication of possible future landscape designs, with the digital photomontage (Lange, 1990) widely employed. In addition, interactive 3D landscape visualisation technologies are increasingly being used by planners and landscape designers. In 1995, Danahy and Hoinkes demonstrated interactive landscape visualisations using their POLYTRIM software running on then state of the art graphical computer hardware (Danahy & Hoinkes, 1995). Since then, digital landscape visualisations have been used to represent a variety of differing future scenarios from large scale environments (Perrin, Beauvais, & Puppo, 2001) down to highly detailed site design (Morgan, Gill, Lange, & Romano, 2009). Research surrounding interactive landscape models has tended to concentrate on techniques to improve photo-realism (House, Schmidt, Arvin, & Kitagawa-DeLeon, 1998), user immersion (Bishop & Dave, 2001) and model complexity without degrading rendering speed (Deussen, 2003). This has led to successful solutions for immersive Virtual Reality (VR) laboratories, but ones that require complex bespoke computer hardware, such as the 13 workstations and 13 projector configurations described by Zehner (Zehner, 2009). The advent of laptops with powerful graphical resources and portable projectors has meant that it is possible to move interactive 3D landscape models to multiple locations. For example, a model originally created for use in a VR lab was also used as an interactive learning tool at a natural history museum using a laptop (Morgan, Gill, Lange, & Dallimer, 2012). Internet based dissemination of interactive landscape models has also been undertaken (Shojaei, Rajabifard, Kalantari, Bishop, & Aien, 2014), but this tends to require a reasonable level of computing hardware at the client side to render the downloaded models together with the ability to navigate the model using the supplied user interface.Thus, although there are now the tools to construct and render detailed landscape models, their intrinsic information is often locked in VR laboratories (Zehner, 2009), or may contain a barrier to use through requisite hardware and the need to learn a user interface (Paar, 2006). All of which can also make it difficult to integrate with existing online planning portals and none of these methods make it simple for the public to interrogate existing models quickly on-site. On-site access of landscape visualisations would allow the public to contrast the future vision of landscape designers with the reality on the ground and it may also help engage with more people who actively pass through a site.In 2001, Rakkolainen and Vainio examined the usefulness of 2D maps and 3D models in a mobile environment as an aid for navigation of an unknown urban environment. The results from their trial showed both 2D maps and 3D elements were interchangeably consulted by participants (Rakkolainen & Vainio, 2001). They were hampered however by the lack of computation resource in the handsets available to them, but predicted the arrival of more computationally powerful devices.Nowadays, new opportunities arise for transmission of landscape visualisations with the advent of ‘smartphone’ and ‘tablet’ technologies that can derive their location, have high resolution screens, internet connectivity and enough computing power available to render graphical images (Evans-Cowley, 2012). These devices are becoming increasingly commonplace and offer an opportunity to present landscape visualisation to the public in an easily accessible manner. This has been demonstrated with ‘apps’ that can overlay information on video feeds, presenting Augmented Reality (AR), e.g. Layar (Layar, 2009). However, these can suffer from occlusion issues or poor video quality (Takacs et al., 2008). Alternatively, apps are available that can present pre-prepared visualisations of future scenarios whilst on-site (Lange, 2011, Bilge, Hehl-Lange, & Lange, 2014, Priestnall, 2009). These methods can provide either the visual fidelity of VR lab based models or the interactivity of viewpoint, but not both.Therefore, the aim of the work presented in this paper is to illustrate a method that disseminates highly detailed and interactive 3D visualisations of landscape and urban design proposals via smartphones and tablets on site. Such an approach could be highly advantageous to planners and designers (Graham-Rowe, 2011), both in potentially reducing costs of delivery and increasing inclusiveness in decision making.In Section 2, a theoretical discussion is presented that explains how the new method relates to existing visualisation techniques. Section 3 details the implementation of several different prototypes that provide on-site visualisations by re-using existing virtual 3D landscape models. Section 4 highlights the results of using the prototype system out at a location. Finally, future work, discussion and conclusions are presented.Mobile phone ownership in Europe has increased rapidly in the last decade, but the type of devices being sold is changing. UK Office of Communications (OFCOM) data states that adoption of a smartphone (a mobile phone that has a web browser and internet connectivity) very rapidly increased in the UK population to 61% in 2014 (UK Office of Communications (OFCOM) 2015). These devices have a high-resolution colour display, increasingly rapid data connections, Global Positioning Service (GPS) and compass.Therefore, with the general population increasingly using smartphones, one potential method to improve public participation in landscape design would be to provide access to the visualisations usually associated with public participation via their smartphone or tablet device. This would continue the trend of providing planning portals for people to access, but rather than access being via a static computer, they would be able to view them when and wherever they had mobile data connectivity. In other words, the visualisations would come to the person on site, rather than people going to them. This would allow the public to reference a 3D landscape model from any position and would avoid the situation of only providing a handful of chosen 3D views of a proposal (Graham-Rowe, 2011), which could be critical to judging the visual impact of a proposal. Large-scale adoption of this technique has the potential to create a more democratic method of access to landscape planning and design scenarios.This theoretical system can even be taken one step further. With the GPS and compass combining to allow the smartphone to determine its position and direction and given that virtual models are correctly geo-referenced then it is possible to map the real world smartphone location to the corresponding location in one or more virtual landscape proposals. This real to virtual world mapping provides the possibility of delivering on-site visualisations matched to the current view of the user, which would provide a very simple method for comparing the current situation with any future proposals.Smartphones are increasingly equipped with more advanced graphical rendering capabilities, so one solution would be to provide the ability to download virtual models to the smartphones and render these locally to the user. However, due to memory, power, size and thermal constraints, the computing power of mobile devices is unlikely to match that of graphic workstations. Similarly, the quality of any visualisation rendered locally, including the AR approach, is unlikely ever to match that of the VR labs.One alternative approach is to re-use existing virtual models based on powerful remote server farms and let them render the visualisations requested by the user and transmit these to the user over mobile data networks. This would allow higher fidelity visualisations, but may slow the overall interactivity with the virtual model, making user interaction dependent on the data connection round-trip times.In order to place this new theoretical system in context, the presentation of virtual 3D landscape models can be grouped into six methods:1)VR labPC mobileInternet PCAR mobilePre-prepared mobileOn-demand mobile“VR lab” encompasses non-transportable immersive environments built to display interactive virtual landscape visualisations. “PC mobile” groups together approaches where the virtual model can be taken to different sites using a PC laptop or transporting a desktop PC. “Internet PC” represents attempts to disseminate interactive 3D landscape models via the Internet to home PCs for local rendering and viewing. The complexity of the models transmitted in this way can vary based on how much must be downloaded and is dependent on sufficient hardware being available on the home PC for interactive viewing. “AR mobile” categorises all attempts to render and overlay a model over the real world using a mobile device. “Pre-prepared mobile” represents pre-rendered visualisations available for certain areas of a design proposal. Finally, the proposed “on demand mobile” defines any system that would deliver user specific imagery from a remote 3D virtual landscape model to a mobile device.To understand the advantages and disadvantages of this range of approaches, the following criteria of interest were applied (Table 1):•whether the method can be used on sitethe size of the potential audience the visualisation method can addressthe level of detail and area of context that can be held in the modelhow interactive the visualisations arewhether a data connection is needed to access the visualisationsThe idealised presentation system is one that provides on-site visualisations, gives access to a large potential audience, displays high levels of model complexity, is highly interactive and is without the need to use data connectivity. However, it can be seen that no approach satisfies all of these. Each method of presentation ends up trading off some capability for another.Regarding all the options, the “on demand mobile” solution did present an approach for delivering a high level of model complexity on site and to a large audience, albeit at the cost of having a dependency of servers and data network, which will determine the level of interactivity. As there was no known solution for the on-demand mobile approach, a prototype was developed to illustrate this concept.The results of a study by Paar into the adoption of 3D visualisation software in Germany highlighted that “ease of learning” is highly important to successful adoption (Paar, 2006). Thus, any technology that provides this visualisation on-demand functionality and aims for widespread adoption should also present it in a user interface that requires minimal learning by the user to operate. Therefore, a design goal for the prototype was also to make user interaction as simple as possible.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It is now possible to create detailed visualisations of possible changes to our environment through interactive 3D landscape models. These can be shared with the public in one of the six methods (VR lab, PC mobile, internet PC, AR mobile, pre-prepared mobile, on-demand mobile) detailed in this paper. Each method has advantages and disadvantages associated with it, but determining which method to use in which circumstance is not yet clear.3D models were previously restricted to being explored in a remote lab or office environment, in that the 3D or virtual environment is mainly restricted to a purely visual representation. While an aural component can also be part of the representation (Lindquist & Lange, 2014), being on site provides a multi-sensory environment that is very difficult to recreate faithfully in a remote location. This isolation from the actual site can lead to divergent responses to visualisations (Wergles & Muhar, 2009). The approach presented here allows interactive exploration of landscape visualisations amongst the current context.The different methods that can be pursued open up a number of routes in research, development and application that need exploring further (Gill, Lange, Morgan, & Romano, 2013). These efforts need to involve the general public, experts in software engineering and the planning and design disciplines in order to understand the suitability and to get maximum benefit of these methods for public participation in planning and design.