@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mining point-of-interest data from social networks for urban land use classification and disaggregation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We demonstrate the unification, classification and validation of online POI data.The classified POI data is used to disaggregate land use at a high spatial resolution.The disaggregated land use data is useful for LUTE models and for economic analyses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information extraction,Machine learning,Points of interest,Land use,Volunteered geographic information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Over the last few years, much online volunteered geographic information (VGI) has emerged and has been increasingly analyzed to understand places and cities, as well as human mobility and activity. However, there are concerns about the quality and usability of such VGI. In this study, we demonstrate a complete process that comprises the collection, unification, classification and validation of a type of VGI—online point-of-interest (POI) data—and develop methods to utilize such POI data to estimate disaggregated land use (i.e., employment size by category) at a very high spatial resolution (census block level) using part of the Boston metropolitan area as an example. With recent advances in activity-based land use, transportation, and environment (LUTE) models, such disaggregated land use data become important to allow LUTE models to analyze and simulate a person’s choices of work location and activity destinations and to understand policy impacts on future cities. These data can also be used as alternatives to explore economic activities at the local level, especially as government-published census-based disaggregated employment data have become less available in the recent decade. Our new approach provides opportunities for cities to estimate land use at high resolution with low cost by utilizing VGI while ensuring its quality with a certain accuracy threshold. The automatic classification of POI can also be utilized for other types of analyses on cities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Increasing amounts of data on points of interest (POIs), public events, and urban sensing are becoming available online. Spatially detailed and volunteered geographic information (VGI) together with modern techniques for geo-processing offer new possibilities for deriving disaggregated land use data that represent activities in cities. In urban settings, such analyses can link travel with different activity patterns in ways that can be usefully incorporated into models of land use and transportation interactions. As urban simulation evolves into more sophisticated activity-based land use, transportation, and environment (LUTE) models, the demand for spatially high-resolution data increases greatly. For example, with respect to work location choice, the traditional disaggregation approach that assumes uniform distribution of employment across space in the area of analysis, such as transportation analysis zones (TAZ), is no longer satisfactory. To obtain disaggregated employment data to represent detailed land use and then model transportation demand and its environmental impacts, cities have been collecting business establishment data from proprietary data sources or unemployment insurance databases (Wang, Waddell, & Outwater, 2011), which are often expensive and/or have use restrictions. Given this background, we propose to answer the following question: How can we utilize publicly available emerging VGI sources and traditional aggregate census data to estimate disaggregated urban land use (or employment size by category)?In this study, we develop and apply methods that efficiently transform VGI into standardized information that can be utilized in urban planning and particularly illustrate the concept by estimating urban land use (i.e., employment size by category). We propose the use of web mining and machine learning techniques to automatically collect and classify POIs from different sources to a standard taxonomy such as the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) (2012) used in the U.S., Canada and Mexico, which is essential for proper analysis of the POI data, especially when these POIs are collected from different sources. After comparing several classification methods, we apply the results to estimate employment sizes by category at a disaggregated level. With six towns in the Boston metropolitan area as an example, we develop and illustrate the methods. Data sources for this study include employment by category at the aggregate census block group level, volunteered POI information, and geographic boundaries of both the aggregate and disaggregated area of analysis. We also employ two sets of proprietary business establishment data—the first for supervised machine learning training and the second for developing a benchmark model to compare results.The basic unit of information collected from social networks in our study is a point-of-interest, which is a specific point location that a considerable group of people find useful or interesting. The POIs are scattered across a myriad of different websites, systems and devices, complicating the development of an exhaustive database of such information. There are currently hundreds, if not thousands, of voluntarily generated POI directories on the Web, such as Yahoo! Local,1http://local.yahoo.com (Last visited in December 2012).1Google Places2http://www.google.com/places/ (Last visited in December 2012).2and Facebook Places,3https://www.facebook.com/about/location (Last visited in December 2012).3each of which uses its own taxonomy of categories or tags. To take full advantage of these resources, categories must be unified via a common taxonomy, thus maximizing the quantity and heterogeneity of information available. The type of information provided by each source can vary widely, but there exists a common set of fields generally available for each POI, including name, address (and/or GPS position), categories or tags, and optional official website. A clear distinction can be made between local business directories and platforms that are based on social networks. In the first group, the owner itself usually creates the POI and its details. The information provided is usually more accurate because the business establishment wants to be easily found by potential customers; thus, the chosen categories are more precise. In the second group, each individual is free to create a third-party reference to a geo-referenced company or service. The information entered is not validated by any authority, and, in cases with open taxonomies, the category set can be random. However, there are advantages with this group—the database is often more comprehensive in terms of number and types of POIs. Additionally, this group can have a wider spatial coverage, with the same database consisting of data from several cities or even countries; the data reflect the perspective of the user, which is relevant for leisure trip generation, for example.In this study, we give special attention to Yahoo! data, which were essentially built from user-volunteered contributions, for two major reasons: (1) the data are comprehensive for our study area, and (2) the legal terms of Yahoo! service allow us to implement the study. The latter point is particularly relevant, as there are many such data sources on the Web with restrictive rules (e.g., massive data usage not permitted even for research). We also use proprietary business databases available for this research first for supervised machine learning and then for ground truth, including the Dun & Bradstreet (D&B)4http://www.dnb.com/ (Last visited: December, 2012).4and infoUSA5http://www.infousa.com/ (Last visited: December, 2012).5commercial databases created by consultancy companies that specialize in commercial information and insights for businesses.6We obtained these two proprietary databases through university research funding.6The proprietary business establishment data acquisition process was usually semi-automatic and involved the integration of official and corporate databases, statistical analysis and manual evaluation.7According to companies who sell these proprietary databases – http://www.dnb.com/lc/sales-marketing-education/data-quality.html and http://www.infousa.com/data-quality/.7The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents relevant literature and previous studies. Section 3 gives an overview of the research framework and study area. Section 4 discusses the machine learning process and results of automatically classifying online POIs. Section 5 describes the method of employing POIs and aggregate employment data to disaggregate land use into a level with higher spatial resolution and compares estimation results from VGI-based POIs with those from an independent proprietary POI source for ground truth. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
According to our case study, by using volunteered geographic information in the form of points of interest together with publicly available aggregate employment data from the census at the aggregate level, we can derive more accurate land use estimations at the disaggregated level than the traditional disaggregation approach, which assumes uniform distribution of land use across the aggregate spatial level. In general, extracted online POI data are very useful in estimating accurate disaggregated land use, although there are several issues of data validity and reliability. First, because POI information is extracted from online platforms, the coverage and accuracy of the information depends heavily on (1) the completeness of online public sources and (2) the consistency of public categories. For most urban areas in the U.S., where information technology has been widely used to provide and acquire information, the POI information can be widely accessible, but potential gaps may exist between the total business establishments and the available information online. These gaps can be reduced as more cities improve their information technology infrastructure and online user-content platforms for publishing POI information apply rigorous and standardized categorization guidelines. Combining different online sources can help reduce these gaps but may also introduce problems of redundancy, which has been addressed by our machine learning method. However, the issue of data currency may not be easily adjustable because VGI-based POI data may not reflect obsolete business establishments instantaneously, even though these POIs may disappear with time.Depending on the requirements of different types of urban analyses, the frequency of obtaining updated VGI-based POI data can vary as well. For example, researchers can use annually updated VGI-based POI data to estimate disaggregated land use for LUTE model each year. The cost of obtaining these online POIs can be very low once the machine learning classification method has been developed, as the same algorithm can be run repeatedly for updated POI data. However, with various degrees of restrictions on the massive usage of the VGI data according to legal terms by different VGI service providers, there may be additional costs associated with obtaining VGI data.In general, for cities without resources to purchase or update proprietary business establishment data (e.g., infoUSA data), our methods presented here provide an alternative to developing timely disaggregated land use estimations, which are essential for activity-based LUTE models. In a separate study, we have applied this disaggregation approach (using extracted online POIs and aggregate employment data) to Lisbon, Portugal, in an integrated LUTE model developed by the MIT-Portugal program (MPP). Disaggregated land use information is very important to improve travel demand models, partially because travel demand is very sensitive to micro-level changes in travel time and distances. As destinations tend to be more clustered and concentrated than residential locations, the location and categorization information of POI is very useful for planners to understand characteristics and derived travel demand at the micro-level. Meanwhile, as discussed in previous sections, the classification and disaggregation of land use using VGI-based POI can also be very useful for analyzing urban and regional economies, especially when disaggregated employment data by size and industrial category will not be easily available in the future at the local level from public sources, such as the US County Business Patterns or ZIP Code Business Patterns data. The methods developed in this study will be helpful in facilitating researchers and planners to study micro-level travel behavior, travel demand, and urban economies and will create new opportunities for cities with limited resources that wish to develop policy-sensitive urban models at the disaggregated level.