@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spatio-temporal modeling of roof-top photovoltaic panels for improved technical potential assessment and electricity peak load offsetting at the municipal scale

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a methodology for improved roof-top PV deployment decision-making.We calculate solar radiation time series for every potential roof-top using FOSS4G.We compare 15min time step PV electricity generation load against local demand.We demonstrate how demand and supply can be matched in small geographical areas.We propose and evaluate strategies for selecting convenient potential PV plants.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Integrated spatial and energy planning,Solar cadastre,Roof-top photovoltaic,Energy balance time series,Open source GIS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Integrated spatial and energy planning has become a major field of interest to meet the current renewable energy share expansion and CO2 emissions reduction targets. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) play a considerable role in supporting decision making in this field. Solar potential maps are a popular strategy to promote renewable energy generation through photovoltaic (PV) panel installations at city and municipal scales. They indicate the areas of roofs that would provide the maximum amount of energy in kWh per year. These are often used to suggest “optimal locations” for PV-panels and/or recommend system sizes to achieve a certain level of yearly autarchy. This approach is acceptable if PVs have only a minor share in the local energy supply system. However, increased PV-penetration can lead to instability of the local grid, create hazards for the security of the supply, and considerably escalate the storage and system back-up requirements. To obtain a proper understanding of the consequences for the local energy balance when selecting or rejecting a certain installation, examining the hourly and intra-hourly time series of the potential energy generation from PVs is necessary. This paper introduces a GIS-based procedure to estimate the potential PV-electricity generation time series for every roof-top section within a study area using open source software. This procedure is complemented by a series of strategies to select suitable PV-installations considering the time series analysis of supply and demand. Furthermore, thirteen technical indicators are considered to evaluate the PV-installation sets selected with every strategy. The capabilities of the procedure are tested using data from a German rural municipality. The proposed procedure constitutes an efficient and accessible way to assess solar potentials at the municipal scale and to design roof-top PV exploitation plans, which are more appropriate to fulfill the local energy requirements.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A shift in the energy supply system from fossil to renewable energy sources requires integration of the spatial and energy planning processes (Stoeglehner, Niemetz, & Kettl, 2011). In contrast to fossil and nuclear energy sources that concentrate high amounts of energy in reduced volume and are found in specific locations, renewable energy sources (RES) can only be obtained in a relatively low energy density and are dispersed throughout the earth’s surface (Biberacher, Gadocha, & Zocher, 2008; Stoeglehner et al., 2011). When replacing fossil sources by RES, space becomes a precious object, not only for residential, commercial, industrial and transport uses but also for the energy supply infrastructure and resource land (Stoeglehner & Narodoslawsky, 2009). Optimal solutions for these requirements can only be found if the problem is treated in a holistic way. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) offer a solution. They have become essential for determining renewable energy potentials and demonstrating their local impacts (Angelis-Dimakis et al., 2011), as the continuously increasing number of GIS-based studies indicates. They assess the energy generation potential of renewable sources considering environmental, technical, economic, social and/or political criteria (Calvert, Pearce, & Mabee, 2013).Solar potential maps, also called solar cadastres, have become popular tools to promote renewable energy generation through roof-top PV-installations at the city and municipal scales (Agugiaro et al., 2012; Theodoridou, Karteris, Mallinis, Papadopoulos, & Hegger, 2012). In general, these maps provide information about the annual solar irradiation on a surface (kWh/m2/year) and estimate the yearly electricity production from roof-top photovoltaic systems in kWh. The most basic versions are grounded on measurements of the average usable yearly solar radiation in a particular region. The potential areas are the building areas reduced by typical average factors (e.g., average areas of the roof that cannot be used due to the presence of dormers). At the final stage, the total potential energy production is determined by multiplying the remaining area of every building by the amount of solar radiation and an average discount rate to consider the efficiency rates of PV-installations. This type of calculation is prescribed as the minimum requirement for developing municipal energy use plans in Bavaria, Germany (Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Umwelt und Gesundheit, Infrastruktur, & Oberste Baubehörde im Bayerischen Staatsministerium des Innern, 2011). Cities worldwide use digital elevation models gained from LiDAR data and GIS tools. These allow consideration of the shadowing effects of the local topography, near buildings and vegetation in the calculation of the global solar radiation. The most advanced versions provide information including solar-thermal systems, system installation costs, system payback times, potential reduction of CO2 emissions and even the local availability of installers (Kanters, Wall, & Kjellsson, 2014). Furthermore, roof surfaces that are suitable for PV are explicitly shown in online Web-GIS platforms. Thus, building owners can inform themselves quickly and easily about their possibilities for using solar energy. Additionally, the information provided helps public administrations in developing sustainable regional energy supply programs and setting PV-penetration goals.Although rooftop PVs are the best example of spatial multiple-shift use, their fluctuating power output is a serious disadvantage that has received minor attention in the design of solar cadastres. In many cases, the roof area of single and multi-family houses is suitable for installations, which can produce more power than the internal yearly consumption. PV-electricity is generated without causing any sealing or emissions and with minimal visual impact. However, not all energy produced can be used if the generation time does not match the demand periods. With stand-alone systems, this issue can be solved by installing storage capacity. For grid-connected PV-installations, storage can be installed locally, but the grid itself also serves as storage. The grid relocates the excess production to places with actual demand and provides the required electricity when the PV-system does not generate enough. Yet, there are limits to the amount of energy that can be handled by the grid; most parts of the existent infrastructure are not designed to cope with high amounts of reverse loads (U.S. Department of Energy, 2007). A high PV-penetration level affects the stability of the energy supply and the power quality (Azadian & Radzi, 2013; Paatero & Lund, 2007; Passey, Spooner, MacGill, Watt, & Syngellakis, 2011). Moreover, the temporal gaps of the supply and demand reduce the value of investments and increase the payback time of PV-systems (Orioli & Di Gangi, 2013). This problem is ignored when potential locations are rated by taking only the maximum yearly energy production into account, as is the case with solar cadastres. The consideration of the temporal variability of the electricity generation should be part of the decision making process for adequate levels of PV-penetration in sustainable local and regional energy systems. The adequate level of PV-penetration depends both on the mix of energy sources aspired and the local factors affecting rooftop PV-generation, such as rooftop PV orientation, inclination, share of self-consumption and system costs (Lang, Gloerfeld, & Girod, 2015). Although some methodologies were proposed to assess the roof-top PV-potential based on its spatial and temporal aspects, they are either performed in a low resolution such that very important local factors must be neglected (see e.g., Zeyringer et al., 2013) or they provide a very detailed prediction of PV-generation potentials without addressing the local demand (see e.g., Jakubiec & Reinhart, 2013 and Lukač, Seme, Žlaus, Štumberger, & Žalik, 2014).Therefore, the methodology is still missing to model the spatial and temporal features of roof-top PV-electricity generation potentials and electricity demand on the local scale so that peak load offsetting and energy storage can be planned on the municipal level. In this paper, we introduce a methodology to fill this gap and apply the data gained to the strategic planning of renewable local energy systems based on open source GIS solutions.Our approach includes the following steps: first, a procedure to obtain potential PV-electricity generation time series for every roof-top section within a study area is described. Second, three strategies are proposed to select “optimal locations” for roof-top PV-plants using the PV-output time series and considering temporal demand patterns. Third, thirteen technical indicators to evaluate the results of the strategies are presented so that the advantages and disadvantages of every strategy can be discussed and an appropriate roof-top PV-penetration goal can be set.The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we describe the methodology used to generate the electricity demand and PV-output time series for all rooftops in a study area and to analyze them. Section 3 describes the case study where the methodology is tested. The results of the case study are presented in Section 4 and discussed in Section 5. Finally, the last section of the paper is devoted to the conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Solar cadastres are a valuable tool for promoting roof-top PV-installations among the inhabitants of cities and municipalities. They are also used to calculate local PV-potentials and to support the development of regional energy supply programs to expand the penetration of renewable energy in the energy matrix. The methods, tools and data used to produce the solar maps have been improved. However, there is an important factor that is still missing. They do not offer information about the temporal variability of solar resources and their consequences on the local energy system.This paper presented a methodology to gain time series of roof-top PV-potential using well-known open source GIS tools. The requirements in terms of input data are barely more demanding than is normally necessary to produce solar cadastres with summarized yearly information. Furthermore, the accuracy of the prediction is expected to increase because the reduction factor for the PV-electricity generation due to modules/surface temperature can be considered for every time step.The methodology has been applied to data from a German rural municipality. There is a vast difference between the conclusions that could be made from examinations of the yearly and intra-hourly values of the energy generation potential. When analyzing time series, the amount of energy that can actually be exploited is only a minimum fraction of the total yearly potential. Trying to force the PV-penetration beyond 60% of the yearly demand would mean either dumping most part of the generated energy or building storage capacity many times larger than the installed PV-capacity. Only penetration levels below 40% would allow most of the energy to be consumed. Setting an optimal penetration level goal for a municipality depends on additional specific local technical and economic factors that are not considered here. However, using the proposed procedure contributes to concretizing the limits of technical possibility and meaningfulness.It is usual to consider that the optimal roofs-tops for PV-installations are those receiving the maximum amount of solar global radiation per year. We proposed three strategies for rating PV-panels that illustrate to what extent this is true when considering all potential roof-top areas in the same grid. Even in a limited geographic area, where climatic differences between PV-installation locations do not play a role, there are combinations of roof-top PV-installations that can deliver better results than the combination selected when maximizing the energy production. It is possible to deliver more energy when it is actually required. It is also possible to reduce the over-production peaks and the required back-up and storage capacities for the whole area. The only drawback is the increment of required installed capacity. The analysis should be extended to further technical, economic and environmental factors to find an optimal strategy. Nevertheless, for penetration levels up to 40% and locations sharing similar conditions with our case study, the proposed strategy ProperP could bring a series of important advantages.Future research should include improvements in the resolution of the digital elevation model and the consideration of a period of time longer than a year. These considerations will increase the confidence in the conclusions that can be made from the methodology. On the other hand, further RES and back-up technologies, not only for electricity generation but also for heating and warm water, should be included in the analysis at the same detail as we have proposed for PV. This will serve to evaluate the complementarity between energy sources and to properly define RES penetration goals.Finally, PV-plants are not only built on rooftops with the maximum amount of expected energy production per year. In most locations, the public interest is to increase the PV-share, and the interest of private householders is to build plants that generate profit. There is not a specific strategy that is being followed. Setting an adequate penetration objective and having a concrete plan to achieve it, can, however, contribute to shaping the local energy system sustainably and to optimizing the use of space. Policy makers need tools to propose a roadmap and to make private householders aware of the actual effects that their potential installations cause in the local system. This is a precondition to make realistic economic evaluations of planned investments. Solar cadastres that also take the temporal variability of the energy generation potential into account are an important step to satisfy these requirements. The proposed methodology is a way to gain this information by using well-established open source GIS tools.