@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Beyond preference: Modelling segregation under regulation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A stylized Pigovian intervention into Schelling’s classic segregation model.A bottom-up computational approach to modelling interactions between private preferences and public institutions.A technical attempt to address the relations between race, space and planning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Segregation,Cellular automaton,Preference,Institution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Segregation models often focus on private racial preference but overlook the institutional context. This paper represents an effort to move beyond the preference centricity. In this paper, an ideal Pigovian regulatory intervention is emulated and added into Schelling’s (1971) classic spatial proximity model of racial segregation, with an aim to preserve collective welfare against the negative externalities induced by the changing local racial compositions after individual relocations. A key discovery from a large number of cellular automata is that the Pigovian regulation tends to result in less segregated but also less efficient (in terms of aggregate utility) residential patterns than laissez faire. This finding, albeit from a highly stylized model, bears intellectual relations to an important practical question: What are the potential racial effects of Pigovian local planning interventions, such as financially motivated anti-density zoning or the collection of a development impact fee? On top of its modest policy implications, this paper demonstrates a bottom-up computational modelling approach to reconcile the preference-based and institution-orientated academic perspectives regarding racial residential segregation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As a longstanding American urban phenomenon, residential segregation by race involves both preferential and institutional reasons. However, scholarship on this subject tends to fragment, eliciting a quite clear divide between the preference-based versus the institution-orientated perspectives. For instance, Schelling’s (1971) classic segregation models1Schelling (1971) actually contains two segregation models. The first is a spatial proximity model or the so called checkerboard model of segregation between neighbourhoods. The other is a bounded neighbourhood tipping model. This paper mainly addresses the former model.1build entirely upon individual preference regarding the community level racial composition, with little attention paid to the local regulatory context. This feature seems to persist in Schelling’s contemporary counterparts (Card et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2003; Clark, 1991; Fossett & Waren, 2005; Wang, 2011; Zhang, 2011). On the other hand, since the seminal work by Massey and Denton (1993), inquiries about the institutional causes of racial segregation have mushroomed, primarily relying on more qualitative methods coupled with in-depth case studies (Squires & Kubrin, 2005; Squires & O’Connor, 2001).This paper may be seen as an attempt to move beyond the aforementioned preference-institution divide. Revisiting Schelling’s (1971) classic spatial proximity model, this study explores the segregation outcomes in an artificial municipality which regulates individual agent actions for the sake of collective welfare in an ideal Pigou (1920) style, by explicitly accounting for and adjusting the potential negative externalities of all private transactions and relocations. In methodological terms, this piece resonates with earlier works by Webster and Wu (2001) and Heikkila and Wang (2009), among others, in trying to redress the micro-foundations of bottom-up computational models from an institutional economics perspective. While the word “institution”, according to North (1990), can stand both for formal interventions and informal conventions, its first connotation is mainly referred to hereafter.The relation between racial residential segregation and local planning regulation has for long been debated. For example, Nelson, Sanchez, et al. (2004) studied the data about major US metropolitan areas in the 1990s, but found no significant statistical relations between segregation measured in dissimilarity index and the adoption of such planning interventions as restrictive land use zoning, impact fee collection, and building permit caps. By contrast, another empirical study later by Rothwell and Massy (2009) identified financially motivated anti-density zoning as a significant factor in excluding, though covertly, ethnic minorities from White dominated residential suburbs.Unlike the previous studies, this paper is intended to address the above debate from a more generic modelling perspective. Cellular automaton is employed in this study as a simplified agent-based simulation approach (Batty, 2009) to revisit Schelling’s (1971) seminal spatial proximity model, which assumes a gridded urban spatial structure resembling a checkerboard that contains a finite number of locations. Each location can be easily represented by a cell, with every cell either accommodating a Black or a White family, as in the Schelling original. A household’s satisfaction, measured in terms of utility, only depends on the racial composition of its neighbours, who live upon the nearest surrounding cells. When a household is unsatisfied with the local racial make-up, it seeks to move to another location. In Schelling (1971) relocation is essentially free insofar as the space allows. In the present model, however, any relocation imposing a net social cost upon the whole municipal community is prohibited. This could be framed as an ideal Pigou (1920) scenario, wherein the externalities of individual action are perfectly explicit and internalized through interventions, making the aggregate social cost tantamount to the accounted private cost; action stops when the cost is too high.A large number of simulations show that a municipality which governs individual agents using the Pigovian mode of regulation eventually tends to generate less aggregate utility, but also becomes less racially segregated than in the Schelling original. Besides its quite intriguing, albeit admittedly modest, policy implications, this study illustrates the relevance of cellular automaton, as a kind of bottom-up computational modelling approach, to urban planning research in general and segregation studies in particular, given the profound spatial as well as institutional complexities therein contained (Batty, 2007).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews Schelling’s (1971) spatial proximity model and points out that the model can be modified to account for Pigovian local regulation as a stylized institutional factor. This is followed by the set up of cellular automaton in this paper, with the simulation results reported and analyzed afterwards. The penultimate section discusses the policy and intellectual implications. Conclusions are drawn in the end, along with suggestions for future research.The phenomenon of residential segregation by race not only draws urban planners’ attention, but also interests economists. Thomas Schelling (1971) is one of the first mainstream economists who have looked into the dynamics of segregation. From a game-theoretic perspective Schelling modelled segregation in a spatially explicit fashion. Schelling found that ethnic integration would eventually be improbable, even if individual agents have only mild racial preference and just avoid becoming ethnic minority in their local neighbourhoods.Fig. 1below illustrates the structure of private racial preference in Schelling’s spatial proximity model. The two vertical axes in Fig. 1 measure, by utility (U), the degree of a White and a Black household’s satisfaction respectively with housing when living in a neighbourhood. The horizontal x axis shows the percentage of neighbours who are African Americans.Schelling assumed that a household, whether Black or White, would dislike becoming racial minority within a neighbourhood and would want to move away immediately if that happened. Otherwise a household would stay happily at its current place and remain indifferent to its neighbours’ ethnic identity. Let U=0 denote dissatisfaction and U=1 stand for satisfaction. Hence the utility function is binary for both a White and a Black household:(1)Uw=1,when,x⩽50%0,when,x>50%(2)Ub=1,when,x⩾50%0,when,x<50%Eqs. (1) and (2) are represented respectively by two lines in Fig. 1, one marked with blank and the other with solid diamonds. The dotted line in Fig. 1 stands for a catastrophic transition in utility from 0 to 1 or vice versa.Schelling defined neighbourhoods explicitly in spatial terms. He first examined locations on a line, upon which every point has eight neighbouring points, four on each side. He then moved to a two dimensional checkerboard model, in which a neighbourhood is usually made up of nine cells forming a 3*3 square, hence a typical Moore neighbourhood. This rule however does not apply to neighbourhoods in the urban periphery, which may contain less than nine cells given the boundary constraint.For an illustrative example, in Fig. 2above, there is a 3*3 square containing nine white cells, numbered from 1 to 9. Cell 9 in the center of this white square has eight neighbours, including all of the cells surrounding it. Note that this particular neighbourhood is unique for cell 9. In fact every cell in Schelling’s checkerboard model perceives its neighbourhood in reference to the cell’s own location; no cell shares exactly the same neighbourhood with another cell.Schelling also allowed any discontent households to move freely to wherever they want, as long as the space is available. It should be noted that Schelling did presume a certain number of vacancies in the checkerboard so that an unsatisfied household could relocate to one of the preferred untaken spots and in the mean time leave a new vacancy available for other unhappy agents.Schelling’s free moving scheme exemplifies a typical institutional arrangement in most standard segregation models. But contrary to what is emulated in Schelling, a household’s location choice, in reality, is often affected by the various forms of regulatory planning control. One primary example is residential zoning. In many affluent suburban communities, the local zoning ordinances often mandate minimum lot size and single family occupancy (Fischel, 2000, 2004). More price-based interventions include charging a one shot upfront impact fee toward a new residential development (Ihlanfeldt & Shaughnessy, 2004). Otherwise if a municipality is managed by a local homeowner association, a new participant is often required to deposit a considerable amount of membership dues (Mckenzie, 1994; Teaford, 1997).Notwithstanding the diverse forms of planning regulations, economists consider most of these interventions essentially Pigovian, in the sense of aiming to internalize the negative externalities that private deals can cause to the local community as a whole (Fischel, 2000; Ihlanfeldt & Boehm, 1987). For example, an individual homeowner letting a single family house to multiple households usually means the entire community is burdened with extra demand for local infrastructures such as water and sewage services. This kind of private party transaction, in economics terms, reduces the utility of those who are not directly involved in and thus external to the deal, often ending up with net social cost. Anti-density zoning resolves such externality issues by restricting the supply of land, capping the number of residents per unit, and essentially raising the price of housing for potential home buyers and renters. Compared with zoning, collecting an impact fee is even more direct by charging the newcomers a sum of payment to offset the negative externalities of immigration. Interventions in the both cases are Pigovian, in the sense of forcing a concerned individual to be responsible for the social cost of private transactions.Certainly, the exercise of any intervention in practice is always contingent upon a variety of political, cultural or even coincidental factors and thus much more complex than described above. Yet notwithstanding the real world complexity, it is both possible and reasonable to incorporate a stylized Pigovian intervention into Schelling’s classic spatial proximity model of racial segregation. Note that the same externality issue actually also lurks in Schelling’s model. Since every household cares about the racial make up of its neighbourhood, a household’s utility might be affected adversely when the old neighbours move away and new families come in, which may result in an undesirable change in the racial composition of local neighbourhood (Pancs & Vriend, 2007). If the entire community ends up with a net loss in welfare due to the relocations of a few individual agents, a Pigovian regulatory intervention becomes justifiable, for the same reason that zoning and impact fees, for instance, are rationalized in practice.To date it remains controversial how the variegated local planning regulations can affect the pattern of racial residential segregation. The debate revolves particularly around the effect of zoning on local ethnic diversity. On one hand critics like Sager (1969) and Seitles (1998) have fiercely charged exclusionary zoning as de facto racial discrimination in the housing market. Their key claim is that the US housing market is imbued with racially discriminatory private preference. Zoning covertly institutionalizes such private discrimination in the name of protecting communal interest. On the other hand, researchers like Fischel (2004) insist that zoning does not directly target race, since lower income renters and homebuyers of any ethnic background can be priced out of the market due to such ordinances as density control. More empirical research also shows divergent results. For example, Nelson et al. (2004) suggests that there is no significant statistical relations between the degree of segregation and the exercise of planning interventions such as restrictive land use zoning, impact fee collection, or building permit caps in major US metropolitan areas during the 1990s. However, Rothwell and Massy (2009) discovered that anti-density zoning and impact fee collections did seem to significantly exclude African Americans from White dominated residential suburbs.The above controversy can be partly attributed to the gap between what is modelled and what is happening in reality. Conventional segregation models tend to place an overwhelming weight on private preferences regarding the community level racial composition, while largely neglecting the local regulatory context (e.g., Card et al., 2008; Chen, 2003; Clark, 1991; Fossett & Waren, 2005; Wang, 2011; Zhang, 2011). A more integrated approach would not only look at the individual’s racial preferences, but also account for the institutional factors that affect agent’s decisions and actions. Recent years have seen a mounting number of publications in this direction (e.g., Benenson et al., 2009; Grauwin, Bertin, et al., 2009; Pancs & Vriend, 2007).A strengthened notion about the interplay between private choices and public institutions, arguably, also features many contemporary developments in the general field of computational urban spatial modelling. For instance, Webster and Wu (2001) used a cellular simulation to justify localized land use control from a Coasian efficiency perspective. Heikkila and Wang (2009) also deliver an agent-based model of polycentic urban form and illustrate the implicit yet critical influence of social institutions on urban spatial structure. The both works, among many others, demonstrate a renewed appreciation of the microeconomic foundations of bottom-up computational urban modelling, aiming perceptively at emulating spontaneous agent actions given certain types of institutional structures. Bottom-up computational modelling deployed in such fashion, according to Batty (2007), has arisen as an essential approach to understanding and unravelling social and behavioural complexities underpinning urban spatial structures. In a similar spirit, the next section of this paper presents a cellular automaton as a simplified agent-based model (Batty, 2009), whereby an individual agent’s freedom of action in Schelling’s spatial proximity model is regulated and restrained for the sake of collective welfare.A cellular automaton is coded in Visual Basic after a substantial modification and secondary programming based on Teknomo’s (2001) original codes. The specific model setup is detailed below.There is a municipal space which contains N*N cells as land parcels available for housing. The definition of neighbourhood mostly follows the Schelling (1971) original, with one difference. While Schelling allows a certain number of cells to be vacant, in the revised model all cells are occupied, either by a Black or a White household. This setting is necessary because the revised model involves a moving-by-swapping algorithm as detailed below.Since there is no vacant cell available, a discontent household can move only by exchanging its current location with another cell. Adapted from Zhang’s (2011), a moving-by-swapping algorithm is employed in this paper, guided by the principle of Pareto optimization. Specifically, imagine two households from a same racial group who could swap their locations. Yet since the both agents have the same utility function, a trade would make neither better off; both would remain unhappy. In contrast a transaction between two racially different households would at least make neither worse off and possibly increase the total payoffs. Given Eqs. (1) and (2), Eq. (3) holds for any individual location:(3)Uw+Ub=1⇒Ub=1,if,Uw=0Uw=1,if,Ub=0Eq. (3) has the following intuition: A household will deal with another only if, (a) they are from different racial group, and, (b) one of the two is unhappy at its present location. In other words, a household would always end up satisfied by dealing with an unhappy household, insofar as the two households are from different ethnic groups. Note that this does not necessarily mean the former would have to be better off, since an agent can be content already before it switches. On the other hand, a discontent household can never become any further worse off; swapping location is nevertheless possible (yet not guaranteed) to make the unsatisfied happy again. In summary an exchange between two racially different households must be Pareto improving (Zhang, 2011). Thus given the principle of Pareto improving, two households from different racial backgrounds would always agree to a deal, as long as at least one of them is unsatisfied with the existing condition.An implicit assumption underlying this model concerns the vision of individual agent. An agent is assumed to only see the immediately adjacent peers, in the same way as it delineates its own neighbourhood. However one may also consider a trade between two faraway agents made up of multiple rounds of local transactions as the two agents move closer and closer throughout the process of spatial simulation. Now assume that spatial proximity decides the priority in deal-making. According to Eqs. (1) and (2), a discontent family must have more than half of its neighbours from the alternative ethnic group, so it has to choose which neighbour gets priority. In this model a household is supposed to start looking from the cell immediately to the left of it and then move clockwise until it finds the first possible dealmaker within its neighbourhood. For an illustrative example, a household upon cell 9 in Fig. 2 would search from cell 1 to 8, following the numerical sequence clockwise, until it identifies a suitable neighbour to trade the locations. Similar rule applies to a household located in the urban periphery with less than eight neighbours.As there are only two kinds of households inhabiting the municipal space, every cell can exhibit only two possible racial states, or formally,s∈{w,b}, where w denotes White and b stands for Black. Also note that an unhappy agent can always find a racially different neighbour who is willing to exchange locations. Thus a Markovian transition function for any single cell may be expressed as the follows:(4)si,t+1=w,if,Ubi,t=0,or,Uwj,t=0b,if,Uwi,t=0,or,Ubj,t=0si,t+1denotes the state of cell i at time t+1, which depends on the utility of a household occupying cell i at time t. Given the moving-by-swapping algorithm, an unhappy household will always switch with a neighbour located at cell j from the other racial group. Otherwise a happy family would simply stay. Another possibility is that a household, whether happy or not, has to swap its home with a nearby unhappy agent who is racially different and taking cell j at time t. (A caveat is that cell j’s relative location to cell i is not fixed in a spatial sense. Instead one may assume that an agent upon cell j always gets the priority to deal with an agent upon cell i, as long as there is a deal to make.) This would also trigger a transition in cell i’s racial state from time t to t+1. Finally the sojourn between t and t+1 is defined as the length of time during which every cell has to update its ethnic state once as per Eq. (4).Regulation in this model targets the aggregate household utility within the municipality averaged by the number of households. The following Eq. (5) assesses the average utility, denoted as ψ, at time t across the municipal space.(5)ψt=∑i=1N*NUsi,ti,t/(N*N)Instead of maximizing ψt, regulation in this model aims to ensure that no location swapping would ever diminish ψt. To formalize this type of regulation, letξi↔j,tdenote the net social profit or aggregate efficiency gain that a location swap between two households at cell i and cell j at time t can produce for the entire local municipality. As indicated in Eq. (6) below,ξi↔j,tis assumed to be made up of two parts. One part is the total private pay-offs for the two households involved in the exchange, denoted asPi↔j,t. The other part is,Ei↔j,t, the externality this transaction imposes upon the other local households which are not directly engaged in the deal.Ei↔j,t<0implies a negative externality induced by the private transaction.(6)ξi↔j,t=Pi↔j,t+Ei↔j,tIfPi↔j,t+Ei↔j,t<0, or in other words,ξi↔j,t<0, the transaction entails an overall inefficiency or a net social cost and will be forbidden under Pigovian regulation for the sake of infringing collective interest. This may also be understood as a scenario wherein the two private parties cannot make sufficient profits to afford a Pigovian impact fee that is intended to make up for the induced negative externality. Otherwise the exchange will be endorsed. In this vein, the following relationship is readily deducible:(7)ψt+1=ψt+∑j=1N∑i=1Nξi↔j,t/(N*N),only if,ξi↔j,t≥0,⇒ψt+1⩾ψt∀tEq. (7) says that the regulation tends to improve or, at least, would never reduce the overall household utility in a municipality. To ensure that this condition holds, a backtracking algorithm is applied when coding the model in Visual Basic (Gurari, 1999).Incorporating Pigovian regulation into the model requires the rule of transition aforementioned in Eq. (4) to be accordingly modified as illustrated in Eq. (8) below:(8)si,t+1=W,if,Ubi,t=0,or,Uwj,t=0,and,ξi↔j,t⩾0B,if,Uwi,t=0,or,Ubj,t=0,and,ξi↔j,t⩾0Recall thatξi↔j,tonly exists when there is at least one unhappy agent either taking cell i or cell j at time t. Otherwise no transaction would happen between two satisfied agents.Because cellular automaton is a simulation approach, some stopping conditions need to be specified in advance. In the case of this model a key interest lies with the average housing utility, ψt. If the value of ψtremains constant for N iterations, or formally,(9)ψT+N=ψT+N-1=⋯=ψTthen the simulation is assumed to reach a stable endpoint at time T. Otherwise the simulation should also stop after a sufficiently large number of iterations, which equals to the total number of cells involved in the model:(10)T=N*NAn initial racial residential pattern needs to be placed upon the municipal space as a starting point of the simulation. As in the Schelling original, two types of distribution are generated randomly by computer as the initial patterns. The first involves a random distribution of an equal number of White and Black households. In the second case there is no control on the ratio between the White and Black population, as long as the aggregate population equal to N*N. However it should be noted that, in the both cases, the number of Blacks and Whites, once after a simulation has started, would remain fixed until the end of the simulation.Recall Schelling’s key discovery: Segregation would always arise, even though individual agents only have a very mild racial preference. Will this discordance between “Micromotives and Macrobehaviours” (Schelling, 1978) persist in a regulated Schelling model? To answer this question, one needs to monitor the segregation pattern. For this purpose an indicator is adapted from Moran’s I to specifically measure the overall degree of segregation:2The more conventional segregation indices such as the dissimilarity index are not suitable in this case, wherein the boundary of neighbourhood is self-referenced (given a cell’s own location) rather than delineated exogenously as in Massey and Denton (1989), for example.2(11)|It|=∑i=1N*N∑k=1n[Xk,t-∑i=1N*NXi,t/(N*N)]/[Xi,t-∑i=1N*NXi,t/(N*N)]where(12)Xi,t=0,if,si,t=w1,if,si,t=band cell k is one of cell i’s neighbours, including but not limited to cell j. n is the total count of neighbours and for most cells, n=8. n might be less than eight for cells at the municipal borders.Given the statistical properties of Moran’s I, the value of Itfalls in the range of [−1,1] (Odland, 1988). In the context of this model,It=1, if the entire municipality sees a complete separation between White and Black households. In another extreme,It=-1, if a household, wherever it lives within the municipality, always finds all of its neighbours to be from the other ethnic group. Finally,It=0, if every household is located in a racially mixed neighbourhood, with half of the neighbours being White and the other half being Black. Thus,|It|, the absolute value of It, has a value range as [0,1]. A larger value in|It|indicates a racially segregated pattern overall, whereas a smaller value suggests the municipality to be relatively more integrated in racial terms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
