@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of two-view geometry methods with automatic ground-truth generation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Easy data collection in any 3D, feature rich scene with any calibrated cameraGround truth acquired automatically by high resolution structure from motionRigorous 2-view geometry evaluation with many reduced resolution test samplesMore elaborate rigid geometry tests are trivial to devise, given 3D ground truth.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evaluation,Database,Automated ground truth,Structure from motion,Multi-view geometry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of recovering the geometry of a pair of partially overlapping camera views has been addressed in a multitude of ways. The most common solutions consist of establishing correspondence by means of robust local image feature extraction and matching, computing an initial estimate of geometry using a linear method in a robust framework and, lastly, iterative non-linear refinement [1–4]. Evaluating the performance of such a system is in itself an important and challenging problem. While geometry estimation methods could be analysed with relative ease by means of simulation, evaluating the effectiveness of the visual components of the process is more difficult.A number of evaluations related to multi-view geometry have been made available, as reviewed in Section 2. The majority of these methods focus on a theoretical analysis of the performance of local image features and descriptors (see [5] for a review of local image features). These evaluations suffer from various limitations, such as unrealistic and restricted scenery and small data set size, and extending them can be a difficult and expensive task.Many evaluations involve planar scenes, which are not sufficiently challenging for emerging wide-baseline techniques. A number of 3D scene evaluations have been prepared using a robot arm to acquire the camera pose accurately. While these are more challenging, they are limited to small, artificial scenes (unless one is willing to acquire a large, expensive robotic arm). Extending any of these data sets to other spectra, such as thermal infra-red, is not feasible because thermal features are typically spatially diffuse and relatively homogeneous on continuous planes.This paper proposes an evaluation system that makes use of calibrated video with relatively high spatio-temporal resolution to acquire ground truth geometry and generates a large number of difficult test cases by decimating the video. The ground truth is computed by means of a structure from motion (SFM) algorithm designed to maximise accuracy. The only equipment required is a calibrated camera. Test data is generated by reducing the spatial resolution of the video and selecting pairs of frames with geometry characteristics that match the desired evaluation regime. For example, in order to evaluate a system's robustness to change in depth or scale, frame pairs are selected with a range of different depth ratios, while ensuring that the change in view angle is tightly controlled to eliminate its influence on results. The high spatio-temporal resolution of the original video and the accuracy of the ground truth reconstruction system typically ensures that the error in the ground truth is several orders of magnitude smaller than what any current multi-view geometry system can produce from the decimated, wide baseline test cases.The proposed system is useful for constructing evaluations of any part of the multi-view geometry estimation process in any scene with at least some trackable features and is not restricted to the visual domain. It is especially suitable for mid to wide baseline evaluations. As long as there is a significant reduction in resolution between the original and test video, the evaluation will produce valid results. If original and test resolution are the same, the accuracy of the ground truth may be comparable to the test system and will therefore not provide a meaningful baseline.Example evaluation scenarios are presented in Section 4 to demonstrate the proposed system. While the presented evaluations are not exhaustive in terms of the range of evaluated techniques, they serve to demonstrate the flexibility and application domain of the proposed evaluation system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
