@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gaussian Markov random field based improved texture descriptor for image segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Distributions of GMRF local parameter estimates as improved texture descriptors.Spatially localized parameter estimation using local linear regression.Approaches to overcome inconsistencies in localized parameter estimation.Proposed descriptors capture both spatial dependencies and distributions of texture.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gaussian Markov random field,Texture feature extraction,Local feature distributions,Local linear regression,Texture segmentation,Natural image analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Texture plays a vital role in human perception of visual objects and scenic regions, together with other visual cues such as colour, brightness and form [1]. As a result, much research in recent years has been carried out in texture feature extraction [2–6]. Segmentation of textured images has its own significance in image segmentation domain with wide spread applications in many fields including medical image processing, remote sensing, document processing, defect detection and object recognition [1]. Feature-based texture segmentation basically consists of two successive processes; texture feature extraction and a routine of feature clustering [7]. The texture feature extraction mainly aims at formulating effective discriminative texture descriptors and has been intensively studied [2–4,6].In statistical model based texture feature extraction, texture is assumed as a realization of a random process which is governed by the model parameters. Texture features obtained from these methods, especially Markov random fields (MRF), have proved to offer a powerful framework for image analysis [8–10]. Gaussian Markov random field (GMRF) is an important subclass of MRF whose joint distribution is a multivariate Gaussian distribution [9]. A local conditional probability distribution of GMRF encapsulates spatial dependencies between a pixel and its neighbours [11]. Model parameters of the conditional distribution offer a satisfactory feature set, which successfully enables to discriminate many different textures [12]. GMRF is widely popular because it avoids the difficulties in parameter estimation and therefore makes the process analytically and computationally efficient [9,13,14]. Using a Gaussian model is a valid assumption because most of the real textures like wood, wool, water, etc. obey the Gaussian notion [14]. GMRF based features produce good results for homogeneous, fine, stochastic textures, but poorly perform when characterizing more structured and macro textures [10,15].In this paper our contribution is to propose a method based on GMRFs which can easily capture both statistical and structural properties of a texture. It can overcome the problem of parameter smoothing occurred in traditional GMRF parameter estimation. Our method suggests simple alterations to the existing GMRF feature extraction technique and achieves significantly better results. We perform parameter estimation using least squares estimation similar to the traditional GMRF parameter estimation, however we fit localized linear models at each pixel based on local linear regression. The issues arising in the local parameter estimation process are drawn into special attention and are addressed by using the generalized inverse [16], setting constraints on estimation window size and applying regularization. The localized process of parameter estimation results in spatial variations in the parameter estimates which are repetitive with the periodic texture patterns. We propose the distributions of these local parameters as a successful discriminative texture descriptor and designate as local parameter histograms (LPHs).LPH descriptors capture both pixel dependencies and spatial distributions in a texture and therefore give a significant discriminative performance over classical GMRF features. In this study, we perform general and natural texture image segmentation using the novel LPH descriptors and demonstrate convincing segmentation results with a simple segmentation method such as k-means clustering algorithm. Segmentation experiments on large datasets are carried out. The LPH descriptors are also compared against the state-of-the-art structural and spectral texture feature extraction methods based on local feature distributions. The results on natural image segmentation could be further improved by integrating colour information and using advanced segmentation algorithms for better boundary localization. Therefore, for texture segmentation where more discriminative features are required rather than exact modelling of texture, LPH features are a better choice over the classical GMRF features.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide the background which lead to the novel texture descriptors. Section 3 presents the theoretical foundation of GMRFs and in Section 4 we discuss local linear regression and its adaptation to GMRF parameter estimation. In Section 5 we address the issues arising in localized estimation with small sample sizes. Section 6 describes the construction of local parameter histograms. Section 7 illustrates the experimental results on texture segmentation and finally, we conclude this work in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have introduced a novel improved texture descriptor based on GMRFs. Although much research have been proposed to improve discriminative power of GMRFs based features, localized feature formulation and their distributions have not been given proper consideration. In this study with simple alterations and posing carefully selected restrictions to the classical GMRF parameter estimation process, the localized parameter estimates are obtained. These localized parameter estimates are able to well preserve structural information and their distributions form an effective texture feature. Also these features are less dependent on model order selection and Gaussian restrictions, however, they harness the advantage of simplicity of parameter estimation in GMRFs. The distributions of local parameters named as LPH descriptors significantly improve the discriminative power of classical GMRF features. Also they show robust effective results compared to the state-of-the-art texture descriptors. Impressive natural image segmentation results have been achieved using LPH descriptors with k-means clustering algorithm. However, the boundary localization of segmentation process can be further improved by integrating colour information and using advanced segmentation methods.