@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Piecewise-planar reconstruction using two views

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A piecewise planar reconstruction pipeline is proposed.Line cuts are detected based on signal symmetry analysis.SymStereo and PEARL are combined for carrying the 3D reconstruction and plane fitting simultaneously.Experiments show significant improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Piecewise-planar reconstruction,SymStereo,Stereo-rangefinding,Semi-dense reconstruction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The article describes a reconstruction pipeline that generates piecewise-planar models of man-made environments using two calibrated views. The 3D space is sampled by a set of virtual cut planes that intersect the baseline of the stereo rig and implicitly define possible pixel correspondences across views. The likelihood of these correspondences being true matches is measured using signal symmetry analysis [1], which enables to obtain profile contours of the 3D scene that become lines whenever the virtual cut planes intersect planar surfaces. The detection and estimation of these lines cuts is formulated as a global optimization problem over the symmetry matching cost, and pairs of reconstructed lines are used to generate plane hypotheses that serve as input to PEARL clustering [2]. The PEARL algorithm alternates between a discrete optimization step, which merges planar surface hypotheses and discards detections with poor support, and a continuous optimization step, which refines the plane poses taking into account surface slant. The pipeline outputs an accurate semi-dense Piecewise-Planar Reconstruction of the 3D scene. In addition, the input images can be segmented into piecewise-planar regions using a standard labeling formulation for assigning pixels to plane detections. Extensive experiments with both indoor and outdoor stereo pairs show significant improvements over state-of-the-art methods with respect to accuracy and robustness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Stereo cameras are becoming increasingly popular because of the recent advent of 3D visualization and display. A few years ago they were considered special purpose devices that could only be found in research laboratories and high-end equipments, but nowadays they are a consumer electronics product being available either as standalone hand-held cameras (e.g. Fujifilm Finepix 3D and Sony Bloggie 3D), or integrated into smart-phones (e.g. HTC Evo 3D). Our work is motivated by this proliferation of stereo cameras that is expected to create an urge for robust algorithms able to render complete, photo-realistic 3D models in an automatic manner.Stereo reconstruction is a classical problem in computer and robot vision that deserved the attention of thousands of authors [3,4]. Despite the many advances in the field, situations of poor texture, variable illumination, severe surface slant or occlusion are still challenging for most stereo matching methods, making it difficult to find a tuning that provides good results under a broad variety of acquisition circumstances [5]. Since man-made environments are dominated by planar surfaces, several authors suggested to overcome the above mentioned difficulties by using the planarity assumption as a prior for stereo reconstruction [6-10]. These approaches have the advantage of providing piecewise-planar 3D models of the scene that are perceptually pleasing and geometrically simple, and, thus, their rendering, storage and transmission is computationally less complex. This article proposes a pipeline for two-view Piecewise-Planar Reconstruction (PPR) understood as the detection and reconstruction of dominant planar surfaces in the scene.11We mean by PPR something that is different from approximating surfaces by small planes, as typically done in several dense stereo methods (e.g. [11,12])PPR is in a large extent a chicken-and-egg problem. If there is accurate 3D evidence about the scene, such as points, lines, vanishing directions, etc, then the problem of detecting, segmenting, and estimating the pose of dominant planes can be potentially solved using standard model fitting techniques [2,13]. On the other hand, if there is a prior knowledge about dominant planar surfaces in the scene, then the matching process can be constrained to improve the accuracy of the final 3D reconstruction, e.g. the known plane orientations can be used to guide the stereo aggregation [11]. Existing methods for PPR typically comprise three steps that are executed sequentially:1.3D reconstruction: The objective is to collect 3D evidence about the scene from multiple views. This evidence can either be obtained from sparse stereo that matches a sparse set of features across views (e.g. [8,9]), or from dense stereo that performs dense data association between frames by assigning to each pixel a disparity value (e.g. [10]).Plane hypotheses generation: Given the 3D data, the objective is to detect and estimate the pose of planar surfaces using some sort of multi-model fitting approach.Plane labeling: The goal is to assign to each pixel one of the plane hypotheses generated in the previous step. This is usually done using a Markov Random Field (MRF) formulation with photo-consistency being used as data term.While most methods were originally designed to receive multiple views [6,7,8,9,10,14], we propose a pipeline that uses only two views and makes no assumptions about the scene other than the fact of being dominated by planar surfaces. The novelty is mainly in the steps of 3D Reconstruction and Plane Hypothesis Generation, and the contributions can be summarized as follows:•Reconstruction of line cuts using Stereo from Induced Symmetry (SymStereo): Establishing dense stereo correspondence is computationally expensive specially when dealing with high-resolution images. On the other hand, two-view sparse stereo tends to provide insufficient 3D data for establishing accurate plane hypotheses. Thus, we propose to carry a semi-dense reconstruction of the scene by independently recovering depth along a set of pre-defined virtual planes using SymStereo [1]. Since the intersections of the virtual scan planes with the planar surfaces in the scene are lines, we extract line segments from the profile cuts and use these line cuts to generate plane hypotheses.Improving SymStereo accuracy in the case of surface slant: In a similar manner to what happens in conventional stereo, surface slant affects the depth estimation obtained from SymStereo. In this case, the line cuts are poorly reconstructed and the plane surface estimation is inaccurate. We study the problem of surface slant in the context of the SymStereo framework and devise a simple solution that enables the reconstruction of highly slanted planes.Global plane fitting: Most methods for PPR treat stereo matching and plane detection in a sequential manner [6,14,7,8,9,10]. This is problematic because the accuracy of the plane hypotheses is inevitably limited by the accuracy of the initial 3D reconstruction that does not take into account the fact of the scene being dominated by planar surfaces. We carry the 3D reconstruction and the plane fitting in a simultaneous and integrated manner using the recent PEARL framework proposed in [2]. The algorithm alternates between a global discrete optimization step, which merges plane hypotheses and discards spurious detections, and a continuous optimization step over the symmetry energy, which refines the plane pose estimation taking into account surface slant. The output is a set of plane hypotheses and a semi-dense PPR of the 3D scene, where the reconstructed line cuts are labeled according to the plane detections.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
