@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Timely autonomous identification of UAV safe landing zones

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An autonomous method of identifying UAV safe landing zones from imagery is presented.Fuzzy logic is used to combine various attribute values and determine a safety score.We model the execution times of two safe landing zone detection options.Incorporating knowledge enhances accuracy and reduces susceptibility to noise.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
UAV safe landing zone detection,Terrain classification,Fuzzy logic,UAV safety,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have the potential to revolutionise current working practices for many military and civilian applications such as assisting in search-and-rescue missions [1] and environmental monitoring [2]. The widespread availability of multiple Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) air frame designs when coupled together with recent advances in sensing technologies such as lightweight, high resolution colour cameras ensures that in comparison to manned aircraft UAVs offer a versatile and often inexpensive solution to many such applications. A key advantage provided by UAVs is the removal of humans from situations which may be classified as dull, dangerous or dirty, for example power line inspection, aerial surveillance and monitoring of atmospheric pollution.There are two main types of UAV control, piloted and autonomous. Piloted UAVs are controlled in real-time by a human operator often located many miles from the deployment area. On the other hand, autonomous UAVs generate low-level flight control commands in response to high-level goals, for example GPS waypoints. One such project concerned with the creation and evaluation of autonomous UAVs is the Sensing Unmanned Autonomous Aerial Vehicles (SUAAVE) project [3] which has a primary focus of utilising swarms of communicating, autonomous UAVs for a mountain search-and-rescue type scenario. Currently, there are three types of adapted, Ascending Technologies rotor based UAV platforms used within the SUAAVE project. Each platform has a flight speed of around 10m/s with approximately 20min battery life. Colour cameras of varying dimensions, power requirements and capabilities are fitted to the UAVs. Additionally, all platforms contain an IEEE 802.11 wireless networking card, a GPS receiver, an Inertial Navigation System (INS) and an ATOM processing board enabling automated, in-flight processing and analysis of captured colour aerial imagery and other sensory inputs.As with manned aircraft the dependability and integrity of a UAV platform can be influenced by the occurrence of various endogenous and exogenous events, for example a change in wind strength may impact upon the UAV's remaining battery life. Due to the potential ethical and legal implications of an in-flight UAV failure the UK Civil Aviation Authority's UAV regulations are currently similar to those specified for model aircraft [4]. As such one regulation is that UAVs must remain within 500m of the human operator at all times thereby limiting the usefulness of UAVs for many real-world applications. Before these operational constraints can be relaxed there are a number of safety related technical challenges which must be addressed including sense-and-avoid capabilities and provision of a safe landing system.For many safety critical situations the safest course of action may be to instruct the UAV to land as quickly and safely as possible. In particular there are three types of error which may impact upon the safe operation of a UAV thus necessitating an emergency landing.1.Loss of communication link. A key system requirement of the SUAAVE project is that each swarm member must maintain a direct or multi-hop communication link with the base station. This communication link is via the IEEE 802.11 wireless networking protocol and enables each UAV to receive commands such as return home or land immediately from a human-in-the-loop. The loss of this link would potentially result in the UAV being uncontrollable and is therefore deemed a safety critical event.Hardware/software errors. The most serious of this class of error, for example an actuator failure, may require the UAV to descend immediately in a controlled fashion and land on the ground directly below. Other less serious errors, for example a software module crashing, may require the UAV to land and perform a soft reset.GPS failure. During normal flight conditions the UAVs used within the SUAAVE project navigate using coordinates obtained from a GPS receiver. However, the signal strength and reliability of GPS can be influenced by terrain profile [5]. Whilst a method of position estimation using Ordnance Survey (OS) map data and aerial imagery has been developed [6], in the event of prolonged loss of GPS signal the UAV would be commanded to land.Intuitively it cannot be assumed that the ground directly beneath the UAV is suitable for landing in, as it may contain humans, animals or hazards. Furthermore, due to the limited flight time of the UAVs it cannot be assumed that previously determined landing sites are attainable. It is therefore desirable to have an autonomous method of Safe Landing Zone (SLZ) detection which can be executed on colour aerial imagery obtained from onboard, passive colour cameras. Due to the flight speed of the UAVs, algorithms using such imagery, for example SLZ detection must execute in real-time as failure to do so will result in areas on the UAV's flight path remaining unprocessed.In Fig. 1the primary phases of UAV operation are illustrated in conjunction with an overview of SLZ detection. Upon bootstrap success the UAV becomes airbourne and recursively cycles through the self diagnostics and operation modes. During operation mode the SLZ detection algorithm is continuously executed on sensed aerial imagery. Detected SLZs with a high safety score are stored in a database thereby providing an invaluable measure of robustness should a UAV encounter an error in a location where no SLZs exist. We consider this mode of operation to be a soft real-time system whereby it is not regarded as a safety critical event if processing a colour image requires slightly longer than a predetermined threshold. Should diagnostics fail, the UAV will attempt to recover by, for example navigating back within communication range with other swarm members. In the event where this recovery fails the UAV is issued with an abort command and must determine if a suitable SLZ exists from its current location. We consider abort mode to be a hard real-time system whereby failure to process a colour aerial image within the required time frame may have catastrophic consequences.Within this paper we present an extension of our previous work on autonomous SLZ detection discussed in [7] and [8] resulting in a SLZ detection algorithm which has the capability of exploiting knowledge in the form of OS data in addition to utilising the multichannel nature of colour aerial imagery. There are two primary contributions. Firstly, we incorporate OS data into the potential SLZ detection phase thus providing a measure of robustness against image noise. Furthermore, we use OS data to assist with the assignment of SLZ safety scores, fusing the OS data and multichannel aerial imagery to perform terrain classification and also to determine the Euclidean distance between a SLZ and man-made objects. Secondly, given the scenario of an abort command, the available time frame under which the hard real-time system must execute is variable and strongly influenced by the UAV's remaining battery life. Whilst incorporating knowledge into the SLZ detection algorithm provides a more reliable result there is a time overhead incurred. We therefore model the execution time of two SLZ detection options one of which incorporates knowledge enabling the UAV to choose an optimal, viable method.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows; in Section 2 a brief overview of work related to SLZ detection is given. In Section 3 we discuss autonomously identifying potential SLZs. These potential SLZs are then assigned a safety score as presented in Section 4. In Section 5 we model the execution times of two SLZ detection options thus enabling the UAV to choose an optimal, viable, SLZ detection method. An evaluation is presented in Section 6. Finally, conclusions and proposed further work are outlined in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
