@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mixtures of Gaussian process models for human pose estimation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel algorithm for large scale human pose estimation problems.Uses multiple Gaussian processes in a mixture of expert framework.Allows the accurate regression of Gaussian processes to be scaled to large data.Algorithm gives state of the art performance on 3 pose estimation data sets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer vision,Gaussian processes,Human pose estimation,Mixture of experts,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Discriminative human pose estimation is the problem of inferring the 3D articulated pose of a human directly from an image feature. This is a challenging problem due to the highly non-linear and multi-modal mapping from the image feature space to the pose space. To address this problem, we propose a model employing a mixture of Gaussian processes where each Gaussian process models a local region of the pose space. By employing the models in this way we are able to overcome the limitations of Gaussian processes applied to human pose estimation — their O(N3) time complexity and their uni-modal predictive distribution. Our model is able to give a multi-modal predictive distribution where each mode is represented by a different Gaussian process prediction. A logistic regression model is used to give a prior over each expert prediction in a similar fashion to previous mixture of expert models. We show that this technique outperforms existing state of the art regression techniques on human pose estimation data sets for ballet dancing, sign language and the HumanEva data set.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Gaussian processes are a powerful technique for accurately modelling noisy regression problems. Discriminative human pose estimation, where we wish to estimate the articulated pose of a human directly from an image feature, can be solved using regression techniques to gain a fast and accurate pose estimate. However the mapping from image features to pose is multi-modal due to the ambiguities inherent in estimating a 3D pose from a single 2D image. In this paper we evaluate a mixture of Gaussian processes model, where each model represents a local part of the data set. This allows us to overcome the primary limitations of Gaussian processes, their O(N3) training complexity, and their uni-modal predictive distribution.Mixture of expert models [13,3] have received a lot of attention in discriminative pose estimation [17,23,6,25,14]. These models employ multiple linear regression models, each acting as an expert for a local region of the data set. The predictive distribution is a mixture of Gaussian distributions where each Gaussian component is given by one of the experts and the priors are given by a logistic regression model. This distribution is able to model the multi-modal pose distribution, giving a predictive mean and variance for each mode. These models are learnt using an expectation maximisation algorithm in a maximum likelihood formulation. Although each of the experts is a linear model, a mixture of experts model is able to model non-linear functions by approximating the function using piecewise linear chunks.Alternatively, non-linear feature transforms such as Gaussian kernels can be used to allow each expert to model non-linear regions. However, obtaining good kernel hyper parameters can be challenging, often requiring an expensive cross validation procedure. These models also suffer from a degenerate variance formulation where the uncertainty of a prediction starts to decrease as the test point moves away from the training data, resulting in confident but incorrect predictions.In this paper we use a model consisting of multiple Gaussian process experts, each expert modelling a local region of the data set. We demonstrate how to adapt the mixture of expert framework such that it can be applied to Gaussian processes. This allows us to take advantage of the attractive properties of Gaussian processes, namely their ability to infer accurate kernel parameters from training data and their accurate uncertainty formulation. Our proposed model also allows their computational limitations to be overcome allowing our model to scale to large data sets. We show that this model outperforms other state of the art regression techniques for discriminative human pose estimation.Section 2 discusses the relevant work, Section 3 details our mixture of Gaussian process model, and Section 4 evaluates the model and compares it to other state of the art regression techniques. Finally, Section 5 concludes and suggests directions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
