@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Unrestricted pose-invariant face recognition by sparse dictionary matrix

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have presented a method for facial expression invariant face recognition.We propose a novel method for real-world pose-invariant face recognition.Proposed method use a single image in gallery with any facial expressions.We generate a sparse dictionary matrix for each people based on triplet pose angles.Convincing results were acquired to handle pose on the FERET, CMU PIE and LFW databases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Real-world,Facial expression generic elastic models,Face synthesis,Pose-invariant face recognition,Sparse representation,Sparse dictionary matrix,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a novel method is proposed for real-world pose-invariant face recognition from only a single image in a gallery. A 3D Facial Expression Generic Elastic Model (3D FE-GEM) is proposed to reconstruct a 3D model of each human face using only a single 2D frontal image. Then, for each person in the database, a Sparse Dictionary Matrix (SDM) is created from all face poses by rotating the 3D reconstructed models and extracting features in the rotated face. Each SDM is subsequently rendered based on triplet angles of face poses. Before matching to SDM, an initial estimate of triplet angles of face poses is obtained in the probe face image using an automatic head pose estimation approach. Then, an array of the SDM is selected based on the estimated triplet angles for each subject. Finally, the selected arrays from SDMs are compared with the probe image by sparse representation classification. Convincing results were acquired to handle pose changes on the FERET, CMU PIE, LFW and video face databases based on the proposed method compared to several state-of-the-art in pose-invariant face recognition.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Real-world pose-invariant face recognition is one of the most difficult and challenging tasks in computer vision due to large changes in poses of human faces. Typical face recognition methods have been prosperous at working under controlled situations. However, carrying out pose-invariant face recognition is very difficult in real-world situations when alternations in illumination and facial expression exist.Performances of face recognition systems are great under controlled situations, but expressively reduce for images displaying large pose, illumination and facial expression variations. Handling of head pose change is thus one of the most essential aspects for a concrete real-time face recognition method. Although there have been many advances in the last few years to incorporate robustness into head pose change in face recognition approaches, it is still a challenge to attain this manner under unrestrained situations due to precision and speed problems.Available pose-invariant face recognition methods can be mostly categorized into two separate types: 1) 2D methods which include subspace-based techniques which present nonlinearities into a 2D shape to extract new poses [21,2], view-based methods which utilize a subset of shapes to demonstrate appearance from a diverse view [3,4] and etc., and 2) 3D model-based methods which employ a 3D model to present new poses of faces [1,5–18]. In this paper, a novel method from the third type is proposed.A main problem of the above studies is that face images acquired under controlled conditions (e.g., the FERET database) are considered, which are usually frontal, occlusion-free, with a clean background, consistent lighting, and limited facial expressions. However, in real-world applications, face recognition needs to be performed on real-life face images captured in unconstrained scenarios. There are significant appearance variations on real-world faces, which include facial expressions, illumination changes, head pose variations, and etc. Therefore, face recognition in real-world faces is much more challenging compared to the case for faces captured in constrained conditions.In this paper, a novel approach is proposed for unconstrained face recognition from real-world face image by 3D face reconstruction and sparse representation. Accordingly, a 3D model is initially reconstructed from frontal face images in a real-world gallery. To reconstruct a 3D model from each human face in real-world scenarios, a Facial Expression Generic Elastic Model (FE-GEM) is proposed. The FE-GEM method for facial expression-invariant 3D face reconstruction is the extension of the Generic Elastic Model (GEM) [6] to resolve the drawback of handling facial expression in 3D face reconstruction. Then, each 3D reconstructed face in the gallery is synthesized to all possible views and a Sparse Dictionary Matrix (SDM) is generated based on triplet angles of face pose for each person. On the other hand, automatic head pose estimation by the Constrained Local Model (CLM) [19] is used to extract the triplet angles (including yaw, pitch and roll) of face poses. Therefore, for each person, an array of SDM is selected based on triplet angles of face pose which were estimated from automatic head pose estimation. Finally, the face recognition is performed by sparse representation classification [20] between the selected arrays of SDM and probe images. The main contribution of this paper is the generation of the SDM matrix based on triplet angles of face pose for each registered input image by sparse representation and 3D reconstructed depth to recognize face across pose changes.The experimental evaluation was provided to evaluate the proposed method on FERET, CMU PIE and LFW face databases. Promising results were acquired to handle pose changes based on the proposed method compared with several state-of-the-art in pose-invariant face recognition. Also, evaluating the LFW database demonstrated that the proposed method is very rapid and efficient for real-world scenarios in pose-invariant face recognition. Furthermore, to real-time experiments, the proposed method was evaluated on video databases with 30 subjects. Evaluating video database demonstrated that the proposed method is very rapid and real-time for pose-invariant face recognition.In this paper, the main contributions that are proposed are as follow:1)The FE-GEM method is presented to handle facial expression variations for 3D face reconstruction in real-world scenarios in which reconstructed models are more accurate than the original GEM method.The manner of generation of the SDM matrix is another contribution of this paper. The SDM is generated based on triplet angles of face pose for each gallery image by 3D face reconstruction and adopting the sparse representation and LBP on synthesized face for carrying out pose-invariant face recognition in real-world scenarios.Speed is a main contribution of this paper that is very rapid and closely real-time in comparison with the state-of-the-art approaches to handle pose changes in face recognition.The presented approach improves the recognition rate of the best 3D model-based across pose on the CMU-PIE and FERET databases. Also, the proposed approach obtained results that outperformed the best approaches on the LFW database. Moreover, the proposed method is evaluated on the video databases to recognize the face in real-time videos.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the related works. In Section 3, automatic head pose estimation by the CLM is explained. Section 4 describes the 3D face modeling method from a single frontal face image. In Section 5, the generation manner of SDM and the training method for each human face in the database are proposed for pose-invariant face recognition. Experimental evaluations are given in Section 6 and conclusions are presented in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
