@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Scale-invariant contour segment context in object detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design a scale-invariant shape descriptor for shape matching and object detection.A graph-based segment matching algorithm is introduced.Accurate boundary of object can be detected in natural image.Compute the similarity between descriptors properly in clutter background

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Object detection,Shape descriptor,Scale-invariant,Contour segment context,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The evaluation of the scale of an object in a cluttered background is a serious problem in computer vision. The most existing contour-based approaches relevant to object detection address this problem by normalizing descriptor or multi-scale searching, such as sliding-window searching, spatial pyramid model etc. Besides, Hough-voting framework can predict the scale of an object according to some meaning fragments. However, utilizing scale-variant descriptor or complicated structure in these measures reduces the efficiency of detection. In the present paper, we propose a novel shape feature called scale-invariant contour segment context (CSC). This feature is based on the angle between contour line segments. It remains unchanged as scale varies. Most importantly, it evaluates the scale of objects located in cluttered images and facilitates localization of the boundary of the object in unseen images simultaneously. In this way, we need to focus on just the shape matching algorithm without considering the variant scale of the object in an image. This is a procedure which absolutely differs from voting and sliding window searching. We do experiments on ETHZ shape dataset, Weizmann horses dataset, and the bottle subset from PASCAL datasets. The results confirm that the present model of object detection, based on CSC, outperforms state-of-the-art of shape-based detection methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shape plays an important role in object detection in computer vision. This is because some invariant shape information remains in various transformations and blurs. Shape-based approaches for object detection have drawn considerable attention from many researchers and many studies of object detection and shape matching have focused on this area [1–17].Generally, there are three main problems in object detection in a cluttered background: 1) Variant scale of object, which prevents the vision system from knowing the scale of object in unseen image. 2) Deformations of intra-class objects, which affects the accuracy of detection. 3) Cluttered edges between background and object, which contain missing or clustered object edges.Other detection models meant to address these problems have been proposed recently. Hough-voting is used to assess variations in scale [2,11,7,15]. Shotton et al. [18] combined contour and texture information. Shotton et al. [16] introduced a multi-scale model using contour fragments. The sliding window scheme was designed for searching multiple scales and identifying the optimal scale [1,19]. Part-based matching approaches are suitable for dealing with the deformation of objects. These approaches incorporate skeleton models and local fragment features [20,1,4,6,7,21,9]. Global shape matching using combinations of partial matching, such as fragment matching, has an advantage when dealing with non-rigid deformations within classes. Most existing models are based on fragment matching, so optimization algorithms are used to integrate the results of early matching into a final evaluation of detection. Ma and Latecki [6] proposed a novel advanced method of object detection involving the use of maximum clique in similarity graphs. The model poses shape matching as graph matching. Wang et al. [22] proposed to use graph matching for detecting object. Yang et al. [23] regarded object detection as a problem of finding dominant sets in weighted graph. Lu et al. [5] grouped fragments for detection using particle filters. Srinivasan et al. [9] built many-to-one maps using image-to-model matching to deal with unequal numbers of fragments.Some parts of intra-class objects remain unchanged and others may vary. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the body of a swan remains invariant over time but the neck deforms. The unchanged parts contribute more to detection than the changed parts do. Approaches based on voting use the unchanged areas to locate objects and evaluate scale. However, the local shape features used in these methods are not very discriminative. Most of the aforementioned algorithms use local feature descriptors limited to a small local area [1,6]. To achieve global detection, most of these methods can be combined with spatial construction [21]. There are also global feature descriptors suitable for evaluation of detection but sensitive to transformation. Given the variety of inner class objects, multiple prototypes with deformation can be combined and used to detect objects accurately in cluttered backgrounds. These models ignore transform-invariant shape features and the fact that unchanged parts can be the discriminative. Unchanged areas are not just local or global features. They can be defined by the proportions of unchanged parts. This feature is here considered, and a novel descriptor that uses unchanged parts is presented.In the present paper, shape representation is based on contour line segments. These are similar to the contour fragments that appear in many models [1,4,6,15,16]. However, the present fragment here is a line segment. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the line segments are marked by different colors. For simplicity, all segments mentioned in the remainder of the paper refer to line segments. Observing two segments of partially occluded object that tend to be unchanged shows the absolute dissimilarity of the angle between them to be invariant under scaling, translation, and rotation conditions. The segments are called orientation-based features because only the angles between them are considered. Orientation-based models are inspired by biological systems, specifically the human visual system. Hubel and Wiesel [24] provided a fundamental analysis of orientation features. Currently, there are some effective biologically inspired computational models which use orientation feature. These include the famous HMAX model [25]. HMAX has shown outstanding performance in object recognition. Another research team has shown a novel approach to the detection of orientation in natural images [26].A scale-invariant shape feature, contour segment context (CSC), is here proposed. It functions by adding context information to orientation features. Another characteristic of the present model is its ability to capture the maximum similarity of CSC between images when comparing their correspondence. This is a novel means of addressing noisy backgrounds in that the deficiency boundary of the object and cluttered segments does not increase the difference of the actual object from the background.A detection schema integrating feature correspondence and matching is here presented and used for object detection. Experiments indicate that the present model is rational. A result of detection is shown in Fig. 1. The present model solves the three problems described above: Variation of scale, Deformation within classes, and Confounded boundaries. CSC makes a fundamental contribution to accurate evaluation of scale and simultaneous detection of objects boundaries.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces some related works. Section 3 gives an overview of the method. Section 4 introduces a shape model based on line segments and an algorithm for basic matching between two images represented by segments. Section 5 shows the procedure for object detection. Experimental results are shown in Section 6. Conclusion and future work are outlined in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
