@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Morphological analysis for investigating artistic images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An approach to analyze alterations of artworks and their reproductions is presented.Point correspondences, point grouping, and transformations are estimated jointly.Finding of initial grouping assignments is phrased as a linear program.A statistical stability analysis yields the complexity of the registration model.An extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluation is performed on challenging images from art history.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shape analysis,Registration,Grouping,Model selection,Stability analysis,Cultural heritage,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes an approach for automatically analyzing the alterations of an original artwork during its reproduction. The overall deformation of the artwork is modelled by a piecewise linear model, where regions of the artwork that feature similar alterations are automatically inferred and assigned to the different model components. Model complexity, that is, the required number of affine components required for registration, is automatically estimated using a statistical stability analysis. The main challenge is to simultaneously solve three tasks: (i) inferring the correspondences between both shapes, (ii) identifying the groups in the image that share the same transformation, and (iii) estimating the transformation of these groups. Our approach is tested on controlled scenarios as well as on real historical images.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although some stylistic movements in art like impressionism or pointillism define themselves by color, shape has been the predominant way to perceive an artwork. The theory about the primacy of shape can be traced back to Giorgio Vasari (1511–1574) who propagated the line drawing as the predominant technique of all visual arts. His use of the term disegno (conceptual design) can be read as the assignment of ideas to shapes. This “shaped idea” is represented through shapes in preparatory drawings, in the artwork itself as well as in drawn reproductions. Based on this observation, changes in shape between artworks and their reproductions or preparatory drawings can be associated with changes in ideas and concepts that reveal artistic choices and stylistic variations. Thus, the analysis of these changes helps art historians to understand the impact of historical influences in the creation and reproduction of art. However, in many cases, these alterations between shapes are very subtle and thus, it becomes extremely difficult, even for experts, to determine the nature and extent of the deformations suffered by different parts within an artwork. The automatic solution of such a shape analysis poses an ambitious computer vision task, and its solution is the focus of the present paper. The nature of the artwork deformations analyzed in this work arises either due to deliberate alterations or due to geometric errors accumulated during the drawing process. For instance, a typical example for a deliberate alteration between a preparatory drawing and the finished work is a subtle conceptual change that induces small alterations in the relative position of extremities in a human pose. These conceptual changes may have personal, cultural, or historical reasons, and thus, it is of interest for art historians to recognize the parts that feature similar transformations and to determine to which extent these parts differ from other regions in the image.The system presented in this contribution addresses the description of an overall non-linear deformation as featured between an original artwork and its reproduction, and at the same time, it gives insights about the local structure of the shape deformation. Shape transformation models within computer vision can be classified into linear and non-linear models. Since global linear models cannot be used for describing complex shape changes due to their limited description power, a common choice for describing non-linear changes has been the usage of splines like the TPS [5]. However, besides requiring the estimation of a high number of parameters (proportional to the number of points in the shape) to determine the model, its complexity is regularized by a single manually set parameter for the entire shape. The global nature of this parameter makes it impossible for the model to locally adapt its complexity according to the shape deformation. Therefore, the present paper presents a piecewise linear registration model that adapts the complexity of each component according to the shape deformation in the underlying region. Moreover, the assignment of regions in the shape to different model components induces a clustering which is used in turn to visualize the structure and geometry of the deformation introduced by the artist during the reproduction procedure.However, a challenge of using piecewise linear models is to automatically determine the number of components required for registration. In the absence of prior knowledge about the shape deformation, the answer to this question represents an important part of the analysis. Nonetheless, an indispensable requirement for selecting the number of components is the robustness of the registration solution. The present paper considers this robustness or stability from a statistical point of view. A stable registration solution for a given number of components is understood as a solution that is reproducible on different subsampled versions of the shape and does not too sensitively dependent on the sample set at hand. Thus, the “correct” number of transformations is defined as the number that yields the most stable solution capable of handling the trade-off between a too rigid transformation and an overparameterization of the transformation model.Finally, we utilize the proposed approach to analyze prominent reproductions from different periods of art history. At first, images coming from the Codex Manesse illustrated between ca. 1305 and ca. 1340 in Zürich and their reproductions commissioned by Bodmer/Breitinger in 1746/1747 are considered. This image collection is important for art history since the Codex Manesse is the single most comprehensive source of Middle High German Minnesang poetry [3] and represents an outstanding source for understanding the visual interpretation of the Middle Ages in early modern and modern times. Whereas the tracings from book illustrations like the reproductions of the Codex Manesse exhibit only slight changes, the differences between a drawing and a mural painting are obviously greater. Therefore, we also analyze parts of Michelangelo's ceiling fresco in the Sistine Chapel (1508–1512) with sketches, which were made in the artists surroundings, probably after Michelangelo's own preparatory drawings or by Dutch artists after the original artwork had been completed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
