@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tracking in dense crowds using prominence and neighborhood motion concurrence

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an online method for tracking dense crowds, capable of handling anomaliesAn alternative to existing methods which require modeling of crowd flowsIntroduce the notion of prominent individuals for tracking dense crowdsEmploy a new model, Neighborhood Motion Concurrence, to predict individual’s positionComparison with existing methods using ground truth for eight sequences

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Crowd analysis,Dense crowds,Tracking,Prominence,Neighborhood motion concurrence,Hierarchical tracking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Crowd analysis is an active area of research in Computer Vision [1]. Over the past few years, methods have been proposed that estimate density and number of people in a crowd [2,3], find group structures within a crowd [4], detect abnormalities [5–8], find flow segments [9,10], and track individuals in a crowd [11–13].Density is an important feature which can be used to classify different kinds of crowds [1]. From the computer vision perspective, videos of high density crowds can be divided into groups based on the number of pixels on target. High density crowds with extremely small object size permit only holistic approaches for scene understanding, such as finding motion patterns and segmentation of crowd flows [14,15,9,10]. However, if individuals in a crowd are distinguishable, then tracking of individuals may be possible, which is important in the context of safety and surveillance [1].Tracking in dense crowds [16,12,13] is a challenging problem. Non-crowd methods, which track individuals in isolation do not perform well on dense crowds [16] because the large number of objects in close proximity poses difficulty in establishing correspondences across frames. Furthermore, human motion in crowds is influenced by social constraints [17] which force individuals to follow more complex, non-linear patterns that need to be taken into account for successful tracking of dense crowds.Methods specifically designed for dense crowds generally require some learning of motion priors, which are later employed for tracking. For instance, Ali and Shah [16] proposed an algorithm which is based on the assumption that all individuals in a crowd behave in a manner consistent with global crowd behavior and learn the direction of motion at each location in the scene. The floor fields they learn severely restrict the permitted motion that individuals in a particular scene can have. This restriction on the motion of individuals due to time-invariant priors would cause the tracker to fail when, (1) the crowd flow is dynamic, (2) the crowd flow shifts or moves to a new region which was not learned before, and (3) when there are anomalies. Furthermore, camera motion and jitter can make learning the crowd flow difficult, if not impossible. Though learning, whether online or offline, certainly helps in tracking dense crowds when these issues are not present, our goal in this paper is to emphasize the use of visual and contextual information available in such crowded scenes to track in an online manner, without any pre-processing, learning or crowd flow modeling.At the core of our approach lies template-based tracking, which is used to obtain the probability of observation. However, the simplicity of a template-based tracker demands more than just appearance to perform well in high density crowds. We supplement the tracker with novel visual and contextual sources of information, which are particularly relevant to crowds and reduce the confusion in establishing correspondences.The first idea we explore is prominence of individuals which is similar to saliency (generally used for features and points). In any crowded scene with a large number of people, the appearance of some individuals will be markedly different from the rest (Fig. 1). The probability of confusing such individuals with the rest of the crowd will be low. Thus, the prominence of such individuals provides extra information which should be leveraged in tracking.The second idea is to employ influence from neighbors to make better prediction for an individual's position. This idea is based on the observation that individuals in dense crowd experience social forces that bound their movement. For instance, an individual cannot jump across its neighbors in a single time instance. The restriction on movement that each individual experiences is proportional to the density of the crowd. Social force models, both in computer graphics and vision, are generally geared towards collision avoidance, where the goal is to predict positions such that subjects or individuals don't collide with each other. Our model, on the other hand, exploits the fact that movement of individuals in a dense crowd is similar to their neighbors, and therefore can be used to make better predictions.Combining prominence and influence from neighbors, our method imposes an order on the way positions of individuals are updated. Individuals with prominent appearance are updated first, which subsequently guide the motion of the rest of the crowd. While updating, if the underlying patch-based tracker gives weak measurement for an individual, then position of the individual is updated based on appearance-based dense instantaneous flow. Thus, the framework we introduce incorporates these ideas as well as their inter-relationships. Our contributions in this paper can be summarized as,•An alternative approach to dense crowd tracking which highlights the significance of prominence and spatial context for tracking dense crowds without requiring crowd flow modeling,Introduction of the notion of prominent individuals, its relevance to tracking in dense crowds, and a method to detect prominent individuals,Incorporation of influence from neighbors, prominent or not, to better predict and estimate an individual's position,A tracking framework which imposes an order in the way individuals are tracked, where positions of prominent individuals are updated first and individuals with low probability of observation from underlying tracker are updated last.Since space is complementary to time, both the visual information (prominence) and spatial context (influence from neighbors) are complementary to temporal constraints (crowd flow, motion patterns) introduced in previous works on tracking people in dense crowds. Our goal in this work is to emphasize the first two, which when coupled together allow tracking in an online fashion, without modeling crowd flow and without looking at observations from the future.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
