@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-view facial landmark detector learned by the Structured Output SVM

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Real-time multi-view landmark detector independent on initializationDetector composed of a mixture of tree based Deformable Part ModelsLandmark detector learned by the Structured Output Support Vector MachinesCoarse-to-fine strategy to speed up inference based on dynamic programming

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Deformable Part Models,Structured output SVM,Facial landmarks detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a real-time multi-view landmark detector based on Deformable Part Models (DPM). The detector is composed of a mixture of tree based DPMs, each component describing landmark configurations in a specific range of viewing angles. The usage of view specific DPMs allows to capture a large range of poses and to deal with the problem of self-occlusions. Parameters of the detector are learned from annotated examples by the Structured Output Support Vector Machines algorithm. The learning objective is directly related to the performance measure used for detector evaluation. The tree based DPM allows to find a globally optimal landmark configuration by the dynamic programming. We propose a coarse-to-fine search strategy which allows real-time processing by the dynamic programming also on high resolution images. Empirical evaluation on “in the wild” images shows that the proposed detector is competitive with the state-of-the-art methods in terms of speed and accuracy yet it keeps the guarantee of finding a globally optimal estimate in contrast to other methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The detection of facial landmarks in images is a crucial step in many computer vision applications involving faces. For example, the landmark positions are used for alignment and normalization of face having substantial impact on the overall accuracy of face recognition systems estimating e.g. age, gender or identity (for example [1,2]).In this paper, we propose a real-time multi-view landmark detector based on Deformable Part Models (DPM) [3,4]. An exemplary output of the proposed detector is shown in Fig. 1. The detector is composed of a mixture of tree based DPM, each component describing landmark configurations in a specific range of viewing angles. The usage of view specific DPM allows to capture a large range of poses and to deal with the problem of self-occlusions. The estimation of the viewing angle and the landmark position is done simultaneously by a structured output classifier. The inference problem can be solved globally by the dynamic programming, hence the detector's output is independent on an initial estimate in contrast to majority of other methods. Parameters of the DPM based structured classifiers are learned from annotated examples by the Structured Output SVM algorithm [5]. The objective function of the learning algorithm is directly related to the performance measure used for detector evaluation. In order to obtain a real-time detector, we use several speedups. First, we use tree based shape model defined by separable pair-wise potential functions which allows to decrease the computational complexity of the dynamic programming procedure from quadratic to linear in terms of the number of landmark positions via employing the distance transform [6]. Second, we propose to use the MIPMAP technique [7] for fast computation of features used by the local landmark classifiers. Third, we propose a coarse-to-fine strategy in order to reduce the size of the search space on higher resolution images. Evaluation on the challenging “Annotated Faces in the Wild” (AFLW) database [8] and 300-W dataset shows, that the proposed detector achieves competitive localization error compared to the current state-of-the-art detectors [9–13], yet it keeps the guarantee of finding a globally optimal estimate.The proposed detector significantly outperforms the detector of [9], on which we build our approach. The authors of [9] propose a multi-view tree based DPM detector, which simultaneously estimates face locations, landmark positions and viewing angles. The conceptual difference to our method is the objective function optimized by the learning algorithm. Their learning algorithm is a variant of a two-class Support Vector Machines [14] which, in this application, optimizes the detection rate of resulting face detector while the landmark positions serve only as latent variables not appearing in the loss function. In contrast, our method based on the Structured Output SVMs optimizes directly the average landmark localization error, being the evaluation metric of landmark detectors. Using the proper learning objective function leads to a significant improvement in the localization accuracy, as we demonstrate empirically.The contributions of this paper are as follows:•We treat the multi-view landmark detection as an instance of the structured output classification problem. The parameters of the detector are learned from examples by the Structured Output SVM algorithm [5]. Unlike the existing related method [9], the objective function of the learning algorithm is directly related to the performance measure commonly used for evaluation of landmark detectors.We implemented a coarse-to-fine strategy to decrease the computational complexity of the inference procedure based on the dynamic programing. The proposed strategy allows to keep a real-time performance of the proposed detector when it estimates a dense set of landmarks (for example 68 landmarks on the 300-W benchmark) on high resolution images.We propose to speed up the evaluation of a dense local feature descriptor via representing the base features (in our case Local Binary Patterns [15]) computed in multiple scales in the form of MIPMAP [7]. The MIPMAP representation avoids repetitive evaluation of the base features which significantly decreases the evaluation time without increasing the localization error.We experimentally show that a well tuned tree based DPM landmark detector with the guarantee to find globally optimal estimate is comparable in speed and accuracy to other methods using more complex shape models and local optimization strategies like [10–13].This paper combines the results of our previously published conference paper [16] and a workshop paper [17]. In addition, this paper proposes a coarse-to-fine search strategy which is necessary for the estimation of a dense landmark sets in higher resolution images, such as images appearing in the 300-W competition.The paper is organized as follows. Related work is discussed in Section 2. The proposed detector and its learning is described in Section 3. The coarse-to-fine strategy is outlined in Section 4. The experimental evaluation is given in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed a real-time, full multi-view landmark detector based on the Deformable Part Models. The detector uses a mixture of tree based graphical models to capture landmark configurations in a full range of yaw angle. The landmark positions and the viewing angle are estimated simultaneously by a global optimization method based on the dynamic programming. The objective function of the learning algorithm is tightly related to the evaluation metric. The benefits of using a proper objective function are demonstrated by empirical comparison with the Zhu & Ramanan detector [9], which has similar structure, but uses simpler two-class SVM algorithm for learning. To achieve a real-time performance we have implemented several speedups. First, we proposed a coarse-to-fine search strategy using an output of a fast low-resolution DPM detector to shrink a search space of the consequent precise DPM detector operating on a high resolution image. Second, we sped up the computation of LBP based dense feature descriptor by pre-computing base LBP features in multiple scales and representing them as a MIPMAP. Third, we use a DPM with decomposable pair-wise potentials, which allow to reduce the inference time by the distance transform. Experiments on public benchmarks with “in the wild” images show that the proposed detector is comparable in accuracy and speed with other approaches using more complicated shape models and local optimization methods for inference.An open-source implementation of the proposed detector together with learned models can be downloaded from http://cmp.felk.cvut.cz/~uricamic/clandmark.