@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Estimating layout of cluttered indoor scenes using trajectory-based priors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Scene layout estimation using both trajectory data and image featuresNo assumptions are considered about the structure of the scene.Efficient estimation of the scene structure in the presence of scene clutterWe show that using line segments we obtain better surface normal.Our data and segmentation results will be publicly available for comparison.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scene segmentation,Trajectory,Scene layout,Semantic context,Conditional random field,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Given a surveillance video of a moving person, we present a novel method of estimating layout of a cluttered indoor scene. We propose an idea that trajectories of a moving person can be used to generate features to segment an indoor scene into different areas of interest. We assume a static uncalibrated camera. Using pixel-level color and perspective cues of the scene, each pixel is assigned to a particular class either a sitting place, the ground floor, or the static background areas like walls and ceiling. The pixel-level cues are locally integrated along global topological order of classes, such as sitting objects and background areas are above ground floor into a conditional random field by an ordering constraint. The proposed method yields very accurate segmentation results on challenging real world scenes. We focus on videos with people walking in the scene and show the effectiveness of our approach through quantitative and qualitative results. The proposed estimation method shows better estimation results as compared to the state of the art scene layout estimation methods. We are able to correctly segment 90.3% of background, 89.4% of sitting areas and 74.7% of the ground floor.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Estimating layout or structure of an indoor scene is important for many tasks, such as activity analysis [1], robot navigation [2,3], scene understanding [4,5] and object placement [6–8]. Specifically for the analysis of elderly activity, scene layout provides a semantic context knowledge that is necessary for long-term observation. With the help of scene context, we can localize a person and monitor his daily behavior. Semantic context also benefits the unusual event prediction, such as fall detection [9,10]. Lying on the sofa has a different interpretation from lying on the floor. With semantic context information usual lying on sofa can be taken as usual activity.Keeping these important aspects and applications in mind, different mechanisms have been proposed for indoor scene layout estimation. State of the art methods use either spatial image features [11–13] or trajectory-based temporal information [1,5] for this purpose. However, both types of features have their own problems and either of the features cannot be recommended individually to estimate the layout of indoor scene. A major challenge for spatial image-based feature techniques arises from the fact that most indoor scenes are cluttered by a lot of furniture and decorations [14]. They often obscure the geometric structure of the scene, and also occlude boundaries between walls and the floor. Appearances and layouts of clutters can vary drastically across different indoor scenes, so it is extremely difficult (if not impossible) to model them consistently. Similarly trajectory-based techniques normally cluster the trajectory data and model only the paths [5,15]. They do not take care of the clutter or resting places in the scene. The modeling of resting areas [1] has been done using stop points of a trajectory inside a resting place. This mechanism cannot be reliably used in case of noise in the trajectory data. A normal stop outside a resting area might be taken as a resting place.Trajectory data either can be directly used or it can be used for action recognition. Action information in turn can be used for different purposes like for detecting action consequences and classifying videos of manipulation action according to action consequences [16]. Similarly another approach encodes the essential changes in visual scenery in a condensed way such that a robot can recognize and learn a manipulation without prior object knowledge [17].Though image features and trajectory data are not self-sufficient for reliable scene layout estimation but they can be used together to achieve reliable indoor scene layout estimation. In this work, we propose a mechanism which learns the scene semantic context model using image segmentation mechanism in an unsupervised way. We do not use trajectories directly for scene layout estimation rather our segmentation mechanism uses both spatial image and trajectory-based features. We are also able to model the resting or sitting places in the scene. An overview of the approach is as follows. We assume a static and uncalibrated surveillance camera in the scene. Given a moving person in the scene; we first model the trajectory of moving person using a set of key-points on his silhouette. We identify or cluster the regions corresponding to feet locations of moving person as floor. Given a potential floor area, we define the relative height of each point relative to the floor. Similarly using lines and trajectories we define the orientation of each point in the scene. We now incorporate height, orientation and color information into a Conditional Random Field (CRF) to define relationship between different points in the scene. Fig. 5gives an overview of the CRF-based image segmentation for unsupervised scene layout estimation procedure. A graphcut-based inference algorithm is run on our CRF to define the final scene segmentation or layout.The key contribution of this work are as follows:(1)Indoor scene layout estimation using both trajectory data of a moving person and image features. The estimation process is fully automatic and unsupervised. We do not use any training data. No assumptions are considered about the structure of the scene.Efficient estimation of the scene structure in the presence of scene clutter. We classify scene clutter as either sitting areas or scene background. Modeling resting areas as a separate class improves overall scene layout estimation process.We show that using line segments instead of voting-based straight lines we can obtain better orientation map or surface normal. Improvement in orientation map improves overall scene layout estimation by providing correct orientations for resting places like sofa and bed.Experiments are performed on a new dataset of scene videos with moving person along with publicly available videos of the indoor scenes and better segmentation results are achieved. We show using quantitative and qualitative results that by combining trajectory information of moving persons with image attributes, we can obtain an accurate indoor scene layout, superior to geometric methods. We will make the data and segmentation results publicly available for comparison.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related work and contributions of this paper are described in Section 2. The proposed scene layout estimation mechanism is elaborated in Section 3. Image segmentation mechanism used for scene layout estimation is explained in Section 4. The performance of the approaches are evaluated in Section 5. The proposed approach is compared with other approaches in this section followed by a conclusion in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
