@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hankelet-based dynamical systems modeling for 3D action recognition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model an action as sequence of outputs of linear time invariant (LTI) systems.We represent the outputs of LTI systems by means of Hankelets.We adopt an HMM to model the transitions from one LTI system to another.We formulate an inference and supervised learning formulation for our model.We also present a deep analysis of the parameter settings for our action representation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hidden Markov Model,Hankel Matrix,Linear time invariant system,Discriminative learning,Action,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, a large portion of the research in computer vision has focused on the problem of action recognition and modeling. Detection, recognition and analysis of actions are of great interest in several application domains such as surveillance [1–4], human–computer interaction [5], assistive technologies [6], sign language [7–9], and, more recently, computational behavioral science [10,11] and consumer behavior analysis [12].The wide diffusion of cheap depth cameras, and the seminal work by Shotton, et al. [13] for estimating the locations of the joints of a human body from depth maps, have given new stimulus to the research in 3D action classification both by quickening the development of novel applications, and by providing a setting to test new ideas and frameworks. Therefore, very recently, we have seen a proliferation of works introducing novel body pose representations for action recognition given depth maps and/or skeleton data [14–20].In this paper, we propose to represent an action as a series of movements to exploit their temporal structure while discriminating among different action classes. As an example, consider the action of handshaking which can be modeled by the following ordered sequence of movements: moving the whole body to approach the other person, raising the arm, and shaking the hand. Furthermore, each of these movements can be represented as a sequence of observations (for example a sequence of body poses) which are characterized by their own dynamics. Therefore, an action can be represented in terms of a “sequence of simpler dynamics”.This reasoning leads to the idea that an action should be modeled by a hierarchical dynamical model, such as a mixture of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [21], coordinated mixture of factor analyzers [22] or switching models [23]. However, the burden of learning the model parameters and the size of the required training set may limit the applicability of these methods.Here, we propose to approximate the abovementioned complex hierarchical dynamical model by adopting a simpler representation for the movements. In particular, we focus our attention on the switching of the dynamics across time. For this purpose, we represent movements using body motion templates. A body motion template may be either an ordered set of trajectories (i.e. trajectories of body parts such as hands, arms, legs, head, torso) or a sequence of frame descriptors (based on bag-of-words, oriented flow, dense trajectories, etc.) within a temporal window. For simplicity, in the remainder of the paper we will assume that a body motion template is an ordered set of trajectories of 3D body joints within a temporal window. However, our framework may be used with other feature representations as long as they have an ordering relation.Fig. 1illustrates the basic idea of our approach. An action is a temporal series of body motion templates (movements). Each body motion template is a series of raw observations in a temporal window (eventually of varying duration) which is characterized by a specific dynamic. Thus, we aim at decomposing an action into sub-trajectories that are modeled as the outputs of a sequence of atomic linear time invariant (LTI) systems, using an HMM to model the transitions from one atomic LTI system to another. Furthermore, each body motion template is described by means of a truncated Hankel matrix (Hankelet) [24], which embeds the parameters of the LTI system [25]. In summary, an action is modeled by an HMM where the observations are Hankel matrices, computed in a sliding window, and where each hidden state represents an LTI system for which only a Hankelet is known. Finally, for classification purposes, we train a set of HMMs (one for each action class) using a discriminative approach.Fig. 2contrasts traditional HMM representations against our approach. Instead of learning the parameters of a switching HMM (Fig. 2(a)), we consider a probabilistic switching LTI system (Fig. 2(b)) where an HMM is used over the Hankel matrices of the systems, avoiding the need of performing any system identification (Fig. 2(c)).The results presented here are an extension of our preliminary work [26]. In particular, in this paper:•we account for the learning of the atomic LTI systems via a discriminative method that encourages correct predictions of the HMMs;we provide a deeper description of our discriminative learning approach in relation to former models;we present an extensive validation of our Hankelet-based action representation for different parameter settings.The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we review previous work on action recognition and modeling, and on discriminative learning of HMM parameters; in Section 3 we present our Hankelet-based action representation; in Section 4 we explain our action model and describe our classification and LTI inference methods; in Section 5 we describe the discriminative learning of the model parameters and of the atomic LTI systems; in Section 6 we present experimental results on publicly available datasets and analyses of the performance of our technique for varying settings and parameters of the Hankelet-based representation. Finally, in Section 7 we present conclusions and outline future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have proposed to represent an action in terms of a sequence of outputs of atomic LTI systems. We represent each atomic LTI system by means of a representative Hankel matrix. We have adopted a discriminative HMM to model the transition from one LTI system to the next. We have also presented a novel method for learning the state representations (the atomic LTI systems) where our discriminative learning formulation encourages correct predictions of the models.In experiments on two challenging action recognition benchmarks, our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy by considering only the 3D trajectories of body joints. Our experimental results show that our discriminative learning approach seems to be more effective than the standard generative model learning approach for HMMs. However, our experiments have highlighted limitations of our Hankelet-based action representation when dealing with sequences that share the same dynamics but have different semantic labels due to differences in motion directions (such as moving towards left or towards right). Therefore, one possible future extension of our work could consider encoding such information within the action representation. In contrast to other works at the state-of-the-art, our technique does not require any pre-processing of the data to account for cross-subject biometric differences or varying duration of the action sequences.A deep analysis of the impact on classification accuracy of varying settings for building the Hankelets has shown that the classification accuracy depends on the temporal duration of the sliding window used to compute the Hankelet. On the other hand, the order of the dynamical model had less influence on classification accuracy, and simple dynamical models suffice to get good classification performance for the datasets tested. This work does not deal with segmentation of the trajectory into atomic systems, which remains an interesting topic for future investigation. Under a generative point of view, a semi-Markov model could be employed, which would increase the overall computational complexity of the model.The proposed framework is general and is not limited to action recognition. In a future work we will study the possibility of applying this framework in other application domains such as event recognition and crowd analysis.