@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Keyword spotting in unconstrained handwritten Chinese documents using contextual word model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a contextual word model for keyword spotting from handwritten Chinese documents.The contextual word model combines character classifier, geometric and linguistic contexts.Promising results were obtained on a large handwriting database CASIA-HWDB.The geometric and linguistic contexts improve the spotting performance significantly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Keyword spotting,Chinese handwritten documents,Word similarity,Contextual word model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a method for keyword spotting in off-line Chinese handwritten documents using a contextual word model, which measures the similarity between the query word and every candidate word in the document by combining a character classifier and the geometric context as well as linguistic context. The geometric context model characterizes the single-character likeliness and between-character relationship. The linguistic model utilizes the dependency of the word with the external adjacent characters. The combining weights are optimized on training documents. Experiments on a large handwriting database CASIA-HWDB demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method and justify the benefits of geometric and linguistic contexts. Compared to transcription-based text search, the proposed method can provide higher recall rate, and for spotting words of four characters, the proposed method provides both higher precision and recall rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the huge volume of existing documents and the ever increasing new documents in daily life, the need of efficient document retrieval techniques is prominent. On scanning documents into digital images, character recognition and retrieval techniques can help efficiently sort the documents, summarize, find documents and locate regions of interest. Among the techniques of document retrieval [1,2], keyword spotting finds relevant documents containing the queried words and locates the word instances for further investigation. For printed documents of degraded image or handwritten documents, keyword spotting is still an unsolved problem due to the difficulty of word segmentation and recognition. Traditional character and word recognition techniques do not give sufficiently high accuracy on these documents, such that text search based on transcription (text line recognition) does not perform satisfactorily. For example, a state-of-the-art handwriting recognizer reports word recognition rate of 79.7% on online data and 74.1% on off-line data [3].Compared to transcription-based text search, keyword spotting has the advantage that the information related to the query word can be exploited adequately to improve the recall rate of retrieval. This is particularly important for the less frequently used words, which are usually recognized less accurately by traditional recognizers. As a two-class (binary) problem, keyword spotting can easily get variable points of precision–recall tradeoff by setting variable decision thresholds. Transcription-based search is less flexible in this respect, particularly, when the recognition accuracy is low. The recall rate of transcription-based search can be improved by giving multiple alternative recognition results, but this requires a large number of alternatives for guaranteeing high recall while sacrificing the precision.Depending on the format of query, keyword spotting techniques can be grouped into two categories: query-by-example (QBE) and query-by-string (QBS). In QBE, the user manually locates a word instance in the document and uses it as a template for locating the other instances. This method works well only for documents of a specific style (imaging condition, font or handwriting style). QBS is more convenient for the users to enter the query by keyboard, and is flexible for spotting words of arbitrary style. By this method, the character/word model needs to be trained with a large number of samples. Previous works have contributed largely to efficient word template matching for example-based spotting [4–10] and character/word model learning and model inference for text-query-based spotting [11–17]. To avoid word segmentation errors, some methods spot words from the document without layout analysis [10,18], while some perform text line-based spotting without explicit word segmentation [15–17,19].The retrieval and keyword spotting of Chinese [18,20,21] and Japanese documents [22–26] have some characteristics different from that of English documents. Chinese/Japanese documents have no difference between inter-character and inter-word spaces. Therefore, the recognition and retrieval methods of Chinese documents mostly adopt character models and perform character/word segmentation during recognition/matching. It is also complicated by the large number of character classes (over 5000 classes are frequently used). To alleviate the search complexity of recognition, a character classifier is usually used to assign a small number of high confidence classes to the input character pattern [27].Oriented for text query-based retrieval, this paper proposes a text line-based keyword spotting method for off-line handwritten Chinese documents using a contextual word model, which combines the character classification scores on candidate character patterns, the geometric relationship and linguistic dependency between characters. Candidate words are generated by concatenating consecutive primitive segments after character over-segmentation. By training the character classifier on large number of samples, the proposed method yields promising performance on multi-writer handwritten documents. The benefits of the geometric and linguistic contexts, especially those between the word and external characters, are justified. When retrieving four-character words, the proposed method provides both higher precision and recall rates than transcription-based text search. This paper is an extension to our previous conference paper [28] by adding external context dependency, optimizing the combing weights, performing evaluation on a larger dataset and comparing with transcription-based search.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the related works. Section 3 gives an overview of our Chinese handwritten keyword spotting system. Section 4 describes the contextual word model and Section 5 describes the word model matching procedure for spotting. Experimental results are presented in Section 6 and concluding remarks are offered in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
