@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust geometric ℓ

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Consider the spatial distribution information in feature poolingHandle the misalignment problems in image classification and action recognitionImprove the discrimination of feature pooling in visual recognition tasksConduct extensive experiments on visual recognition tasks

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Feature pooling,Spatial distribution,Image classification,Action recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Feature pooling is a key component in modern visual classification system. However, the conventional two prevailing pooling techniques, namely average and max poolings, are not theoretically optimal, due to the unrecoverable loss of the spatial information during the statistical summarization and the underlying over-simplified assumption about the feature distribution. Addressing these issues, this paper proposes to generalize previous pooling methods toward a weighted ℓp-norm spatial pooling function tailored for class-specific feature spatial distribution. Optimizing such a pooling function toward discriminative class separability that is subject to a spatial smoothness constraint yields a so-called geometric ℓp-norm pooling (GLP) method. Furthermore, to handle the variation of object scale/position, which would affect not only the learning of discriminative pooling weights but also the applicability of the learned weights, we propose a simple yet effective self-alignment step during both learning and testing to adaptively adjust the pooling weights for individual images. Image segmentation and visual saliency map are utilized to construct a directed pixel adjacency graph. The discriminative pooling weights are diffused using random walk on the constructed graph and therefore the discriminative pooling weights are propagated onto the salient and foreground region. This leads to a robust version of GLP (RGLP) which can cope with the misalignment of object position and scale in images. Comprehensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed GLP feature pooling framework. The proposed random walk based self-alignment step can effectively alleviate the image misalignment issue and further boost classification accuracy. State-of-the-art image classification and action recognition performances are attained on several benchmarks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Driven by the increasing amount of image and video data from internet or surveillance cameras, computer vision areas such as image classification [59,63], image re-ranking [58,60], and action recognition [45,61] have made significant progresses in recent years. As an important step in many practical visual recognition tasks, feature selection is of great interests to many researchers [32,33,34,44]. With the prevalence of the bag-of-words (BoW) model [31] for image classification or image-based action recognition [46], feature pooling has become a common practice for image/video feature representation and selection. For a typical image classification task, local image features are first extracted and quantized according to a visual dictionary. Then, the quantization indices of all the local features are summarized to form the global feature representation. A most common summarization method is to form the histogram, i.e. to sum up all the occurrences of each index throughout the entire image in an orderless manner. From the viewpoint of feature pooling [12,28], histogram representation is equivalent to average pooling. Despite its conceivable ease and compactness, average pooling is not immune to local feature noise.To overcome this limitation, max pooling has been proposed [39,40]. Instead of performing averaging operation, max pooling adopts the element-wise maximum values of feature vectors over the whole image or the region of interest as the pooled features. Max pooling has proved to be more robust against local feature noise and can achieve better classification performance [55].The simple assumption associated with average or max pooling, that the spatial distribution for each visual feature is uniform across different classes, causes severe information loss. However, spatial distribution of available features can be important for visual recognition. In the image classification task, if we assume the objects/regions in the images are roughly aligned, the image local features do possess class-specific discriminative geometric information, i.e. spatial distribution patterns. Fig. 1illustrates such an issue for the average and max pooling methods. For images from a specific class, their visual features indexed by the same visual word often share similar spatial distribution. Besides, such class-specific spatial distributions are quite distinct from each other and encode discriminative information. However, as shown in this figure, neither average nor max pooling can capture the underlying difference and produce discriminative features due to the loss of spatial information in the pooling process.Moreover, these two deterministic pooling methods either treat all the local features uniformly or only select the most salient one, and they both assume local features are distributed independently. By comparison, a discriminative pooling scheme is expected to be more flexible and able to capture the spatial correlation of features.Motivated by the above considerations, we propose a so-called geometric ℓp-norm pooling method. Overall, the proposed method aims to learn a pooling function that implicitly encodes the class-specific geometric information of feature distribution in the form of weighted norm. This function is optimized toward best class separability, and in the meantime, it takes into account the following prior knowledge: nearby local image pixels often present similar characteristics, thus a regularization term is employed that encodes the correlation of local features.Another inevitable problem for image classification or action recognition is the misalignment of image foreground, which is caused by large variation in object position/scale in each image. Misalignment of the foreground regions/objects in the training image degrades the effectiveness of the learned discriminative feature pooling function. Moreover, if the object position and scale of a testing image is not aligned with those of the training images, the learned common pooling function cannot capture the discriminative features for classification.In this work, we propose a simple yet effective self-alignment method using the side information from visual saliency [21] and image segmentation [2], which can not only adaptively adjust the discriminative pooling weights for individual images during the training process, but also tailor the learned pooling function for individual testing images. A basic observation is that within a visually consistent (e.g., homogeneous color) image local region, pixels convey similar discriminative information, thus the pooling weights for the pixels within the same local region should be similar. Motivated by this observation, we construct an adjacency graph where nodes represent pixels and edges encode the spatial and color adjacency between pixels. Simple random walk algorithm can effectively and efficiently diffuse and adapt the learned common pooling function onto individual images based on the constructed adjacency graph. Further, visual saliency map is utilized to convert the adjacency graph into a directed graph and it can direct the pooling weights propagation toward the object (foreground) region of the given image. This random walk based self-alignment step results in an image-specific adaptive feature pooling scheme which is robust to image foreground misalignment.Based on the GLP framework originally developed for image classification [10], we further consider the misalignment problem and propose the RGLP algorithm, which can be then applied to several applications including image classification and action recognition. To this aim, the contents of introduction, the experiments, and other related parts are extended correspondingly. Our experimental results show that the proposed robust geometric ℓp-norm pooling scheme is insensitive to median level image foreground misalignment. To sum up, the proposed robust geometric ℓp-norm pooling framework possesses the following advantages:•As the pooling function is learned by directly maximizing the class separability, it is designed to bear good discriminating capability.The pooling function exactly corresponds to the class specific spatial pattern of each visual word, thus the spatial distribution information of visual words is properly utilized.It models the correlations among local features and makes a more reasonable assumption about feature distribution. Also it can naturally unify the average and max pooling in a more flexible framework.Using the simple random walk based self-alignment module, the learning pooling weights can be tailored to individual images according to the object (foreground) position and scale, as well as the image segmentation results. Therefore the object (foreground) misalignment problem is alleviated and the resulting image representation is more robust and the classification performance is further boosted.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The related literature is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 then elaborates on the geometric ℓp-norm feature pooling method and provides the theoretical comparison with the max and average pooling methods. An iterative optimization procedure for learning the discriminative pooling weights is also presented. In Section 5 we introduce the random walk based self-alignment method to alleviate the image misalignment problem, which results in an image-specific adaptive pooling scheme. In Section 6 extensive experimental results on benchmarks are presented and conclusions are drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
