@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Offline text-independent writer identification using codebook and efficient code extraction methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two new codebook based methods for writer identification are proposed.The introduced code extraction methods are very efficient.Optimal parameter values for English and Farsi handwritings are determined.The method is compared with the existing methods comprehensively.The proposed method outperforms existing methods for Farsi and English languages.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Handwritten documents,Writer identification,Farsi handwriting,English handwriting,Codebook,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, an efficient method for text-independent writer identification using a codebook method is proposed. The method uses the occurrence histogram of the shapes in a codebook to create a feature vector for each specific manuscript. For cursive handwritings, a wide variety of different shapes exist in the connected components obtained from the handwriting. Small fragments of connected components are used to avoid complex patterns. Two efficient methods for extracting codes from contours are introduced. One method uses the actual pixel coordinates of contour fragments while the other one uses a linear piece-wise approximation using segment angles and lengths. To evaluate the methods, writer identification is conducted on two English and three Farsi handwriting databases. Both methods show promising performances with the performance of second method being better than the first one.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Handwriting is a behavioral biometric which can be used for writer identification and verification. This biometric can be applied in different domains such as security [1,2], forensic and criminal justice systems [3] and historical document analysis [4,5]. In addition, it can be used for the enhancement of handwriting recognition systems [6].Writer recognition includes writer identification and writer verification. In writer identification, the writer of query handwriting should be determined among a number of writers for each of whom sample handwriting is available. In writer verification, the goal is to determine whether the writer of two handwritten texts is the same person or not. Writer identification and verification can be performed offline, where only the images of handwritings are available; or can be done online, where dynamic features such as pen speed, pen pressure and height of the pen are also available further to the image of the handwriting. Finally, writer identification and verification can be divided into two categories of text-dependent and text-independent. In text-dependent methods, writers are required to write a specific fixed text to perform the identification or verification. In contrast, in text-independent methods, any text can be used for this purpose.Fragmented parts of different people's handwritings are quite different. As a result, the occurrence histogram of different fragments appearing in handwriting can be employed as a feature vector for writer identification. To construct this histogram, a collection of fragments that usually appear in handwritings should be available. This collection is called the “codebook”, and each of its members is called a “code”. In cursive handwritings, connected components may be too long and may have a wide variety of shapes. But smaller fragments or codes are more desirable. This paper presents two novel methods for extracting simple fragments from connected components and using them to efficiently recognize human handwritings. The methods are offline and text-independent and are evaluated in English and Farsi writer recognition tasks, showing promising performances. The organization of the paper is as follows. In the next section, the related work is discussed. Section 3 describes the details of the proposed method, and Section 4 presents the experimental results. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the conclusions of the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper studied the offline text-independent writer identification problem using the codebook approach. The curve fragment and line fragment code extraction methods were introduced and their performances were investigated. Results obtained through these methods were better than the performances of the existing code extraction techniques. These methods extract the code from small parts of connected components and they have the advantage of using the frequently appearing shapes which might be parts of different characters. Besides, these methods extract many codes from handwritings resulting in more robust feature vectors. The line fragment method showed the best performances. It approximates contour fragments using the segments' angles and lengths and eliminates some details. This simplification helps in grouping and finding similar shapes. In addition, the code length in this method is shorter than other methods, and therefore, its codebook construction is faster.Two English databases, namely, the IAM and Firemaker and three Farsi databases were used for testing the methods. One of the Farsi databases had three varieties of short, medium and long texts. As a result, the effect of text size on the methods' performances was also investigated. The achieved performance of the proposed method on the IAM database was 93.7% when the leave-one-out strategy was used. In addition, the performance of 91.8% on the handwritings of 900 writers was achieved. For the Farsi language, the correct identification rates of 97.7%, 99.1% and 100% were reached for samples with 4, 8 and 12 lines, respectively. In addition, the performance of the method on a Farsi database with 480 writers was 96.9%.The performance of the line fragment method is promising. But, computation times of the feature vector and codebook construction in this method are large. These computation times may be decreased by using a hierarchical clustering method. This can be investigated in the future studies. In addition, the optimal values of the parameters of the introduced code extraction methods are different for different languages. Here, the optimal values have been determined empirically. However, it is desired to have a method for the automatic determination of the optimal values of the parameters. This can be considered as a problem for future work.