@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On ear-based human identification in the mid-wave infrared spectrum

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Collected thermal profile face database (using a middle-wave infrared “3-5 microns” camera).Developed a fully automated thermal ear recognition system for real-time human identification (works in day or night).Local Ternary Pattern yields (Rank-1=80.68% and 68.18%) using manually and automatically segmented ears respectively.Score-Level fusion of the Local Ternary Pattern (LTP) and Local Binary Pattern (LBP) enhanced the performance by~5%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thermal infrared imaging,Thermal ear features,Score level fusion and multi-biometrics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper the problem of human ear recognition in the Mid-wave infrared (MWIR) spectrum is studied in order to illustrate the advantages and limitations of the ear-based biometrics that can operate in day and night time environments. The main contributions of this work are two-fold: First, a dual-band database is assembled that consists of visible (baseline) and mid-wave IR left and right profile face images. Profile face images were collected using a high definition mid-wave IR camera that is capable of acquiring thermal imprints of human skin. Second, a fully automated, thermal imaging based, ear recognition system is proposed that is designed and developed to perform real-time human identification.The proposed system tests several feature extraction methods, namely: (i) intensity-based such as independent component analysis (ICA), principal component analysis (PCA), and linear discriminant analysis (LDA); (ii) shape-based such as scale invariant feature transform (SIFT); as well as (iii) texture-based such as local binary patterns (LBP), and local ternary patterns (LTP). Experimental results suggest that LTP (followed by LBP) yields the best performance (Rank1=80:68%) on manually segmented ears and (Rank1=68:18%) on ear images that are automatically detected and segmented. By fusing the matching scores obtained by LBP and LTP, the identification performance increases by about 5%. Although these results are promising, the outcomes of our study suggest that the design and development of automated ear-based recognition systems that can operate efficiently in the lower part of the passive IR spectrum are very challenging tasks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automated methods of recognizing an individual are based on measurable human body characteristics. However, different biological characteristics exhibit both strengths and weaknesses. For example, fingerprints and irises can result in high recognition rates but in order to be measured accurately they require controlled conditions and the subjects need to interact cooperatively with a device. In military and law enforcement applications where remote recognition is necessary, face and ear biometrics can be used for establishing human identity, because they have several advantages over other biometric traits: they are non-intrusive, understandable, and facial images can be captured in either cooperative or non-cooperative manner at variable standoff distances. Unlike human faces, ears are not affected by facial expression or by differences in background [1].The ear biometric has certain advantages over other biometrics: ears are relatively static in size and structure over each individual's life [2]. One of the concerns when using the ear biometric is that there is no longitudinal study (to our knowledge at this point in time) that shows that ear shape is static. The forensic science literature though reports that ear growth, after the first four months of birth, is highly linear [2]. The rate of stretching is approximately five times greater than normal during the period from four months to the age of eight; after which it is constant until around the age of seventy when it again increases. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one biometric experiment on the effect of aging on ear recognition by Ibrahim et al. [3]. This experiment shows that ear recognition rate is marginally affected over the eleven month period of data collection and the authors concluded that “ear can be used in various applications as a time invariant biometric”.A typical 2-D ear biometric recognition system has three modules:1.Detection (segmentation): The ear region is localized in a given 2D image and then segmented for further processing.Feature extraction: Ear-based features are extracted using certain attributes. Some of these features required ear alignment such as Iannarelli's geometric distances; while others do not require alignment such as SIFT features. Iannarelli [2] manually aligned the ear images; other methods extracted the external ear contour (edges) and used the two extreme, having maximum in-between distance, points to align the ear image [4,5].Matching: In this module the features extracted by a query ear are compared against those extracted by multiple ears in the enrollment (gallery) database to associate the identity of the query ear to one of those in the database. The features extracted from each ear sample of the gallery dataset are matched against those extracted from the samples of the probe dataset.While most of the current ear-based recognition approaches are mainly focused in performing feature extraction on data acquired in the visible band [6], in this work we perform a set of experiments and investigate the efficiency of several feature extraction approaches on profile mid-wave infrared face images. Fig. 1illustrates why designing mid-wave IR based ear recognition techniques is important.The MWIR band has both reflective and emissive properties and it can operate in both day and night time environments. Other advantages of MWIR over the active IR band, i.e. near IR or short-wave IR (see Fig. 2) are: (i) MWIR imagery can be acquired without any external illumination in day or night environments (regions in the active IR band might require an external light source), (ii) anatomical features not observable in the active IR spectrum can be observable in MWIR [7], and (iii) background clutter in MWIR images is not always visible.The above observations as well as the potential future applications in law enforcement and the military, were the main motivation for our work. To the best of our knowledge, this paper represents the first attempt in the open literature to investigate the problem of ear recognition in a specific range of the passive infrared (thermal) band.The importance of using the middle-wave infrared (MWIR) band for human recognition was first discussed in [8,9]. In [8], the authors studied the problem of eye detection in the MWIR spectrum and discuss the effect of eye detection, one of the fundamental steps in most face recognition systems, on face recognition. The authors showed that MWIR face images can efficiently be matched to MWIR face images (same session). They also suggested that cross-session (i.e. outdoors vs. indoors) matching in the MWIR band can significantly degrade recognition performance (in terms of rank-1 scores). In [9], the authors also discussed the challenges associated when designing face identification systems that operate in the MWIR band. The authors illustrated the advantages and limitations of intra-spectral (MWIR to MWIR) matching, while they also revealed how challenging the problem of cross-spectral (MWIR to visible or vice versa) matching is.In [10], the authors proposed a statistically-based algorithm for physiological feature extraction (namely wrinkles, veins, edges, and perimeters of facial characteristics). Fiducial (that is, reference) points are subsequently detected either manually or automatically. For that purpose, they used three different extractors, i.e., a fingerprint-based minutiae detector, the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT), and the speeded up robust features (SURF) detector. Finally, they matched faces using an alignment-based matching algorithm with the ability of finding the correspondences between a stored set of gallery points and an input set of probe points. A summary of MWIR-based algorithms, methods and experiments can be found in [7].While all the aforementioned MWIR-based approaches focused in the area of face recognition, there is no reported work in the open literature regarding ear recognition in MWIR band in particular, or thermal IR band in general.Though thermal images have found to be useful in face recognition [8,9], there are some limitations for thermal band [11].•Health or physical related conditions: There are various conditions under which the thermal characteristics for human skin (e.g. face regions) can be altered. These can be generally categorized into health variations (e.g. high fever, consumption of alcohol etc.), or physical variations related to stress, emotional state or physical activity. Since human ears (as well as the nose and eyebrows) are more exposed to external air flow from the environment, they are generally cooler than other parts of the human face and less affected by changes of human physiology [12]. Fig. 3shows examples of ear images that appear darker than areas of visible (exposed) blood vessels (e.g. superficial temporal artery [13]).Occlusion: The usage of glasses or human hair blocks most of the thermal energy emitted for human skin (including faces or ears).Thermal sensitivity: thermal sensitivity of the MWIR cameras is important since it impacts image quality, i.e., the greater the sensitivity, the more accurate the camera can be in order to produce higher quality images.Cost: High-end sensors are very expensive. However, the cost of thermal security cameras has dropped considerably, and is now comparable to high end digital single-lens reflex (DSLR) cameras (visible band). For example, FLIR is now offering LWIR cameras starting at less than 3000 US dollars, making them more affordable and thus researchers can utilize them in several innovative ways.In this work, we designed and developed an ear-based recognition system that works in the MWIR band. The main modules of the system are ear detection, feature extraction and matching. Our ear detection approach is based on a new cascaded AdaBoost framework that is more computationally efficient when compared to the baseline one [14]. Then we investigate several feature extraction methods using MWIR left and right profile face images. Finally, a set of experiments is conducted to determine the effect of the aforementioned design steps in recognition performance:•The first set of experiments investigates the recognition accuracy of intensity-based and shape-based feature extraction approaches;The second set of experiments uses automated ear detection [14], then investigates the same feature extraction approaches;The third set of experiments evaluates the effect of combining several features on recognition performance (see Fig. 4).The methods studied in this work are evaluated using the WVU visible-thermal profile face (VTPF) database that consists of face images of more than 80 subjects and that was captured on two different sessions. The database was assembled indoors spanning over a time period of about 3months, with at least 2weeks between data re-acquisition for all participants.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the hardware used in data collection and the acquired database. Section 3 describes the ear detection technique. Section 4 presents several methods for feature extraction, namely: intensity-based such as ICA, PCA, and LDA; shape-based such as SIFT; and texture-based such as LBP, and LTP. Section 5 describes various experiments to evaluate the proposed technique, and Section 6 provides concluding remarks, and sketches our plans for future work.The thermal camera used in this work is a high definition middle-wave infrared (MWIR) camera produced by FLIR Systems.11“FLIR Systems,” http://www.flir.com, 2011.It is capable of acquiring thermal imprints of human skin and analyzing the thermal distributions and temporal variations. The camera is capable of generating high definition thermal images and operating in diverse testing environments. It features a high resolution 1024×1024 indium antimonide (InSb) focal plane array (FPA) achieving mega-pixel image resolution in a single thermal image. The spectral range of the camera is 3–5μm, and it has a 14bit dynamic range and a noise equivalent temperature difference (NEDT) of less than 25mK. The camera was outfitted with a 50mm MWIR lens also provided by FLIR Systems.The live face capture configuration we used is illustrated in Fig. 5. The camera features a high resolution 1024×1024 indium antimonide (InSb) focal plane array (FPA) achieving mega-pixel image resolution in a single thermal image. The distance between the subject's ear and the camera was set to about 6.5ft and thus, the size of an average ear region was 73×48 pixels. The database was assembled indoors spanning over a time period of 20days. In the beginning of the session, the subjects were briefed about the data collection process after which they signed a consent document. We had access for a top of the line FLIR MWIR camera for a very short period of time, and that is why we only managed to collect about 88 subjects, out of which about 57 subjects participated in two sessions. One of the issues though is that the data collection was not originally designed to address the problem of ear detection (but face recognition) and thus, the available profile images were not always usable for the problems of ear detection and recognition.While the target was to collect only full profile images (+/−90° head yaw) some subjects did not follow the exact data collection protocol. This resulted in having some sample images with head yaws (y-axis) that range from +/−10° to +/−90°. Thus, we had to deal with a more challenging problem (i.e., detecting ears under variable poses), since having only full profile data would result in better detection rates.Another issue is the thermal sensitivity of the camera that is an important factor since it impacts image quality, i.e., the lower the sensitivity, the more accurate the camera can be in order to produce higher quality images. The camera that we are using has the highest sensitivity in the market. The associated software of the camera was used to perform regular calibration (before acquired each set of thermal profile images), which ensures that the camera operates to its optimum performance, and as a result it guarantees measurement accuracy and reliability. The camera operated in a controlled, low temperature environment (room temperature) where better thermal sensitivity can be exploited since the thermal contrast (temperature delta within an image) is very low. An additional software tool (provided by FLIR) was used to remove noise (e.g., dead pixels) from face images and control the temperature scale limits (e.g., setting the temperature range from 28° to 41°C that is the typical range of human body temperature) during data collection.The ear detection procedure classifies images based on the value of rectangular features. These features encode ad-hoc domain knowledge, and can work faster than pixel-based ones [15]. The original approach to detection (baseline) has been widely used to solve the problem of face detection (e.g. in the work of Viola–Jones). A modified version of the baseline approach was used to the ear modality in 2008 [16].For our study and in order to have accurate ear detection results using MWIR profile face images, we re-designed the methodological steps of the original ear detection procedure, and thus, managed to reduce the learning time. Hence, the required training time was reduced from several weeks (using the original Viola–Jones method) to several hours (using our proposed approach) [14].In the ear detection method [14], each rectangle feature f represents the main component of the weak classifier h(x,f,p,ϕ), where ϕ is a threshold, and p is the polarity indicating the direction of the inequality:(1)hxfpϕ=1ifp⋅fx<p⋅ϕ0otherwise.The learner is called a weak classifier due to its low performance. Each ensemble classifier consists of a set of T weak classifiers, where θ is the threshold of the ensemble (strong) classifier:(2)Hx=Continue∑t=1Tαt⋅htx>θRejectotherwise.These ensemble classifiers have a cascade arrangement forming the ear detection system (see Fig. 6).In order to detect an ear in an input image, the image is scanned using the proposed cascaded AdaBoost system. This means that the input image is divided into overlapped sub-images of 24×16,22The average ear size is 73×48pixels.and each region is evaluated. Then, the image is scaled down by a factor s=0.8 and the process is repeated. At this post-processing stage, all the detected regions at various levels of the scale pyramid are scaled back to the original image resolution. Finally, the overlapped detected regions are combined into one rectangle region.In this section, we examine various ear recognition algorithms proposed in the visible domain and attempt to apply these techniques in the MWIR domain. These feature extraction methods are: intensity-based such as (ICA) [17], (PCA) [18], and (LDA) [19]; shape-based such as (SIFT); and texture-based such as (LBP), and (LTP). Since ICA, PCA, and LDA are well known algorithms, we do not provide more information on them. What follows is a description of SIFT, LBP and LTP feature extraction methods.The scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) is a shape based feature extraction method for extracting highly distinctive invariant features. SIFT algorithm [20], consists of four major stages:•scale-space extreme detection: the difference-of-Gaussian (DOG) function is applied to an ear image to identify candidate points that are invariant to scale and orientation.key point localization: this step rejects points having low contrast (sensitive to noise) or that are poorly localized along an edge.orientation assignment: a gradient orientation histogram is computed in the neighborhood of each key-point, where histogram peaks correspond to dominant orientations.key point descriptor: for each selected key-point orientation, the feature descriptor is computed as a set of orientation histograms.LBP operators are one of the best performing texture descriptors [21]. The basic LBP operator assigns a decimal value to each pixel in the image by thresholding (P) neighbor pixels at distance (R), as shown in Fig. 7. The histogram (H) of these decimal values represents the feature vector.Ojala et al. [21] called a local binary pattern uniform, if it contains at most two bitwise transitions from 0 to 1 or vice versa when the bit pattern is considered circular. This is considered as a feature selection method that reduced the number of features, and hence reduces the processing time. Experimental results, using 180 pre-processed MWIR ear images, showed that:•93.55% of the patterns in the 8.1 neighborhood are uniform pixels,89.57% of the patterns in the 8.2 neighborhood are uniform pixels,84.16% of the patterns in the 16.2 neighborhood are uniform pixels.Hence, we decided to use the uniform pattern only.For the block based division, the image is divided into N blocks. These blocks can be of arbitrary size and can overlap. The LBP operator is applied to each block separately, and their corresponding histograms H=[h1h2…hN] are calculated. Integration of these blocks can be at the feature level, by concatenating the histograms extracted from various blocks, then the overall histogram H is used for matching. One of the main advantages of dividing the image into sub-blocks is that these blocks are expected to be more discriminative than using the whole image.Local ternary pattern (LTP) operators extend LBP to 3-valued codes [22], in which gray levels in a zone of width ±t around centered value are quantized to zero, ones above this are quantized to +1 and ones below it to −1, i.e. the indicator s(u) is replaced by a 3-valued, as shown in Fig. 8. This trinary number is transferred into two binary numbers. In other words, two separate channels of LBP descriptors are formed. Two histograms of these two decimal values are concatenated to form the feature vector.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has presented a study on the problem of ear recognition using thermal profile face image (TPF) database with head yaws (y-axis) angle that range from +/−50° to +/−90°. Experimental results show that: (i) our proposed ear recognition method can operate on MWIR thermal band with promising results; (ii) LTP was proven to yield the best performance 80.68% using manually segmented ear regions, and 68.18% using automated ear detection regions; and (iii) the proposed fusion method yielded 72.73% recognition accuracy using automated ear detection regions.Although our approach is relatively successful in identifying ears under various rotation angles and using relatively sizable database, it would be desirable to: (i) scale up the database, and (ii) enhance system performance under variable angles. Another extension of our work would be to test cross-band (thermal and visible) reliable ear features.