@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Compression of multiple user photo galleries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper presents a new coding scheme for photo collections of social events.The approach is intended for server-side storage of image databases.Heterogeneous users could contribute to the dataset.The algorithm implements a predictive coder exploiting the visual similarity.The coding efficiency significantly improves with respect to existing solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image coding,Photo collections,Geotagging,Synchronization,SIFT,Predictive coding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The possibility of sharing multimedia contents in easy and ubiquitous way has brought to the creation of multiuser photo albums. Pictures and video sequences taken by different people attending common social events (e.g., concerts and sport competitions) are gathered together into huge sets of heterogeneous multimedia data. These databases require effective compression strategies that exploit the common visual information related to the scene but compensate effectively the differences depending on the acquiring viewpoints, camera models, and acquisition time instants.The paper presents a predictive coding strategy for multi-user photo gallery, which initially localizes each picture in terms of viewpoint, orientation, time, and acquired elements. This information permits ordering all the images in a prediction tree and associates to each of them a reference picture. From this structure, it is possible to build a predictive coding strategy that exploits the redundant elements between the image to be coded and its reference. Experimental results show an average bit rate reduction up to 75% with respect to HEVC Intra low complexity coding.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to recent surveys, everyday about one quarter of the world's population shares data and information through social media [1]. Many of these connections involve the exchange of multimedia material such as images and videos. Every 60s 4.7 million posts are uploaded to Tumblr; 277,000 snaps are shared on Snapchat; and more than five million videos are viewed on YouTube.This mass multimedia distribution has been permitted by the development of multimedia sharing applications and web platforms, together with the availability of camera-enabled connected mobile devices. These two elements allow users to easily take, edit, and share pictures within their network. This sharing is more and more common both during large-scale events (e.g., sports, music), where networked communities of users share contents of common interest, and in personal life, where relatives or friends merge their photo collections to create a unique archive documenting that common experience [2].The aggregation of huge amounts of multimedia data brings the need for data processing algorithms that permit effective search, retrieval, analysis, selection, and storage of these contents. Some of the approaches presented in the literature aim at automatically selecting and indexing photo collections via a semi-automatic summarization [3,4]. Other strategies are intended to enable a quick browsing of multimedia data exploiting their timestamp values [5]. Ordering images in correct chronological order is an important issue as well [6]. Broilo et al. [2] also show that, by combining timestamp information with visual features, it is also possible to have a correct synchronization when merging photo albums taken by different users. Other approaches ease the organization of pictures by clustering them according to EXIF data [7]. When the uploaded contents are video sequences, parameterizing the activity level of the different regions in a frame permits using this information to synchronize different video streams [8]. Synchonization becomes utterly crucial whenever multiple media need to be aggregated together [9], and it is still nowadays a difficult task to solve in a distributed and heterogeneous scenario [10].Together with search, synchronization, and retrieval issues, research has recently focused on data compression as well. The design of effective coding algorithms, which are able to store multimedia data at high quality without requiring huge amounts of memory, is still a challenging issue when referred to contents acquired by heterogeneous devices [11]. Current state-of-the-art storage technology adopts non-predictive coding solutions, where each picture/video is compressed independently from the other data available on the server. This solution permits fast retrieval and decoding but requires a significant amount of storage space whenever the population of multimedia contents grows. Predictive coding [12] permits mitigating this effect since common elements can be predicted from previously-stored data. This reduces the amount of required disk storage but implies an increment in computational complexity and number of decodings; accessing a single picture or video implies decoding all the elements that are related to it according to the coding dependencies. As a matter of fact, predictive strategies need to control the dependency structure accurately.This paper presents a new predictive coding approach for photo collections of the same event generated by multiple users. The proposed solution assumes that multiple photo collections have been generated by different people which assist at the same event during the same period of time from different viewpoints (see Fig. 1). Pictures are gathered together, and aggregated into a new common photo album. The approach relies on an accurate estimation of the dependencies between different pictures estimated from geometrical (acquisition position and orientation) and temporal properties, as well as from visual content. Note that this task is more difficult than standard temporal prediction operated in video coding since pictures could be quite different due to different acquisition locations, different camera and color distortions, and long time intervals intercurring from one picture to the following one. The proposed solution permits improving the coding performance of state-of-the-art solutions [12] and effectively controls the decoding delay related to the dependencies created by the predictive coding paradigm.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews some of the related works concerning the compression of multiview images. Section 3 presents the general structure of the coder, while Section 4 describes how images are ordered and references are computed. Section 5 describes the predictive coding scheme that was adopted, and Section 6 reports the coding performance of the proposed solution compared with that of the approach in [12]. Final conclusions are drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper proposes a novel coding scheme for the challenging compression of multiuser photo collections. The 3D information estimated from matched keypoints is combined with the temporal coordinates and used to find the similarities between images, while the critical issue of finding the correct ordering has been solved through a graph-based optimization scheme. Experimental results prove how the proposed approach is able to obtain good performances even on images taken with different cameras and in different lighting conditions. Further research will focus on designing locally-optimized warping transformations.