@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic sub-category partitioning and parts localization for learning a robust object model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The ideas of sub-category and part-based are used to learn a robust object model.A novel object representation is proposed based on the topic model.An iterative learning process is presented under the semi-supervision way.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Object model,Topic model,Layout topic,Sub-category partitioning,Part localization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The object model is one of the indispensable ingredients of many computer vision applications, such as object recognition, object detection and object segmentation. To recognize generic object category rather than just specific object instances, the object model must contain and reflect the largely intra-class variations in visual appearances of different object instances belonging to the same object category.Many deformable object models have been proposed to capture significant variations in appearance and shape, such as deformable template models [1–5] and part-based models [6–10]. However, any single deformable model is not enough to represent the rich variations [7]. One of the solutions is to partition the generic object category into several specific sub-categories and learn the deformable model for each sub-category, as shown in Fig. 1. Thus, the generic object model is expressed by multiple sub-category models.The present paper considers the problem of learning such object models from example images by combining the ideas of sub-category partitioning and of part-based modeling. Specifically speaking, given a set of object instances from the same object category, our method will automatically partition them into different sub-categories, locate the meaningful parts in each instance and learn the part-based model for each sub-category. It is very important to study the relationship between the sub-category partitioning and the parts localization in the process of learning object model. For example, when people view cars from various perspectives (e.g. frontal views versus side views), the visually composed parts of cars can be very different; in turn, people can use their visually composed parts to distinguish different viewpoints of car.To achieve the goal, this paper proposes a novel hierarchical object representation based on the topic model. It is called the Layout-Part Topic Model (LPTM). In the LPTM, parts are formalized as a group of regions that are spatially clustered. The spatial relationships of parts are formalized as a group of layouts that give a description of the geometric topology for the relative positions of parts. Naturally, an object instance will be represented as a probability distribution over a set of parts with certain layouts, and the object instances belonging to the same sub-category will have similar probability distributions over the layouts and parts. In addition, the layout information is also helpful in sub-category partitioning.To learn the distribution of object model over the layouts and parts from a given set of object instances, our method divides the LPTM into two Spatial Distribution Topic Models (SDTM), namely, the layout-based SDTM and the part-based SDTM. Accordingly, an iterative learning process is proposed based on the two SDTMs, i.e. using the layout-based SDTM to run the sub-category partitioning and using the part-based SDTM to run the parts localization. The sub-category partitioning is to discover several sub-categories from the set of object instances while the parts localization is to locate the possible part regions in each object instance. Each iteration leads to improved consistency between the sub-category partitioning and the parts localization, and the iteration process will stop until the sub-category partitioning no longer changes. Meanwhile, the distribution of the layouts and the parts is also obtained by using the parameter learning method of the topic model in the iterative process. Finally, our object model is composed of multiple sub-category models, and each sub-category model is a parts-based model.To sum up, the main features of this paper are: (1) to present a novel hierarchical object representation for learning a generic object model; and (2) to provide an iterative learning process to automatically discover the sub-categories and learn their part-based models from a set of object instances with a bounding box. The new method is implemented to illustrate the capability for learning object models and evaluate them on several public and standard databases through the experiment of object detection. The experimental results show that our method proves to be better than existing methods.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is a discussion on the related work. Section 3 introduces the layout-part topic model, and Section 4 describes the learning process in detail. In Section 5, experiments on multiple datasets are conducted by using our method and our method is compared with several others. Conclusions and discussion are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
