@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Approaches for automatic low-dimensional human shape refinement with priors or generic cues using RGB-D data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel and accurate method to refine low dimensional human shape using RGB-D data is proposed.Uses of multiple modalities do not carry any features from the shape provider.Combines low and high level observations jointly in multi-layer graph structureExtensive experiments showed that it outperforms compared suitable algorithms.Also, an existing method is extended by fusing more generic cues for this purpose.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human shape refinement using RGB-D data,Multi-layer graph cut,Human body shape descriptor,Random decision forests,Refinement of low-dimensional representations,RGB-D,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Some human detection or tracking algorithms output a low-dimensional representation of the human body, such as a bounding box. Even though this representation is enough for some tasks, a more accurate and detailed point-wise representation of the human body is more useful for pose estimation and action recognition. The refinement process can produce a point-wise mask of the human body from its low-dimensional representation. In this paper, we tackle the problem of refining low-dimensional human shapes using RGB-D data with a novel and accurate method for this purpose. This algorithm combines low-level cues such as shape and color, and high level observations such as the estimated ground plane, in a multi-layer graph cut framework. In our algorithm, shape prior information is learned by training a classifier. Unlike some existing work, our method does not utilize or carry features from the internal steps of the methods which provide the bounding box, so our method can work on the outputs of any similar shape providers. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed technique significantly outperforms other suitable methods. Moreover, a previously published refinement method is extended by incorporating more generic cues to serve this purpose.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Detecting and tracking humans are important tasks for a wide range of computer vision applications, such as human behavior understanding, surveillance systems, autonomous driving, interactive games, and gesture recognition. A rough low-dimensional representation of the human, such as a bounding box, is commonly output by human detection and tracking algorithms [1–14].Even though this representation is enough for some tasks, a more accurate and detailed point-wise representation is useful to obtain better object descriptors which could be more beneficial for action recognition [15,16] and pose estimation tasks [17,18]. It is possible to obtain a point-wise representation of a human from a low-dimensional representation, a process which can be called shape refinement. An illustration of this process using color and depth images can be seen in Fig. 1.The refinement of a low-dimensional human shape representation is a challenging problem. Several reasons make this process difficult. Representation of the human, most commonly a bounding box in an image, B(x,y,w,h), where x and y is the top left point, w is the width, and h the height of the box, not only contains the human points, but it also includes some background points. The background in the bounding box might have colors, texture, or 3-D geometric features which are similar to those of the human. Additionally, the human might be standing in any position, which causes pose variance and possible self-occlusion of body parts. All of these factors make the refinement process complicated. On the other hand, the bounding box representation provides some hints about the appearance and color of the object. Also, a smaller search space is given to label the points as foreground/background, and the existence of a human in the box is guaranteed. These hints and advantages do not exist if the human body points need to be found and segmented in the entire image space.In this paper, a novel algorithm which combines low- and high-level observations obtained from RGB-D data in a multi-layer graph cut framework is proposed for refining a low-dimensional representation of the human shape—a bounding box B(x,y,w,h). We assume that this representation is provided by some other human detection or tracking method. The proposed algorithm does not leverage the internal computations of the methods which provide the bounding box. Hence, it is generic and applicable on the output of any kind of method which produces a similar low-dimensional human shape. A point-wise descriptor is built to employ the shape information of the point neighborhood. This powerful descriptor utilizes the depth data of the scene by generating three cues that are (1) relative geodesic and (2) vectorial spatial distances of a point to the middle point of B(x,y,w,h), and (3) the local structure information encoded as the normal. The descriptors are used to train a Random Forest machine learning algorithm [19] which favors the most important cues in the descriptor. Multiple low- and high-level observations–e.g. the point-wise confidence scores output by the classifier, the color, and estimated ground plane–are combined jointly in a multi-layer graph. The proposed method outperforms existing comparable algorithms in our experiments.Moreover, a previously published graph cut-based refinement algorithm [20] is extended to serve the same purpose. This method does not incorporate any prior information which must be learned by a classifier as in our first proposed technique. It fuses three generic cues: the color, the depth, and the normal of the points obtained from a single color and depth (RGB-D) image.A review of related work is summarized in the next section. The human shape descriptor, the proposed classifier, and integration of low- and high-level observations in the multi-layer graph are described in Section 3. The generic cues, and the details of the extended graph cut-based method are explained in Section 4. Experimental results of the proposed and extended methods are analyzed in Section 5. Finally, the proposed work is summarized and possible extensions of this work are drawn in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
