@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A distinct and compact texture descriptor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A powerful texture descriptor is developed for texture classification.The descriptor is built via fractal analysis on the local binary patterns.The descriptor enjoys both high discriminative power and robustness.The descriptor is compact and computationally efficient.The descriptor demonstrated excellent performance on four datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Texture description,Local binary pattern,Fractal dimension,Multi-fractal analysis,Texture classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a statistical approach to static texture description is developed, which combines a local pattern coding strategy with a robust global descriptor to achieve highly discriminative power, invariance to photometric transformation and strong robustness against geometric changes. Built upon the local binary patterns that are encoded at multiple scales, a statistical descriptor, called pattern fractal spectrum, characterizes the self-similar behavior of the local pattern distributions by calculating fractal dimension on each type of pattern. Compared with other fractal-based approaches, the proposed descriptor is compact, highly distinctive and computationally efficient. We applied the descriptor to texture classification. Our method has demonstrated excellent performance in comparison with state-of-the-art approaches on four challenging benchmark datasets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual texture, a powerful cue for characterizing scene structures that exhibit a high degree of similarity in their image patterns, provides a rich semantic description for many computer vision tasks such as image understanding, scene classification and visual retrieval. Although there is an abundant literature on texture description, developing an effective and efficient texture descriptor remains a challenging problem. A desired texture descriptor should be highly discriminative and robust to environmental changes, such as illumination changes, occlusions, non-rigid surface distortions and camera viewpoint changes. Meanwhile, the descriptor should be compact and computationally feasible for real-world applications.In the past, a number of approaches [1–9] for texture description have been proposed to achieve robustness against environmental changes. The basic idea of these approaches is to compute a global description based on some local texture features. One popular approach to local texture description is the so-called local binary pattern (LBP) [10]. The LBP and its variants [11–16] have been demonstrated to be effective in describing local image patterns and classifying materials. However, the performance of the existing LBP-based methods in recognizing random texture in real scene is very limited. The reason is that most of these methods use simple histogram-based statistics to integrate local features. Such histogram-based statistics only count the number of elements and lose the details of how the elements are spatially distributed.One promising alternative to the histogram-based statistics is the fractal-based approach [17–22] that characterizes the spatial distribution of elements using fractal geometry. Many fractal-based approaches have been successfully used in texture classification. However, in the existing approaches, often the features are highly redundant. For instance, the gradient and Laplacian multi-fractal measurements used in [19,23] would provide similar information about edges, and the descriptor proposed in [18] is insufficiently compact (1218-dimensional). Some approaches involve large-scale clustering (e.g., [17]) or some complex alignment stages (e.g., a tight frame system is involved in eXuHJF12CVIU) and as a result, the computational cost becomes expensive.In this paper, we are motivated to combine the power of the local pattern coding strategy and the global fractal analysis. Built upon the local binary patterns of image, a practical fractal-based texture descriptor is developed. An input image is first represented by local binary patterns, and then fractal dimension is computed on each type of pattern and all the fractal dimensions are finally concatenated as a feature vector. Owing to the effective LBP-based local representation, the proposed descriptor becomes compact. Meanwhile, benefitting from the robust fractal analysis, the proposed approach enjoys both high discriminative power and robustness against many environmental changes. We applied our descriptor to texture classification on four challenging benchmark datasets. The proposed approach has exhibited excellent performance in both effectiveness and efficiency in comparison with state-of-the-art approaches.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related works on texture descriptor for texture classification. Section 3 introduces some background knowledge about local binary patterns and fractal analysis. Section 4 is devoted to the proposed approach. The experimental evaluations are reported in Section 5 and the conclusion is drawn in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
