@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimized polygonal approximations through vertex relocations in contour neighborhoods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Polygonal approximations using relaxed approximations allowing the vertices of an approximation to lie outside the contour.Adaptive estimation of contour neighborhoods where the vertices of an approximation are located.A general approach to reduce error measure of any polygonal approximations through vertex relocation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Polygonal approximation,Dominant points,Point neighborhood,Vertex relocation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents yet another algorithm for finding polygonal approximations of digital planar curves; however, with a significant distinction: the vertices of an approximating polygon need not lie on the contour itself. This approach gives us more flexibility to reduce the approximation error of the polygon compared to the conventional way, where the vertices of the polygon are restricted to lie on the contour. To compute the approximation efficiently, we adaptively define a local neighborhood of each point on the contour. The vertices of the polygonal approximation are allowed to ‘move around’ in the neighborhoods. In addition, we demonstrate a general approach where the error measure of an already computed polygonal approximation can possibly be reduced further by vertex relocation, without increasing the number of dominant points. Moreover, the proposed method is non-parametric, requiring no parameter to set for any particular application. Suitability of the proposed algorithm is validated by testing on several databases and comparing with existing methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Polygonal approximation is an effective way for capturing the outline of digital planar shapes [2,24], where the outline of an image is approximated by a sequence of line segments. Such approximations can be utilized for shape modeling [16] and recognition [17]. The main motivation for such an approximation based modeling lies in the ability of the approximation to cope with the noise on the shape contour [6,16]. At the same time, a polygonal approximation is a more compact representation of the shape contour [2]. For this reason, a lot of research has been carried out (for decades) in search of effective polygonal approximation algorithms [4,6,7,10–16,19,21–23].Most of these polygonal approximation algorithms attempt to find a set of points, called dominant points, on the shape contour that serve as the vertices of the approximating polygon [6,12]. Such an approximation generally minimizes some error criteria, like (weighted) mean squared error [10,19,20]. Most of the polygonal approximation algorithms share a common idea where a significant measure is defined for each point on the contour. Then a subset of points on the contour is selected based on this measure. This is done by either selecting most significant points [7,23] or removing redundant non-significant points from the contour as much as possible [6,12,16]. This selection process requires some definition of relative significance of points on the contour. This relative significance can be defined using some threshold [12] or can be determined by finding a set of points that optimizes some error measures. Several researchers have demonstrated the superiority of optimization over thresholding [6,16].In addition, most of the polygonal approximation algorithms (if not all) share another common feature: vertices of the polygonal approximation are a subset of the contour points. This can be a limiting factor; since a better approximation can possibly be obtained if we allow the vertices to lie outside the contour points. We call such an approximation as relaxed approximation. Fig. 1demonstrates one such example. The main motivation behind a relaxed approximation is that such an approximation allows us more flexibility in reducing the error of the approximation. In this paper, we statistically substantiate this claim through experimentations on various image databases.However, finding an optimum relaxed approximation can be computationally prohibitive, as the vertices may not lie on the contour. This is especially true for contours with large number of points. This paper proposes a novel method that is somewhat a ‘middle way’: take the benefit of relaxed approximations, while try to reduce the computational overhead. This approach is described more formally below.In this work, we consider a curve C as an ordered set of points {pi=(xi,yi),i=1,2,…,n}, where pi+1 is a neighbor of pi. For a closed curve, pnand p1 are neighbors also. Since we are dealing with digital images, the points pion C are treated as pixels in the digital images. Therefore, for our purpose, points on a curve are taken from a discrete two dimensional space. If a curve is formed from the boundary pixels of a digital image, then this curve is called a contour.For a point pi(either in real or discrete space), a neighborhood can be defined as a set of points Ν(pi), where for each point q∈Ν(pi), dis(q,pi)≤r, and r>0. Here, dis(q,pi) refers to the distance between the points q=(qx,qy) and pi=(pix,piy). In real space, dis(q,pi) can be defined as the Euclidean distance between q and pi(Fig. 2(a)). However, in pixel space (the case in this work), the points on the curve C have integer co-ordinates and the calculation of dis(q,pi) can be simplified by computing City-block or Manhattan distance between q and pi. Fig. 2(b) shows one such example, where the curve points are treated as pixels.In this paper, we propose a non-parametric algorithm that selects a sequence of m points d1,d2,…,dmas the vertices of a polygon that approximates a contour C, where dj∈Ν(pi), j=1,2,…,m, for some i∈{1,2,…,n}. We also present a simplified version of the proposed method that can work as a general framework to reduce the approximation error of any ‘in-hand’ approximations (approximations computed from possibly other algorithms). In this general framework, a subset CRof C is found initially by an existing polygonal approximation algorithm. Then, the neighborhoods of points in CRare searched for the best set of vertices for a polygonal approximation of C. In addition, the proposed method is non-parametric: neighborhoods of the points in C and the best set of vertices of the polygon approximating C are found adaptively.This paper thus improves the state of the art in finding polygonal approximations of digital planar curves through the following contributions.•Improved polygonal approximations through relaxed approximations, allowing the vertices of the approximations to lie outside the contour.Efficient computation of relaxed approximations by searching the vertices of the approximations in adaptively estimated local neighborhoods.A general approach to reduce error measure of any polygonal approximations through vertex relocation.Regarding the third point above, the following comments can be made. For any digital curve, an approximation with zero mean squared error (called ISE) can be obtained by following the curve exactly (just remove the collinear points from the curve!). Such an approximation generally results in a large number of vertices in the polygon. Reducing the number of vertices of the polygon will increase the resulting ISE. Thus, algorithms for finding polygonal approximations generally attempt to minimize the number of vertices and ISE at the same time. Getting the optimal combination of these two parameters can be computationally prohibitive for large contours. Therefore, researchers have utilized heuristics to reduce the approximation error [5,6,11,12,16]. The following scenario occasionally arises while reducing the error of the polygonal approximations. Suppose, two equal-size sets of vertices V1 and V2 define two approximations of a curve C. Now, the associated errors E(V1) and E(V2) of the two approximating polygons of C can be different; that is, E(V1)≠E(V2), |V1|=|V2|. This indicates the possibility of obtaining an approximation of C with less error by relocating the vertices of the already existing approximation. For example, vertices are shifted along the curve to reduce the approximation error in [20]. In this paper, we present a general approach that can possibly reduce the error of an in-hand approximation by relocating the vertices of the polygon in their neighborhoods. Experimental results indicate that a statistically significant amount of improvement is possible through this approach.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes some related works on polygonal approximations. Mathematical formulations of polygonal approximations are presented in Section 3. The proposed algorithm is described in Section 4. Section 5 details the experimental results. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we demonstrate that a relaxed approximation can be a better choice in approximating digital planar shape due to its flexibility in reducing approximation error. In addition, we conclude from our experimentations that a significant amount of vertices in the approximations obtained by existing algorithms is in need of relocations to get better approximations. Our vertex relocation process can be utilized by other researchers to improve the existing methods.The proposed algorithm can be made faster in specific applications. If the shapes are normalized in a particular application, then a fixed neighborhood width can be used. This fixed neighborhood width can be calculated by running the estimateNeighborhood procedure on a number of samples and then by averaging the estimated neighborhood widths.