@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic scene understanding using temporal association rules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Uses temporal mining technique event recognition in dynamic scenesTemporal association rules are then generated from frequent patterns. These association rules help model the sequence cycle.Spatio-temporal anomalies are identified and detected in a hierarchical manner.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scene understanding,Computer vision,Association rules,Traffic surveillance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The basic goal of scene understanding is to organize the video into sets of events and to find the associated temporal dependencies. Such systems aim to automatically interpret activities in the scene, as well as detect unusual events that could be of particular interest, such as traffic violations and unauthorized entry. The objective of this work, therefore, is to learn behaviors of multi-agent actions and interactions in a semi-supervised manner. Using tracked object trajectories, we organize similar motion trajectories into clusters using the spectral clustering technique. This set of clusters depicts the different paths/routes, i.e., the distinct events taking place at various locations in the scene. A temporal mining algorithm is used to mine interval-based frequent temporal patterns occurring in the scene. A temporal pattern indicates a set of events that are linked based on their relationship with other events in the set, and we use Allen's interval-based temporal logic to describe these relations. The resulting frequent patterns are used to generate temporal association rules, which convey the semantic information contained in the scene. Our overall aim is to generate rules that govern the dynamics of the scene and perform anomaly detection. We apply the proposed approach on two publicly available complex traffic datasets and demonstrate considerable improvements over the existing techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In visual surveillance, there has been an increasing interest in recognizing object behaviors, by interpreting high-level semantics of scene dynamics. However, computing relationships between different actions in the scene or detecting rare events in an ocean of video data is a daunting task. Analyzing event interactions manually is practically impossible, and is solely dependent on human operators. In addition, as the scene gets crowded, the complexity of the relationships between the agents increases as well. Even though it has become an active research area, it is still a complex problem with a lot of constraints, and an unsupervised method is required to make the task easier. An elegant solution to this problem can open doors to a wide spectrum of applications, such as video surveillance [1], anomaly detection [2], and crowd analysis [3].Typically, the input to a dynamic scene analysis system is a video, and the first task is to detect moving objects and record their motion characteristics, in the form of object trajectories (or optical flows). Each trajectory denotes an individual event in the scene during a time interval. This step is generally followed by behavior or activity segmentation, which identifies semantically meaningful components and groupings to reveal different events. Traditionally, algorithms such as K-means and fuzzy clustering have been used extensively, while many recent works have explored spectral clustering and normalized cuts [4]. The resulting clusters model the various events, indicating the spatial layout of the scene. Finally, the last step is to learn the temporal scene behavior. Behavior in our context explains the way an object acts in relation to the other objects in the scene. It can be defined as a sequence of events with spatial and temporal constraints. Recently, probabilistic methods such as Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBN) [5], Hidden Markov Models (HMM) [6], and Probabilistic Topic Models (PTM) [2], have been used extensively by the computer vision community to learn the scene dynamics.The dynamic scene understanding problem can be expressed as: obtain the motion patterns in the scene, build the scene structure and lastly, interpret the high-level semantics of the scene. A dynamic scene may also involve multiple agents interacting with one another, and the actions may occur in parallel with one another or recur over time. Thus, we are interested in answering questions such as: what is happening in the scene, where the objects are located and how they interact within their environment. In this work, we aim at developing a robust system that can learn the scene model with minimal human intervention. In this regard, video mining can help extract salient information from a video without such supervision [7]. In order to analyze and discover the temporal interdependencies and relationships between various events occurring in a scene, we make use of temporal mining algorithms. These relationships between events are modeled as temporal patterns, discovered using a frequent temporal pattern mining algorithm. A frequent temporal pattern can be defined as a set of composite events that occur repetitively in the video, and are expressed using temporal relations in Allen's taxonomy [8], such as before, after, and meet. Once these frequent patterns are obtained, forward temporal association rules are generated. These rules capture the correlations between the frequent temporal patterns present in the video.We define an anomaly as an atypical behavioral pattern based entirely on the model in context, thus every scene can have a different set of anomalies. In this work, anomaly detection is performed in a hierarchical manner. First, we identify unusual events within a spatial context. These spatial anomalies can be found once unique event clusters are identified. The second type of anomalous behavior can be found by using frequent temporal patterns (and their time duration) to discriminate between the usual and the unusual complex composite events.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we have proposed a method that analyzes traffic patterns and detect irregular events. To the best of our knowledge, temporal mining techniques have not been used for event recognition in dynamic scenes. We first discover frequent temporal patterns and use Allen's temporal relations [8] for representation. The time duration of composite events is included in the pattern as well. Temporal association rules are then generated from these frequent patterns. These association rules help model the traffic cycle sequence and detect anomalous behavior. Recent works suggest traffic cycle as an ordered sequence of activities. We on the other hand, indicate exactly how two events are related (overlaps, equals, starts, etc.) and the time interval they occupy. Spatio-temporal anomalies are identified and detected in a hierarchical manner. We show results on two standard public datasets and demonstrate considerable improvement over the current methods.