@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A framework for semantic people description in multi-camera surveillance systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
No training or camera calibration is needed and achieve real-time processing.Extract descriptors from targets with rotations and scale change.Descriptors of partially visible people can also be extracted.No high resolution cameras are needed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
People re-identification,Human appearance model,Semantic features,Soft-biometric,Surveillance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
People re-identification has been a very active research topic recently in computer vision. It is an important application in surveillance systems with disjoint cameras. In this paper, a framework is proposed to extract descriptors of people in videos, which are based on soft-biometric traits and can be further used for people re-identification or other applications. Soft-biometric based description is more invariant to changing factors than directly using low level features such as color and texture. The ensemble of a set of soft-biometric traits can achieve good performance in people re-identification. In the proposed method, the body of detected people is divided into three parts and the selected soft-biometric traits are extracted from each part. All traits are then combined to form the final descriptor, and people re-identification is performed based on the descriptor and Nearest Neighbor (NN) matching strategy. The experiments are carried out on SAIVT-SoftBio database which consists of videos from disjoint surveillance cameras, as well as some static image based datasets. An open ID recognition problem is also evaluated for the proposed method. Comparisons with some state-of-the-art methods are provided as well. The experiment results show the good performance of the proposed framework.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, camera based surveillance systems are widely used in our daily life. These surveillance systems are applied in many areas including home security, environment monitoring, industrial process control, and surveillance of public places. For some of these applications, the concern is the safety in public or private places with human as the main target. The traditional way is to hire human operators monitoring the system and report if any unexpected events or suspicious people are observed. However, as usual there are 20 to 40 cameras in one surveillance system, it is unrealistic and inefficient for operators to monitor the whole system. To spare the human resource and reduce the cost, a surveillance system which is able to automatically detect the semantic information is highly desired. Tasks for such a system include detecting people in the video, tracking them and detecting their behaviors, even identifying the people if it is necessary.To build such an automatic surveillance system, people detection and tracking algorithms are very important. Tracking people in one camera is plausible in practice. There are already some mature methods. For example, people can be tracked by using model matching [1], or searching in the neighborhood from last frame [2], or using joint probabilistic methods [3,4]. However, surveillance systems in reality consist of several cameras covering different areas without overlapping. Compared with single camera based system, people tracking in multi-camera based system is a more challenging work.Consistently tracking one people in different cameras raise the demand to re-identify the people when he/she appears in different cameras or reappears in the same camera, known as people re-identification. People re-identification has been a hot-topic recently [5,6]. However, it faces many problems. Firstly, due to the distribution of different cameras, the same person could appear in different view angles. This increases the difficulty of constructing a robust human appearance model. Secondly, there could be illumination variation in different cameras. Illumination variation is a challenging problem in people tracking and identification since it may affect the human appearance in the images. In addition, different cameras having different specifications could lead to a series of problems. For example, the same object may appear in slightly different colors in different cameras due to different image sensors used. Furthermore, the pose of people may keep changing while they are in some actions like walking or running. Another problem is the low resolution of images obtained in surveillance system. Last but not least, occlusion is a common problem existing in people tracking and identification.Biometric information such as face [7] and gait [8] can do a great job in identifying people, but there are some constraints to use them in surveillance systems. To identify a people by face, it requires videos or images with high resolution and being captured in close distance. Also, the identification of face is mainly focusing on the frontal face, thus the cooperation of people is necessary. These are not suitable for the surveillance systems mentioned above. Moreover, different view angles of cameras and different poses of the same people make re-identification difficult by gaits.Actually, the essential problem in people tracking or re-identification is to construct a model that can represent the people distinctly and robustly, especially under the condition that most of the camera based surveillance systems are covering different areas without overlap. Distinct means the discrepancy between the model of one people and models of other people should be as significant as possible, while robust means the model should be invariant to those changing factors. Besides using biometric information, one alternative is to model people by their appearance, assuming that the appearance of people does not change in short-term, such as hair color, and skin tone.In this paper, a framework is proposed to construct human appearance model for people re-identification in disjointed camera surveillance system. Most existing people re-identification methods use local features like color, texture, key-points, etc., but there is a trend to include soft-biometric traits [9] in people re-identification. To form a distinctive yet robust descriptor, a set of soft-biometric traits are selected in the proposed framework. These traits describe certain parts of a people that do not change easily in short-term. Descriptors are further used for people re-identification. Though soft-biometric traits are not as distinct as biometric information in identifying a person, a set of them combined together are expected to achieve a good performance. Besides, an open ID problem is evaluated for the proposed method and some state-of-the-art methods, which have not been aware of in most existing methods.The novelties of our proposed method are listed as below:1.No training or camera calibration is needed beforehand. As simple methods are developed for the extraction of soft-biometric traits, the proposed method is able to achieve real-time processing on videos.Able to handle the scale change and incomplete appearance. Unlike other methods extracting descriptors from well cropped and resized images, the proposed method can extract descriptors from images with different scales, even with some rotations. Descriptors of partially visible people can also be extracted, which is implausible in other state-of-the-art methods.No high resolution cameras are needed. Normal camera with resolution of 352×288 would meet the requirement.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a review on related works on people re-identification and soft-biometric. Overview of the proposed framework is given in Section 3, followed by the detailed description of the proposed method in Section 4. Experimental results and discussion are provided in Section 5. Finally, conclusion is addressed in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
