@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using texture to complement color in image matting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The texture information is leveraged to complement color in image matting.The proposed method combines color and texture information in matting process.The proposed combined method presents the best among current matting methods.The proposed method has first ranks with respect to MSE and Gradient error.Several experiments are carried out to reveal potential power of texture in matting.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Alpha matting,Texture matte,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Current image matting methods based on color sampling use color to distinguish between foreground and background pixels. However, they fail when the corresponding color distributions overlap. Other methods that define correlation between neighboring pixels based on color aim to propagate the opacity parameter α from known pixels to unknown pixels. However, strong edges of textured regions may block the propagation of α. In this paper, a new matting strategy is proposed that delivers an accurate matte by considering texture as a feature that can complement color even if the foreground and background color distributions overlap and the image is a complex one with highly textured regions. The texture feature is extracted in such a way as to increase distinction between foreground and background regions. An objective function containing color and texture components is optimized to find the best foreground and background pair among a set of candidate pairs. The effectiveness of proposed method is compared quantitatively as well as qualitatively with other matting methods by evaluating their results on a benchmark dataset and a set of complex images. The evaluations show that the proposed method presented the best among state of the art matting methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Digital matting is the accurate extraction of foreground regions from images and videos and is useful for image and video editing operations. The compositing equation is given by [1](1)Ip=αpFp+1−αpBpwhere Fpand Bpare the foreground and background colors of pixel p which are linearly combined using αpto represent its observed color Ip. The alpha values lie in [0, 1] with pixels having α=1 and α=0 belonging to foreground and background, respectively. For a three-channel color image, the digital matting task (also known as alpha matting) involves estimation of seven unknowns from three compositing equations for each pixel. Typically, the solution space is constrained through the availability of trimaps, which partition the image into three regions — known foreground, known background and unknown (i.e., consists of a mixture of foreground and background colors). Trimaps are usually user-defined, but can also be guided [2] or be generated automatically [3]. Assumptions on image statistics are also used to constrain the solution of Eq. (1)[4–6]. The algorithm for matte estimation in this paper is based on trimaps. Once the alpha matte is estimated, an editing operation could combine the extracted foreground image with a new background using the compositing equation.The accuracy of alpha matte estimation is largely dependent on the accuracy of the trimap. If the trimap is coarse, i.e., it partitions the foreground and background sparsely, then the quality of alpha matting deteriorates. One of the main approaches to alpha matting is to select best known samples of foreground and background regions that contribute to an accurate matte estimation. The α value for an unknown pixel p is calculated from the selected foreground and background samples by(2)αp=Ip−BF−BF−B2.The other approach is to assume that neighboring pixels are correlated under some image statistics. This involves the estimation of α over a small neighborhood followed by propagation of the α towards unknown pixels guided by gradient of the image. This approach overcomes the disadvantage of a coarse trimap from which reliable samples of foreground and background colors cannot be obtained for unknown pixels that are far away from the trimap. Yet another approach casts the matting problem as an optimization problem where the cost function consists of a data term representing color sampling and a smoothness term representing alpha propagation. Thus, they can be seen as a combination of sampling and α-propagation methods.Color sampling based matting methods rely on color values of some selected known pixels to estimate the alpha values of unknown pixels. These approaches work well when dealing with images that have well separated foreground and background color distributions. However, they fail to pull alpha matte when the foreground and background color distributions are close together and have some overlap since the color feature cannot discriminate between foreground and background colors anymore. Also, α-propagation based matting methods fail to estimate alpha accurately when dealing with complex images because textured background or foreground of complex images may contain strong edges that block the propagation of alpha. The above two drawbacks are illustrated in Fig. 1. The alpha mattes extracted by color sampling approach of Bayesian matting [7] and shared matting [8], alpha propagation based approach of closed-form matting [4] and the combined approach of robust matting [9] (which takes advantage of color sampling and alpha propagation techniques) show that parts of the book are also considered as foreground as seen in the zoomed version of window 2. Due to the similarity between the color of hair and part of the letters in window 2, which causes the local foreground and background color distributions to overlap, even careful selection of known foreground and background pairs results in some portions of the background being wrongly estimated as belonging to the matte. At the same time, strong edges in the background prevent propagation of alpha, which also contributes to the erroneous matte. In fact, the edges corresponding to some of the letters in the title of the book are visible in these methods.In this paper, we propose to alleviate the above problems of existing matting methods through two contributions: (i) The first one is the development of a color sampling based alpha matting algorithm where several properties of potential candidates for foreground and background are considered to select a suitable foreground–background pair from which the alpha matte can be calculated. (ii) The second contribution is an evaluation of the role that texture plays in an accurate estimation of alpha. As mentioned, color features fail when there is overlap between foreground and background distributions. In such cases, we show that the texture feature can be used to discriminate between foreground and background. When the alpha matte from the texture features is combined with that obtained from the color features, we achieve a more accurate estimate of the unknown alpha matte. We show the result of our combined matting approach in Fig. 1, where much of the background that appeared in the other methods have been eliminated. Compared to shared sampling [8], our method has performed well as seen in windows 1 and 2, where more of the book region has been correctly identified as belonging to the background.The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we present a brief review of some important matting methods. In Section 3, a new color based matting method is proposed and the role of texture in alpha matting is studied in Section 4. The combination of color and texture features to arrive at the final alpha matte is discussed in Section 5. Experimental results are presented in Section 6 and finally conclusions are presented in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
