@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D shape descriptor for object recognition based on Kinect-like depth image

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the common 3D shape descriptor from Kinect-like depth image.We evaluate the 3D shape descriptor in object recognition.We introduce 3D shape descriptor performance frameworks.Shape distribution and local spin image outperformed other 3D shape descriptors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inter-class,Intra-class,Instance,Kinect-like depth image,3D object retrieval,3D shape descriptors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
3D shape descriptor has been used widely in the field of 3D object retrieval. However, the performance of object retrieval greatly depends on the shape descriptor used. The aims of this study is to review and compare the common 3D shape descriptors proposed in 3D object retrieval literature for object recognition and classification based on Kinect-like depth image obtained from RGB-D object dataset. In this paper, we introduce (1) inter-class; and (2) intra-class evaluation in order to study the feasibility of such descriptors in object recognition. Based on these evaluations, local spin image outperforms the rest in discriminating different classes when several depth images from an instance per class are used in inter-class evaluation. This might be due to the slightly consistent local shape property of such images and due to the proposed local similarity measurement that manages to extract the local based descriptor. However, shape distribution performs excellent for intra-class evaluation (that involves several instances per class) may be due to the global shape from different instances per class is slightly unchanged. These results indicate a remarkable feasibility analysis of the 3D shape descriptor in object recognition that can be potentially used for Kinect-like sensor.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
3D objects have been used widely in computer graphics and computer aided design. A 3D object surface is normally represented in three main forms: 3D primitives, depth map or point cloud and meshes [1]. 3D primitives are based on basic shapes such as line, plane and cube while meshes consist of vertices and edges connected together to form a 3D object. On the other hand, point clouds consist of 3D points of the raw information obtained from a stereo camera, range or laser sensor. Among these three forms, the most commonly used representation for 3D shape is meshes; due to the less data storage required compared to point clouds and also due to its capability to represent a complex 3D shape easily compared to using 3D primitives.Recently, many works were proposed on how to extract a 3D shape descriptor from meshes especially for the aim of 3D object retrieval and 3D content based indexing. Such applications are popular in the area of industrial part designing, biology, chemistry, anthropology and archeology [2]. 3D object retrieval was reviewed by many researchers especially on generalizing the feature extraction approach and finding the direction of such application [3–7]. The recent progress on the development of advanced scanning, 3D modeling technologies and large number of 3D objects in database has resulted in the need to have a fast searching mechanism with high discriminating power [8]. Recently, the Microsoft Kinect sensor was launched [9] and this opened up the investigation of 3D shape descriptors to object recognition or classification. This is due to the capability of such technology to obtain depth and color information in almost real-time which is beneficial to object recognition and classification based applications.Previous researches in object recognition and classification using 3D shape descriptors that were based on Microsoft Kinect were designed solely for the interest of the robotic community [10,11]. The main goal of those studies was to investigate the object color and depth properties obtained from such sensor for autonomous robot application [12]. By proving that the combination between the RGB information and depth information outperforms the RGB based sensor (conventional camera) for object recognition, those studies have opened a new perspective in computer vision for object recognition and classification. However, a few studies have been done to analyze the feasibility of the existing 3D shape descriptors (previously, designed for 3D object retrieval) obtained from depth information from Kinect-like sensor.In this present study, we review and compare the common 3D shape descriptors (according to [13]) proposed in 3D object retrieval literature for object recognition based on depth information obtained from Kinect-like sensor. These 3D descriptors are: (1) shape distribution[14,15], (2) local spin image[16], global spin image[13]and shape histogram[17]. In this study, an RGB-D object dataset from [10] has been used which consists of 300 objects or instances taken from multiple views with a Kinect-like 3D camera and generalized into 51 classes. RGB image and depth image pairs of each object are taken in 3 different height angle views of 30, 45 and 60° with respect to horizon (see Fig. 1). In this work, we propose two different evaluations; (1) inter-class evaluation; and (2) intra-class evaluation and the performance of the shape descriptors. For inter-class evaluation, one instance was selected randomly for each class in the dataset and N depth images per class were selected randomly in the dataset before the 3D shape descriptors were obtained and a self-similarity matrix was produced. This matrix is compared with a ground truth matrix in order to generate the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve showing the trade-offs of true positive rate and false positive rate. The similar comparing mechanism was used in intra-class evaluation except that a set of input depth images was built by selecting I instances randomly for each class and N depth images are selected randomly for each instance.In our study, the intensive 3D shape descriptor analysis and extensive analysis of previous works in [10,11] including our previous work in [18] have been done in order to determine the feasibility of 3D shape descriptors in object recognition or classification based on Kinect-like depth image. This study has been carried out in terms of discriminating power (based on ROC curve) and efficiency (based on similarity measurement function complexity) in three different aforementioned evaluation mechanisms called inter-class and intra-class evaluations.The coordination of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, several related works are summarized including the 3D shape descriptor literature in 3D object retrieval and the constraints in implementing 3D shape descriptors in object recognition or classification based on Kinect-like depth image. After that, common 3D shape descriptors used in this work are reviewed in Section 3 before our two proposed evaluations; (1) inter-class; and (2) intra-class evaluation are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 presents and discusses the results from all evaluations before the conclusion is made in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
