@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiview stereo and silhouette fusion via minimizing generalized reprojection error

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A generalized reprojection error is proposed to fuse stereo and silhouette cues.The method composes of convex optimization and mesh-based surface refinement.Insensitive to initialization and scalable for high-resolution reconstruction.Good performance for data with smooth texture and sparsely sampled viewpoints.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiview stereo,3D reconstruction,Silhouette fusion,Convex relaxation,Reprojection error,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Accurate reconstruction of 3D geometrical shape from a set of calibrated 2D multiview images is an active yet challenging task in computer vision. The existing multiview stereo methods usually perform poorly in recovering deeply concave and thinly protruding structures, and suffer from several common problems like slow convergence, sensitivity to initial conditions, and high memory requirements. To address these issues, we propose a two-phase optimization method for generalized reprojection error minimization (TwGREM), where a generalized framework of reprojection error is proposed to integrate stereo and silhouette cues into a unified energy function. For the minimization of the function, we first introduce a convex relaxation on 3D volumetric grids which can be efficiently solved using variable splitting and Chambolle projection. Then, the resulting surface is parameterized as a triangle mesh and refined using surface evolution to obtain a high-quality 3D reconstruction. Our comparative experiments with several state-of-the-art methods show that the performance of TwGREM based 3D reconstruction is among the highest with respect to accuracy and efficiency, especially for data with smooth texture and sparsely sampled viewpoints.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Accurate reconstruction of a 3D geometrical shape from a sequence of calibrated 2D images has many real world applications, such as augmented and mixed reality [1,45], urban reconstruction [2,46], object detection [3,47] and object recognition [4,48]. 3D reconstruction based on multiple images is an active field of research in computer vision [5,6,42] and has attracted considerable recent interest [40,41,43,44], due to its capability to produce high-quality reconstruction for indoor and outdoor scenes and drastically decreased cost in image acquisition by digital cameras and cellphones.There are several image cues that can be utilized for multi-image based 3D reconstruction [7], such as texture, defocus, shading, stereo, and silhouette. Among them, stereo cues are the most common ones. The reconstruction based on stereo cues is also known as shape from stereo and multiview stereo. Based on the Lambertian reflectance model of illuminated surface [8], multiview stereo methods can infer a 3D shape by finding local correspondences among the input 2D images. However, due to noise, illumination variation, inaccurate camera calibration and/or lack of texture on the object, correspondences are often misidentified, resulting in degraded 3D reconstruction accuracy and sometimes unpleasant visual effect. Although the introduction of neighbor [9–11] or non-local information [12] may alleviate this problem, these remedies are inadequate in finding reliable correspondences for objects which do not contain sufficient textures. To solve this problem, energy minimization techniques based on weighted area function [13,14] have been proposed by adding surface smoothness as a regularization term. These techniques lead to compact and smooth surfaces and thus reduce outliers. However, regularization techniques lead to over-smoothed surfaces and thus generate artifacts in certain cases, such as objects with thin or protruding structures.Another commonly used cue for 3D reconstruction is silhouette. The methods that use silhouette cues to recover 3D surfaces are called shape from silhouette. These methods [15–17] aim at reconstructing a visual hull by using multiple silhouette images. The visual hull is the intersection of the visual cones associated with all image silhouettes. For any 3D point inside the visual hull, its projected point in each 2D image is expected to be enclosed by the silhouette. Since the projections of thin or protruding structures are generally located on boundaries of silhouettes, such structures can be recovered in the boundaries of the visual hull. The quality of the visual hull is directly affected by the segmentation quality of the silhouettes. With recent advances in image segmentation methods, visual hull reconstruction has become increasingly accurate and robust. However, there are still problems using this approach, e.g., concavities in a shape cannot be reconstructed from the visual hull at all.To recover deep concave, thin and protruding structures, we plan to take advantages of both stereo and silhouette-based techniques by integrating these cues in the process of reconstruction. The accuracy of 3D reconstruction not only depends on how the objective function is designed, but also depends on how the surface is represented. Volumetric based methods are capable of freely changing topology of surface and efficient for optimization, but the drawback is their high cost in memory for large volume data. The mesh based methods can represent high-resolution surface without large memory requirements, however, most of them are limited in handling topology changes and sensitive to initial condition. It is thus important to integrate the advantages of volumetric and mesh based methods. In this paper, we present an effective and accurate multiview reconstruction method based on a two-phase optimization for generalized reprojection error minimization (TwGREM). A generalized reprojection error is formulated to integrate stereo and silhouette consistencies into an energy function, which allows the recovery of concavities while preventing over-smoothing of protruding structures. By utilizing the advantages of the implicit and explicit representations of surfaces, a two-phase optimization method is used to minimize this function. In the first phase, with the implicit representation of surface on 3D volumetric grids and the convex relaxation technology, the method is robust against initial conditions and can be efficiently solved using variable splitting and Chambolle projection with freely changing surface topology. In the second phase, the result is further parameterized and refined on a triangle mesh to produce the high-quality reconstruction output.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the related work is reviewed in Section 2. The proposed TwGREM method is presented in Section 3, which includes main concepts of the method, formulation of an energy function, and energy optimization. Experimental results are analyzed in Section 4 before the paper is concluded in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
