@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cross-domain action recognition via collective matrix factorization with graph Laplacian regularization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply collective matrix factorization to cross-domain action recognition.We build a novel graph Laplacian regularization term.The framework jointly learns semantic representations and a linear classifier.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Action recognition,Collective matrix factorization,Graph Laplacian regularization,Latent semantic representation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates the problem of cross-domain action recognition. Specifically, we present a cross-domain action recognition framework by utilizing some labeled data from other data sets as the auxiliary source domain. It is a challenging task as data from different domains may have different feature distribution. To map data from different domains into the same abstract space and boost the action recognition performance, we propose a method named collective matrix factorization with graph Laplacian regularization (CMFGLR). Our approach is built upon the technique of collective matrix factorization, which simultaneously learns a common latent space, linear projection matrices for obtaining semantic representations, and an optimal linear classifier. Moreover, we explore the label consistency across different domain and the local geometric consistency in each domain and obtain a graph Laplacian regularization term to enhance the discrimination of learned features. Experimental results verify that CMFGLR significantly outperforms several state-of-the-art methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human action recognition has received extensive attention in computer vision community due to its many potential applications such as video surveillance, video retrieval, and man–machine interaction [1–5]. Over the last few decades, remarkable progress has been made in conventional action recognition systems, which often use a robust classifier trained by sufficient human annotated data under the assumption that testing data and training data are drawn from the same feature space and the same distribution. However, the discriminative power of the trained model may be undermined by two facts in real-world scenarios. On one hand, it is often expensive or impossible to label large amount of training data. On the other hand, the assumption that testing data share the same feature space and the same distribution with training data cannot be always guaranteed. Therefore, it is reasonable to resort to training data in other domains as compensation to boost the performance of action recognition systems.Recently, cross-domain dictionary learning for sparse representation has emerged as a useful tool to tackle this issue [6–9]. Although formally diverse, all these methods are built upon an assumption that the sparse representations of the same action in the source domain and the target domain tend to be similar. The gap of sparse representations is bridged by cross-domain dictionary learning methods, which are mostly based on the K-Singular Value Decomposition (KSVD) [10] algorithm. We have also witnessed that collective matrix factorization (CMF) produced impressive results in the related field of cross-modal hashing. In [11], CMF is used to learn a latent factor model from different modalities of an instance in an unsupervised manner, and the learned factor model can well preserve the semantic similarity between multiple modalities.Enlightened by these works, we put forward a novel cross-domain action recognition algorithm named Collective Matrix Factorization with Graph Laplacian Regularization (CMFGLR). The proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 1. First, we make use of the collective matrix factorization technique to learn a common latent semantic space and the features of data from different domains are projected into a common latent semantic space. Second, in order to make the learned semantic feature more discriminative, we incorporate the label consistency between different domains and the local geometric consistency in each domain into our framework. In addition, an optimal linear classifier is learned simultaneously. The main contributions of our work are described as follows.(1)We propose a novel cross-domain action recognition framework, which employs collective matrix factorization to learn a common latent semantic space, narrowing the semantic gap of features of data from different domains.To further enhance the discriminative power of the learned semantic features, we integrate a graph Laplacian regularization term to exploit the label information between different domains and the local manifold structure of each domain.We incorporate a term of classification errors into the objective function, which enables that the latent semantic representation of actions and a multiclass linear classifier are jointly learned.The remaining sections are organized as follows. We review the related work in Section 2. Section 3 presents the proposed approach and describes the optimization of the objective function in detail. Section 4 presents experimental results and analysis on human action recognition, followed by the conclusion in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
