@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Boosting Fisher vector based scoring functions for person re-identification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose BFiVe, a new supervised algorithm for single-shot person re-identification.The descriptors are a set of compressed local Fisher vectors extracted from a coarse to fine image subdivision.In the training step each region gives rise to a learnt weak ranking function.The ranking function of the image gallery is obtained by a boosted selection of a weak learner subset.The matching rate at rank 1 on VIPeR is 38.9%, on 3DPes 41.7%, on PRID-2011 19.6%, and on i-LIDS-119 48.1%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Person re-identification,Fisher vector,Adaptive boosting,Likelihood ratio,Similarity ranking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem to automatically retrieve a selected person from video streams is of fundamental importance to video analysis. Applications vary from searching for suspicious individuals in a network of surveillance cameras, to maintaining person identity from one camera to the other for behavior analysis. Several factors contribute making the problem very hard, in fact a person's appearance can vary greatly through scenes due to changes in viewpoints, illumination conditions, pose and orientation, or to the possible usage of different acquisition devices. Other disturbing factors are the presence of shadows, occlusions, or individuals in the scene with similar appearance.Person re-identification consists of matching observations of individuals across disjoint camera views. In very recent years, this problem has received a considerable attention, and various surveys and reviews are available, pointing out different aspects of this challenging topic [1–6]. For this reason, we direct the reader to these papers for a detailed discussion on the challenges posed by the problem, and for an overview of state-of-the-art methods along with their performance on publicly available data-sets.Broadly speaking, in order to address the problem, people have to be detected in videos and be represented by descriptors which aim to capture their visual appearance. The descriptors are then used to compare different individuals and to determine the correspondence among them. Re-identification methods proposed in literature usually avoid to consider the detection phase and assume to work with images whose content is restricted to a bounding box around the person. They differ on the descriptor construction that can refer to a single view of the person (single-shot methods) or to multiple views obtained by briefly tracking (tracklet) the person's movements (multi-shot methods), and on the comparison of descriptors, which can be direct (unsupervised) or based on similarity measures learned using a set of labeled samples (supervised).Although re-identification can be regarded as a binary classification problem over pairs of people descriptors, it is clear that a binary answer (same person or not) becomes harder as the gallery size increases. Thus the evaluation of a re-identification system is accomplished by regarding re-identification as a ranking problem rather than a classification one: the algorithms return a sorted list of candidates and the best performance is obtained if the correct correspondence is in most cases at, or close to, the first position of the returned list.Using a standard taxonomy, the method proposed in this paper is a supervised single-shot recognition method. The major novelty of the proposed method, named BFiVe, consists of combining the power of Fisher vector descriptors with the ability of boosting procedures to select the most appropriate local descriptors to build a strong scoring function.Starting from low-level features computed at pixel level in regions obtained from a coarse to fine image subdivision, an image is initially represented by a family of local descriptors based on Fisher vectors that are then dimensionally reduced to an optimal size using Principal Component Analysis. In the training phase, a pool of weak scoring functions is generated using the local descriptors. Finally, the construction of a strong scoring function by means of an adaptive boosting procedure is performed using a minimum error procedure on the weak learners. The error is computed by analyzing the position of the right match in the ranked output of the weak scoring function. In this way, the regions that better contribute to collocate the right match in the very first positions weigh more in the global scoring function.Previously published methods, to the best of our knowledge, aggregate local descriptors in order to build a single image descriptor, and learn a single metric to provide the final ranking. The novelty of BFiVe is that it learns a proper metric for each subimage, i.e. there are as many learnt rankers as the regions the image is divided into. A second learning step is performed using a ranking-based boosting approach, which combines local rankers to establish the final ranking function.The proposed method has been experimentally validated on four challenging data-sets: VIPeR, 3DPeS, PRID 2011 and i-LIDS-119. The obtained figures clearly outperform the best previously published results on all of them.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the state-of-the-art methods included in the supervised single-shot category. Section 3 presents synthetically the BFiVe method. Sections 4 and 5 explain the techniques we propose for the description of images and for the learning of the scoring functions, respectively, while Section 6 illustrates the on-line usage of the method. Section 7 presents the experimental validation of BFiVe including a comparison with the state-of-the-art, the methodology followed for parameters selection, and an analysis of the computational complexity. Section 8 analyzes several aspects of the proposed method, discussing its main features. Section 9 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a supervised learning approach for single-shot person re-identification is proposed. The descriptor of a person image consists of a set of local region descriptors based on Fisher vectors extracted from a coarse to fine image partition, starting from color and gradient features of the pixels in the region.The training phase acts in two steps. In the first step, each region descriptor is used to define a weak scoring function, or weak ranker, that, when applied to a pair of images, produce a similarity score between them. In this way, it is possible to sort a database of known people with respect to the likelihood they depict the same person by only regarding corresponding portions of the images. The second step consists of a boosting procedure, that is performed to select a subset of the weak scoring functions to minimize a ranking error computed on the learning set. The error takes into account the relative position in the ranking of image pairs depicting the same person with respect to those depicting different individuals. The final scoring function is a weighted combination of the selected weak ranking functions. The function is applied on a test set to evaluate the proposed method.We experimentally demonstrated that using weak learners with a boosting strategy outperforms the use of a single learner based on a descriptor containing the same information.The experiments, conducted on publicly available data-sets that are typically used in single-shot re-identification papers, show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art: the recognition rate at rank 1 is 38.9% on VIPeR, 41.7% on 3DPeS, 19.6% on PRID 2011, and 48.1% on i-LIDS-119.