@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust stereo matching using adaptive random walk with restart algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a robust stereo matching algorithm using a random walk with restart.The proposed method considers occlusion and depth discontinuities.The method achieves high accuracy with low computational costs in the reconstruction.Our method works well on the varying illumination and exposure test.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Global optimization,Random walk with restart,Stereo matching,Superpixels,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose a robust dense stereo reconstruction algorithm using a random walk with restart. The pixel-wise matching costs are aggregated into superpixels and the modified random walk with restart algorithm updates the matching cost for all possible disparities between the superpixels. In comparison to the majority of existing stereo methods using the graph cut, belief propagation, or semi-global matching, our proposed method computes the final reconstruction through the determination of the best disparity at each pixel in the matching cost update. In addition, our method also considers occlusion and depth discontinuities through the visibility and fidelity terms. These terms assist in the cost update procedure in the calculation of the standard smoothness constraint. The method results in minimal computational costs while achieving high accuracy in the reconstruction. We test our method on standard benchmark datasets and challenging real-world sequences. We also show that the processing time increases linearly in relation to an increase in the disparity search range.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Depth perception is a fundamental issue in the study of computer vision. Depth information is used in object recognition, human tracking, and image segmentation, as well as in robotics applications, including navigation, localization, and mapping. The depth is therefore an important measure in order to understand space and the objects within it. The stereo camera is a popular method to measure a 3D point cloud. Stereo matching algorithms attempt to determine corresponding objects between the two scenes. There has been considerable progress in this field. Scharstein and Szeliski [1] showed that the majority of stereo matching algorithms can be built from four basic components:•Computation of local matching costs for all pixels.Aggregation of pixel-wise matching costs in the support regions.Search for the global optimal disparity values.Refinement of the resultant disparity map.The stereo algorithms can be classified into two groups, local and global, depending on whether the global search and refinement are performed. Initially, the pixel-wise matching costs between the reference and target images are calculated. The pixel-wise costs are often noisy, and contain minimal information in texture-less regions. Therefore, the costs of neighboring support regions are aggregated together. A local algorithm would finish at this stage and assign the best disparity value based on the aggregated costs at each pixel. Thus, local methods are typically faster, yet less accurate in comparison to a global technique.In contrast, a global method takes account of the overall scene structure and depth smoothness in order to determine the disparity map. Recently, stereo algorithms have achieved impressive results using the Markov Random Field (MRF). The labeling of an MRF is known to be NP-hard. Due to this factor, belief-propagation (BP) and graph cut (GC) methods are widely used to approximate the optimal solution of the global method. However, BP- or GC-based stereo matching algorithms require substantial computational resources. In this study, we present a novel stereo matching algorithm that utilizes a random walk with restart (RWR) to optimize the matching cost without the need for the conventional BP or GC algorithms. The proposed method provides two benefits: computational efficiency, and theoretical optimality. These factors enable the proposed method to achieve high-quality matching results at relatively low computational cost.We also propose an adaptive RWR algorithm (ARW) that is suited for practical applications. The use of a stereo camera presents many problems, including low texture, occlusion, and depth discontinuities. A general energy minimization formulation contains data and smoothness terms, which are effective when considering the low-texture areas of an image. However, this approach will often fail when conserving occlusion or depth discontinuities, resulting in an overall unsatisfactory matching. In order to solve this problem, our proposed algorithm includes two additional procedures. Firstly, the occluded regions are detected through a left-right consistency check. Secondly, we introduce a robust penalty function to compute an additional fidelity term that allows us to preserve the depth discontinuity. These two advances play an important role in improving the performance.This paper's primary contribution lies in its introduction of a novel global optimization method for stereo matching. Our proposed algorithm is based on the RWR method, instead of the conventional GC or BP. We describe a new interpretation of the RWR method, and outline its benefits, in relation to stereo matching and classical optimization algorithm. In addition, we modify the conventional RWR algorithm for our purposes, by taking account of regions of occlusion and discontinuity. With these modifications, we achieve high-accuracy stereo reconstruction at little computational cost in comparison to GC- and BP-based methods. This is our main contribution to the literature. Our experimental results quantitatively demonstrate that the performance of our method is comparable to existing state-of-the-art techniques. We also implement our proposed method in a real-world test environment, and reveal its minimal processing time requirements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
