@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D human motion analysis framework for shape similarity and retrieval

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new framework is proposed for 3D human video analysis, based on a new descriptor called Extremal Human Curve.Motion analysis is incorporated by employing motion segmentation into clips.Clips are represented by trajectories on shape space.Clip matching is performed using DTW on the manifold.Summarization by clustering is exploited in content-based motion retrieval.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Motion analysis,Shape similarity,3D video retrieval,3D human action,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While human analysis in 2D image and video has received a great interest during the last two decades, 3D human body is still a little explored field. Relatively few authors have so far reported works on static analysis of 3D human body, but even fewer on 3D human video analysis.Parallel to this, 3D video sequences of human motion are more and more available. In fact, their acquisition by multiple view reconstruction systems or animation and synthesis approaches [1,2] received a considerable interest over the past decade, following the pioneering work of Kanade [3].Most of the recent research topics on 3D video focus mainly on performance, quality improvements and compression methods [4,2,5]. Consequently, 3D videos are yet mainly used for display. However, the acquisition of long sequences produces massive amounts of data which necessitates efficient schemes for navigating, browsing, searching, and viewing video data. Hence, we need to develop an efficient and effective descriptor to represent body shape and pose for shape retrieval and video clustering. We also need a motion retrieval system to look for relevant information quickly.3D Human body shape similarity is an important area, recently attracted more attention in the field of human–computer interface (HCI) and computer graphics, with many related research studies. Among these, research started with 3D features have been applied for body pose estimation and 3D video analysis.In this paper, a unified framework providing several processing modules is presented. All viewed within a duality pose/motion approach as summarized in Fig. 1below.We first focus on the analysis of human pose and we propose a novel 3D human curve-based shape descriptor called extremal human curves (EHC). This descriptor, extracted on body surface, is based on extremal features and geodesics between them. Every 3D mesh is represented by a collection of these open curves. The mesh to mesh comparison is then performed in a Riemannian shape space using an elastic metric between each two correspondent human curves.At this level, our ultimate goal is to be able to perform reliable reduced representation based on geodesic curves for shape and pose similarity metric. Invariant to pose changes, our EHC descriptor allows pose (and motion) comparison of subjects regardless of translation, rotation and scaling. Such descriptor can be employed not only in pose retrieval for video annotation and concatenation but also in motion retrieval, clustering and activity analysis.Second, we are interested in the task of video segmentation and comparison between motion segments for video retrieval. As a 3D video of human motion consists of a stream of 3D models, we assume that EHC features are extracted from all 3D shape frames of the sequence, which is further segmented. For direct comparison of video sequences, the motion segmentation can play an important role in the dynamic matching by segmenting automatically the continuous 3D video data into small units describing basic movements, called clips.For the segmentation of these units, an analysis of minima on motion vector is performed using the metric employed to compare EHC representations. Finally, the motion retrieval is achieved thanks to the dynamic time warping (DTW) algorithm in the feature vector space.The contributions of this paper are:•The proposed surface-based shape descriptor called EHC provides a compact representation of the shape. Thereby, reducing both the required space for storage and the time for comparison. As our descriptor is composed of a collection of local human curves, the EHC can find a number of useful applications lying on body part analysis.The use of video segmentation allows a semantic analysis of the human motion, within a hierarchical structure of three level “video-clip-pose”.The modeling of curves in the shape space manifold allows calculating statistics on shape models and motion clips. Thanks to this latter, templates for the pose/clip are computed as average of a collection of poses/clips. The matching with such templates which represents a class, reduces retrieval complexity algorithm from n to log(n).The development of a unified framework, viewed as a duality pose/motion, for several processing modules on video retrieval and understanding, where all use the same features and similarity metric.The outline of this paper is as follows: Section 3 discusses related works in the area of static and temporal shape similarity and video retrieval. The extremal curve extraction is presented in Section 4. Section 5 describes the pose modeling in shape space and the elastic metric used for curve comparison. In Section 6, our approach used for motion segmentation and retrieval is presented. Section 7 describes video clustering and summarization for motion understanding. In Section 8, evaluation of our framework and experimental results for shape similarity, video segmentation and retrieval is performed. Finally, we conclude by a discussion of the limitations of the approach in Section 9 and a summarization of our result issues for future works in the Conclusion section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
