@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Viewpoint-independent gait recognition through morphological descriptions of 3D human reconstructions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new model-free approach for gait recognition.The recognition is achieved independently of the trajectory.Our method is based on 3D morphological analysis of gait sequences.Our approach is able to identify people walking on curved paths.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gait recognition,Morphology,View-independent,Appearance-based,3D reconstruction,Histogram,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many studies have confirmed gait as a robust biometric feature for identification of individuals. However, direction changes cause difficulties for most of the gait recognition systems, due to appearance changes. This study presents an efficient multi-view gait recognition method that allows curved trajectories on unconstrained paths in indoor environments. The recognition is based on volumetric analysis of the human gait, to exploit most of the 3D information enclosed in it. Appearance-based gait descriptors are extracted from 3D gait volumes and temporal patterns of them are classified using a Support Vector Machine with a sliding temporal window for majority voting. The proposed approach is experimentally validated on the “AVA Multi-View Dataset (AVAMVG)” and on the “Kyushu University 4D Gait Database (KY4D)”. The results show that this new approach is able to identify people walking on curved paths.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research on human gait as a biometric feature for identification has received a lot of attention due to the apparent advantage that it can be applied discreetly on the observed individual without needing the active participation of the individual.Previous studies on gait recognition have been classified into two categories: model-based and model-free approaches. The model-based methods extract gait features by fitting a model to input images, whereas model-free approaches characterize the human gait pattern by a compact representation, without having to develop any articulated model for feature extraction and having practical application even with low quality images where the color and texture information is lost.In addition, regarding viewing angle, the previous work can be categorized into two approaches: view-dependent and view-independent approaches. The view-dependent approaches assume that the appearance will not change during walking. In such methods, a change in the appearance, caused by a view change, will adversely affect performance [1]. Fig. 1shows the influence of a curved path on the silhouette appearance. As one of the advantages of gait as biometric is that it does not need the cooperation of the individual, the trajectory of motion cannot be restricted to just straight paths.On the other hand, the use of volumetric information allows more information to be analyzed in contrast to methods which only compute gait descriptors from silhouettes or 2D images. This paper presents an efficient view-independent method to recognize people walking along unconstrained (curved and straight) trajectories. This approach focuses on capturing 3D morphological and structural information from volumetric reconstructions of walking humans, which are previously aligned along the way. The main contribution is that our method allows direction changes, achieving a good recognition rate on unconstrained paths.Some potential applications of this work are access control in special or restricted areas (e.g. military bases, governmental facilities and laboratories) or smart video surveillance (e.g. bank offices) [2].This article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes works related to the topic of gait recognition. Section 3 explains the details of the proposed algorithm and describes three new descriptors which obtain information from 3D occupancy volumes. An analysis of the proposed method and the performance is given in Section 4. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has proposed a method to recognize walking humans independently of the viewpoint and regardless direction changes. The method focuses on capturing 3D morphological and structural information from volumetric reconstructions of the gait. The main contribution is that the method achieves a good recognition rate on completely unconstrained paths, allowing direction changes, in contrast to others view-independent approaches where the view change is restricted to a few angles. In our method, the individual can walk freely in the scene without adversely affect to the recognition.For this purpose, it was designed a mechanism of person detection and gait alignment based on 3D reconstructions. In order to extract information from the 3D volumes, three gait morphological descriptors are proposed. The first one is the Cover by Rectangles (CR) [18] applied on rendered front projections of the gait volume. The second is composed by an aggregation of three Cover by Rectangles descriptors computed on the top, side, and frontal projections of the gait volume (CRP). Lastly, the third new proposed descriptor is called Cover by Cubes (CC) and it is defined as the union of all the cubes with the largest size that can fit into a gait volume of a person.The experimental results show that the CRP descriptor is the most reliable for using with our gait recognition method, providing good results in both AVAMVG and KY4D gait databases. The experimental results also show what is the optimal size for the histograms of each descriptor on each dataset. Finally, by using a majority vote policy on a sliding temporal window, the system is able to correctly identify up to 96% of the subjects of the AVAMVG gait database and nearly 94% of subjects of the KY4D dataset.