@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An improved distance-based relevance feedback strategy for image retrieval

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The performance of existing nearest neighbor approaches is studied in a CBIR context.Several issues on the application of NN methods to the CBIR problem are analyzed.An improved relevance feedback algorithm also based on the NN paradigm is proposed.The accuracy of the estimates is improved by considering locality of labeled samples.Experimental results evidence significant improvements in most cases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CBIR,Image retrieval,Relevance feedback,Nearest neighbor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most CBIR (content based image retrieval) systems use relevance feedback as a mechanism to improve retrieval results. NN (nearest neighbor) approaches provide an efficient method to compute relevance scores, by using estimated densities of relevant and non-relevant samples in a particular feature space. In this paper, particularities of the CBIR problem are exploited to propose an improved relevance feedback algorithm based on the NN approach. The resulting method has been tested in a number of different situations and compared to the standard NN approach and other existing relevance feedback mechanisms. Experimental results evidence significant improvements in most cases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Content based image retrieval (CBIR) refers to the application of techniques to retrieve digital images from large databases, by analyzing the actual content of the image rather than the metadata associated with it.In general, a CBIR system represents each image in the repository as a set of features (usually related to color, texture and shape), and uses a set of distance functions defined over this feature space to estimate similarity between pictures.A query can be understood as the intention of a user to retrieve a certain kind of images, and it is usually materialized as one or more sample pictures. The goal of a CBIR system is to retrieve a set of images that is best suited to the user's intention. Obviously, the potential results of such a system will strongly depend not only on the particular features of the representation space but also on the implicit or explicit distance functions used to measure similarity between pictures [1–3].This way of assessing similarity comes along with the implicit assumption that image resemblance is related to a distance defined over a particular feature space. This leads to the so-called semantic gap, between the semantics induced from the low level features and the real high level meaningful user interpretation of the image. To reduce this gap, relevance feedback has been adopted by most recent CBIR systems [4]. When relevance feedback is used, the search is considered an iterative process in which the original query is refined interactively, to progressively obtain a more accurate result. At each iteration, the system retrieves a series of images according to a pre-defined similarity measure, and requires user interaction to mark the relevant and non-relevant retrievals. This data is used to modify some system parameters and produce a new set of results, repeating the process until a satisfying enough result is obtained. In this context, the relationship between any image in the database and the user's desire is usually expressed in terms of a relevance value. This value is aimed at directly reflecting the interest that the user may have in the image and is to be refined at each iteration.Most relevance feedback algorithms use the user's selection to search for global properties which are shared by the relevant samples available at each iteration [4]. From a Pattern Recognition viewpoint, this can be seen as obtaining an appropriate estimate of the probability of (subjective) relevance. Many different approaches exist to model and progressively refine these estimates. But relevance feedback faces a small sample problem whose models cannot be reliably established because of the semantic gap. In this context, nonparametric distance-based methods using neighbors are particularly appealing [5–8]. The aim of these methods is to assess relevance of a given image by using distances to relevant and non-relevant neighbors. In particular, an image is considered as much relevant as its distance from the nearest relevant image is small compared to the distance of its nearest non-relevant image.In the present work, all these considerations about distance-based CBIR approaches are taken into account to derive a novel way of reliably estimating relevance from distances. The algorithm is then evaluated exhaustively in three databases and in a variety of contexts, including both query by example and refinement of a textual search.The paper is organized as follows. The next section explains the model used; outlines the assumptions made; presents the name conventions used throughout the article; and describes the plain nearest neighbor approach. Section 6 exposes several key facts about the way relevance is estimated and introduces a novel alternative. In the experimental section the proposed algorithm is compared against the original one [5,6], some extensions [7,8], and other representative relevance feedback methods. Finally, the main conclusions of the proposed approach are outlined along with some work in progress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
