@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lattice estimation from images of patterns that exhibit translational symmetry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Regular texture patterns exhibiting translational symmetry were modelled.Model comparison was implemented using Bayes Information Criterion.Texel lattice geometry was estimated from e.g., images from a textile archive.Accuracy was better than other methods with which it was compared.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Texture,Statistical image representation,Pattern recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The analysis of regular texture images is cast in a model comparison framework. Texel lattice hypotheses are used to define statistical models which are compared in terms of their ability to explain the images. This approach is used to estimate lattice geometry from patterns that exhibit translational symmetry (regular textures). It is also used to determine whether images consist of such regular textures. A method based on this approach is described in which lattice hypotheses are generated using analysis of peaks in the image autocorrelation function, statistical models are based on Gaussian or Gaussian mixture clusters, and model comparison is performed using the marginal likelihood as approximated by the Bayes Information Criterion (BIC). Experiments on public domain images and a commercial textile image archive demonstrate substantially improved accuracy compared to several alternative methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Regular textures can be modelled as consisting of repeated texture elements, or texels. The texels tesselate (tile) the image or, more generally, a surface. Varying illumination, varying physical characteristics of the textured surface, geometric deformations and sensor noise all result in images of such patterns exhibiting approximately regular, as opposed to exactly regular, texture. In this paper, we consider the task of automatically extracting texels from images. In particular we are interested in analysing patterns in printed textiles. Such patterns often exhibit translational symmetry and the visual structure within each texel can itself be complex. Translationally symmetric regular textures can always be generated by a pair of shortest vectors (two linearly independent directions), t1 and t2, that define the size, shape and orientation (but not the position) of the texel and the lattice that it generates. The lattice topology is always then quadrilateral. Such textures form one class of wallpaper pattern [1]. We restrict ourselves to consideration of images of planar, approximately regular textures viewed under orthographic projection. Whilst this might at first seem restrictive, this problem is, as will become apparent, far from completely solved. Furthermore, solutions will find application in analysis, retrieval and restoration of textile, wallpaper and tile design images, for example. The aim then, is to automatically decide whether a translationally symmetric regular texture class provides a good model for a texture image, and in cases in which it does, to extract the most predictive texel geometry.In an earlier conference paper [2], this problem was cast in a statistical model comparison framework; models representing different hypotheses for lattice geometry were compared using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). In this paper we extend this work in several ways. A more extensive discussion of related literature is provided setting the work more clearly in context, and certain aspects of the method have been clarified. False hypotheses are pruned using a constraint on the angle between t1 and t2. Classification of texture images as regular or irregular using model comparison is compared empirically to an alternative method [3,4]. Model comparison is performed using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) as well as BIC. New experiments are reported on larger datasets, and results are reported separately for private and public datasets thus enabling future comparisons to be made using the public data. A detailed comparison of lattices obtained using several methods is presented. Experiments involving qualitative observer evaluations are expanded. The proposed method and implementations of two alternative methods from the literature are compared quantitatively against ground-truth annotations using two quantitative evaluation measures.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the most closely related previous work. Section 3 presents the model comparison framework. Section 4 describes details of lattice models. Section 5 describes the method used in our experiments for generating lattice hypotheses. Evaluations are described in Section 6 and conclusions are drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It seems clear that the method proposed in this paper has superior accuracy to the methods with which it was compared. This was the case on both the commercial and public databases. In particular, the number of lattice extractions not judged to be clearly correct by observers was only a third of that obtained by the closest competing method. Even with parameter settings which disadvantage it relative to the other methods, the proposed method gave markedly better lattice estimates (Table 2). Furthermore, the value of σ2 had little effect on the results (see Table 1).Most errors made by BIC were due to overfitting, e.g., over half of those BIC results (Gaussian, σ2=100) rated OI were due to overfitting. Replacing BIC with AIC exacerbates this problem since AIC penalises model complexity less and thus tends to overfit more. This is why the AIC result in Table 1 (row 6) is a little worse than the corresponding BIC result (row 1).The method proposed is fully automatic and can be used to both classify images as regularly or irregularly textured and to estimate lattice geometry from those textures that are regular. Adopting the theoretical framework of statistical model selection has yielded accuracy clearly superior to other methods with which it was compared. Nevertheless, the error rates could be usefully lowered further by future work.The framework can easily embed other existing work. Alternative methods for generating hypotheses could be explored in the context of the approach. Further work is needed to explore the relative merits of alternative statistical texture models. This should enable better performance on images of damaged textiles, for example. The ratio of the two BIC values used in Eq. (10) might provide a useful measure of the extent to which a texture is regular (in the sense studied in this paper). Validation of this hypothesis is left for future work. BIC can sometimes agree poorly with the marginal likelihood and it would be worth exploring approximations based on sampling methods, for example. Finally, it should be possible to extend the approach to handle varied viewing geometry, and to the analysis of near-regular textures on deformed 3D surfaces by allowing relative deformation between texels.