@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ordered trajectories for human action recognition with large number of classes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A technique that captures information of objects with longer duration.A feature selection like approach that delivers better performance than several trajectory variants.Removal of a large number of trajectories related to background noise.We apply our technique on action datasets HMDB51, UCF50 and UCF101 containing largest number of classes till date.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Action recognition,Dense trajectories,Large scale classification,Fisher vector,Bag-of-Words,SVM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, a video representation based on dense trajectories has been shown to outperform other human action recognition methods on several benchmark datasets. The trajectories capture the motion characteristics of different moving objects in space and temporal dimensions. In dense trajectories, points are sampled at uniform intervals in space and time and then tracked using a dense optical flow field over a fixed length of L frames (optimally 15) spread overlapping over the entire video. However, among these base (dense) trajectories, a few may continue for longer than duration L, capturing motion characteristics of objects that may be more valuable than the information from the base trajectories. Thus, we propose a technique that searches for trajectories with a longer duration and refer to these as ‘ordered trajectories’. Experimental results show that ordered trajectories perform much better than the base trajectories, both standalone and when combined. Moreover, the uniform sampling of dense trajectories does not discriminate objects of interest from the background or other objects. Consequently, a lot of information is accumulated, which actually may not be useful. This can especially escalate when there is more data due to an increase in the number of action classes. We observe that our proposed trajectories remove some background clutter, too. We use a Bag-of-Words framework to conduct experiments on the benchmark HMDB51, UCF50 and UCF101 datasets containing the largest number of action classes to date. Further, we also evaluate three state-of-the art feature encoding techniques to study their performance on a common platform.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human action recognition requires the modelling of the coordinated motions – the actions – of different parts of the human body and their interaction with other objects or persons nearby. Offline applications include event detection, e.g. injury detection in team sport matches; efficient video retrieval, e.g. spotting a person in news footage; and video indexing. Online applications include automatic surveillance in public places, shopping malls, hospitals etc.; interactive applications, e.g. video games; robotics and more.In early research, human action recognition focussed on classifying only very few (6–11) action classes, which mostly involved motion of the whole body without much interaction with nearby objects or people. Experimental validations were mainly carried out on videos collected in very controlled environments, such as in a laboratory, staged by a single person on several occasions. However, with the widespread use of the internet these days, users are uploading millions of videos on social networking sites such as YouTube and Facebook. This has created challenges for developing robust techniques for action recognition in real-world videos, even more so when considering a much larger number of action classes.Real-world videos can contain movements of the entire body or of only some specific regions, e.g. facial expressions or moving a limb, possibly repetitive, whole-body movements such as walking and running, or a number of sequences of body movements, such as walking in a queue or cross-walking at an intersection. It is of interest to investigate how to adapt, generalise or fuse the existing techniques to model any kind of human actions. In real-world videos, context (e.g. the environment/situation) and interaction of the body with the context (e.g. objects/persons) are also important to correctly classify the actions being performed. In this paper, we focus on a feature representation scheme for large scale human action recognition in realistic videos.We select the local representation based Bag-of-Words (BoW) technique to test our proposed hypothesis. Firstly, interest points are detected at different spatio-temporal locations and scales for a given video. Then, local feature descriptors are computed in the spatio-temporal neighbourhood of the detected interest points, which capture shape (gradient) or motion (optical flow) or similar measurements describing the human action dynamics. We observe that trajectories obtained by a Kanade–Lucas–Tomasi (KLT) tracker [1], either densely sampled [2] or sampled in one of the variants [3–6], have been consistently performing well on several benchmark action recognition datasets. Hence, we focus our current work on trajectories only.We conjecture that objects moving for a longer duration contain more discriminative information for action classification. Hence, we propose a scheme to select such trajectories from the base (dense) trajectories in a very computationally and memory efficient way. We refer to such selected trajectories as ‘ordered trajectories’. We study and present our results on the large scale action datasets HMDB51, UCF50 and UCF101 containing at least 50 different action classes. All experiments are performed in a BoW framework using a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier. In this paper, we make the following contributions:1.A technique that captures information of objects with longer duration trajectories.A feature selection like approach that selects about half of the dense trajectories, yet delivers better performance than the original and several other trajectory variants.Removal of a large number of trajectories related to background noise.In the remainder of the paper, Section 2 contains a review of the latest advances in feature representations w.r.t. large scale action recognition. Section 3 describes the proposed framework. Section 4 details the local feature descriptors, codebook generation, classifier and datasets used to conduct our experiments. Section 5 presents and discusses the results obtained on the benchmark datasets. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6.Several techniques to detect interest points and construct local feature based representations exist in the literature. Laptev et al. [7] first proposed the usage of Harris 3D corners as an extension of the traditional Harris corner points. Later on, cuboid detectors obtained as local maxima of the response function of temporal Gabor filters on a video were proposed by Dollár et al. [8]. Willems et al. [9] proposed a Hessian interest point detector, which is a spatio-temporal extension of the Hessian saliency measure for blob detection in images. Wang et al. [10] proposed a dense sampling approach wherein the interest points are extracted at regular positions and scales in space and time. Spatial and temporal samplings are often done with 50% overlap. Further, Wang et al. [2] extend the dense sampling approach by tracking the interest points using a dense optical flow field.We focus particularly on trajectory based techniques of the last 5years as they have been found to perform better than most other techniques on larger action recognition datasets, e.g. UCF50 and HMDB51, with 50 or more action classes. For the sake of presentation of our work, we review trajectory based techniques from three perspectives. Firstly, we review those works that propose a variant of trajectories [4,5] and/or new local feature descriptors [3]. Secondly, we review those works, which construct features in different scales/volumes obtained by dividing the video along height, width and time, and then aggregate these. This is akin to the popular Spatio-Temporal Pyramidal approach [11–13]. The trajectories and their variants can also be aggregated together. Thirdly, we review those works, where some trajectories are selected from those obtained by the above approaches. All three categories for feature representation are still in practice and found to yield good results on different action recognition datasets. They are described below.Uemura et al. [14] proposed human action recognition based on the KLT tracker and the SIFT descriptor. Multiple interest point detectors were used to provide a large number of interest points for every frame. Sun et al. [15] proposed a hierarchical structure to model spatio-temporal contextual information by matching SIFT descriptors between two consecutive frames. Actions were classified based on intra- and inter-trajectory statistics. Messing et al. [16] proposed an activity recognition model based on the velocity history of Harris 3D interest points (tracked with a KLT tracker). Matikainen et al. [17] proposed a model to capture the spatial and temporal context of trajectories, which were obtained by tracking Harris corner points in a given video using a KLT tracker.Wang et al. [2] proposed dense trajectories to model human actions. Interest points were sampled at uniform intervals in space and time, and tracked based on displacement information from a dense optical flow field. Kliper-Gross et al. [5] proposed Motion Interchange Patterns (MIP) for capturing local changes in motion trajectories. Based on dense trajectories [2], Jiang et al. [4] proposed a technique to model the object relationships by encoding pairwise dense trajectory codewords. Global and local reference points were adopted to characterise motion information with the aim of being robust to camera movements. Jain et al. [3] proposed another variant of dense trajectories recently, showing that significant improvement in action recognition can be achieved by decomposing visual motion into dominant (assumed to be due to camera motion) and residual motions (corresponding to the scene motions). Raptis [18] extracted spatio-temporal structures by forming clusters of dense trajectories to serve as candidates for the parts of each action. Peng et al. [19] developed a set of new descriptors: spatial context descriptors to capture complex spatial structures of appearance and motion and temporal context descriptors to depict clear motion and appearance changes from successive patches. Both types of descriptors are computed from dense trajectories.Each technique has attempted to capture and model some type of characteristic information of objects moving in the video. However, none explicitly tried to capture the information of objects moving for a longer duration. We conjecture that valuable information for action recognition is contained in longer object trajectories.To encode spatial information within the bag-of-features representation, the Spatial Pyramidal approach was first proposed by Lazebnik et al. [12] for object classification in images, but has since also been successfully used in videos. Here, the video sequence is split into sub-volumes and a histogram is computed for each sub-volume. The final histogram is obtained by concatenating or accumulating all histograms of the sub-volumes. Illustrations are given in Fig. 1. For example, when the original video is divided into three horizontal sub-volumes, as shown in Fig. 1(b), three separate codebooks are to be constructed for each sub-volume. Using those dense trajectories that fall in a particular sub-volume, feature histograms are generated. These feature histograms are concatenated to yield the overall feature vector for the video. In this case, the feature vector will be 3 times larger than the one obtained on full-volume dense trajectories. In another case, as can be seen in Fig. 1(f) where the original video is divided into eight sub-volumes, the final vector will be 8 times larger than the one obtained by the full-volume dense trajectories.Zhao and Elgammal [20] divide each frame into cells, over which Dollár's features [8] are computed. Additionally, motion features from neighbouring frames are used in a weighted scheme, which takes into account the distance of the neighbour from the actual frame. A spatial-pyramid matching, similar to [12], is then applied to compute the similarity between frames. Finally, frames are classified individually and a voting scheme is used for action recognition in the video. Ullah et al. [13] used six spatial subdivisions of a video and computed local features and models for each subdivision. They found significant improvement in the recognition rate compared to using the original video.Wang et al. [6] compute features using dense trajectories in a Spatio-Temporal Pyramidal approach and show highest performance on most of the action recognition datasets. Zhu et al. proposed a Generalized Pyramid Matching Kernel (GPMK) based on a multi-channel BoW representation constructed from dense trajectories. It is an extension to the spatial–temporal pyramid matching (STPM) kernel. Instead of the predefined and fixed weights used in STPM, their technique computes channel weights of GPMK adaptively based on the kernel target alignment from training data. Duan et al. [21] proposed the Aligned Space–Time Pyramid Matching technique to effectively measure the distances between two videos that may be from different domains for the purpose of visual event recognition in videos. Each video clip is divided into space–time volumes over multiple levels and the pairwise distances between any two volumes are computed. Liu et al. [22] compute extensive pyramidal features (EPFs), which include the Gabor, Gaussian, and wavelet pyramids. These features were meant to encode the orientation, intensity, and contour information and, therefore, provide an informative representation of human poses. They further employ the AdaBoost algorithm to learn a subset of discriminative and representative features.A main drawback with these kinds of approaches is that they tend to be computationally expensive.Nowak et al. [23] showed by extensive experiments that uniform random sampling can provide performances comparable to dense sampling of interest points. Another independent study [24] showed that action recognition performance can be maintained with as little as 30% of the densely detected features. Chakraborty et al. [25] presented an approach for selecting robust STIP detectors by applying surround suppression combined with local and temporal constraints. They show that such a technique performs significantly better than the original STIP detectors. Shi et al. [26] showed that with proper sampling density, a state-of-the-art performance can be achieved by randomly discarding up to 92% of densely sampled interest points. Peng et al. [19] proposed a motion boundary based dense sampling strategy to select a few dense trajectories, while preserving the discriminative power.These studies have motivated us to search for a smaller, yet richer set of trajectories from the dense trajectories.Moving object tracking involves locating the objects of interest, maintaining their identities and building their trajectories throughout a given video sequence. One of the most successful techniques employed in this domain is tracking by data association. In this technique, initially a pre-learnt object detector is applied to detect the objects of interest in every frame. Then, linking of the detections is performed to obtain the trajectories of the objects of interest. The main challenges include missed detections, false alarms, inaccurate detections, occlusions, and similar appearance among multiple objects. Three popular strategies [27] in use to counter these challenges are: local data association, global data association, and hierarchical data association methods.The local data association strategy performs frame-by-frame tracking [28] based on local measures, such as cues from position, appearance, size, and colour of detections in neighbouring frames. Then, an algorithm is applied to match the detection responses. However, any noisy target detections affect the data association considerably and, thus, the local association methods are likely to lead to a drift in such situations. Global data association strategies utilise inference over multiple objects by seeking to resolve the drift problem over a longer period. For example, Perera et al. and Stauffer [29,30] use the Hungarian algorithm [31] to simultaneously optimise all trajectories of moving objects. However, these approaches are computationally exponential, both in memory and time.The hierarchical association framework combines the local linking and global association methods for better tracking performance. These methods progressively connect the short detections or tracklets into longer ones. They typically split the data association into two separate optimisation problems: linking detections locally in the lower stages and linking trajectories globally in the higher stages. For example, Xing et al. [32] proposed a two-stage association method, which combines local and global trajectories association to track multiple objects through occlusions. A particle filter was used to generate a set of reliable trajectories in the local stage and a modified Hungarian algorithm was used to optimise the data association in the global stage. Similarly, Zhang et al. [27] proposed a unified framework for automatically relearning from local to global information. The local-to-global trajectory models were used to link detections from consecutive frames into trajectories and also link separated trajectories that belong to the same targets into long trajectories.Our proposed technique to find longer trajectories has close similarities to those employed in moving object tracking. Dense trajectories are used to obtain trajectories of moving objects at local level. Cues based on the position (of the trajectories) are taken for linking these dense trajectories to obtain longer trajectories. The difficulties in directly adapting moving object tracking to human action recognition are discussed in Section 4.1. The novelties of the proposed technique compared to tracking are described in Section 5.3.The overall layout of the proposed framework is shown in Fig. 2. Firstly, base trajectories are detected. The proposed ordered trajectories are generated by searching through base trajectories for potential matches to other trajectories to create longer duration trajectories. Local descriptors – Motion Bound Histograms (MBH), Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG), Histogram of Optical Flow (HOF) – are collected from the base trajectories that are found to constitute ordered trajectories. Only the Trajectory Shape descriptor is computed for the generated ordered trajectories. Feature vectors are constructed from these local descriptors using a feature encoding technique. These feature vectors are used to learn a classifier. Separate codebooks are constructed for each type of descriptor. We use dense trajectories, proposed by Wang et al. [2] (and their improved version [33]), in our work as the base trajectories, which we briefly summarise next.Firstly, points uniformly spaced over each frame in 8 spatial scales are sampled. This ensures that points are equally spread in all spatial positions and scales. By experimentation, Wang et al. [6], report that a sampling step size of W=5pixels yields good results over several benchmark datasets. Points in homogeneous regions are removed, by applying the criterion of Shi and Tomasi [34], if the eigenvalues of the auto-correlation matrix are very small. The threshold T set on the eigenvalues for each frame I is(1)T=0.001×maxj∈Iminλj1λj2where (λj1,λj2) are the eigenvalues of point j in the frame I.The sampled points are then tracked by applying median filtering over the dense optical field. For a given frame It, its dense optical flow field ωt=(ut,vt) is computed w.r.t. the next frame It+1, where utand vtare the horizontal and vertical components of the optical flow. A point pt=(xt,yt) in frame Itis tracked to another position pt+1=(xt+1,yt+1) in frame It+1 as follows(2)pt+1=xt+1yt+1=xtyt+M∗ωt|xtytwhere M is a 3×3pixels median filtering kernel.The algorithm proposed by Farnebäck [35] is used to compute dense optical flow. To avoid drifting from their initial locations during the tracking process, tracking is performed on a fixed length L number of frames at a time. Through experimentation [6], L=15 frames is found suitable. In a post-processing stage, trajectories with sudden large displacements are removed.Four kinds of local feature descriptors are computed on the neighbourhood of the points derived by the above trajectories. These were MBH, HOG, HOF and Trajectory Shape. Each descriptor captures some specific characteristics of the video content. HOG descriptors capture the local appearance, while HOF descriptors capture the changes in the temporal domain. The space–time volumes (spatial size 32×32pixels) around the trajectories are divided into 12 equal-sized 3D grids (spatially, 2×2 grids and temporally, 3 segments). For computing HOG, gradient orientations are quantised into 8 bins. For computing HOF, 9 bins are used with one more zero bin in comparison to HOG. Thus, the HOG descriptors are 96-dimensional and the HOF descriptors are 108-dimensional.The MBH descriptors are based on motion boundaries. These descriptors are computed by separate derivatives for the horizontal and vertical components of the optical flow. As MBH captures the gradient of the optical flow, constant camera motion is removed and information about changes in the flow field (i.e. motion boundaries) is retained. An 8-bin histogram is obtained along each component of x and y. Both histogram vectors are normalised separately with their L2 norm, each becoming a 96-dimensional vector. In our experiments, we built separate codebooks for MBH descriptors along x and y. The trajectory shape descriptor encodes local motion patterns. For a trajectory of given length L (number of frames) and containing a sequence of points (pt=(xt,yt)), the trajectory shape is described in terms of a sequence of displacement vectors Δpt=(pt+1−pt)=(xt+1−xt,yt+1−yt). The resulting vector is normalised by the sum of displacement vector magnitudes.(3)T=Δpt,…,Δpt+L−1∑j=tt+L−1ΔpjFor L=15 frames, a 30-dimensional trajectory shape descriptor is obtained. The dense trajectories code available online [2] is used in all experiments.In this section, we first present our hypothesis and later describe the generation of the proposed ordered trajectories from the extracted base trajectories.Several trajectory based techniques exist to capture and model some type of characteristic information of objects moving in the video. For example, as shown in Fig. 3, let trajectories A, B, C of fixed span L begin from frames i,(i+1),(i+2), respectively. Ordinarily, all these trajectories would have been considered when constructing the feature vector for the video. However, the following observations are made•Trajectories, such as A, that continue for a longer span or duration can be expected to capture the characteristic information of the primary object(s) motion.Trajectories, such as B, and to some extent C, that fade out slowly can be expected to capture information about secondary or background object(s) motion.We hypothesize that longer duration trajectories contain more valuable information than all the remaining trajectories put together (as these contain noise, which can affect the training process). However, computing trajectories of longer duration has the following issues that need to be addressed•Limitation of optical flow techniques that may not keep track of changes over long duration.With different length trajectories, the local descriptors computed around each of them would be having different dimensions. For example, trajectories A, B, C with a span of L+2, L, L+1 would result in a Trajectory Shape descriptor dimension of 34, 30, and 32, respectively. Handling these in a BoW setting is not easy and straightforward.We propose a technique to address these primary drawbacks. We hypothesize that any trajectory, even if it is of a longer duration (>L) should be constituted by base trajectories, i.e. trajectories of duration L. We can capture the information of moving objects with a longer duration if we can search for those base trajectories, which constitute the longer duration trajectories. Since the local descriptors of each of these base trajectories are of fixed dimensions, they are directly used in computing feature vectors for the given video. Hence, we do not need to recompute MBH, HOG, and HOF descriptors for the trajectories of longer duration. For example, as seen in Fig. 3, trajectories beginning from frame i can be compared with trajectories beginning from (i+1) to find the trajectories that have longer duration L+1.Further, the proposed technique can be recursively applied. Base trajectories spanning over L frames can be compared with each other to obtain trajectories with span L+1. These L+1 - length trajectories can be compared with each other to further generate trajectories with span L+2 (results are shown in Section 5.2.2).The search for base trajectories constituting longer duration trajectories can be performed in a very simple and efficient manner. We only need a sequential matching of trajectories beginning every two consecutive frames. In this way, we can collect all base trajectories very efficiently, even if the long duration trajectory has undergone major motion changes from where it began. We refer to such collected base trajectories as ordered trajectories.Moreover, as in Fig. 3, we first compare trajectories beginning from frame i with trajectories beginning from frame (i+1) and trajectories beginning from frame (i+1) with trajectories beginning from frame (i+2) and so on. It can be noted that the matching of trajectories beginning from frame i is already being done with trajectories beginning from frame (i+2). This can, hence, be treated as a more efficient way to match trajectories than other techniques such as clustering all trajectories together [18].The two main stages involved in the generation of ordered trajectories – the matching stage and the generation stage – are now described in detail.The objective in this stage is to search for trajectories that have a matching trajectory (beginning from the immediate next frame). Consider a trajectory of points Pi={pi} with length L beginning from frame i. Let the trajectories beginning from the immediate next frame i+1 be denoted as Qi+1j={qi+1j}. The objective can then be redefined as finding a trajectory in the set Qi+1jthat matches the trajectory Pi.Several solutions exist in the literature for this objective. For example, this is essentially similar to a detection-to-track association problem in the moving object tracking domain. Cues such as temporal, kinematic, appearance, and colour of the object trajectories are used to find the matching trajectory. The trajectories in moving object tracking are usually obtained by tracking detected objects of interest. However, the dense trajectories obtain trajectories of any moving object using an optical flow algorithm (described in Section 3.1). Hence, dense trajectories also contain tracks of many non-interest objects; sometimes more than for the primary object itself. Thus, cues such as appearance and colour are not considered in our approach. Our objective is now refined as finding a matching trajectory Qi+1jsuch that tracks of non-interest objects are also minimised. We focus on the kinematic cue – the position of the trajectories.Based purely on kinematics, two trajectories can be tested for a possible match in several ways. For example, probabilities capturing the nature of the position, velocity, orientation, etc. have been used to constitute the cost function and optimised by the Hungarian algorithm for object trajectory assignment in moving object tracking. However, it has to be recalled that the dense trajectories are computed at every interval gap of W=5pixels in (x, y) directions and in multiple scales, so that there are many trajectories related to one main object of interest, e.g. a human body. However, in the moving object tracking domain, the trajectory of a human body is considered as a whole. Hence, the kinematic based cost function should be chosen properly in the action recognition domain.We now present our intuition in selecting the kinematic based cost function. The objective is to search for a trajectory Qi+1jthat can match the trajectory Pi. Trajectories Qi+1jand Pibegin from frames i+1 and i, respectively. The simplest cost function for two trajectories is a corresponding point-to-point distance given by(4)||pi+1−qi+1j2+pi+2−qi+2j2+…+pi+L−1−qi+L−1j2||2An algorithm, such as the Hungarian algorithm, can be used to optimise this cost function. The trajectory, Qi+1k,k∈j, which yields the lowest distance, can be considered as a match for the trajectory Pi. However, the number of dense trajectories is really large and the Hungarian algorithm can be expensive in time. Hence, we propose a simplified cost function and search algorithm as follows.The first term of Eq. (4) is taken as the simplified cost function, given as(5)pi+1−qi+1j22We select the second point pi+1=(xi+1,yi+1) from the trajectory Piand compute its distance distance(pi+1,qi+1j) to all first points of the trajectories Qi+1j(see Fig. 4). The trajectory Qi+1k,k∈j with the lowest distance is taken and compared with a threshold distance dthto ascertain if it is a matching trajectory for Pior not. This threshold distance dthis fixed by using the help of the spacing gap of the dense trajectories. Dense trajectories are computed with a spacing gap of W=5pixels in (x,y) directions. Hence, the threshold distance dthis fixed asW2in all experiments. More details on the efficiency (in terms of computation time) of the proposed algorithm over the Hungarian algorithm are given in Section 5.3.Algorithm 1Generating ordered trajectoriesThis process is repeated for every L=15 frames, i.e. for every trajectory Pi,i=1,2,…N−L−1, where N is the total number of frames in the given video source. For some trajectories Pij, there may not exist any matching trajectories. The pseudo-code for matching trajectories for an entire video is shown in Algorithm 1. For each video, this computation is performed only once. All matching trajectories – Pi,Qi+1j– obtained are conjectured to constitute longer trajectories with duration L+1.The objective of this stage is to compute the local descriptors – MBH, HOG, HOF and trajectory shape – of the longer trajectories obtained in Section 4.2. MBH, HOG and HOF descriptors of the trajectories Piand Qi+1j(which have been identified to constitute longer trajectories) are accumulated to construct feature vectors for MBH, HOG and HOF, respectively. These three types of descriptors are not recomputed. Only the trajectory shape local descriptor is recomputed for the longer duration trajectories, which is explained now.There are two steps involved in computing the trajectory shape of the longer trajectory. In the first step, the matching trajectories Piand Qi+1jare merged to form a longer duration trajectory PQi={pqi},i=1,2,…i+L with duration L+1. Merging is now explained, with the help of Fig. 5. Remember that trajectories are a sequence of points with length L defined as Pi={pi} and Qi+1j={qi+1j}. The first element of the longer duration trajectory {pqi} consists of pi=(xi,yi). The last element of the longer duration trajectory {pqi+L} consists of qi+L=(xi+L,yi+L), respectively. The second element of the longer duration trajectory {pqi+1} consists of the mean of pi+1 and qi+1. The third element of the longer duration trajectory {pqi+2} consists of the mean of pi+2 and qi+2, and so on.Once the sequence of points of the longer trajectory PQiis generated, the trajectory shape descriptor is computed using Eq. (3). As L=16 now, the length of the trajectory shape descriptor is 32.Separate dictionaries are built for each descriptor. We accumulate descriptors from a video of a particular class and randomly select 25% of the total number of descriptors. In this way, we collect information for each class from the training dataset and a subset of 100,000 descriptors is selected randomly. This subset of descriptors is clustered to obtain the visual words.The next step in constructing a BoW representation is encoding a feature using the codebook. In the literature, there exist several encoding methods, such as Hard Assignment (HA), Soft Assignment [36], Sparse encoding [37], and Locality-constrained Linear encoding [38]. Most of these techniques are based on the count of descriptors belonging to different visual words. Most recently, the Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) and Fisher Vector (FV) encodings have been applied to action recognition datasets. These techniques are based on a measure determining how much a descriptor belongs to a particular (assigned) visual word. We apply HA, VLAD and FV encoding schemes in our experiments. Brief details of each encoding technique are given below.•Hard Assignment (HA)HA has been the foremost and one of the most popular techniques for action recognition. This technique computes the frequency of the visual words (of the dictionary) for given video. In our experiments, dictionaries are constructed with k-means clustering. The number of visual words k is set to 4000, which was shown to give good results [10]. We initialised k-means 8 times and kept the result with the lowest error. After creating a codebook C={μ1,μ2,…,μk}, local descriptors are assigned to the closest visual word as(6)q:Rd→C⊂Rd(7)x↦qx=argminμ∈C||x−μ||2where the norm operator ||.||2 refers to the L2 norm.Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD)This is a very recent technique applied successfully to action recognition by Jain et al. [3]. In this encoding, the difference between the descriptors and the closest visual word is collected as residual vectors. For each visual word of dimension d (dimension of the local feature descriptor), a sub-vector viis obtained by accumulating the residual vectors as(8)vi=∑x:qx=μix−μThe obtained sub-vectors are concatenated to yield a D-dimensional vector, where D=k×d. Further, two-stage normalisation is applied. Firstly, the ‘power–law normalisation’ [39] is applied. It is a component-wise non-linear operation. Each component vj,j=1 to D is modified as(9)vj=vjα×signvj,where α is a parameter such that α≤1. In all experiments, k=256 and α=0.2. Secondly, the vector is L2 – normalised asv=vvto yield the VLAD vector.We use two types of classifiers according to the type of encoding technique used. For HA encoded features, we build a non-linear SVM LIBSVM [40] with an RBF-χ2 kernel k(Hic,Hjc) computed as(13)kHicHjc=1AHic−Hjc2Hic+Hjcwhere Hic=hinand Hjc=hjnare the frequency histograms of the visual word occurrences of the cthdescriptor for the ithvideo; A is the average χ2 distance between the training samples.For N types of descriptors, a multi-channel setup is used(14)Kij=exp−1N∑c=1NkHicHjcFor VLAD and FV encoded features, all features are concatenated and a linear SVM (LIBLINEAR [41]) is used. The one-versus-all approach is applied in all cases and the class with the highest score is selected.The proposed technique is applied to three benchmark datasets: HMDB51[42], UCF50[43] and UCF101[44]. HMDB51 contains 51 action categories. A complete list of actions and the data is available online (dataset at http://serre-lab.clps.brown.edu/resources/HMDB/). Digitised movies, public databases such as the Prelinger archive, videos from YouTube and Google videos were used to create this dataset. For evaluation purposes, three distinct training and testing splits are specified in the dataset. These splits were built to ensure that clips from the same video are not used for both training and testing. For each action category in a split, 70 training and 30 testing clips indices are fixed so that they fulfil the 70/30 balance for each meta tag. UCF50 has 50 action classes. A complete list of actions and the data is available online (dataset downloaded from http://crcv.ucf.edu/data/UCF50.php). This dataset consists of 6680 realistic videos collected from YouTube. As specified by Reddy and Shah [43], we evaluate the 25-fold group wise cross-validation classification performance on this dataset. The UCF101 dataset is an extension of UCF50 with 101 action categories, also collected from realistic action videos, e.g. from YouTube. Three train-test splits were provided for consistency in reporting performance. Sample classes are shown in Fig. 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A technique to capture motion characteristics of objects with longer duration has been proposed. It computes base trajectories and selects only a few from them, constituting trajectories of objects with longer duration. These selected trajectories are termed ordered trajectories. Local descriptors of these ordered trajectories are found to yield better performance than that obtained by the original base trajectories. Moreover, information other than the main objects of interest captured by the dense trajectories is also found out to be removed effectively by the proposed technique.Video corresponding to Fig. 7 (e)Video corresponding to Fig. 7 (a)Video corresponding to Fig. 7 (b)Video corresponding to Fig. 7 (d)Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2015.06.009.