@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Deep and fast: Deep learning hashing with semi-supervised graph construction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A semi-supervised graph approach is proposed to infer the hash codes.We simultaneously learn visual features and hash functions.Extensive experiments are conducted to exploit the performance of our method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Deep learning,Hashing,Multimedia retrieval,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Learning-based hashing methods are becoming the mainstream for approximate scalable multimedia retrieval. They consist of two main components: hash codes learning for training data and hash functions learning for new data points. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to designing novel methods for these two components, i.e., supervised and unsupervised methods for learning hash codes, and different models for inferring hashing functions. However, there is little work integrating supervised and unsupervised hash codes learning into a single framework. Moreover, the hash function learning component is usually based on hand-crafted visual features extracted from the training images. The performance of a content-based image retrieval system crucially depends on the feature representation and such hand-crafted visual features may degrade the accuracy of the hash functions. In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised deep learning hashing (DLH) method for fast multimedia retrieval. More specifically, in the first component, we utilize both visual and label information to learn an optimal similarity graph that can more precisely encode the relationship among training data, and then generate the hash codes based on the graph. In the second stage, we apply a deep convolutional network to simultaneously learn a good multimedia representation and a set of hash functions. Extensive experiments on five popular datasets demonstrate the superiority of our DLH over both supervised and unsupervised hashing methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the last decade, the amount of multimedia data has reached an unprecedented level, due to the development of multimedia and the Internet technologies. This has impacted a wide range of research areas, including multimedia retrieval, computer vision, database management, data mining, and social media analysis. A basic solution for dealing with massive multimedia databases is content-based image retrieval (CBIR), which aims to retrieve similar images from a database to the query image. Particularly, image retrieval has long been a major research theme due to many applications such as event detection, scene classification and face recognition [1-3].Image retrieval is typically accomplished in three steps: feature extraction, searching and post-processing. Over the last few years, a long stream of research efforts has been made to improve these three components [4]. From the perspective of image representation and search scheme, most of the successful scalable image retrieval algorithms can be categorized into: 1) quantized local features (e.g., BOW) [5,6] indexed by an inverted index [7]; and 2) holistic features (e.g., GIST and HSV) indexed by compact hash codes [8,9]. The BOW vector for an image is usually high-dimensional when used for large scale image search. In this case, the search efficiency results from the use of inverted lists, which speeds up the calculation of distances between sparse vectors. However, when the size of the image database reaches the million level, the speed degrades greatly. To scale to even larger databases, hashing methods are usually adopted. Each image is represented as a vector, either by extracting holistic feature directly or by compressing local descriptors into a vector representation using recent encoding techniques such as Fisher kernels [10] and the ‘vector of locally aggregated descriptors' (VLAD) [11]. Then, images can be encoded by a small number of bytes using hashing methods [8,12], but with the advantage of preserving some key properties inherited from visual features. For post-processing, after image retrieval returns a list of images, a potential re-ranking technique can be used to reorder the initial results. But this procedure is optional, and there are no well-accepted methods for post-processing due to the time limitation.Although a variety of techniques have been proposed, image retrieval remains one of the most challenging problems. This is due to the fact that the global and local features have different strengths and weaknesses, and specific search schemes have to be adopted based on different visual features. Therefore, there is an urgent need to find a more robust feature and a unified searching scheme for larger scale image retrieval. There arise several questions for scalable CBIR: 1) Is there a generic feature extraction method that is robust on different image datasets? 2) How to integrate this generic feature to existing searching schemes? Some recent efforts have been proposed to tackle these questions. In Refs. [8,13], the authors propose utilizing supervised deep learning to learn image representation and hash codes for image retrieval and promising results were obtained. On the other hand, Wan et al. [14] propose a general framework to apply deep learning to content-based image retrieval. However, these methods use the label information only to identify the similarity between two data points, which is inaccurate in a lot of cases. As shown in Fig. 1, image (b) is more similar than (c) to the query (a), both visually and semantically. If we only use the label information, (b) and (c) will have the same similarity to (a). Therefore, it is necessary to learn a more accurate similarity between images by using visual and label information.In this paper, we propose integrating a generic feature into a hashing search scheme. More specifically, we present deep learning hashing (DLH) with semi-supervised graph construction to enhance the performance of hashing methods for scalable image retrieval. It is worth highlighting the following contributions: 1) We propose a framework to utilize the CNN-generated visual feature as a generic feature, and incorporate this feature into this hashing search scheme for efficient image retrieval on scalable datasets. 2) To infer the hash codes of the training set in both supervised and unsupervised settings, a novel semi-supervised graph construction approach is proposed and an efficient solution is devised. 3) We propose to simultaneously learn a good feature representation and a set of hash functions via CNN for new data points. (4) We conduct extensive experiments to exploit the performance of different hashing methods on five popular image datasets.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a general framework for semi-supervised deep learning hashing (DLH) method for fast multimedia retrieval. In this framework, we firstly utilize both visual feature and class labels to learn an optimal similarity graph to more precisely encode the relationship among training data. Based on this graph, the hash codes can be generated. Then, we apply the deep convolutional network to automatically learn a set of hash functions to get the hash codes for new data points. Extensive experiments on five popular datasets demonstrate the superiority of our DLH compared to both supervised and unsupervised hashing methods.