@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Degenerate motions in multicamera cluster SLAM with non-overlapping fields of view

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analysis of solution degeneracy in general multicamera cluster SLAM.Decomposition of system determines conditions for degeneracy.Dense sub-matrix reveals geometric structure for futher analysis.Identification of degenerate motions independent of feature constellation.Experiments demonstrate that adding features and cameras decreases degenerate set.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
SLAM,Computer vision,Multicamera cluster,Non-overlapping FOV,Degeneracy analysis,Critical motions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An analysis of the relative motion and point feature model configurations leading to solution degeneracy is presented, for the case of a Simultaneous Localization and Mapping system using multicamera clusters with non-overlapping fields-of-view. The SLAM optimization system seeks to minimize image space reprojection error and is formulated for a cluster containing any number of component cameras, observing any number of point features over two keyframes. The measurement Jacobian is transformed to expose a reduced-dimension representation such that the degeneracy of the system can be determined by the rank of a dense submatrix. A set of relative motions sufficient for degeneracy are identified for certain cluster configurations, independent of target model geometry. Furthermore, it is shown that increasing the number of cameras within the cluster and observing features across different cameras over the two keyframes reduces the size of the degenerate motion sets significantly.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Precise robotic motion and manipulation tasks with respect to unknown target environments and objects require an accurate, real-time measurement of the relative position and orientation of the robot and target. Multicamera systems are often employed for robotic pose and target model estimation, as each camera is an inexpensive, light-weight, and passive device capable of collecting a large amount of environment information at high rates. Many researchers across different fields have investigated the use of cameras for the purpose of estimating motion and scene structure. As a result, many techniques using a variety of camera types and configurations have been detailed in the literature.A camera cluster is composed of any number of simple perspective cameras mounted rigidly with respect to each other, as shown in Fig. 1, including configurations in which their fields-of-view (FOV) are spatially disjoint [1]. This arrangement makes effective use of the camera sensors to cover a large combined FOV with high resolution, and in general, is able to overcome the limitations of other camera configurations, such as scale and translation-rotation motion ambiguities [2]. Additionally, by arranging the cameras to look in many directions, the pose estimation is made more robust since when certain cameras do not see any point features suitable for tracking, the other cameras in the cluster can maintain the localization. In this scenario, camera arrangements with a smaller collective FOV may become lost causing the tracking operation to fail. Several multicamera cluster Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [3] algorithms have been proposed in the literature (e.g. [4,5,6]).In order for any pose estimation system to operate successfully, the current state must be uniquely recoverable given the measurable outputs up to, and including the current time step. In the context of a multicamera cluster relative pose system, this means that the image measurements must contain sufficient information to recover the cluster motion and the target model parameters, including the proper global scale metric. Within the SLAM system, the quality of the motion and structure parameter estimates are fundamentally linked. Further the convergence properties and accuracy of the solution depends on the point feature constellation geometry and relative motion trajectory of the camera cluster and target during the estimation. Identifying and avoiding configurations where a solution is difficult to recover is vital to successful application to robotics operations.Furthermore, the solution must be unique since convergence to a different configuration, which may also agree with the measurements, would likely result in failure of perception and control operations. The visual SLAM system can be considered as a physical mechanism with the geometry and links represented in the parametrization. For the solution to converge to a unique configuration, it must be sufficiently constrained by the bearings-only image measurements or the mechanical system is not rigid and the solution can move without violating these constraints.When the multicamera cluster is configured such that there is little or no spatial FOV overlap between the component cameras, the sensitivity of the image measurements to the global scale of the reconstructed model is low, particularly around specific motion profiles known as critical motions [7]. When the relative motion of the cluster is at or near critical, the global scale of the solution is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to recover accurately. In the presence of measurement noise, the solution will converge to an incorrect scale value. If the motion and structure estimates are used in a control loop, the incorrect scale could result in inefficient or unstable behaviour.This work investigates the degenerate configurations when estimating the SLAM system states for a calibrated multicamera cluster over two keyframes while observing a set of point features in each camera and using an iterative optimization or recursive filter-based approach, minimizing the image space reprojection error of point feature measurements. This includes Bundle Adjustment (BA) [8] schemes as well as recursive filters such as an extended Kalman filter [9]. The main contribution is the identification of configurations of motion and target model structure leading to non-unique SLAM solutions.Determining the system configurations leading to solution degeneracy is closely related to the concept of observability in control systems. In the study of observability for nonlinear systems, the local weak observability of the system can be determined by calculating the observability rank condition about any point in the state space [10]. This involves checking the column rank of a matrix containing the partial derivatives with respect to the system states, for increasing orders of Lie derivatives of the measurement model with respect to the system dynamics. When the matrix has full column rank, the system is locally weakly observable about that point.For a SLAM system using only the visual measurements from the cluster cameras and a non-stationary target, the system does not have a model of the dynamics for the relative motion and therefore, only the zeroth-order Lie derivatives are non-zero. In this case, evaluating the observability rank condition is equivalent to checking the rank of the measurement Jacobian matrix, as will be done here in the degeneracy analysis in Section 4. If the system were to contain a model of the relative motion dynamics, and the extra information that comes with it, the higher-order Lie derivatives of the measurement model would contain non-zero terms and the added matrix rows would only increase the likelihood that the matrix has full column rank at any point in the state space. However, in this analysis, no such assumptions about the relative motion dynamics are made and the degenerate configurations arising from only using image measurements for a set of point features over two keyframes are identified.The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 contains a review of the previous analyses for degenerate configurations of the multicamera cluster relative pose system; Section 3 presents the multicamera cluster SLAM system; the degenerate configurations of the pose estimation system are identified in Section 4; and finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work presented a detailed analysis of the degenerate configurations of the calibrated non-overlapping FOV multicamera cluster SLAM problem for an optimization based on minimizing a least-squares cost function with respect to the image-plane reprojection error. The system is reduced to a simple matrix rank test on a matrix consisting of rows of Plücker coordinates for lines in ℝ3. Sufficient configurations for solution degeneracy caused by the relative motion were identified for nc-camera clusters observing any number of point features over two keyframes. This leads to the novel general conclusion that if all of the camera observation vectors, formed as the displacement between the pairs of cameras observing a particular point feature, are parallel in a common coordinate frame, then the system is degenerate. It is further shown for several example systems that with the addition of more cameras to the cluster, more point feature observations, and observations of the point features across different cameras, the set of degenerate configurations is significantly reduced as it becomes impossible for all of the identified vectors to be parallel and the redundant observations prevent all of the determinants of the submatrices from going to zero concurrently.Future work will focus on fully characterizing the necessary and sufficient conditions for the system to become degenerate, including the degeneracies related to the geometry of the point feature constellation from the standpoint of geometric algebra techniques [30].Additionally, the results from this work will be used to generate metrics for deciding when and where to add keyframes in a real-time SLAM system to accurately construct and constrain the generated target model and avoid the degeneracies within the state space caused by measurements from this type of sensor.Finally, most SLAM systems detect and reject non-rigid target structure by monitoring measurement residuals when back-projecting the points back into the camera images. Further investigation is warranted into the possibility of any of the metrics arising from this analysis providing an indicator to detect non-rigid target structure.