@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Research patterns and trends of Recommendation System in China using co-word analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine RecSys studies in China quantitatively, empirically, and longitudinally.Research on RecSys is relatively mature and well-developed overall.Twelve theme-clusters and six larger branches are identified.Some undeveloped or immature research themes continue to persist.Emerging themes with great potential for development are also identified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Recommendation System in China,Co-word analysis,Research patterns,Research trends,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper examines the research patterns and trends of Recommendation System (RecSys) in China during the period of 2004–2013. Data (keywords in articles) was collected from the China Academic Journal Network Publishing Database (CAJD) and the China Science Periodical Database (CSPD). A co-word analysis was conducted to measure correlation among the extracted keywords. The cluster analysis and social network analysis revealed 12 theme-clusters, network characteristics (centrality and density) of the clusters, the strategic diagram, and the correlation network. The study results show that there are several important themes with a high correlation in Chinese RecSys research, which is considered to be relatively focused, mature, and well-developed overall. Some research themes have developed on a considerable scale, while others remain isolated and undeveloped. This study also identified a few emerging themes with great potential for development. It was also determined that studies overall on the applications of RecSys are increasing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past decade, research on RecSys has progressed in China (Hu, Hu, & Deng, 2013) and RecSys has become a hot topic of study in Computer Science and Information Science (Qin & Liang, 2011; Wang & Liu, 2012; Zhang, Chen, & Fu, 2013). Researchers have also successfully applied RecSys theories, algorithms, technologies, and strategies to other areas (e.g., Hu, Hu, Gao, & Hao, 2013; Li, Xu, & Xu, 2013; Meng, Hu, Wang, & Zhang, 2013; Yin, 2013). For example, Hu et al. (2013) calculated the similarity among friends and tags, and used the results for friend recommendation.Given the importance of RecSys in China, researchers have reviewed related literature to identify research advances and development within this field. However, much of the effort has only considered particular subfields of RecSys (e.g., Feng & Liang, 2011; Wang & Liu, 2012; Yang & Zhao, 2011; Yi & Deng, 2011; Zhang et al., 2013), and the conclusions were drawn from purely descriptive and qualitative analysis. Yang and Zhao (2011) outlined the recommendation algorithms in recent years, pointing out that the current recommendation algorithms mainly include collaborative filtering, content-based algorithms, graph-based algorithms, and hybrid algorithms; and they further compared the pros and cons of recommendation algorithms. Similarly, after a qualitative study on the failures of the recommendation algorithms, Feng and Liang (2011) concluded that there are two main aspects of RecSys research: alleviating the problem of sparsity (clustering, and dimension reduction), and establishing a simulation model (association rules, Bayesian model, neural network, and cloud model). They further pointed out that model-based recommendation algorithms would become a mainstream trend with other recommendation technologies as supplement. Wang and Liu (2012) analyzed three important modules in Recommendation Systems: user modeling, the recommendation object modeling, and the recommendation algorithms, and concluded that future research on RecSys would concentrate on feature modeling (user and object), security, applications of complex network theory, sparsity, cold start, and performance evaluation. After a review of relevant literature on RecSys recommendation techniques, research methods and experimental datasets, Zhang et al. (2013) provided further insights on RecSys and pointed out that future research trends would include context-based recommendation, trust-based recommendation, and social tagging-based recommendation.The review of the literature on RecSys research in China shows that most studies used qualitative methods, and were conducted according to the personal judgment of a small number of experts. These researchers identified certain key research subfields or branches of RecSys in China; some of which have matured. In addition, several research directions, such as graph-based recommendations and trust-based recommendations have emerged and received more attention from researchers. Lastly, researchers are increasingly beginning to use recommendation methods from other fields, such as book recommendations, tag recommendation, e-commerce recommendation, and friend recommendation.A review of previous related literature also shows some research gaps and limitations. At this point, little is known about the distribution and structure of RecSys research themes in China. Additionally, previous research findings may be considered limited due to their lack of precise empirical characterization of conceptual contours and the trends over time. There is a need to analyze RecSys in China from a quantitative, empirical, and longitudinal perspective. The major goal of this paper is to address these gaps and limitations by providing a comprehensive exploration and analysis of research advances within RecSys in China over the past 10years. This study will supplement the previous qualitative work by concentrating on empirical analysis of research structures, correlations among research themes, and research trends.Co-word analysis has proven to be an effective approach to help identify and illustrate the correlation between research themes (Lee, 2008; Leydesdorff & Welbers, 2011; Stacey, 2013). This study applied this method for shedding light on the entire research structure, the correlation among themes, and the overall evolutionary trends within RecSys studies in China.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
