@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mining affective text to improve social media item recommendation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a sentiment-aware social media recommendation framework.An ensemble learning-based method is proposed to classify sentiments from affective texts.We conduct comprehensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Recommender system,Sentiment classification,OCCF,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Social media websites, such as YouTube and Flicker, are currently gaining in popularity. A large volume of information is generated by online users and how to appropriately provide personalized content is becoming more challenging. Traditional recommendation models are overly dependent on preference ratings and often suffer from the problem of “data sparsity”. Recent research has attempted to integrate sentiment analysis results of online affective texts into recommendation models; however, these studies are still limited. The one class collaborative filtering (OCCF) method is more applicable in the social media scenario yet it is insufficient for item recommendation. In this study, we develop a novel sentiment-aware social media recommendation framework, referred to as SA_OCCF, in order to tackle the above challenges. We leverage inferred sentiment feedback information and OCCF models to improve recommendation performance. We conduct comprehensive experiments on a real social media web site to verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework and methods. The results show that the proposed methods are effective in improving the performance of the baseline OCCF methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lately, social media websites (e.g., YouTube1http://www.youtube.com.1and Flicker2http://www.flicker.com.2) are increasingly receiving attention. A rapid convergence of online content sharing network websites has been observed in recent years. A large volume of content can be generated and diffused by users in these social media websites. For example, it was reported in 2012 that YouTube received 60h of uploads per minute and 4 billion views per day3http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/9033765/YouTube-uploads-hit-60-hours-per-minute.html.3. In such an environment, there is an urgent requirement for an intelligent tool to effectively recommend social media items. Great challenges on traditional recommendation techniques to provide personalized content to users are seen, due to the dynamic behavior of users in social media websites and the volume of content they generate. Traditional recommendation models assume user preference ratings are available and often suffer from the problem of “data sparsity” (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005). In the real-world social media websites, it is hard to obtain rating information which means that traditional models are limited in their functionality. To address this issue, some researchers have explored rich user generated content as a supplementary source to support personalized recommendation. Tag-aware recommender systems were proposed to incorporate rich tagging information into traditional recommendation models and achieved good performance (Zhang, Zhou, & Zhang, 2011). Furthermore, a user’s online activity (searching and browsing) and his/her social connections have also been explored and utilized to improve recommendation accuracy (Li, Zhai, & Chen, 2012; Wu, Chen, Yu, Han, & Wu, 2013).Recently, affective texts (such as reviews and comments) generated by online users have been given more attention and fruitful sentiment analysis works has begun to emerge rapidly (Balahur, Hermida, & Montoyo, 2011; Feldman, 2013). Some attempts have been made to integrate sentiment analysis results into recommendation generations. The majority of existing work combines sentiment analysis techniques with collaborative filtering techniques to conduct movie rating predication (Jakob, Weber, Muller, & Gurevych, 2009; Leung, Chan, Chung, & Ngai, 2011; Peleja, Dias, Martins, & Magalhães, 2013). However, in relation to the social media context, item recommendation is limited due to a lack of sentiment-awareness. To the best of the author’s knowledge, there are only two studies relevant to sentiment-aware item recommendation in social media websites: (Zhang, Ding, Chen, Li, & Zhang, 2013) and (Pappas & Popescu-Belis, 2013b). These studies only applied sentiment analysis results into the basic neighborhood-based collaborative filtering models. Advanced one-class collaborative filtering (OCCF) models were not explored. Therefore, the combination of sentiment analysis with a recommender system is limited and more extensive experimental work is required.In this paper, we develop a sentiment-aware social media recommendation framework, referred to as SA_OCCF, to tackle the key challenges highlighted above. Firstly, the affective text from user comments is explored and mined by our proposed ensemble learning-based sentiment classification (ELSC) method. Secondly, the derived sentiment feedback information by ELSC is incorporated into the OCCF models and we formalize our sentiment-aware recommendation models (SA_OCCF) to improve social media item recommendation performance. The proposed methods and models are evaluated through comprehensive experiments using the TED dataset. The results show that the proposed SA_OCCF models outperform the baseline methods using a variety of recommendation accuracy metrics.The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as:(1)We propose a sentiment-aware social media recommendation framework, referred to as SA_OCCF, to recommend social media items for online users. This type of framework has rarely been addressed in state-of-the-art social media recommendation research.An ensemble learning-based sentiment classification combining BOW features and lexicon-based features is proposed to mine affective texts from comments. We extend the applications of sentiment analysis studies by incorporating their results into the social media recommendation domain.To evaluate the performance of the proposed ensemble learning-based sentiment classification method and the SA_OCCF framework, we conduct comprehensive experiments and present results showing the effectiveness of the proposed method and framework.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we survey related work on sentiment classification and recommender systems. The details of the sentiment-aware recommendation framework are introduced in Section 3, while Section 4 presents the design and methodology used in the experiments. The results are analyzed in Section 5. We conclude the work in Section 6 and discuss future research applications.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
