@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Explicitly integrating MeSH thesaurus help into health information retrieval systems: An empirical user study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a new interface by explicitly integrating MeSH.The new interface improved user’s question–answer performance.The new interface facilitated users to form new search strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health information retrieval,MeSH terms,MeSH Browser,Usability,User experience,Interface design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When consumers search for health information, a major obstacle is their unfamiliarity with the medical terminology. Even though medical thesauri such as the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) and related tools (e.g., the MeSH Browser) were created to help consumers find medical term definitions, the lack of direct and explicit integration of these help tools into a health retrieval system prevented them from effectively achieving their objectives. To explore this issue, we conducted an empirical study with two systems: One is a simple interface system supporting query-based searching; the other is an augmented system with two new components supporting MeSH term searching and MeSH tree browsing. A total of 45 subjects were recruited to participate in the study. The results indicated that the augmented system is more effective than the simple system in terms of improving user-perceived topic familiarity and question–answer performance, even though we did not find users spend more time on the augmented system. The two new MeSH help components played a critical role in participants’ health information retrieval and were found to allow them to develop new search strategies. The findings of the study enhanced our understanding of consumers’ search behaviors and shed light on the design of future health information retrieval systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Using the Internet to look for health information is a common behavior for consumers. According to the Pew Internet and American Life Project report, over 80% of American adults have searched for health information online (Fox, 2006). Yet, due to complex and sophisticated terminology, health information seekers, especially laypersons, often have difficulty in finding the health-related information they seek (Cline & Haynes, 2001; Hersh, 2009; Keselman, Browne, & Kaufman, 2008; Soergel, Tse, & Slaughter, 2004; Zeng, Kogan, Ash, Greenes, & Boxwala, 2002; Zhang, Wolfram, Wang, Hong, & Gillis, 2008). There are significant mismatches between the consumer terminology, and both the information source terminology and standard medical vocabularies (Zeng et al., 2002). Many health information retrieval systems rely on users to correctly phrase their queries in order to successfully retrieve related information (Yeganova, Comeau, Kim, & Wilbur, 2009). One main challenge, however, is that consumers may lack the domain knowledge needed to choose the right query phrases and their vocabulary may not match the vocabulary of the health area in which they are searching for information (Blair & Maron, 1985; Poikonen & Vakkari, 2009; Voorhees, 1994; Zeng et al., 2006). To address this issue, a medical thesaurus is frequently used to solve the vocabulary mismatch problem (Gault, Schultz, & Davies 2002; Hersh, 2009; Shultz, 2006).By providing controlled vocabularies, synonyms and closely related concepts, a medical thesaurus enables users to formulate queries that retrieve potentially relevant information not expressed in layperson terms. There are more than 150 medical thesauri in the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus. Among them, Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) is one of the most commonly used to facilitate health information retrieval (Yeganova et al., 2009).MeSH is a tree-structured controlled vocabulary produced by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) to facilitate biomedical and health-related information retrieval. It bridges commonly used layperson terms with controlled medical terms used in professional literature. Despite its great potentials, MeSH thesaurus has not been explicitly integrated into a health information retrieval system. After finding a few good citations, a domain expert may successfully look at the MeSH thesaurus and formulate more relevant future queries with appropriate MeSH terms (Marchionini, Dwiggins, Katz, & Lin, 1993). The general users, particularly those who only search occasionally, however, may find it difficult to use current information retrieval systems to find appropriate MeSH terms without direct and explicit help from the MeSH thesaurus. In practice, one solution is to provide automatic MeSH term expansions, such as is implemented in PubMed.PubMed is a text-based search and retrieval system developed by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). According to the National Library of Medicine, in 2002 one third of PubMed’s users came from the general public (Herskovic, Tantaka, Hersh, & Bernstam, 2007). To help consumers unfamiliar with the MeSH terms, a MeSH term expansion technique called “Automatic Term Mapping” was offered to automatically add related MeSH terms behind the scenes (Yeganova et al., 2009). For example, a user’s plain text query “tumor in breast” will be modified as“tumour”[All Fields] OR “neoplasms”[MeSH Terms] OR “neoplasms”[All Fields] OR “tumor”[All Fields]) AND (“breast”[MeSH Terms] OR “breast”[All Fields]Regardless of its success, this technique has a key drawback. It does not provide users any definitions of the MeSH terms that have been expanded. If it did, users could have the opportunity to better understand and learn the preferred medical vocabularies used, and why documents containing the term “breast neoplasms” may appear on top of the result list for a search query of “breast cancer”.Another commonly used MeSH thesaurus help component is the MeSH Browser which is an online MeSH vocabulary look-up aid provided by NLM to help quickly locate MeSH descriptors of interest. A tree hierarchical structure related to the descriptors is available allowing users to identify narrower, broader, and closely related terms. While both PubMed and MeSH Browser could be very helpful to users, their usefulness may be hindered because each system exists independently of the other. When a user enters a query into PubMed, she/he is limited to using only that system and no references are made to information contained within the helpful MeSH Browser tool.Integrating new MeSH help components, such as a MeSH Browser or a MeSH term definition tool into a health information retrieval system, however, may increase the complexity of the search interface. To explore the trade-off between the helpfulness of added components and a simple interface in facilitating health information searching, we conducted an empirical usability study. We used two health information retrieval systems. One is a simple interface with a traditional search system, which we call SimpleMed. The other is augmented with the MeSH Term Brower and MeSH Tree Browser help components, which we call MeshMed. We would like to explore how vocabulary-help components such as the MeSH Term Browser and Tree Browser impact consumer’s behaviors and the effectiveness of health information retrieval. One motivation of the study is that we believe there are still a fraction of people who would like to use advanced search functions or other help components to achieve more accurate and relevant results when they search health information.The subsequent sections of this paper are organized as follows: After a brief literature review, we first describe our research goals. Then we specify our study methodology, including descriptions of the two systems, the participants, the data corpus, search tasks, measurements, and study design and procedure. Our study findings include results of search effectiveness analysis of SimpleMed and MeshMed, new MeSH component contribution analysis, users’ search behaviors and patterns, and participants’ comment analysis. Finally, we conclude our paper with discussion, implications, and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The gap between users’ medical terminology and the terminology used in health information retrieval databases makes it difficult for laypersons to effectively find health information in these systems. Medical thesauri and MeSH tree browsers are helpful tools, but are not directly available for users to access in their information retrieval process. We addressed this issue by developing a system (MeshMed) with integrated MeSH Term Browser and MeSH Tree Browser components. In this study we compared MeshMed to a simple-interface system without these components (SimpleMed).We proposed three research goals for this study. For the first goal, “to compare the effectiveness of MeshMed to SimpleMed in supporting consumers’ health information retrieval,” we found that explicitly integrating the two MeSH help components into the system was more effective in terms of perceived topic familiarity increase and question–answer performance. For the second goal, “to examine the roles of the two new MeSH help components implemented in MeshMed towards effective information retrieval,” we found that the two MeSH help components specifically contributed to topic familiarity increases and encouraged participants to spend a significant amount of time interacting with them. Finally, for the third goal, “to explore whether and how the two new MeSH help components influence users’ search behaviors and search strategies,” we found that the two MeSH help components enabled users to develop additional search strategies in health information retrieval.Most participants explicitly reported their preference of MeshMed as opposed to SimpleMed. The most useful component was the Term Browser which is particularly helpful in understanding and developing new concepts. The Tree Browser provided a unique hierarchical tree structure for an overview of related concepts and their relationships. Based on these findings and observations, we suggested that health information retrieval systems should support visible, immediately accessible thesaurus helps to facilitate users’ information seeking tasks.In conclusion, results from our study improved our knowledge of consumers’ health information retrieval behaviors and how vocabulary help tools impact retrieval effectiveness for those users. Some of our results, such as our finding that searchers learn by using structured terminological support, could be expanded to other types of information retrieval, and deserve further studies in the future.