@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Determinants of the Web accessibility of European banks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The adoption of Web accessibility by banks can be motivated by several factors.Among these we test firm size, operational factors, and CSR commitment.We test our hypotheses using PLS methodology and a sample of European banks.Our results indicate a significant influence of CSR commitment on WA adoption.The other two factors do not seem to exert a significant influence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web accessibility,Innovations,Corporate Social Responsibility,Banking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper aims at identifying the factors influencing the implementation of Web accessibility (WA) by European banks. We studied a database made up of 49 European banks whose shares are included in the Dow Jones EURO STOXX® TMI Banks [8300] Index. Regarding the factors for the implementation, we considered three feasible reasons. Firstly, WA adoption can be motivated by operational factors, as WA can aid in increasing operational efficiency. Secondly, we expect large banks to have higher WA levels, as small firms face competitive disadvantages with regard to technology adoption. Lastly, WA can also be understood as a part of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) strategy, so, the more committed a bank is to CSR, the more prone it will be to implement WA. Our results indicate that neither the operational factors nor the firm size seem to have exerted a significant influence on WA adoption. Regarding CSR commitment, results indicate a significant influence on WA adoption. However, the effect of the influence is contrary to that hypothesized, since more CSR-committed banks have less accessible Web sites. A possible reason for this result is that banks not included in the CSR indexes try to overcome this drawback by engaging in alternative CSR activities such as WA.Nowadays, Internet banking is a must-have service for financial entities. Several authors (Bonsón & Escobar, 2006; Calisir & Gumussoy, 2008) conclude that it (a) contributes to increase profitability, and (b) is a necessary investment to keep the custom of younger members. So, Web sites are a key instrument for improving the competitive edge of banks as well as nonfinancial firms (Llopis, González, & Gasco, 2010).Banks have an additional incentive to have a high quality Web site, as Internet is a means of providing information to investors and other parties interacting with the bank. This factor is especially important in the case of banks whose shares are publicly traded (Bonsón, Escobar, & Flores, 2006; Marston & Polei, 2004). To assess the quality of a Web design, many frameworks have been proposed by researchers. Ho (1997) proposed a framework that included criteria such as timeliness, custom, logistics and seasonal factors. Elliot, Morup-Petersen, and Bjon-Andersen (2000) also proposed a model which considers company information, product service promotion, transaction processing and customer service. Olsina, Godoy, Lafuente, and Rossi (2001) proposed a Web site Quality Evaluation Model based on functionality, usability, efficiency and site reliability. Other similar proposals are those by DeLone and McLean (1992), Katerattanakul and Siau (2003), Kim, Kishore, and Sanders (2005) and Miranda and Bañegil (2004). Regarding the specific case of banks, Miranda, Cortés, and Barriuso (2006) elaborated an index for the quantitative evaluation of e-banking Web sites and Bose and Leung (2008) proposed a framework to assess anti-phishing preparedness of banks’ Web sites.However, Web accessibility was not explicitly included in any of the proposed frameworks. Web accessibility entails overcoming all disabilities that prejudice Internet access: it means that people with disabilities can use it and perceive, understand, navigate, and interact with the Web, and they can contribute to the Web (Thorp & Henry, 2008). We include all disabilities that affect Web access, including visual, auditory, physical, speech, cognitive, and neurological disabilities.Although the studies cited above developed sound procedures which lead to an accurate assessment of Website quality, they did not include Web accessibility understood as the formal definition provided in the last paragraph. Some of the studies (i.e., Bose & Leung, 2008; DeLone & McLean, 1992) focused in specific aspects of Web sites and other information systems of firms, which have no relation with Web accessibility. Others (i.e., Ho, 1997) proposed general frameworks which intend to cover a wide variety of dimensions but fail to consider Web accessibility among the proxies to assess Web quality. Some others (i.e., Olsina et al., 2001) consider concepts such as for example usability which are related to Web accessibility but do not include specific Web accessibility indicators. Finally, some authors (i.e., Miranda & Bañegil, 2004; Miranda et al., 2006) explicitly consider Web accessibility in their frameworks, but they use definitions of accessibility which are driven by popularity or presence in search engines rather than by the ease of access for persons with disabilities. So, a research gap exists.Web accessibility is a technological innovation capable of improving the relationship between the organization and all their stakeholders, not only those with disabilities. This is because one of the key principles is designing Web sites and software flexible enough to meet different user needs, preferences and situations. So, the relationship between a certain organization and people without disabilities but in certain situations could be enhanced. Among these situations we can highlight people using a slow internet connection or older technologies, people with changing abilities due to aging, people with a low level of literacy and/or not fluent in the language of the site and new and infrequent Web users. These factors, under certain conditions, may be a source of competitive advantage for businesses, which therefore may benefit from Web accessibility even if only a small percentage of the people interacting with them have disabilities.In this regard, it is noticeable that some prior research efforts have studied the factors driving the implementation of other innovations which are suitable to increase the performance of banks (see, e.g., Kuisma, Laukkanen, & Hiltunen, 2007, or Faroughian, Kalafatis, Ledden, Samouel, & Tsogas, 2012 for internet banking, Lin, 2011 for mobile banking adoption, and Ou, Yen, & Hung, 2009, or Wang, Wu, Lin, Wang, & He, 2012 for the case of Technology Acceptance Models -TAMs-). However, these papers obtain mixed results, so the extrapolation of their conclusions to the case of Web accessibility is not a sensible practice. Then, we can conclude that a research gap exists.So, in the present research we study the factors that influence the implementation of Web accessibility in the Web sites of a sample which is made up by listed European banks. As will be detailed, banks and other financial entities may have specific motivations to make their Web sites accessible. Furthermore, in this research we used Structural Equations Modeling (SEM) to assess the significance of the hypothesized relations. This approach permits us to avoid statistical problems (multicollinearity, nonnormality). So, more accessibility metrics and proxies of the factors for the implementation can be included in the model. This contributes also to fill the research gap, as other prior studies used a more limited number of proxies to capture the different factors for technology adoption.In addition, we must underline that Web accessibility has a social edge and can be considered an aspect of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) strategy of the firm. This reinforces the conclusion which states that the results of prior studies on the adoption of other innovations, such as TAM or specifically, studies on the adoption of technologies affecting the information systems of the firm (see, e.g., Neirotti & Paolucci, 2011; Pinsker & Li, 2008; Premuroso & Bhattacharya, 2008; among others) should not be directly extrapolated, as these studies do not consider the social edge of innovations.In this regard, an issue that must be considered is that pressures on Web designers to make their Web sites fully accessible are increasing due to legal rulings in recent cases. For example, in 2000 the Australian Human Commission, as a result of the non-compliance of the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 (Cth) in the Bruce Lindsay Maguire v. Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games (SOCOG), No. H 99/115, made the declaration that the respondent had to do all that was necessary to render its Web site accessible to the complainant, and that the respondent should pay to the complainant by way of compensation the sum of $20,000. In USA, the Federal Regulation Section 508, in force since 2001, indicates that Web sites should be accessible to all. Thus, in 2008 Federal judge Marilyn Patel ruled that a class action lawsuit brought by the National Federation of the Blind (NFB) against the retailing giant Target, for failing to make their Web site accessible to the blind, settled for US$6 millions. Nevertheless, since EU countries have not yet faced lawsuits for lack of Web accessibility, EU companies that decide to implement Web accessibility are probably otherwise motivated apart from the threat of future lawsuits. Consequently, there are strong motives for our research.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the theoretical framework and sets out the hypotheses that will be tested by means of an empirical study. Section 3 explains the research design of such a study: the data used, the metrics for the measurement of Web accessibility, some further details about the Web accessibility evaluation procedure, the rest of the variables used as proxies and the empirical methods used. Section 4 shows the results. Section 5 contains the discussions including the limitations of this work and their theoretical and practical implications. Finally, Section 6 outlines the main conclusions of the paper and suggests some further lines of research.Web accessibility is a technological innovation that enables high quality Web sites. Although many research papers deal with several innovations at firm-level, there is a research gap on the factors influencing the implementation of Web accessibility. The literature suggests several general categories of variables that may influence the adoption and diffusion of an innovation by organizations. These are innovation characteristics, adopter characteristics and internal environment characteristics (Robertson & Gatignon, 1986). Within these generic categories specific factors must be specified that are assumed to be applicable to the particular innovation under study. This paper, as well as many others, assumes the perspective of the adopter characteristics (Naranjo-Gil, 2009; Teo, Lin, & Lai, 2009; Vowles, Thirkell, & Sinha, 2011, among many others). While there may be a wide range of feasible specific variables, we only use a relatively small set of variables because we focus on the perspective of the characteristics of the adopters and our aim is to assess the effects of changes in variables rather than to provide an exhaustive set of variables that might influence adoption decisions (e.g., Hameed, Counselle, & Swift, 2012a, show up to 41 organizational factors considered in the innovation adoption literature).As the research framework in Fig. 1shows, we identified the following three factors which are considered to have association with the adoption of WA in European banks: operational factors, size and those related to the CSR strategy of the firm. Considering that it was not possible to include all potential factors affecting the adoption of WA, the choice of theoretical constructs to be used in our model was determined through an extensive literature review as well as informal conversations with various information systems executives. The relationship between the three variables and the adoption of Web accessibility is not only direct but also relationships exist between the variables, especially between firm size and performance, and between firm size and CSR.Web accessibility can help to increase firm performance no matter what the percentage of site users with disabilities may be. First of all, Web accessibility is a means to reduce the costs of the information systems of the firm. This is because incorporating accessibility reduces site maintenance time and personnel, reduces server load, thus reducing the need for additional servers, allows for content re-use by using metadata and representing it using resource description framework (RDF) and simplifies forward migration and backwards compatibility (Henry, 2005). Additionally, accessibility decreases the cost of translating a Web site into other languages. Furthermore, accessible Web sites can be more efficiently used to cut costs by decreasing customer support services and letting customers complete transactions online rather than requiring personnel and paper.Secondly, Web accessibility can help to increase firm revenues. Web accessibility can make it easier for people to find a Web site, access it, and use it successfully, thus resulting in increased audience (more users) (Chisholm, 2005; Heim, 2000), and increased effectiveness (more use) (Henry, 2005). Increase in audience can result from the following benefits of Web accessibility:(a)Increases potential use by more people. Accessible sites can be used by more people – including people with disabilities, older people, people with low literacy, people who are not fluent in the language of the site, people with low bandwidth connections to the Internet, people with older technologies, and new and infrequent Web users – thus increasing the market segments and number of people who can successfully use the site. An important potential market for many organizations is older people. In the countries covered in the present research older people are the group of new Web users for which a faster growth is expected in the following years (European Commission, 2007).Increases findability. Accessible Web sites are generally easier to navigate and read. In most cases they even get higher search engine rankings. The cleaner the code, the better is the chance of a top ranking. Therefore, accessibility techniques increase the findability of Web pages by exposing content to search engines (Pemberton, 2003; Walter, 2008), both internally (within a Web site) and externally (across the World Wide Web).Increase in effectiveness (Web site use) can result from the following benefits of Web accessibility:(a)Increases potential use in more situations. Web sites that can be used by people with disabilities can also be used more easily by people without disabilities who are limited by their situation, such as their use of small displays (i.e. those of mobile phones).Increases usability. Accessible sites are generally more usable for everyone, including people with or without disabilities (Medina, Burella, Rossi, Grigera, & Luna, 2010). Increased usability means Web site users achieve their goals effectively, efficiently, and satisfactorily. In this regard, it is noticeable that some authors obtained empirical evidence that increases in efficiency, greater convenience or increases in the speed of purchase (aspects which are inherent to usefulness) improve individuals’ attitude towards this channel and strengthen their predisposition to purchase (Hernández, Jiménez, & Martin, 2009).With regard to the specific case of financial entities, it is remarkable that banks can take more advantage from Web accessibility than firms belonging to other sectors. This is because banking involves more interaction with the final consumer than basic industries and other activities where customers are firms rather than individuals. So, the operational benefits of Web accessibility (increased potential use by more people, increased findability, increased potential use in more situations, increased usability) are more significant for banks.So, Web accessibility adoption is a means to improve firm performance. Specifically, a link may be expected between poor performance and innovation adoption. This is because low performance firms are more open to technological change. Where a discrepancy between satisfactory and actual performance, i.e. a “performance gap”, is noted, there may be an active search for new alternatives (Downs, 1966). In many cases, managers believe that a change in strategy will improve the business’ ability to generate revenues or profits, increase market share, and/or improve return on assets or investment. So, many studies have concluded that declining profitability is the most common catalyst for changes (Boeker, 1989; Parnell, 1998; Webb & Dawson, 1991).According to the aforementioned arguments, the first hypothesis is:H1Banks with lower profitability are more prone to implement Web accessibility.Firm size has a long history as a deterministic factor in studies on diffusion of technology (see, e.g., Hameed, Counselle, & Swift, 2012b). Empirical research works such as those by Astebro (1995), Colombo and Mosconi (1995), Karshenas and Stoneman (1993), Saloner and Shepard (1995), and Sawang and Unsworth (2011) evidenced that size of the establishment exerts a significant and positive impact upon technology adoption, particularly in the case that innovations were available in the environment. Sectoral studies that focused on the financial sector (i.e., Gopalakrishnan & Bierly, 2001; Hannan & McDowell, 1984) reached the same conclusion.The same pattern is observed for the specific case of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) (see, e.g., Lee & Xia, 2006; Ojah & Mokoaleli-Mokoteli, 2012; Premuroso & Bhattacharya, 2008; Ramamurthy, Sen, & Sinha, 2008; Spinellis & Giannikas, 2012; Tsai & Tang, 2012). Moreover, there is previous evidence that size has a positive effect on the quantity and quality of Web disclosure (see, e.g., Bonsón et al., 2006; Gutiérrez, Fuertes, & Serrano, 2008; among others).The theoretical reasons for the influence of size on technology adoption lie in the fact that small and medium enterprises may face competitive disadvantages with regard to technology adoption, as these kinds of firms suffer from lack of specialized IT people and financial constraints, which determine, respectively, the ability of the company to be aware of the latest developments and the capacity to raise the funds that are needed to implement them (Cagliano, Blackmon, & Voss, 2001; Grando & Belvedere, 2006). Furthermore, for the case of ICT it is crucial to obtain updated information about the latest developments in a structured and systematic way; this task can be carried out more efficiently by specialists, whose services small companies find unaffordable (Tether, Smith, & Thwaites, 1997).So, the second hypothesis can be formulated as follows:H2Bigger banks are more prone to implement Web accessibility.Web accessibility can create strategic benefits for a firm even in the case when these are not readily measurable such as increases in operational performance. This is because Web accessibility can be considered a CSR initiative. CSR is regarded as voluntary corporate commitment to exceed the explicit and implicit obligations imposed on a company by society’s expectations of conventional corporate behavior (Falck & Heblich, 2007).Web accessibility expands opportunities for communication, interaction and employment for people with disabilities, helps reduce the digital divide, benefits older people with diminishing abilities, provides easier access to the Internet for people with low literacy and/or not fluent in the language, as well as for people with low bandwidth connections and/or older technologies. It can affect an organization’s employees, stockholders and board members, suppliers and vendors, partners and collaborators, customers and other stakeholders. Thus, Web accessibility is an integral part of CSR in demonstrating an organization’s commitment to providing equal opportunities (Henry, 2005).Clarkson (1995) used the terms reactive, defensive, accommodative, and proactive to characterize corporate strategy or posture toward social responsibility. Reactive companies will deny responsibility and do less than required. Defensive companies will admit responsibility but do the least that is required. Accommodative companies accept responsibility and do all that is required. Proactive companies anticipate responsibility and do more than is required. Vitaliano and Siegel (2007) have suggested that firms selling durable experience goods or credence services (as is the case of Banks) are much more likely than comparable firms to engage in CSR activities such as making Web sites accessible.In this regard, we must bear in mind that, according to Burke and Logdson (1996), one of the five dimensions of the CSR strategy of a firm is visibility. Web accessibility has a direct impact on this dimension, as an accessible Web site can demonstrate CSR, and an inaccessible one can undermine an organization’s other CSR efforts. In other words, if CSR efforts are not adequately communicated to a company’s stakeholders they are less likely to influence company competitiveness (Weber, 2008), and an accessible Web site can be a valuable tool for this purpose.Furthermore, Web accessibility also has an impact on a key area of CSR business benefits. It has a positive effect on employee motivation, retention and recruitment. Web accessibility can affect the attractiveness of a company for potential employees with disabilities. In addition, it can also directly influence employees as they will probably be more motivated working in a better working environment (European Commission, 2001).For the specific case of banks, the importance of Web accessibility as a part of their CSR strategy is even higher than for other sectors such as chemicals or pulp and paper. This is because the financial services have lower direct environmental impact (in this regard see, e.g., Castelo & Lima, 2008). So, there are not as many feasible actions as in other sectors to demonstrate their community involvement.So, the third hypothesis can be formulated as follows:H3Banks more committed to CSR are more prone to implement Web accessibility.To complete the model two other relationships must be taken into account because they directly affect the assumptions made:•Firstly, empirical studies have frequently found a positive relationship between firm size and profitability. These studies use economies of scale as a justification for such positive relation. The meta-analysis conducted by Gooding and Wagner (1985) concludes that organizational size and productivity are positively related to each other. In the specific case of financial institutions Zacharias (2008) found strong evidence of scale efficiencies.Secondly, previous empirical research has found a significant and positive association between firm size and CSR commitment (Brammer & Pavelin, 2004; Castelo & Lima, 2008; Reverte, 2009; Uhlaner, Van Goor-Balk, & Masurel, 2004; the second study focused on the specific case of banks). This is because large firms are in the public spotlight more than smaller firms and, consequently, they have higher political costs (Watts & Zimmermann, 1978). So, they are expected to engage more heavily in legitimating behavior. CSR is among the legitimating practices that let the firm mitigate political costs (Cowen, Ferreri, & Parker, 1987; Dowling & Pfeffer, 1975). In addition, it must be also borne in mind that various studies have found that there is a positive relationship between CSR disclosure and firm size (Hamid, 2004; Haniffa & Cooke, 2005).The sample analyzed is constituted by quoted banks whose shares are included in the Dow Jones EURO STOXX® TMI Banks [8300] Index. Due to missing data, we excluded four entities, so a sample of 49 firms is analyzed (the list is displayed in Appendix A). The choice of the sample is based on six reasons:(a)It gives an international dimension to the study.The Dow Jones EURO STOXX® TMI Banks [8300] is a very complete index, as it covers 95 percent of the free float market capitalization of the respective investable stock universe.The sample only includes firms belonging to the Bank Super sector (according to the Industry Classification Benchmark [ICB]). So, other financial firms are excluded.All the banks are traded in euros.Listed companies are more dependent on capital markets, and therefore may be a priori more sensitive to issues related to the reported information (such as Web accessibility).Listed companies paying attention to Web accessibility should be more interesting for institutional investors that take social issues into account.The aim of Web accessibility is to guarantee universal access to Web applications, independently of the type of hardware (television, mobile phone, etc.), software (current and old browsers), network infrastructure, language, culture, geographical location and user (persons with all kinds of physical, sensory and cognitive characteristics).The initial costs for organizations implementing Web accessibility can be significant (DeLone & McLean, 1992). Among capacities these initial costs are those related to the software for building, evaluating and repairing the Web site, those of the human resources needed for developing and monitoring the accessibility, staff training, and so on. However, these costs are often offset by a full return on investment.Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI, http://www.w3.org/WAI), launched in April of 1997, is one of the most important initiatives proposed in relation to Web accessibility. Its basic aim is to provide Web developers with specific techniques for increasing the accessibility of Web sites. It was launched by the standard-setting body for the Web (the World Wide Web Consortium, W3C), and it includes guidelines for Web content (Chisholm, Vanderheiden, & Jacobs, 1999), user agents (Jacobs, Gunderson, & Hansen, 2002), and authoring tools (Treviranus, McCathieNevile, Jacobs, & Richards, 2000).WAI developed the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) whose version 1 was published in May of 1999 (Chisholm et al., 1999) and whose version 2 (WCAG 2.0) has been published as W3C Recommendation on December 11 of 2008 (Caldwell, Cooper, Guarino, & Vanderheiden, 2008). In the present research we used WCAG 1.0. This is because there are not yet robust tools that help to check the conformity of Web sites to WCAG 2.0.WCAG 1.0 consists of fourteen guidelines that provide specifications on how to develop accessible Web pages. These guidelines are translated into 91 specific checkpoints that explain how guidelines should be applied to specific content development scenarios. These checkpoints are organized in three priority levels: Priority 1 contains 29 checkpoints that must be met to prevent lack of access for some groups of users; Priority 2 contains 40 checkpoints that should be met to prevent difficulties in access for some users; and Priority 3 contains 22 checkpoints that may be satisfied and it ensures that all contents on the page are completely accessible. The conformance levels are in line with the priority levels. Conformance Level “A” implies that all Priority 1 checkpoints have been satisfied. Conformance Level “AA” implies that all Priority 1 and 2 checkpoints have been satisfied and Conformance Level “AAA” means that all Priority 1, 2, and 3 checkpoints have been satisfied.Several metrics have been proposed to measure the accessibility level (Vigo & Brajnik, 2011), so that features of Web sites are mapped to a value representing the accessibility level of the site. The most popular are qualitative metrics, such as the previously mentioned WCAG. Under this metric, Zero, A, AA or AAA qualification is assigned to the Web sites depending on the satisfied checkpoints. However, these metrics are not sufficiently precise to determine the level of accessibility of a Web application. For example, an application that fulfills only the guidelines of priority 1 and another one that fulfills all the guidelines of priority 1 and all those of priority 2 except one will receive the same qualification (A). Nevertheless, it is clear that the latter is much more accessible than the former. So, this metric is not useful for the comparison of two applications or for the comparison of different versions of the same application. Metrics yielding a quantitative estimation of Web accessibility are more suitable for these purposes. In this research we used three quantitative metrics.WAB metric (Hackett, Parmanto, & Zeng, 2004) was developed at the University of Pittsburgh. WAB yields a quantitative score that provides a continuous range of values ranging from perfectly accessible to completely inaccessible. WAB looks at 25 checkpoints based on WCAG 1.0 (5 of Priority 1, 13 of Priority 2 and 7 of Priority 3). These checkpoints can be automatically evaluated. The number of violations of the checkpoints is the basis for the score, whose calculation is represented in equation 1:(1)WABscore=∑p∑vnvNv×WvNpWith p=Total pages of a Web site, v=Total violations of a Web page, nv=Number of violations, Nv=Number of potential violations, Wv=Weight of violations in inverse proportion to WCAG priority level, and Np=Total number of pages checked.This measure looks at the actual violations of the page and normalizes them against the potential violations. For example, for a checkpoint that looks at the number of images without alternative text, the number of violations is the current number of images without alternative text while the number of potential violations is the number of images within the page. The measure uses the checkpoint priorities for weighting. Priority 1 violations weigh 3 times more than Priority 3, since Priority 1 violations pose more difficulties in accessibility than Priority 3 violations. So, the WAB score for each Web site is the aggregated WAB score of the Web pages contained in the site normalized against the total number of pages. Higher WAB scores mean that more accessibility barriers exist, and low scores mean better conformance with WCAG guidelines. A score of zero denotes that the Web site does not violate any Web accessibility guideline and should not present any accessibility barrier to persons with disabilities.UWEM (Nietzio, Strobbe, & Velleman, 2008) is the result of a joint effort by 23 European organisations in three European projects combined in a cluster. It describes a methodology for evaluating conformance of Web sites with WCAG. Currently, it is designed to be conformant with WCAG 1.0 priority 1 and 2 checkpoints.UWEM provides an evaluation procedure consisting of a system of principles and practices for expert and automatic evaluation of Web accessibility for humans and machine interfaces. Automatic evaluation tests the conformance with a subset of the checkpoints marked as “fully automatable” in the methodology specification.The outcome of the UWEM accessibility evaluation can be presented in multiple ways. One of them is used for automated monitoring of Web accessibility. In this case a UWEM score is calculated by the UWEM score function (metric). Under version 1.2, this score is computed using the formula represented in the following equation:(2)F(s)=Bp1+Bp2+⋯+Bpn+∑t_on_site_levelBstNp1+Np2+⋯+Npn+∑t_on_site_levelNstWith F(s)=UWEM score for the site s, Bpi=Total number of “fail” results from all tests within page piand Npi=Total number applications of all tests within page pi. Bearing in mind that some UWEM tests apply to the Web site as a whole and not to individual pages, Bst=Total number of “fail” results from all test on site level, and Nst=Total number applications of all test on site level are also taken into account.The UWEM metric (F(s)) value ranges between 0 and 1. A score of 1 means that serious accessibility barriers exist and the site is classified as inaccessible. A score of 0 denotes that the Web site should not present serious problems with regard to Web accessibility.The WAB* metric (Martínez, Juan, Álvarez, & Suárez, 2009) is an extension of the WAB metric. As has been commented before, the WAB metric analyzes 25 checkpoints of priority 1, 2 and 3. Nevertheless, some of tests involved in WAB evaluation remain a bit vague. On the other hand, the UWEM metric implements a very precise review of the checkpoints of priority 1 and 2 but none of the checkpoints of priority 3.WAB* is an extension of the WAB metric which tries to address some of the drawbacks of WAB and UWEM. It has the following features:•It considers all checkpoints proposed by WAB, but some of them have been updated as they are deemed to be insufficient. Therefore, it includes checkpoints belonging to the three levels of priority.Eleven checkpoints of the UWEM metric have been added. The evaluation of these checkpoints is carried out in the way proposed by UWEM.The formula used to compute the Web accessibility score is the same as that of WAB.So, WAB* is a metric constituted by 36 checkpoints of automatic evaluation: 6 of priority 1, 23 of priority 2, and 7 of priority 3. In most cases, the score obtained with this metric is higher than that obtained using WAB, since the evaluation carried out with WAB* is much more exhaustive.The Web accessibility measurements needed for the study were performed by the authors by means of a Web tool constructed by them, named Atenea (http://www.atenea-accessibility.es). This tool is based on a desktop pilot tool, named Iris, that implemented and calculated the three metrics used in this paper. In order to ensure the validity and reliability of the results obtained with this pilot tool, they were compared with those of a manual evaluation. Such manual evaluation was conducted with the help of qualitative tools which speed up the process of detecting the checkpoint violations. Some of these tools are referenced by the W3C (http://www.w3.org/WAI/RC/tools) as for example Taw, Hera and HiSoftware Cynthia Says.Once the URLs of the 49 banks were selected, the process of evaluation was the following:(a)Atenea configuration. To ensure greater comfort in the measurement process, Atenea can be configured (through the private area of the Web site) indicating some basic characteristics such as depth level of the analysis and the number of pages to analyze for each URL. In this study the accessibility of the Web sites of banks was assessed through the evaluation of the main page or each URL and all pages in the second and third navigation level. That is, we evaluated the home page, the pages that are linked by the main page, and the pages that are linked from these.Analysis of the Web sites. For each bank it is necessary to indicate the URL and the metric to be used in the assessment (in our case WAB, WAB* and UWEM). Fig. 2shows the basic interface of Atenea which allows the completion of this task (in this example the URL http://www.bankofireland.ie is measured using the WAB metric).Annotation of results. All the results were stored in spreadsheet format. Fig. 3presents the interface of Atenea that shows the obtained results (for the bank analyzed in the previous example, Bank of Ireland).As indicated above, the first latent factor, Web accessibility, was measured with three indicators: WAB, WAB* and UWEM scores. The measurement was conducted during January 2009.As proxy for firm performance we used firm profitability. Profitability ratios have been accepted by most academics and practitioners as representative indicators of performance in Western companies (Doyle, 1994). Furthermore, a considerable amount of literature (e.g., Brief & Lawson, 1992; Kelly & Tippet, 1991, among many others) suggests that, despite its limitations, these kinds of indicators provide a suitable measure of firm performance. To measure firm profitability several financial ratios associated with Return on Equity were chosen: Operating Income/Equity (OIE), Income Before Tax/Equity (IBE) and Net Income/Equity (NIE). The data required for each ratio were obtained from the information contained in the annual accounts available on each bank Web site. In order to mitigate the effect of annual fluctuations we considered the averaged data for three years (2005, 2006 and 2007).With regard to firm size, we chose accounting-based measures rather than market based measures because these kinds of measures are based only on investors’ viewpoints, thus ignoring other stakeholder groups (McGuire, Sundgren, & Schneeweis, 1988). Among the different accounting-based measures we chose the number of employees, the total assets and equity (size data are also averaged for the period 2005–2007). Such kinds of proxies have been widely used both in CSR studies (e.g., Gray, Javad, Power, & Sinclair, 2001, among others) and in diffusion of innovations research (e.g., Gutiérrez et al., 2008, among others).Regarding CSR commitment, we chose two indicators as proxies. We defined two dichotomous variables which denote the inclusion of the bank in 2009 in the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index (DJSI) and in the FTSE-4Good Index (FTSE), respectively (1=inclusion, 0=exclusion). The inclusion is decided on the basis of a thorough analysis of corporate economic, environmental and social performance, assessing issues such as corporate governance, risk management, branding, climate change mitigation, supply chain standards and labor practices. So, these indexes can be used as a research tool to identify environmentally and socially responsible companies.3For further details see http://www.sustainability-index.com/ (for the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index) and http://www.ftse.com/Indices/FTSE4Good_Index_Series/index.jsp (for the FTSE4Good index).3The operationalization of all the variables of our study and the code we will use to refer to them in the remainder of the paper are summarized in Table 1.Taking into account that (a) we have more than one dependent variable, (b) a preliminary study evidenced that multicollinearity problems may exist, we chose a SEM approach rather than a linear regression model. SEM comprises a set of techniques that perform multiple regression analysis between latent variables. So, they are called “second generation of multivariate analyses” (Fornell, 1987).Among the different SEM methods we used Partial Least Squares (PLS). PLS was originally developed by Wold (1982, 1985, among others), but has been extended by other authors (see, in this respect, Chin, 1998a). This technique was preferred over other SEM implementations such as for example LISREL and LISCOMP because: (a) It uses a least-squares estimation procedure, thereby avoiding many of the restrictive assumptions such as multivariate normality and residual distributions (Falk & Miller, 1992), (b) PLS is adequate for new problems where the theoretical knowledge is scarce and/or the sample size is small (Chin, 1998a; Hulland, 1999). In this regard, the application of PLS requires a minimum sample size of 30 (Okazaki & Taylor, 2008).PLS has been used by previous researchers to analyze financial information (Rodgers, 1999; Sohn, Kim, & Moon, 2007; Tan, Plowman, & Hancock, 2007), to assess Internet reporting practices (Serrano, Fuertes, & Gutiérrez, 2007; Serrano, Rueda, & Portillo, 2009) and Customer Relationship Management (CRM) (Joo & Sohn, 2008; Sohn & Chang, 2009) and to evaluate Web sites quality (Éthier, Hadaya, Talbot, & Cadieux, 2006). It has also been widely used to validate technology acceptance models (Al-Somali, Gholami, & Clegg, 2009; Huang, Lin, & Chan, 2012; Limayem & Cheung, 2008; Lu, Zhou, & Wang, 2009; Serenko, 2008). In addition, our sample size of 49 met the minimum sample size requirement. Then, we can conclude that PLS is a suitable technique for our purpose.PLS is formulated by two types of equations namely, measurement model and structural model. The measurement model is used to grasp the relationship between observed variables and latent factors. In this regard, we must underline that we considered the observed variables as reflective indicators rather than formative. The rationale of this is straightforward for the case of the constructs “CSR commitment” and “Web accessibility”, for which the observed variables are clearly reflections of a latent variable. For the case of the constructs “Size” and “Performance” the reflective nature of the associated indicators is less straightforward but we decided to follow the criteria employed by prior researchers who included “Size” (see, e.g., Serrano et al., 2007, 2009) and “Performance” (see, e.g., Sohn et al., 2007) in their PLS models.The structural model is used to assess the hypothesized relationships among latent factors. Since PLS is a limited-information estimation method, an additional procedure is required to estimate the standard errors of the parameter estimates. We conducted a bootstrap analysis (500 samples) as bootstrapping provides better estimates than other re-sampling plans such as jack-knife (Efron & Gong, 1983). All the calculations were made using the software package SmartPLS 2.0 (Ringle, Wende, & Will, 2005) except the principal component analysis in the assessment of the measurement model which was made using SPSS 19.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
