@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ranking cricket teams

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposal of graph and count weightage based ranking algorithms.Addition of parameters (number of runs and wickets) for graph weightage.Study of the affect of damping factor on different PageRank based ranking methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Indexing,Ranking,Cricket teams,Runs and wickets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Teams are ranked to show their authority over each other. Existing methods rank the cricket teams using an ad-hoc points system entirely based on the winning and losing of matches and ignores number of runs or wickets from which a team wins. In this paper, adoptions of h-index and PageRank are proposed for ranking teams to overcome the weakness of existing methods. Each team is represented by a node in the graph with two teams creates a weighted directed edge between each other by playing a match and the losing team points to the winning team. The intuition is to get more points for a team winning from a stronger team than winning from a weaker team by considering the number of runs or wickets also in addition to just winning and losing matches. The results show that proposed ranking methods provide quite promising insights of one day and test team rankings. The effect of damping factor d is also studied on the performance of PageRank based methods on both ODI and test matches teams ranking and interesting trends are found.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sports ratings are performed for showing the standings of different teams and players by analyzing the results of competitions or matches. The team with the highest points is usually ranked number 1. Traditional sports rankings are based on win, loss or tie ratios or polls which are subjective rating of the teams, such as, ICC cricket rankings are based on many ad-hoc rules.1http://www.ehow.com/how_6916968_calculate-icc-rankings.html.1Borooah and Mangan (2010), criticized that current point system based ranking schemes are opaque, so the methods used by ICC for rankings of cricket teams and players still needs to be investigated properly to provide better ranking methods.State-of-the-art indexing and ranking algorithms such as h-index (Hirsch, 2005) and PageRank (Page, Brin, Motwani, & Winograd, 1998), respectively can be adopted to rank cricket teams. H-index indexes researcher in co-author network on the basis of a sort of average citations received by him for her papers. The more the average citations received by a researcher the higher the h-index she has. The number of runs and wickets from which matches are won can be thought of as citations. The intuition is that the more the average number of runs or wickets from which matches are won by a team the higher the index she has. This idea is supported by the fact that in case of more than two teams in a series, if two teams have same points the team with better run rate is considered better by ICC. The run rate is calculated by using number of runs and wickets of team’s previous winnings and losings but this factor is ignored in the ICC cricket rankings. PageRank (Page et al., 1998) is used to rank web pages on the basis of inlinks and the importance of those pages that are providing those inlinks. The more the number pages providing inlinks as well as they are important the higher the PageRank of the page. The nodes in a graph can be taken as teams and the links between them are the matches played between them. If a team A wins from another team B, team B will provide an inlink to team A. In this way a directed graph is built which can be used to rank teams by considering graph weightage in addition to simply considering the number of won or lost matches.We propose Team-index (t-index) (non-graph weightage, as it does not consider the weight of the nodes with which matches are played) for indexing teams which is an adoption of h-index (Hirsch, 2005). T-index considers only the number of runs and wickets from which matches are won, while the strength and weakness of the teams from which a team wins is ignored. Consequently, to consider the strength and weakness of teams from which a team wins we propose TeamRank (TR) (graph weightage, as it does consider the weight of the nodes with which matches are played) which is an adoption of PageRank (Page et al., 1998). The intuition is that the more a team wins matches from the stronger teams the higher it will be ranked. TR considers the strength and weakness of the teams from which a team wins while ignores the number of runs and wickets from which matches are won. Consequently, we propose weighted TeamRank (WTR) which also considers the weight of number of runs and wickets from which a team wins from other teams. The intuition is that if a team wins from more runs or wickets the higher it will be ranked. WTR considers number of winnings, number of runs and wickets, simultaneously. Finally, the t-index (non-graph weightage) is merged with WTR (graph weightage) to propose hybrid method. The results and discussions prove that our proposed methods are useful and should be used to rank cricket teams. The behavior of damping factor d is also studied for different PageRank based ranking methods for ODI and test matches teams’ rankings to find suitable values for each of the proposed methods in this paper. Our proposed methods are quite flexible and can be easily applied for T20 teams ranking as well.The contributions in this work are as follows, (1) proposal of graph and non-graph weightage based ranking algorithms for cricket teams ranking, (2) addition of parameters (number of runs and wickets) instead of simply using match won or lost information for graph weightage (3) hybridization of non-graph weightage and graph weightage based ranking algorithms to provide a unified solution and (4) study of the affect of damping factor on different PageRank based ranking methods for cricket teams rankings of ODI and test matches.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic concepts and terminologies followed by related work in Section 3. Section 4 provides the existing ICC cricket ranking method and our proposed four methods for ranking teams. Section 5 provides dataset and detailed results and discussions for ranking teams in different scenarios. Section 6 finally concludes this work.Batsman, bowler, all-rounder and wicket keeper are four roles of players in a cricket team. Batsman uses a bat to score runs, bowler bowls with a ball to batsman to get him out, all-rounder is a player which is able to both bat and bowl and wicket keeper is a player which stands behind the wickets to capture the ball bowled by the bowler in case it is missed by the batsman.A cricket team consists of eleven players in the ground and a 12th player which enters the ground to replace injured player. Two teams play a match as opponents. One player from each team plays the role of captain. Toss is performed to decide which team will bat and which team will bowl. The toss wining captain decides that her team will bat or bowl. The team bats first have to play the allotted overs bowled by the bowlers of other team to score runs. The team score more runs wins the match.Ground is usually a circle shaped plot with radius 70m where the match is played. There can be different size grounds all over the world such as 60m and also 95m.Pitch is 22m area on which wickets are on both sides and bowlers bowls and batsman tries to hit the ball.An “over” is defined as a set of six balls bowled consecutively by a bowler.Each over has six balls. Bowler bowls and batsman hits the ball with a bat to score runs. There can be no run on a ball or maximum 6 runs can be scored by the batsman when the ball hit by her falls outside the boundary line. Four runs are scored if the ball hit by the batsman roll across the boundary line. Runs can also be scored by the batsman when she hits the ball and runs on the pitch to reach to other side. When a batsman reaches the other side of the pitch after hitting the ball she completes one run. Batsman can score maximum 6 runs by hitting the ball and running on one ball. There are two batsman’s playing on the pitch at the same time one on each side with only one facing the bowler. When one batsman hits and scores even number of runs she again faces next ball bowled by the bowler and if batsman hits and scores odd number of runs the batsman on the other side of pitch faces the next ball in case the over is not finished. Each time the over of 6 balls is finished another bowler bowls an over from the other side of pitch.Here, it is necessary to mention that in cricket game one team bat first and score runs while other team bowls. So in case team batting first wins it wins from runs while in case team batting second wins it wins from wickets. This is why teams can win from runs and wickets both in different matches.ODI cricket matches are the faster, typically completed in one day, and with a maximum of 50 over’s permitted per team. Both teams have to play 50 overs in a day and the team that scores more runs or achieve the target given by other team with saving some wickets wins the match.Test cricket matches can last up to five days in which each team can play two innings, with each day broken into three sessions punctuated by lunch and tea breaks. Each team has to bat twice in test match so in total there are four innings (innings means a team finishes batting or other team finishes bowling), two for each team. Each day a team can usually play maximum 90 overs but in total a team can play any number of overs in test matches. There is no restriction like 50 overs restriction in ODI matches. The teams can win from wickets and runs and sometime even one innings plus some wickets or runs.The international governing body of cricket is International Cricket Council (ICC). ICC awards championship trophies to the teams with highest ratings in both ODI and test matches. ICC is also responsible for making new rules and making amendments in the existing rules for cricket.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper is about different graph and non graph weightage based ranking algorithms for cricket teams’ rankings. It is found that number of runs and wickets from which team wins are important and affect teams ranking. The weightage factor is also important when two teams’ win similar number of matches from similar kind of opponents. The hybridization of h-index and PageRank based methods for ranking cricket teams is also effective as it considers graph, non graph weightage as well as number of runs and wickets for both. It is also concluded that the effect of different values of d on the proposed methods performance is significant. As for ODI matches ranking for TR method the higher value of d is suitable to make rankings scores of teams more distinguishable, for WTR all values of d have same impact and for UWTR lesser value of d is suitable to make rankings scores of teams more distinguishable which is inverse of d’s effect on TR. Damping factor d has similar affect on TR, WTR and UWTR methods when they are used for ranking teams for test matches.In future, we plan to propose the variations of our proposed methods of teams ranking for ranking players of teams such as bowlers and batsman’s. Time Weighted PageRank (Manaskasemsak et al., 2011) can also be adopted for ranking teams by considering temporal dimension.