@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic summarization assessment through a combination of semantic and syntactic information for intelligent educational systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed a specialized method that works well in assessing short summaries.It integrates the semantic relations between words, and their syntactic composition.We experimentally examine the influence of the combination of semantic and syntactic information on short summary assessment.Experiments have displayed that it is to be preferred over the existing techniques.We have developed the method as an intelligent tool to grade students’ summaries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automatic summary assessment,Content coverage,Natural language processing,Automatic grading,Intelligent tutoring systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Summary writing is a process for creating a short version of a source text. It can be used as a measure of understanding. As grading students’ summaries is a very time-consuming task, computer-assisted assessment can help teachers perform the grading more effectively. Several techniques, such as BLEU, ROUGE, N-gram co-occurrence, Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), LSA_Ngram and LSA_ERB, have been proposed to support the automatic assessment of students’ summaries. Since these techniques are more suitable for long texts, their performance is not satisfactory for the evaluation of short summaries. This paper proposes a specialized method that works well in assessing short summaries. Our proposed method integrates the semantic relations between words, and their syntactic composition. As a result, the proposed method is able to obtain high accuracy and improve the performance compared with the current techniques. Experiments have displayed that it is to be preferred over the existing techniques. A summary evaluation system based on the proposed method has also been developed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Summarization is the process of automatically producing a compressed version of a given text that provides useful information for the user (Aliguliyev, 2009; Zipitria, Larrañaga, Armañanzas, Arruarte, & Elorriaga, 2008). Summary writing is an important part of many English Language Examinations (He, Hui, & Quan, 2009). Summarizing instructs students concerning how to recognize the main ideas in a text, how to determine important information that is worth noting and how to eliminate irrelevant information (Brown & Day, 1983; Chang, Sung, & Chen, 2002; Zipitria, Arruarte, & Elorriaga, 2010; Zipitria, Elorriaga, Arruarte, & de Ilarraza, 2004). It can also be useful for the instruction of second language students (Alyousef, 2006; Cho, 2012; Fan, 2010; Hedge, 2001; Pakzadian & Rasekh, 2013).Since summarization can be used as a measure of understanding for a given text, teachers need to grade students’ written summaries. If they do it manually, it is a difficult and very time-consuming task. In order to reduce the time they should spend on this task, many teachers have decided to reduce the number of summaries given to their students. However, if students do not have sufficient practice it affects their summary writing ability. To tackle this problem, computer-assisted assessment (CAA), which has attracted interest in recent years, can help teachers. Due to the progress in other areas, such as E-learning, Information Extraction and Natural Language Processing, automatic evaluation of summaries has been made possible. Several techniques such as Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Franzke & Streeter, 2006; Landauer, Laham, Rehder, & Schreiner, 1997; Zipitria et al., 2004), ROUGE (Lin, 2004), BLEU (Pérez, Alfonseca, & Rodrıguez, 2004) and N-gram Co-occurrence (Lin, 2004) have been proposed for the automatic assessment of summaries. Summary writing assessment can be divided into content and linguistic quality (Jones & Galliers, 1996; Valenti, Neri, & Cucchiarelli, 2003). Whereas content assessment determines how much the information of the source text overlaps with the information in the summary text, linguistic quality assessment judges the accurate spelling and grammar of summaries, etc. In this work, we focused on the content evaluation.Most of the existing assessment methods have focused on long texts, in which they calculate the similarity between the long texts based on the shared words. These methods are suitable for long texts because two similar long texts usually have a number of co-occurring words. However, a short text may only contain a few words co-occurrence or even none. This is because people can express the same meaning using various sentences in terms of word content. In addition, some of the existing methods do not contribute syntactic information to calculate the similarity between texts. However, for the correct assessment of summaries, a method should consider both semantic and syntactic information in evaluation (Kanejiya, Kumar, & Prasad, 2003; Pérez et al., 2005; Wiemer-Hastings & Wiemer, 2000; Wiemer-Hastings & Zipitria, 2001).In this paper, we propose a method that merges semantic relations between words, and their syntactic composition for improving the accuracy of automatic summary evaluation. The semantic similarity is computed using information from a lexical database. The use of a lexical database enables our method to model human common sense knowledge.The proposed method is called SALK: summarization assessment based on linguistic knowledge. SALK can be applied to both short text and long text. The proposed method can be employed in various applications in areas such as text mining (Atkinson-Abutridy, Mellish, & Aitken, 2004), text summarization (Erkan & Radev, 2004), text classification (Ko, Park, & Seo, 2004) and education (Foltz, Laham, & Landauer, 1999; Franzke & Streeter, 2006).The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews some of the proposed techniques that are used to evaluate summaries. Section 3 introduces the proposed method. Section 4 presents the developed automatic summary evaluation system. Section 5 discusses the performance analysis and presents the results of the analysis. Finally, in section 6, we summarize the works discussed and the progress of the project.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
