@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
In the mood for sharing contents: Emotions, personality and interaction styles in the diffusion of news

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an aligned corpus of Tweets and news articles with gold standard mood.We perform correlation analysis of personality, communication style and mood sharing in Twitter.We find the best attributes for the prediction of positive and negative mood sharers in Twitter.We predict positive and negative mood sharers from personality, communication style and Twittermetadata.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Personality,Communication,Mood detection,Social media,Twitter,Contagion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we analyze the influence of Twitter users in sharing news articles that may affect the readers’ mood. We collected data of more than 2000 Twitter users who shared news articles from Corriere.it, a daily newspaper that provides mood metadata annotated by readers on a voluntary basis. We automatically annotated personality types and communication styles of Twitter users and analyzed the correlations between personality, communication style, Twitter metadata (such as followig and folllowers) and the type of mood associated to the articles they shared. We also run a feature selection task, to find the best predictors of positive and negative mood sharing, and a classification task. We automatically predicted positive and negative mood sharers with 61.7% F1-measure.In online news and social media, people read and share links to news articles or other multimedia contents, that are related to their emotions, tastes and identity (Liu, 2007). The exposure to contents generated by others can give rise to different emotions like indignation, joy, anger or sadness (Cambria et al., 2012). Sometimes these contents may be shared or retweeted, indicating the users’ will to participate in a diffuse conversation (Boyd et al., 2010) and share their emotions with others. Researchers (Bachrach et al., 2012; Kosinski et al., 2014) have discovered that such media consumption and sharing is affected by the personality type of the user. Different personality types are associated to different psychological dimensions (Golbeck et al., 2011b), such as linguistic functions, attentional focus, emotionality and social relationships.In this paper, we address the question of how personality types and communication styles of Twitter users are related to the selection of contents they share in Twitter, affecting the diffusion of a positive or negative mood. We formalize this problem in 3 ways: as a correlation analysis, as a feature selection task and as a classification task. We aim at finding the relationships between personality, communicative style and mood sharing; the best predictors of mood and the performance in the classification of positive and negative mood sharers among Twitter users. We identify the data sources in Corriere11http://corriere.it, an Italian news platform that provides mood metadata annotated by the readers on a voluntary basis, and Twitter22http://twitter.com, that is widely used as an information diffusion platform. We annotate the data with personality and communication style labels, then we predict the average mood of the articles shared on Twitter by the users. The main contributions of this work to the research community are: (1) the development of an aligned corpus of Tweets and news articles, automatically annotated with personality types, communication styles and gold standard mood labels; (2) the analysis of the influence of Twitter users’ metadata, personality and communication style in the diffusion of mood; and (3) the prediction of mood of a news article from personal data.The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we report some related works on information spread, mood, personality and emotions. Then we will describe the datasets and the annotations in Sections 3 and 4. In Section 5 we will report and discuss the results of the experiments, finally in Section 6 we will draw some conclusions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we analyzed the role of personality and communication styles in the diffusion of news articles that may affect the readers’ mood. We explored the correlations between personality, communication style and Twtter metadata and we successfully predicted the users who shared articles arousing positive and negative moods. We found some correlations apparently easy to explain, such as the one between sharing satisfaction and an upbeat communicative style. We also found surprisingly significant correlations, like the fact that open minded people tend not to share disappointment. We conclude that these findings can be very interesting for the works about virality and Social Network Analysis: some personality types and some communicative styles correlate with what is being shared, and this is something to keep into account when modeling the diffusion of news or emotions trough social networks.