@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Word sense discrimination in information retrieval: A spectral clustering-based approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new unsupervised method that uses word sense discrimination in IR.The re-ranking method is based on spectral clustering.The effectiveness over queries with ambiguous terms is proved on TREC corpora.Our interest regards improving the precision after 5, 10 and 30 retrieved documents.The method improves results for queries with poor baseline performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information retrieval,Word sense disambiguation,Word sense discrimination,Spectral clustering,High precision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Word sense ambiguity has been identified as a cause of poor precision in information retrieval (IR) systems. Word sense disambiguation and discrimination methods have been defined to help systems choose which documents should be retrieved in relation to an ambiguous query. However, the only approaches that show a genuine benefit for word sense discrimination or disambiguation in IR are generally supervised ones. In this paper we propose a new unsupervised method that uses word sense discrimination in IR. The method we develop is based on spectral clustering and reorders an initially retrieved document list by boosting documents that are semantically similar to the target query. For several TREC ad hoc collections we show that our method is useful in the case of queries which contain ambiguous terms. We are interested in improving the level of precision after 5, 10 and 30 retrieved documents (P@5, P@10, P@30) respectively. We show that precision can be improved by 8% above current state-of-the-art baselines. We also focus on poor performing queries.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to Lin (1997), “given a word, its context and its possible meanings, the problem of word sense disambiguation (WSD) is to determine the meaning of the word in that context”.1For a complete discussion of state-of-the-art WSD see the monograph (Agirre & Edmonds, 2006).1Although WSD is generally easy for humans, it represents an issue for computers. The problem becomes even more difficult to solve when an ambiguous word occurs in short chunks of texts, such as a query in an information retrieval (IR) system.Applying WSD to improve IR results is a well studied problem, but with controversial results as evidenced in the literature. Several authors have concluded that WSD in IR does not lead to significant retrieval performance improvement (Guyot, Falquet, Radhouani, & Benzineb, 2008; Sanderson, 1994). Various studies (Krovetz & Croft, 1992; Uzuner, Katz, & Yuret, 1999; Voorhees, 1993) have argued that the main problem in improving retrieval performance when using WSD is the inefficiency of the existing disambiguation algorithms, a problem which increases in the case of short queries.In more recent years the issue remained “as to whether less than 90% accurate automated WSD can lead to improvements in retrieval effectiveness” (Stokoe, Oakes, & Tait, 2003). This remark refers primarily to the traditional task of WSD which identifies the meaning of the ambiguous word in context. This type of WSD is generally based on external sources, such as dictionaries or WordNet(WN)-like knowledge bases for labeling senses (Carpineto & Romano, 2012; Guyot et al., 2008) and is therefore knowledge-based.Attempts to use knowledge-based WSD in IR have been numerous. In (Gonzalo, Verdejo, Chugur, & Cigarran, 1998) as well as in (Mihalcea & Moldovan, 2000) positive results were reported. These studies made use of semantic indexing based on WN synsets. However, they were all conducted on small data sets. As commented in (Ng, 2011), the evaluation is scaled up to a large test collection in (Stokoe et al., 2003) but the reported improvements are from a weak baseline. Positive results are also reported in (Kim, Seo, & Rim, 2004), although the quantum of improvements is small.Zhong and Ng (2012) are among the few authors who more recently have expressed a growing belief in the benefits brought by WSD to IR – when using a supervised WSD technique. They constructed their supervised WSD system directly from parallel corpora. Experimental results on standard TREC collections show that, using the word senses tagged by this supervised WSD system, significant improvements over a state-of-the-art IR system can be obtained (Zhong & Ng, 2012). However, it is well known that supervised WSD cannot be used on a large scale in practice due to the absence of the necessary annotated/parallel corpora.In contrast to all these authors, we are suggesting and investigating the usage of an unsupervised WSD technique. In this paper, we present an approach that aims at identifying clusters from similar contexts, where each cluster shows a polysemous word being used for a particular meaning. It is our belief that IR is an application for which this type of analysis is useful. Our approach is therefore not concerned with performing a straightforward WSD, but rather with differentiating among the meanings of an ambiguous word. Considering word sense discrimination rather than straightforward WSD avoids the use of external sources such as dictionaries or WN type synsets which are commonly used (Carpineto & Romano, 2012).In this paper, we propose a new word sense discrimination method for IR based on spectral clustering. This state of the art clustering technique is now a hot topic; for example, Takacs and Demiris (2009) studied the use of spectral clustering in multi-agent systems while Borjigin and Guo (2012) recently discussed the cluster number determination in spectral clustering. Spectral clustering has been used in WSD for the first time by Popescu and Hristea (2011) who point out the importance of the clustering method used in unsupervised WSD.We hereby show that WS discrimination based on spectral clustering outperforms the baseline when no WS discrimination is applied and also when using another unsupervised method (Naïve Bayes).The present paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we present the related works on WSD in IR; the focus is on unsupervised methods. Section 3 presents word sense discrimination based on spectral clustering. Section 4 presents the two step IR process using the proposed WS discrimination model. The evaluation is presented in Section 5. A more thorough analysis of the obtained results is performed in Section 6. Section 7 lays out the impact of automatically generated context on our proposed method. Section 8 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a re-ranking method for IR. It shows a remarkable improvement in high rank precision for ambiguous queries. We believe that this represents a very important aspect, considering the fact that IR systems are predisposed to failure in the case of this particular type of queries (Stokoe et al., 2003; Mothe & Tanguy, 2007).Several previous studies (Sanderson, 1994; Guyot et al., 2008) have failed to prove the usefulness of WSD in IR. On the contrary, we show that unsupervised WSD, namely WS discrimination, can improve IR results. We are of the opinion that WS discrimination is sufficient in IR and that WS disambiguation is not compulsory, as opposed to text translation, for example. Analysis of the obtained results has been carried out by us with respect to the two major approaches existing in the literature (Chifu & Ionescu, 2012; Schütze & Pedersen, 1995), as detailed in Section 5. In the only existing related approach, when using a Naïve Bayes-based clustering technique, Chifu and Ionescu (2012) also demonstrated that WS discrimination can improve IR performance. However, in their work they only recorded very small improvement and only on some sub-cases, hence the importance of the clustering technique used for WS discrimination in IR, another point which we have made here.Our method exploits TREC topic definitions which have a level of detail in their description, a level which is not normally available in an IRS; the topic definition is used to provide a context to the query. Other works from the literature use these structural elements and most often the Descriptive part of the query helps in improving the results (He & Ounis, 2004). However, using the complete statement of the topic could lead to valid criticism of experiments such as ours because we exploit this detail. In this paper, we were interested in proving that, if this level of detail is available, then it can be used in a beneficial way to improve retrieval effectiveness, and we have achieved this goal. However, even if our goal was not to develop mechanisms which can capture in an optimal way the needed level of detail, we do propose a method to capture the context of the query and show that our own method for WS discrimination in IR remains useful. Such a method of contextualization, namely the usage of PRF (Buckley et al., 1994), has been employed by us in Section 7 for validating our conclusions in the presence of automatically generated context. Indeed, contextualizing short texts, such as tweet contextualization (SanJuan, Bellot, Moriceau, & Tannier, 2011) and query expansion (Ogilvie, Voorhees, & Callan, 2009) is an active research domain and we think it will be worth considering new contextualization techniques in our WS discrimination method as a future goal.Our future work will also concentrate on query difficulty prediction, which is already an active research area (Carmel & Yom-Tov, 2010; Mothe & Tanguy, 2005; Pehcevski, Thom, Vercoustre, & Naumovski, 2010). The fact that our method rather improves poor performing queries (Section 6.1), especially those with multiple ambiguous terms (Section 6.2), should drive in-depth research along this path.