@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An evaluation framework for cross-lingual link discovery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an evaluation framework for the study of cross-lingual link discovery.All aspects of this evaluation framework are detailed.The effectiveness of various cross-lingual link discovery systems is discussed.Top approaches for realisation of English-to-Chinese link discovery are compared.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wikipedia,Cross-lingual link discovery,Evaluation framework,Validation,Assessment,Evaluation metrics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cross-Lingual Link Discovery (CLLD) is a new problem in Information Retrieval. The aim is to automatically identify meaningful and relevant hypertext links between documents in different languages. This is particularly helpful in knowledge discovery if a multi-lingual knowledge base is sparse in one language or another, or the topical coverage in each language is different; such is the case with Wikipedia. Techniques for identifying new and topically relevant cross-lingual links are a current topic of interest at NTCIR where the CrossLink task has been running since the 2011 NTCIR-9. This paper presents the evaluation framework for benchmarking algorithms for cross-lingual link discovery evaluated in the context of NTCIR-9.This framework includes topics, document collections, assessments, metrics, and a toolkit for pooling, assessment, and evaluation. The assessments are further divided into two separate sets: manual assessments performed by human assessors; and automatic assessments based on links extracted from Wikipedia itself. Using this framework we show that manual assessment is more robust than automatic assessment in the context of cross-lingual link discovery.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wikipedia is an online multilingual encyclopaedia containing a very large number of articles written in most modern written languages. It is extensively hypertext linked between related articles in the same language, and between equivalent (same-topic) articles in different languages. However, there are few links between related articles in different languages. This poses a problem to a multi-lingual knowledge-seeking user for several reasons:First, a user may be trying to acquire language specific words for a domain in which they are familiar. As an example, a martial artist might be interested in acquiring the Chinese, Japanese, or Korean words for the arts in which they are trained. Fig. 1shows a snippet of an English Martial Arts Wikipedia article where it can be seen that the English anchors are linked only to related English articles; links to related Chinese, Japanese, and Korean articles are not present.Second, a user may wish to understand colloquialisms from an acquired second language. As an example, 花蟹 (“flowery crab”) is in common use in Hong Kong to refer to the ten-dollar banknote. The use is non-obvious, and is given in the English Wikipedia article “Hong Kong dollar”; however neither this article nor the English article “Hong Kong ten-dollar note” are linked-to from the Chinese article “香港十元紙幣”. Fig. 2shows the English and Chinese articles about the Hong Kong ten-dollar note from which it can be seen that adding cross-lingual links would enhance the article.Third, a user may simply require a translation. As an example, “crema pasticcera” might appear on a menu and a user might not know what this is. Fig. 3shows several different language versions of the Wikipedia “Custard” articles from where it can be seen that: anchors are typically linked to targets in the source language; not all cross-language equivalent-article links exist (e.g. English is not linked to Italian, and vice versa); Some cross-language equivalent-article links are incorrect (e.g., the Chinese article “奶黄” (custard) is linked to the Italian “Budino” (pudding) article).This problem and its solution are exacerbated by the structure of the web. Web pages typically link from one source page to one target page. This might be acceptable for a mono-lingual web, but in the case of a multi-lingual web it is not. A multi-lingual user faced with reading content in a second (or subsequent) language might prefer to be directed to content in their first language if available. An example scenario is a user who starts reading the Wikipedia in Korean and follows a link to a Japanese article, not being directed back to Korean when content is available in that language. For multi-lingual link discovery it is necessary to extend the model of a link. Whereas before it was from one anchor to one target, it must now be from one anchor to multiple targets – each of which might be in a different language.This leads to the task we are addressing: machine-assisted cross-language link-insertion into Wikipedia. To do this a system for recommending links is needed. That system should take the Wikipedia and from it produce a ranked list of links for a human annotator to consider inserting (either manually or automatically). This machine task is known as cross language links discovery.Herein we define cross language link discovery (CLLD) as recommending and ranking a set of meaningful anchors to place in a source document that point to topically related content in documents in a second or subsequent language.Several English mono-lingual link discovery tools exist (e.g. Wikipedia Miner1http://wikipedia-miner.cms.waikato.ac.nz/.1). These tools help Wikipedia content creators and curators discover and maintain appropriate links for their articles. But none of these tools currently support cross-lingual link discovery. Prior work has examined the quality of mono-lingual link discovery, but none of these frameworks has examined the quality of cross-lingual link discovery. We set out to examine the problems associated with the performance measure of CLLD, and to build a reusable test collection, by running the NTCIR-9 CrossLink track (Tang, Geva, et al., 2011). In this paper we present an evaluation framework for CLLD and a detailed systematic examination of it in the context of NTCIR-9. A preliminary examination was presented at EVIA 2011 (Tang, Itakura, et al., 2011).The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Related work is outlined in Section 2. The framework is given in Section 3. Assessment is discussed in Section 4. The toolset is discussed in Section 5. The framework is applied in Section 6. The effectiveness of CLLD methods is discussed in Section 7. We conclude in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents an evaluation framework for benchmarking cross-lingual link discovery (CLLD) algorithms. It includes detailed discussions on the evaluation methodology and metrics used as well as some of the assessment challenges. The framework was applied to runs submitted to the NTCIR-9 crosslink track. The task of that track was to recommend anchors and target documents (links) from English Wikipedia articles into Chinese, Japanese, and Korean Wikipedia articles. The framework presented herein was instantiated as part of NTCIR-9.Both automatic evaluation and manual evaluation were examined. For automatic evaluation the ground-truth assessments were extracted from direct links already present in the articles and from indirect links identified through triangulation. For manual evaluation assessment was performed by bi-lingual volunteers with a high level of education. Evaluation with these assessments was performed on two kinds of links, file-to-file (“see also”) links and anchor-to-file (“in-text”) links.A substantial number of topically relevant links not already in Wikipedia were identified in submitted runs. This suggests that automatic assessment may be an inadequate method of measuring the performance of CLLD systems and that manual assessment may be necessary.The top four CLLD approaches submitted to NTCIR-9 CrossLink were discussed. They differ in methods of identifying target documents, of disambiguating text, and of ranking prospective links. Evaluation showed that those algorithms were more effective at finding links already in Wikipedia than previously unseen links, and no single algorithm was best at both. Some algorithms produced a disproportionally large number of unique relevant links suggesting that those groups focused on diversification in their result sets.The additional anchors and links identified in the runs submitted to the NTCIR-9 CrossLink task may be useful additions to Wikipedia. However Wikipedia does not currently support multiple targets per anchor and so changes to the code-base would be necessary before addition of the links. If that were to be done then in future work it would be prudent to assess the quality of the links in situ before mass change. The topical relevance of the new links has been determined by the manual assessors. The similarity to already present links has been determined through automatic assessment. But the usefulness of the links remains unknown – that is, we don’t know whether or not a user would click on the links and whether they would find the target documents beneficial to their work task. We have, throughout, outlined many areas for further work, and we also leave for further work the analysis of user behaviour and log files.Wikipedia does not appear to store a list of preferred languages for each user. Doing so would make it possible to automatically filter a set of cross-language links to the most appropriate set for the user. Indeed user-specific link sets were seen in early hypermedia systems where a domain expert might want to see a different link set (e.g. from Wikipedia to PubMed) to a novice (e.g. from Wikipedia to a dictionary). We leave for further work an investigation into user-specific links in Wikipedia and form Wikipedia to sources external to Wikipedia.One of our initial motivations was that of expanding the Wikipedia’s coverage in languages that were underrepresented in topical coverage. Linking from English to Chinese, Japanese, and Korean was appropriate in the context of NTCIR-9 CrossLink, but involves linking from an overrepresented language to others. Consequently at NTCIR-10 CrossLink-2 we are currently studying linking from Chinese, Japanese and Korean to English. Together CrossLink and CrossLink-2 provides a real opportunity to enhance Wikipedia cross language linking and we look forward to reporting on that work in the future.