@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development and validation of a Disaster Management Metamodel (DMM)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Disaster management knowledge is dispersed and requires a centralised and better access.We present metamodelling a way of unifying DM knowledge.We develop our DM Metamodel, DMM.We validate theoretically and illustrate how it would apply in representing DM knowledge used in two recent disasters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knowledge sharing,Metamodelling,Disaster management,Model validation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Disaster Management (DM) is a diffused area of knowledge. It has many complex features interconnecting the physical and the social views of the world. Many international and national bodies create knowledge models to allow knowledge sharing and effective DM activities. But these are often narrow in focus and deal with specified disaster types. We analyze thirty such models to uncover that many DM activities are actually common even when the events vary. We then create a unified view of DM in the form of a metamodel. We apply a metamodelling process to ensure that this metamodel is complete and consistent. We validate it and present a representational layer to unify and share knowledge as well as combine and match different DM activities according to different disaster situations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Disaster Management (DM) involves collaborative decision making activities often characterized by a high level of complexity involving different sources of knowledge distributed across time, space and people. In other words, not all situational knowledge is immediately available, not one person will be positioned to makeall decisions, and not all knowledge is coming from the same place (recall the false Tsunami alert due to data not being available immediately, andocean level checked at various points, and various people on various coasts analyzing incoming data). In this paper, we advocate the use of a middle knowledge layer to enable DM practitioners to discern disaster dependent and disaster-independent features in the challenges that they face. We introduce this middle layer of knowledge in the form of a disaster-independent metamodel to unify knowledge from different disaster experiences.Our generic DM Metamodel (DMM) that we present in this paper will help resolve the complexity of access to DM knowledge through dividing all identified common concepts which exist in many DM models into four different views (Mitigation, Preparedness, Response and Recovery-phase class of concepts) to clearly group concepts according to DM phases. This paper aims to use the generic representational layer (a metamodel) to give a unified view of common concepts and actions that apply in various disasters. This research was initiated in Othman and Beydoun (2010a, 2010b, 2010c), where we illustrated examples of the commonality of concepts across four different disaster areas (an Evacuation Procedure, a Mitigation Analysis, a Rescue Procedure and a Recovery Procedure of bushfire disaster). The DMM developed will provide a set of generic concepts useful to a DM modelling language, while not necessarily providing all required details demanded by every single specific disaster on hand. Some details are hidden behind the general concept we use and we leave them to each individual user to extend it based on specific disaster problem they need to handle.Metamodelling has been promoted by the efforts of the Object Management Group (OMG) (OMG, 2003). We use it in our work to unify existing attempts to represent DM knowledge in a reusable form and to give a unified point of access. We illustrate our unification approach by presenting the result and validation of the metamodel which generalizes most of the concepts used in existing DM practices as described in existing models. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we provide some background and related works to this research. Section 3 provides the actual development process of our Disaster Management Metamodel (DMM) based on a metamodelling approach. Section 4 presents a DMM, the resultant metamodel. Section 5 validates the DMM using three validation techniques: Comparison against other models, Frequency-based Selection and Tracing in real world disasters. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper with a discussion of possible future work related to this research.Various kinds of modelling languages have been created for different disciplines including systems engineering (Weilkiens, 2008), software engineering (OMG, 2001) and business process modeling (Beate & Birgit, 2006). These languages are typically used to specify systems so that stakeholders can better understand them. This paper aims at developing a modelling language to describe the domain of DM and draws on research from metamodelling (Nordstrom, Sztipanovits, Karsai, & Ledeczi, 1999; Tran, Low, & Beydoun, 2006) to develop a process to create such a language. A metamodelling process generally aims to create a collection of classes to describe domain concepts to represent domain entities, actions or states (Sowa, 1984). This collection of concept is the metamodel. The language which we seek is underpinned by the metamodel that has a capability to generalize the domain through collecting all domain concepts and partitioning the domain problems into sub-domain-problems. A harder task in the development of a domain description is how the end user will build his/her own model with the concepts and notation from a domain language (Beydoun, Gonzalez-Perez, Henderson-Sellers, et al., 2006). In software engineering, a metamodel aims to create interoperable, reusable, portable software activities and components. A metamodel also contains the specification of modeling environment for certain domain, and defines the syntax and the semantics of the domain. It can be viewed from three different perspectives: (i) as a set of building blocks and rules used to build new models, (ii) as a model of a domain of interest and (iii) as an instance of another model. In our context, a metamodel is a fundamental building block that makes statements about the possible structure of DM models (Stahl, Voelter, & Czarnecki, 2005).Various metamodelling frameworks have been defined by many information systems researchers (e.g. Berre, 1992; Henderson-Sellers & Bulthuis, 1996; Karagiannis & Kuhn, 2002; OMG, 2002; Rossi & Brinkkemper, 1996; Rossi, Ramesh, Lyytinen, & Tolvanen, 2004; Venable, 1993; Wintraecken, 1993). In this paper, we follow a metamodelling framework based on the Meta Object Facility (MOF) (Karagiannis & Kuhn, 2002; OMG, 2002) offered by Object Management Group (OMG) (See Fig. 1). Our DM Metamodel (DMM) will be a set of constructs of the DM Language and their relationships corresponding with the Metamodel layer of MOF. Through the use of DMM, it will be easier to manage multiple requirement perspectives as advocated in Nissen, Jeusfeld, Jarke, Zemanek, and Huber (1996), Sadraei, Aurum, Beydoun, and Paech (2007). DMM will specify the relationships between DM models and indirectly define possible relationships between the various perspectives described by the models. In earlier work (Othman & Beydoun, 2010a, 2010b, 2010c), we adapted an iterative metamodelling process to the domain of DM. This paper will further develop this process to ensure that it becomes domain independent. In other words, the resultant process will not require in-depth knowledge of DM to enable producing the metamodel. We will apply it to generate a complete and a comprehensive DM Metamodel, which will be the final product of an iterative process. Its evolution will be interleaved with the validation process of the metamodel. Any amendments resulting from the validation process (e.g. concept amendement/deletion/addition) will immediately feed into the iterative process. In Othman and Beydoun (2010a, 2010b, 2010c), we identified a number of techniques which use external sources to validate the concepts in the metamodel (e.g. other existing models or disaster descriptions). Specifically, we illustrated the ‘Comparison against other models’ (Jin, Chen, & Simpson, 2001; Sargent, 2005) using one external source to validate a part of the preliminary version of the metamodel. For the purpose of the validation in this paper, we refine 20 DM models in details using our metamodel and applying multiple validation techniques.The quality of the metamodel is measured based on how it can fulfill the purpose of its development (Beydoun, Lopez-Lorca, Sanchez, & Martinez-Bejar, 2011; Garcia, 2007): addressing the needs of domain practitioners, increasing the transparency to the knowledge encoded within the domain applications and how amenable to be validated by experts in the domain area. Our end users (domain practitioners) include emergency managers, DM coordinators or safety managers for various public and private organizations seeking to create a DM model to manage anticipated disasters. Disaster Management (DM) includes all aspects of planning and responding to all phases of a disaster, including mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery activities (W3C Incubator Group, 2008). United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Risk (UNISDR, 2009) defines four phases of disasters: (1) Mitigation: The lessening or limitation of the adverse impacts of hazards and related disasters. (2) Preparedness: The knowledge and capacities developed by governments, professional response and recovery organizations, communities and individuals to effectively anticipate, respond to and recover from the impacts of likely, imminent or current hazard events or conditions. (3) Response: The provisions of emergency services and public assistance during or immediately after a disaster in order to save lives, reduces health impacts, ensure public safety and meet the basic subsistence needs of the people affected. (4) Recovery: The restoration, and improvement where appropriate of facilities, livelihoods and living conditions of disaster-affected communities including efforts to reduce disaster risk factors.This paper targets at reducing interoperability challenges and facilitating knowledge sharing similar to Pascot, Bouslama, and Mellouli (2011) but in DM. It is common wisdom that no two disasters are exactly the same, and that every disaster requires its own management process. However, the way disasters impact human lives and business processes are similar and responses are often transferrable between disasters. For example, evacuation of personnel is a DM action that is applicable in many disaster situations (Othman & Beydoun, 2010c). We use a variety of models which have been developed by many domain experts on the subject of DM studies (see Appendix A). Existing DM models which exist nowadays can be categorized as requirements models because of abstract representations of an existing or a desired model in the real world (e.g.: warning system (Sun, Iannella, & Robinson, 2006), planning, response (Sanjay & McLean, 2003), decision making (Asghar, Alahakoon, & Churilov, 2008), technology tools (Uno & Kashiyama, 2008), evacuation (Uno & Kashiyama, 2008) and disaster risk reduction (World Health Organization (WHO), 2009)). The meaning and definition of specific concept terminologies and their relationships may differ from one observer to another (Gharehdaghli, 2003). Domain concepts can have multiple descriptions. Some concepts are observed to represent similar DM activities which are expressed differently. For example, in a Circular Model for Disaster (Kelly, 1998), the terminology ‘Emergency Response’ is being used to represent the response and rescuing activities of victims. The same activity however is represented by using ‘Emergency State’ in the Ibrahim-Razi Model (Shaluf, 2008). A specific domain modelling language expressed as a metamodel offer an alternative and better approach resolving this kind of problem. Our approach unifies the various terminologies used. The DM Metamodel (DMM) developed in this paper describes all the DM model concepts and the way they are arranged, related and constrained. It also provides a flexible structure to facilitate storage and retrieval of DM knowledge.To construct our DMM, a set of common and frequently used DM concepts is first determined. Our identified DM concepts and their definitions are rooted in the existing DM literature. A study of the DM domain is first performed by investigating a large collection of existing DM models (85 in total). This gives us a broad knowledge of the DM activities and operations. Relationships amongst these concepts are then identified. The metamodel creation process is iterative with continuous refinement of new concepts. To create the DMM, we use an 8 step Metamodelling Creation Process adapted from Beydoun, Low, Henderson-Sellers, et al. (2009) and Othman and Beydoun (2010c):Step 0: Models collection and preliminary domain study: This prepares the knowledge source, namely, collecting relevant models from the public domain.Step 1: Identifying sets of model. We use the overall coverage of DM models to select 37 DM models to initiate the metamodelling process and to prepare two validation sets (as shown in Table 1). We also ensured that all highly cited models are included (as per Google Scholar at the time of submission of the paper).Step 2: Extraction of general concepts in models identified in Step 1. Extracted concepts are disaster type independent (see Table 2). Disaster-specific concepts are omitted in this step (e.g.: earthquake magnitude, tsunami warnings, fire danger index, Haiti earthquake victims or bushfire evacuation).Step 3: Short-listing of candidate definitions. Widespread occurrence of any particular DM definition is taken into account leading to adopting a set of general concept grounded in commonly agreed meaning in the DM community. A greater weight is given to sources with clearer definitions (as opposed to those considered implicit definitions that can be subject to interpretation).Step 4: Reconciliation of definitions. In choosing the common concept definition to be used, consistency with earlier choices is maintained. Further, if there is inconsistency between two or more sources (especially because DM involved various kinds of disasters), we choose the concept which has more coherent usage with the rest of the chosen concepts.Step 5: Designation of concepts into 4 sets: Mitigation, Preparedness, Response and Recovery. This is a common DM abstraction corresponding to DM phases and is common to most of the models we considered. Output of this step is shown in Table 3.Step 6: Identification of relationships within and across Mitigation, Preparedness, Response and Recovery diagram and relationships interfacing the categories. Output of this step is the initial version of our DMM (Figs. 2–5).Step 7: Validating the metamodel. Step 7 will be detailed in Section 4. The rest of this section will detail each of the steps 1 to 6.This step includes collecting the knowledge sources to be used. We undertake a meta study on how to distinguish between them. This also enhances our domain awareness as recommended in Kelly and Pohjonen (2009) as an initial step for any metamodelling process. In total we collected 85 DM models from a variety of sources: journals, conference papers, government, non-government and disaster agencies organization reports, online disaster-related websites, books, etc. Collecting these models was done in two stages. In the first stage, we focused on discovering categories of DM models and ascertained that there are sufficient DM models in the literature for metamodelling to be a feasible path. We first used the following academic collections of journals: Scopus, Web of Science and Google Scholar. For this purpose, we used the search keyword ‘disaster management model’. This effort led to the discovery of 30 DM models (out of the 85). With this number, we became more confident that the literature on DM modeling is sufficiently mature to apply a metamodelling process. We continued our searching using Google pursuing DM models from government reports, DM-related websites and online databases. This led to discovering another 20 models. We categorized these 55 models according to following seven different perspectives: (i) phase-based (e.g.: mitigation, response), (ii) organization-based (e.g.: Red Cross, FEMA), (iii) user/role-based (e.g. Emergency Manager, Monitoring User, Fire department), (iv) disaster-based (e.g.: Bushfire, Air Crash, Tsunami, Earthquake), (v) technology-based (e.g.: Satellite for monitoring, fire extinguisher), (vi) activity-based (e.g.: Damage assessment, evacuation), and (vii) decision-based (e.g.: disaster declaration method, deliverable of humanitarian aid).In the second stage, we aimed to ensure that every perspective is sufficiently covered. We used the same knowledge sources (Scopus, Web of Science, Google Scholar and Google). However, this time, the keywords that we used were based on the seven perspectives above. For examples, to find DM models for the user/role-based models, we used the keyword ‘firefighter+disaster management model’. The models available covering the seven perspectives turned out to be numerous. For our metamodelling goal, we chose further 30 new models to cover all seven perspectives. These models were selected based on their clarity and how well documented they were. Priority was also given to higher cited models.From the 85 DM models collected in Step 0, three sets of models are filtered through for the metamodelling-based synthesis of DMM: Set I is used to initiate the metamodelling process and this includes 17 models that cover all phases of DM. Another two sets, Set V1 and V2, are used to undertake two validations of the DMM (Step 7 in the process). The sets are formed according to how broadly they cover the four phases of DM. Some models cover all four phases, some cover 2 to 3 phases, others focus on only one phase. Some models focus on a specific DM perspective and do not pay too much attention to the boundaries of the DM phases rather than (e.g.: evacuation operation (operation-based)). If a model does not cover any DM phase or perspective, we exclude it from any further investigation. The models included in each set are shown in Table 1.For Set I, we require wide coverage across the concepts and as our aim is to create a DMM that can be widely applicable. Using the coverage measure alone, we quickly get an indication of how widely applicable the sourced model is. The model is said to have a high coverage value if the model can cover the whole phases of DM (general model). Whereas, a model has less coverage value if the model only describes a specific DM phase such as mitigation (specific model). As supported by Kelly et al. in their discussion regarding the practices for a development of domain-specific modeling, “Finding the proper generic-specific balance is a key-success factor in domain-specific modelling development…” (Kelly & Pohjonen, 2009, pp. 25). For example, a ‘Manitoba Health Disaster Management Model (Manitoba Health Disaster Management, 2002) could cover most of the whole DM aspect in the model, whereas a ‘Place-based Model for Understanding Community Resilience’ (Cutter et al., 2008) covers a small portion of the DM domain. In the selection of models for Set I, we ensured that selected models can cover all phases in DM (Mitigation, Preparedness, Response and Recovery). The initial metamodel development requires the combination of all generic concepts existing in the domain. The combination of concepts that comes from all DM phases will provide generic concepts for our DMM.For validating our DMM, two validation sets are needed as our two validation processes have different objectives. The objective of the first validation is to identify any missing concepts in the initial metamodel and ensure the broad coverage of the metamodel. No existing model, as earlier discussed, provides a complete coverage. However, collectively in Set V1, the 10 models together ensure that all DM phases are adequately represented in this validation. The objective of our second validation is to evaluate the importance of individual concepts included in the DMM. If a concept is rarely used, we want to delete it or replace it with a more general concept. To enable such evaluation, we ensure that the models of V2 have wider coverage to provide overlaps and to enable a frequency count of the individual DMM concepts.Similar to Beydoun, Low, Henderson-Sellers, et al. (2009), Beydoun (2009) and Beydoun, Low, Mouraditis, and Henderson-Sellers (2009), we manually extracted concepts from each model in Set I (containing 17 models in total). This is a laborious process where every model in Set I is used to identify potentially concepts that are required in our DM generic metamodel. The outcome of this process is shown in Table 2. We illustrate this process in the rest of this section with examples.The first model we process is Benaben’s (Benaben, Hanachi, Lauras, Couget, & Chapurlat, 2008) expressed using Ontology Web Language (OWL) focusing on crisis management. This metamodel elaborates a common and sharable reference model built to characterize crisis situations in three interrelated views namely System, Treatment System and Crisis Description. Benaben’s model characterizes crises and collaborative processes that deal with them, aiming to integrate partners through information system interoperability. 20 concepts are derived from Benaben’s model: Flow, Task Of Actor, Actor On Site, Responders, Returned and Resettled Evacuees, Resource, Crisis, Danger, Trigger, Effect, Risk, Gravity Factor, Complexity Factor, Infrastructure, Natural Site, People, Service of Actor, Good, Risk Analysis and Event.The second processed model is Kruchten’s (Kruchten, Monu, & Sotoodeh, 2008) which conceptualizes disasters as encompassing multiple stakeholder domains depicted in four main views: Disaster Visualization, Physical View, Communication and Coordination Simulator, and Disaster Scenario. It aims to create a common language to communicate, analyze and simulate interdependencies about disaster scenario without having to disclose all critical and confidential data between the parties involved. Six concepts are derived from Kruchten’s model: Disaster Event, Residential Cell, Agent, Infrastructure, Resource and Rescue Team. The third processed model is Asghar’s (Asghar, Alahakoon, & Churilov, 2006) focusing on the arrangement of disaster activities in a logical sequence. It is built by linking DM actions with appropriate hazard and risk assessment activities. It also incorporates environmental conditions, making it possible to analyse and separate the environmental issues from a disaster. From this model 24 further concepts are identified: Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, Recovery, Early Warning, Coordination, Resource Management, Hazard Assessment, Damage Assessment, Training, Education, Risk Analysis, Communication, Evacuation, Reconstruction, Restoration, Evacuation, Structural Mitigation, Non-Structural Mitigation, Exercise, Environmental Affects, Exposure, Strategic Planning and Debris Removal are derived.The collection of concepts derived from Set I is refined and revised during this step. This step yields a total of 240 common concepts from 17 models identified to be reconciled. For every concept we short list several definitions to use towards deriving a common definition. When two or more concepts share the same definition or even two or more concepts share the same concept name, a process to harmonize and fit the definition in the metamodel is required. For example in Kructhen’s model, we short list only five from the concepts originally chosen (Table 2). We omit the concept ‘Residential Cell’ as it is too specific to one kind of disasters. As another example, from Emergency Management Australia (EMA) (EMA, 2004b), we short list only the following concepts and definitions:–Evacuation concept which is defined as ‘The planned relocation of persons from dangerous or potentially dangerous areas to safer areas and eventual return’.Event as ‘An incident or situation, which occurs in a particular place during a particular interval of time’.Emergency Plan as ‘A documented scheme of assigned responsibilities, actions and procedures, required in the event of an emergency’.Aid as ‘Free material or financial assistance or other support given to an organization, community or country.Damage Assessment as ‘A report on the extent of damage caused by an event’.This step requires specifying a list of candidate definitions of all short-listed concepts (the definitions will be reconciled in Step 4). e.g.: a ‘Disaster Event’ is defined as ‘An event which its characteristics will instantaneously or over time change the wellness of cells or the state of infrastructure elements’; a ‘Resource’ is defined as ‘Something that contributes significantly to wellness’, an Infrastructure’ as ‘The thing that produces and transports a given resource to the cells’.Differences between definitions are reconciled in this step. In choosing or synthesizing the common concept definition to be used, definitions shortlisted in Step 3 are considered. The definitions are developed by various people with varying backgrounds and perspectives. If there is a contradictory use of concept definition between two or more sources, then a process to harmonize and fit the definition in the metamodel is required. Some models omit explicitly defining some of their concepts. In such cases, they do not provide any input to the reconciliation process. As an example, the concept of People is defined differently in three models: Benaben (Benaben et al., 2008) defines it as ‘All the group of persons which can be threatened by the crisis situation’. Kructhen (Kruchten et al., 2008) defines it as ‘Cell that contains people’. EMA (EMA, 2004b) denotes this by “Victim” as “A person directly affected by a disaster”. EMA’s is too specific to one of the phases (response), Kruchen’s is too specific to their model, therefore we choose Benaben’s as the basis of our generalized definition within our DMM. As a result, the People concept in our metamodel is defined as “Collections of human in local communities who are threatened by disaster”.Reconciled concepts are designated into one of the DM phases: Mitigation, Preparedness, Response or Recovery (UNISDR, 2009). Mitigation is a phase in which DM seeks to eliminate or reduce the impact of disasters themselves and/or to reduce the susceptibility and increase the resilience of the community subject to the impact of those hazards. Preparedness is the phase to establish arrangements and plans. It provides education and information to prepare the community to deal effectively with disasters as they may eventuate. Response phase will activate preparedness arrangements and plans to put in place effective measures to deal with emergencies and disasters if and when they do occur and lastly Recovery will assist a community affected by an emergency or disaster in reconstruction of the physical infrastructure and restoration of emotional, social, economic and physical well-being (EMA, 2004a). Designation into the phases is shown in Table 3.We now determine the relations between our DMM concepts. As shown in Figs. 2–5, we use the (—), () and () symbols to denote Association, Specialization and Aggregation relationships respectively. As an association example, ‘AffectWellness’ between Disaster and Exposure concepts indicate that a disaster could affect all elements which are at risk by a disaster. As specialization relationships, Lifeline, Property, NaturalSite and People specialize the Exposure concept. As an aggregation example, EmergencyManagementTeam and ResponseOrganization are related by the relation ‘a grouping of’’ during the response phase. In almost all DM models observed, we found the existence of emergency management team during response phase of DM. More examples of binary relationships are shown in Table 4. For each pair of related concepts, semantics of the relationships are identified and depicted with a specific symbol.DM is a continuous process with activities linking phases at different points. Correspondingly, in our DMM, relationships between concepts are identified not only between concepts within the same phase, but also between concepts from different phases. Concepts from classes in different phases can be linked and the continuous process in DM can be formed. For example, LongTermPlanning (in Recovery phase) is a concept designating an activity to formulate a plan to meet future DM needs, based on extrapolations from the present needs. Planning begins with the current status and charts out a path to a projected status, including short-term plans for achieving interim goals. Linkages across phases are established either through relationships between concepts from different phases or through common concepts between phases. Table 4 shows examples of relationships that link concepts from different phases. For example, an association relationship can link the concept of StrategicPlanningCommittee (from the Recovery phase) to the concept describing an ongoing plan MitigationPlan (from the Mitigation phase). Another example of a relationship that ties two concepts across two phases is the InitiateDeliverableOf relationship (also shown in Table 4). This can be used to create a link between the concept MutualAidAgreement in the Preparedness-phase class and the ‘Aid’ concept in the Response-phase class.Linkages across phases are also established through common concepts between phases. The use of the concept EmergencyManagementTeam shows that the activation of emergency management service should start from the preparedness stage in any disaster management process. Whereas the use of the concept Resource is to show that the three phases require overlapping sets of resources for their phase activities. These resources will support the DM_plan concept in each phase. The plan for each phase is emphasized as a specific concept in each: for the Mitigation-phase class we have the MitigationPlan, in Preparedness-phase class – the PreparednessActionPlan, in Response-phase class – the EmergencyPlan and in the Recovery-phase class – the RecoveryPlan.DMM clearly presents classes of concepts in the four DM phases: Mitigation-phase (Fig. 2), Preparedness-phase (Fig. 3), Response-phase (Fig. 4) and Recovery-phase (Fig. 5). The metamodel may also be used as a tool to determine the completeness of a given DM solution. To show how the metamodel can be used, the next effort of this research is to create the Metamodel-based Disaster Management Knowledge Repository (DMKR) as a system prototype to demonstrate the usefulness of DMM. This system will utilize DMM as a foundational representation to store varying and existing DM solutions and activities. The development of DMKR will also illustrate the applicability of DMM in modelling real-world DM situation by providing DM practitioners with quick access to relevant knowledge and enable them to develop new and disaster specific processes for their problems. The use of this DMKR will be illustrated in both storing DM knowledge, and later retrieving this knowledge in a context driven manner. The stored DM knowledge will be reused to allow a flexible mixing and matching of different DM actions as disaster contexts change.The resultant metamodel is represented in four different diagrams to clearly group classes into four phases of DM: Mitigation-phase (Fig. 2), Preparedness-phase (Fig. 3), Response-phase (Fig. 4) and Recovery-phase (Fig. 5) class of concepts. Each figure shows classes which refer to the concepts that should exist during a corresponding phase of DM. The resultant metamodel contains the relationships among concepts and represents the semantics of the DM domain. For example, the Response-phase class (Fig. 6) has a central concept, ResponseOrganization. The aggregation symbol () is used to describe relationships between ResponseOrganization concepts and other concepts including Resource, EmergencyManagementTeam, EmergencyOperationCentre, EmergencyPlan, Aid and Rescue. Another example of relationship between concepts is the association (denoted by the symbol ()). This describes relations between EmergencyManagementTeam and ResponderTask concepts. It indicates that the task of response actor (person) is defined by the emergency management team. Another example, a Resource concept ‘requires’ Deployment concept, indicating that during any response phase, emergency resources such as rescue equipment, police transportation, fire equipment or medicine have to be deployed to help the disaster victims.We validate our DMM for generality, expressiveness and completeness. This determines that the theories and assumptions underlying the concepts in the metamodel are correct; the representation of metamodel of the problem entity; the structure of the metamodel, and that the logic and causal relationships are suitable for the intended purpose of the metamodel (Sargent, 2005). We apply the following three commonly used validation techniques:(i)Comparison against other models – Derived concepts of the developed metamodel are validated and compared to concepts from other (valid) existing similar domain models or metamodels (Sargent, 2005). For this we use a set of 10 DM models in Set V1 (as listed in Table 3 and Appendix A (Table A1)). We thoroughly ensured that each concept in each of the models can be appropriately derived from a concept within DMM. Where required, we modified the DMM to ensure that it can represent all models in the validation sets. This is described in Section 4.1 where we also list the changes we made to first version of DMM yielding DMM 1.1.Frequency-based selection – The importance of the individual concepts included in DMM is evaluated as advocated in Manning, Raghavan, and Schütze (2008) and Kok, 2010. The second set of 10 models in Set V2 is used (see Table 3 and Appendix A (Table A1)). This validation is described in Section 4.2 where we also list the changes we make to DMM1.1 yielding DMM 1.2.Tracing – The behavior of different types of specific entities in the model is traced (followed) through the model to determine if the logic of the model is correct and if the necessary accuracy is obtained (Sargent, 2005). This tracing validation will determine that an agreement has been achieved between the concepts in the metamodel and real DM scenarios (e.g.: bushfires). It is shown in Section 4.3.The first validation ensures that DMM can represent each of the models in Set VI (shown in Appendix A). Where applicable, DMM was modified to ensure that every model can be represented. DMM was revised by adding 11 new concepts (listed in Table 5). Not all phases were changed to the same extent e.g.: the Mitigation-phase of DMM only gained the Insurance concept as shown in Fig. 6). The validation also confirmed the use of all relationships between all concepts (also shown in Table 6). None of the existing relationships were deleted.In this second validation, we perform a Frequency-Based Selection (FBS) technique using 10 models (Set V2 in Table 1). This is a Feature Selection technique that evaluates the importance of individual concepts in the model developed in Kok (2010). It is based on the premise that the best model is formed using the most common features (Zhang & Ye, 2011) and it is commonly used e.g. in data mining (Saleh & Masseglia, 2011), software analysis (Manning et al., 2008), and medical retrieval systems (Jalali & Matash Borujerdi, 2011). By performing FBS, we remove features (concepts) that do not have correlations (or a need) to the classification from DMM.We first collate concepts from the models in the validation Set V2 and in doing so we also ensure that they can all be refined using DMM 1.1 (see Appendix B). As expected, most concepts, in eight of the ten models, were easily derived and only three concepts were added to DMM (see Fig. 7). The second task in our FBS validation is to score each concept according to its frequency. Concepts that have a low score are revisited and are liable for deletion. The frequency results obtained for all DMM concepts are shown in Table 7(Mitigation and Preparedness concepts) and Table 8(Response and Recovery concepts).Using the concept frequency, we estimate an importance value for each concept in DMM, ‘Degree of Confidence (DoC)’. This value designates the expected probability that a DMM concept is used in a randomly chosen disaster model. It is defined as follows:Degree of Confidence=Frequency of ConceptTotal of Set V2Models×100%Table 9shows the result of this calculation for every DMM concept. We define five categories of concepts based on their DOC value:(i)Very Strong (DoC result: 100–70%).Strong (69–50%).Moderate (49–30%).Mild (29–11%).Very Mild (10–0%).Very Strong refers to the concept that many times appears in Set V2 models, whereas Very Mild is the other end of the scale. For example, the DMM concept, MitigationPlan, has a strong concept DOC value of 90%:DoC(MitigationPlan)=910×100%=90%Aiming for absolute theoretical completeness is cited as a common bad practice in metamodel development (Kelly & Pohjonen, 2009). As discussed in Kelly and Pohjonen (2009, pp. 23), similar to the development of domain-specific modelling, metamodel development is not about achieving perfection. We concur with these views and if a DMM concept has a ‘zero’ DoC score, it gets deleted only after due consideration. Concepts with zero values are instead revisited and liable for deletion. DOC classification for all DMM concepts is shown in Table 9: 19 concepts in DMM 1.1 are categorized as ‘Very Strong’, 23 are “Strong’, 25 are ‘Moderate’, 13 are ‘Mild’ and 4 concepts are ‘Very Mild’ (Table 9).The four very mild concepts are Property, NaturalSite, BuildingCodes and Land-UsePlanning. We reassess including them in DMM. We delete BuildingCodes and Land-UsePlanning, as they are deemed as too specific to one kind of disasters (Bushfires). Revisiting DMM, we also found that the StructuralMitigation is in fact more generic to represent the BuildingCodes and LandUsePlanning. As for the other two (Property and NaturalSite), we opt to keep them as they are common across varying disasters.As a result of FBS, classes for the Mitigation-phase and Response phases are changed. The classes for Preparedness and Recovery phases remain unchanged. Figs. 7 and 9show the new validated version of Response concepts and Mitigation concepts, respectively.As a result of ensuring that DMM represents each of the models in V2, we also added three concepts to the Response-phase class (encircled in Fig. 7):–HumanitarianAid – A material or logistical assistance provided for humanitarian purposes, typically in response to an event or series of events which represents a critical threat to the health, safety, security or wellbeing of a community or other large group of people, usually over a wide area.DevelopmentAid – An aid given by governments and other agencies to support the economic, environmental, social and political development of developing countries.BilateralAid – An aid or funds that are given to one country from another.As a result of the refinements described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, the DMM classes of concepts are shown in Figs. 6–9. Figs. 7 and 9 are annotated to clarify the impact of the FSB validation.The next validation will confirm the representational adequacy of DMM, in a DM common scenario, namely, bushfires. Furthermore, it will highlight how this representation can be used in a specific instance of bushfires, the devastating bushfires in Australia in 2008.In this last validation, we use DMM to instantiate a specific disaster. This will ensure that the concepts are indeed usable by DM practitioners. We seek to instantiate from our DMM the preparedness against bushfires, by Australian state government schools. Fig. 10illustrates the abstraction layers involved in this validation. DMM artifact descriptions show a situation of how one possible instantiation of model can be made from DMM at M2 level, to another model in level M1. This is followed by the instantiation to user or real world model at level M0.In the aftermath of the devastating bushfires of 2008,1In 2008, devastating bushfire hit the state of Victoria in Australia and led to a catastrophic loss of life, nearly 200.1the Department of Education and Early Childhood Development (DEECD) in Victoria (Australia) mandated that every school review its emergency management plan and address any priority maintenance works (Department of Education, 2010) according to newly formed guidelines. Our metamodel is at M2 Level, the model (guidelines) developed by the government is at M1 (Fig. 11) and the actual DM application for bushfire is at M0 (Fig. 12).Fig. 11 depicts the guidelines described in the Emergency Response Coordination model (at M1 level) to coordinate response activities during DM. This represents a particular DM response-phase model clearly derivable from DMM (at M2 level). This particular M1 model is later usable by a DM user (the followers of the Victoria Bushfire Coordination Workflow). A state bushfire engineer can map their own bushfire organization problem by adopting class model as produced in Fig. 11. For example, as shown in Fig. 12, a Rescue class can be used as Marysville Bushfire Rescue to represent the instance of Rescue concept. In order to create a new model element, we use stereotype (<<Rescue>>), a special notation for expressing the extensibility mechanism in UML. Similarly, EmergencyManagementTeam class could be used as Victoria Fire & Emergency Unit in Victoria bushfire case model, M0. As can be seen, the concepts directly derived from DMM (shown in Fig. 11) adequately generate all concepts required in this instance of Bushfire Management identified without any need for further amendments.Our Disaster Management Metamodel (DMM) has been developed based on a careful analysis of the existing literature and domain specific disaster models. It has been validated through a couple of iterations and applied to a specific case. While the DMM is generic and domain-independent and can be instantiated for specific DM scenarios, it has some drawbacks that need to be addressed as the DMM is evolved.The following are some of the limitations which will be taken into account in the next iteration of the DMM refinement.•In developing our DMM, we have considered only the models presented in English which could lead to a cultural bias. In the next stage of our model refinement, we will consider a more diverse set of models from different geographic regions, which will improve the completeness and applicability of the model.While we sought input from practitioners and experts during the DMM development, validated the model against two sets of models from the literature and applied it to a specific DM case, there was no formal evaluation of the model done by the experts in disaster management. As part of future work, the DMM and the results will be validated by a group of DM experts.In the second part of the DMM validation process (Section 4.2), we used frequency-based-selection. In this process, we were interested in knowing whether a particular concept appeared in a model or not and did not focus on how many times it appeared. In information retrieval, this frequency is used to indicate the importance of a concept. In the next iteration of the DMM development, we will consider this fact and refine the model accordingly.In developing the DMM, our goal was to create a model that is general and complete. Hence, we tried to include all the concepts that occurred in all or most of the models. While, this resulted in a broad model that represents common practice, it might not be the “best practice” model. Our DMM might be construed as a model that is useful for training novices but may not be useful in helping organizations develop a state-of-the-art or best practice model. While specialized (best practice) models can be instantiated from the general DMM, in our future work, we will take a synthesis approach and incorporate most important concepts from the various models in order to produce a class of best practice models.So far, we did not investigate how the retrieval process for a DM repository (developed using DMM) can be enacted. We still need to further investigate how a DM practitioner can articulate his/her queries using constructs that can be mapped to our metamodel. This will require the creation of a repository using the metamodel and engaging actual DM practitioners. We are currently in a dialog with the New South Wales State Emergence Services (NSW SES) towards this.As, the DMM is designed to support DMM knowledge reuse, the ultimate test of DMM would be in the deployment of a knowledge repository developed using DMM. In other words, using DMM-based repository to support DM business processes. This will first test the expressivity of DMM through interactions with domain experts from different disasters and the reusability of the stored knowledge. For instance, in this work, we assume that DM knowledge is symbolic (similar to other existing models). Whether this assumption will hinder the applicability of the approach and to what extent, can only be assessed empirically once a knowledge repository is deployed using the metamodel.The DMM could evolve over time. Currently, we have not incorporated specific mechanisms for evolving the DMM in a consistent manner. While some human intervention would be necessary, automating or partially automating this process would be beneficial. This would make the DMM stay current and be useful in managing DM activities. Our future work will include developing feedback mechanisms that will facilitate the evolution of our DMM.This paper has discussed the development and validation of the Disaster Management Metamodel (DMM). The metamodel presented is intended to become an effective platform for sharing and integrating DM knowledge from varying sources. Existing disaster models are not based on any metamodels or standards but rather constitute proprietary solutions mainly focused on frameworks and other model aspects. This is the first work that develops a DM Metamodel across the four established phases of disaster management. Our DMM can unify these works as a navigation metamodel. More importantly, the DMM is the first step to allow interoperability of DM solutions and effective transfer of knowledge across international boundaries. It may also be used as a tool to determine the completeness of any DM solutions.We presented the metamodel in a familiar format, UML, to increase its ease of use and broaden its appeal. In synthesizing our metamodel, we used 17 models (Set I) for the initial development of DMM. In the second iteration, 10 models (Set V1) were used to validate (using comparison against other models technique) and refine the DMM. As a result, 11 new concepts were identified. In the third iteration, we used another 10 models (Set V2) for a second validation (using frequency-based selection) of DMM which resulted in minor change to DMM (two concepts were deleted and three new concepts were added). The first two validations improved the expressiveness and the completeness of the concepts in DMM. We applied a third validation (tracing technique) to ensure and illustrate the applicability and utility of our DMM in a real disaster management modeling exercise, namely, the bushfire management in the state of Victoria in Australia.Our metamodelling approach can decrease time and implementation costs of DM systems and allow various DM approaches to be easily shared and communicated. The metamodel can describe various DM activities and desired outcomes and serve as a representational layer of DM expertise. It can facilitate appropriate decision making based on combining and matching different DM activities according to the disaster scenario on hand. A unified DM Metamodel can ensure that the key concepts are easily presented to newcomers of the domain, create better communication amongst practitioners, and research could then focus on improving and/or realizing a unified body of knowledge (OMG, 2003). For instance, the unified DMM can facilitate global communication among different disaster emergency users as the metamodel has generalized all the concepts that must exist in this domain. With guidelines for creating a comprehensive DM model which can cover all the phases of DM (e.g.: Earthquake Emergency Response Model – Response phase and Bushfire Risk Reduction Model – Mitigation phase), users can create new customized DM model based on combining sets of suitable concepts based on their own disaster management requirement. To this end, our future work will aim to create a repository based on the DMM to store DM knowledge and to allow a responsive and flexible DM approach; one that is based on mixing and matching DM actions as disaster management contexts change.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
