@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic suggestion of phrasal-concept queries for literature search

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A phrasal-concept query suggestion method for literature searches is proposed.Key phrasal-concepts are suggested with related concepts.Evaluation was performed using two test collections.User experiments verify preferences to use phrasal-concept queries.Phrasal-concepts can lead significant improvements over state-of-the-art baselines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Query suggestion,Phrasal-concept query,Literature search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Both general and domain-specific search engines have adopted query suggestion techniques to help users formulate effective queries. In the specific domain of literature search (e.g., finding academic papers), the initial queries are usually based on a draft paper or abstract, rather than short lists of keywords. In this paper, we investigate phrasal-concept query suggestions for literature search. These suggestions explicitly specify important phrasal concepts related to an initial detailed query. The merits of phrasal-concept query suggestions for this domain are their readability and retrieval effectiveness: (1) phrasal concepts are natural for academic authors because of their frequent use of terminology and subject-specific phrases and (2) academic papers describe their key ideas via these subject-specific phrases, and thus phrasal concepts can be used effectively to find those papers. We propose a novel phrasal-concept query suggestion technique that generates queries by identifying key phrasal-concepts from pseudo-labeled documents and combines them with related phrases. Our proposed technique is evaluated in terms of both user preference and retrieval effectiveness. We conduct user experiments to verify a preference for our approach, in comparison to baseline query suggestion methods, and demonstrate the effectiveness of the technique with retrieval experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Query suggestion is an effective technique to help users by providing relevant query examples (Baeza-Yates, Hurtado, & Mendoza, 2004; Jones, Rey, Madani, & Greiner, 2006). This technique has been widely adopted for many Information Retrieval (IR) tasks, including domain-specific IR such as patent search and medical information retrieval (Kim, Seo, & Croft, 2011; Luo, Tang, Yang, & Wei, 2008). Literature search (e.g., finding relevant research papers) is one of the most promising domains that can be helped by query suggestion. In this domain, the typical users are scientists, and they need to find existing articles relevant to their current work. Since a scientific study is related to a number of research topics, people typically use many queries for retrieving a comprehensive list of related papers. In this situation, query suggestion can reduce the complexity of the search by providing effective query examples. In addition, sometimes scientists need to find relevant papers outside their specific area of expertise, and example queries can be a good guideline for exploring new areas.Despite the potential effectiveness of query suggestion in literature search, there has not been much research in this area. Instead, prior work has focused on elaborating retrieval models that find related papers based on features derived from a detailed initial query, such as a draft paper (e.g., Bethard & Jurafsky, 2010; Larsen & Ingwersen, 2006; Ritchie, Robertson, & Teufel, 2008; Strohman, Croft, & Jensen, 2007). Although these previous studies have found some important features for retrieval models (e.g., distance in a citation graph (Strohman, Metzler, Turtle, & Croft, 2005) and author citation behavior (Bethard & Jurafsky, 2010)), we believe that query suggestion can assist users in a complementary manner by making it easier to formulate multiple effective queries. Furthermore, we can integrate these queries with state-of-the-art retrieval models, leading to further improvement.To develop effective suggestions for literature search, we need to consider its unique characteristics. In contrast to general web search, domain-specific search tasks (e.g., patent retrieval, medical search, and literature search) will each be carried out in a very specific environment, and a query suggestion method should be designed for the unique characteristics of that environment. In literature search, one unique characteristic is that phrasal concepts and terminology (e.g., “lexicon acquisition using bootstrapping”) are frequently used as keywords in target documents (i.e., research papers). Since scientists use longer technical terms to describe their research ideas, phrasal concepts are frequently observed in academic writing. It follows that queries that emphasize phrasal concepts should be more effective for discriminating relevant documents from non-relevant documents in retrieval. In addition, typical users of literature search may prefer using phrasal-concept queries because phrases and terminology tend to have clear meanings, and users can more easily understand the areas that the suggested queries are targeting. Another typical characteristic of literature search is the lack of query log data. Many query suggestion methods for general web search rely heavily on large query logs (e.g., Baeza-Yates et al., 2004; Jones et al., 2006; Ma, Yang, King, & Lyu, 2008), but these data are not generally available for literature search because of a relatively small amount of search traffic.Given that phrasal concepts are important for literature search and query log data is generally not available, we propose a query suggestion method that can generate phrasal-concept queries by exploiting pseudo-labeled documents. Specifically, we collect candidate (phrasal) concepts from pseudo-relevant documents (i.e., the top k documents retrieved by a baseline query), and identify “key concepts” – effective phrasal-concepts for finding relevant documents – by using the labeling propagation algorithm (Zhu & Ghahramani, 2002), which propagates retrieval effectiveness (labels) of the baseline query to associated candidate concepts. Once key concepts are found, we provide a context by extracting “related concepts” that are statistically associated with a key concept. We then construct phrasal-concept queries by combining key concepts with their related concepts, and suggest a list of phrasal-concept queries in descending order of predicted effectiveness of their key concepts. Note that we use the terms phrasal-concept and concept interchangeably.For evaluation, the ideal situation is that scientists provide their research descriptions as initial queries, and relevant articles are identified by asking the same scientists. However, no such data is available, and there have been alternatives proposed to automatically generate evaluation data from existing citation databases (Ritchie, Teufel, & Robertson, 2006). For example, He, Pei, and Kifer (2010) develop an initial query using the sentences containing citations from a published paper, and regard the citations as the relevant articles. This approach favors a local recommendation because it only considers local contexts of the query paper (i.e., published paper) (He, Nie, Lu, & Zhao, 2012). On the other hand, the settings used in (Bethard & Jurafsky, 2010; Strohman et al., 2007) assume that the abstract and title of the query paper are a research summary written by the user, and the list of references cited in the paper is the set of relevant documents. This method uses the global context of the query paper for retrieval. In this paper, we adopt this approach for the retrieval experiments.We evaluate our phrasal-concept query suggestion method based on user preference as well as retrieval effectiveness. We conduct user experiments to verify that users prefer the queries suggested by our technique, compared to other effective query suggestion and query expansion methods. To assess the retrieval effectiveness of our method, we compare the retrieval performance to other query expansion methods in simulated literature search environments.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we outline previous work in query suggestion, query expansion, and literature search. Section 3 defines a phrasal-concept query suggestion task for literature searches, and Section 4 describes our proposed techniques. In Section 5, we provide experimental results and discussions. We summarize our contributions and future work in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
