@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A semantics and image retrieval system for hierarchical image databases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposes automatic semantics and image retrieval system for hierarchical databases.System uses < 1/3 search space to retrieve semantics, and finally similar images.≈ 77% semantic retrieval accuracy on ImageNet. Uses ≈ 4% space to retrieve images.System reports precision of 0.78 @ 20 and 0.67 @ 100 images on categorized WANG.The study explores adequacy of visual signatures set used to represent a semantic.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Content based image retrieval,Semantic assignment,Clustering,Visual search space,Indexing of visual features,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work presents a content based semantics and image retrieval system for semantically categorized hierarchical image databases. Each module is designed with an aim to develop a system that works closer to human perception. Images are mapped to a multidimensional feature space, where images belonging a semantic are clustered and indexed to acquire its efficient representation. This helps in handling the existing variability or heterogeneity within this semantic. Adaptive combinations of the obtained depictions are utilized by the branch selection and pruning algorithms to identify some closer semantics and select only a part of the large hierarchical search space for actual search. So obtained search space is finally used to retrieve desired semantics and similar images corresponding to them. The system is evaluated in terms of accuracy of the retrieved semantics and precision-recall curves. Experiments show promising semantics and image retrieval results on hierarchical image databases. The results reported with non-hierarchical but categorized image databases further prove the efficacy of the proposed system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During last two decades image retrieval emerged as a promising technology which also received a widespread interest of media. Researchers from various fields such as image processing, pattern recognition, computer vision, psychology, and many more have joined hands together and put their sincere efforts into understanding the real world implications, applications, and constraints in image retrieval. Many techniques were developed as a result of their collaborative work (Datta et al., 2008; Deselaers et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2007; Vassilieva, 2009). Initially, image retrieval systems worked on a text-based framework, then came the content-based image retrieval (CBIR), and now the focus has been shifted to automatic image annotation (AIA). In CBIR systems, image contents are visually interpreted for retrieval and a visual feature space is generated to search similar images. These systems try to emulate human perception through visual distances in the form of similarity measures defined on color, texture, and shape features. The major challenges in this domain are image database for testing, feature extraction and indexing techniques along with distance measures corresponding to human-visual system, query processing, user friendliness, and visual semantic gap (Datta et al., 2008). In such a state of affairs, till now CBIR community does not have universally acceptable algorithms to characterize human vision in the context of object recognition and image retrieval. It is time to think about more sophisticated and robust models and algorithms to index, retrieve, organize, and interact with image data.Most of the existing CBIR systems/approaches limit their contributions to one or two of these issues. In an attempt to effectively address these issues, this work proposes a prototype for a full-fledged semantics and image retrieval system working on a large image database. The system is developed especially for semantically categorized hierarchical image databases and is fully automatic irrespective of the size of the database. Semantic based categorization of an image database results in a hierarchical tree structure with categories and subcategories of images at various levels. Visual features of images in such a database form a semantic based hierarchical search space on which the proposed system works. The core of the system consists of an effective way of traversing the hierarchical search space (to reduce the search space/time), clustering performed within categories (to reduce semantic gap), and indexing of clusters (to further reduce the search time). A user friendly interface is developed for experimentation. Experiments are performed with two sets of query images (inside and outside database) on a hierarchical image database (e.g., ImageNet), and also on a flat database (e.g., WANG), to analyze the efficacy of the system for semantic assignment as well as image retrieval.The manuscript is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief review of CBIR systems. Section 3 presents the proposed content based semantics and image retrieval system and discusses its modules including feature extraction, clustering of image data, indexing, and adaptive branch selection on clustered and indexed data. Results are discussed in Section 4 and Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
