@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring search task difficulty reasons in different task types and user knowledge groups

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of a search task difficulty reason scheme.Relationship between task difficulty and task type: common and different reasons across task types.Relationship between task difficulty and user knowledge: common and different reasons among different knowledge groups.Implications for general and personalized information retrieval system design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Task difficulty reason,Task type,Topic knowledge,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Search task difficulty has been attracting much research attention in recent years, mostly regarding its relationship with searchers’ behaviors and the prediction of task difficulty from search behaviors. However, it remains unknown what makes searchers feel the difficulty. A study consisting of 48 undergraduate students was conducted to explore this question. Each participant was given 4 search tasks that were carefully designed following a task classification scheme. Questionnaires were used to elicit participants’ ratings on task difficulty and why they gave those ratings. Based on the collected difficulty reasons, a coding scheme was developed, which covered various aspects of task, user, and user–task interaction. Difficulty reasons were then categorized following this scheme. Results showed that searchers reported some common reasons leading to task difficulty in different tasks, but most of the difficulty reasons varied across tasks. In addition, task difficulty had some common reasons between searchers with low and high levels of topic knowledge, although there were also differences in top task difficulty reasons between high and low knowledge users. These findings further our understanding of search task difficulty, the relationship between task difficulty and task type, and that between task difficulty and knowledge level. The findings can also be helpful with designing tasks for information search experiments, and have implications on search system design both in general and for personalization based on task type and searchers’ knowledge.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online information searching has become an everyday activity in the lives of people around the world. With today’s search systems, people can often easily find the information they need. However, at times, people may have a hard time searching for information to fulfill a particular information need, for example, planning for a trip, buying a car, or researching the literature on a topic. These difficult tasks can lead to users not finding desired information and accordingly cause frustration and/or system switch behaviors. Search systems aimed at helping people locate information effectively, efficiently, and enjoyably should make it an important goal to reduce task difficulty, assist users with difficult tasks, and increase users’ satisfaction.Task difficulty has been attracting more and more research attention in the field of information retrieval (IR). Some researchers studied query performance and query difficulty from the language model perspective (e.g., Carmel, Yom-Tov, Darlow, & Pelleg, 2006; Cronen-Townsend, Zhou, & Croft, 2002). Others studied task difficulty from the search task level. Kim (2006) suggests that difficulty is the task doer’s perception of task complexity. Li and Belkin (2008) define task difficulty as a subjective perception assessed by task doers. Studies along this line have examined users’ search behaviors in difficult vs. easy tasks (e.g., Aula, Khan, & Guan, 2010; Gwizdka, 2008), users’ perception of task difficulty before and after working on the tasks (Liu, Liu, Yuan, & Belkin, 2011), and the prediction of task difficulty from search behaviors and/or other factors such as user characteristics (e.g., Arguello, 2014; Gwizdka, 2008; Liu, Belkin, & Cole, 2012).Despite the above research directions of task difficulty, little has been known about why users feel certain tasks are difficult and what makes them feel this difficulty. Even though a system can predict, from monitoring the users’ behaviors, that they are having difficulty in their search, the system cannot help users overcome the difficulty without a further understanding of what caused the difficulty. This calls for an exploration of search task difficulty reasons, and Liu and Kim (2013) started to address this issue and developed a task difficulty reason scheme based on a lab experiment with 32 participants searching for 4 tasks. It would be helpful to test this scheme with more participants. In addition, it would be interesting to explore if the difficulty reasons vary across task types and across users with different backgrounds. In order to better understand the nature of search task difficulty and eventually benefit search system design, the current research attempts to explore the following research questions:1.What are the reasons users perceive a search task is difficult?Do the task difficulty reasons vary across different tasks and task types?Do the task difficulty reasons vary between searchers with different levels of task topic knowledge?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on the data collected in a controlled lab experiment, the paper explored why information searchers felt an information task was difficult and identified the various reasons that led to task difficulty perception. A task difficulty classification scheme previously developed by Liu and Kim (2013) was confirmed. It involved several aspects: users, tasks, and user–task interaction. Following this scheme, the difficulty reasons that users gave for each task session were categorized. Difficulty reasons were compared in different tasks and task types. It was found that the common reasons leading to task difficulty in all four tasks were specific requirements and too much (unrelated) information, meaning that users wanted the system to provide the right, exact, and relevant information in the search result pages. Various difficulty reasons could be linked with the different task types. The study also examined the commonalities and differences between the identified top difficulty reasons between users with different levels of topic knowledge. The possible reasons that led to the different top reasons were discussed, and some implications were provided for changes in system design to personalize searches for different groups of users, besides helping reduce task difficulty for all users in general. Future research can examine the relationships between task difficulty reasons, users’ search behaviors, and contextual factors (tasks, knowledge background, etc.). Future studies can also attempt to collect data and identify the task difficulty reasons in a naturalistic setting, which all help improve our understanding of task difficulty and building IR systems that help reduce users’ perception of difficulty.