@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Active learning for sentiment analysis on data streams: Methodology and workflow implementation in the ClowdFlows platform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a cloud based platform for data stream processing with workflows.The ClowdFlows platform enables processing of multiple concurrent data streams.We implement an active learning scenario for sentiment analysis on data streams.Machine learning methods are shown to be suitable for sentiment analysis.Active learning improves the accuracy of sentiment classification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Active learning,Stream mining,Sentiment analysis,Stream-based active learning,Workflows,Data mining platform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sentiment analysis from data streams is aimed at detecting authors’ attitude, emotions and opinions from texts in real-time. To reduce the labeling effort needed in the data collection phase, active learning is often applied in streaming scenarios, where a learning algorithm is allowed to select new examples to be manually labeled in order to improve the learner’s performance. Even though there are many on-line platforms which perform sentiment analysis, there is no publicly available interactive on-line platform for dynamic adaptive sentiment analysis, which would be able to handle changes in data streams and adapt its behavior over time. This paper describes ClowdFlows, a cloud-based scientific workflow platform, and its extensions enabling the analysis of data streams and active learning. Moreover, by utilizing the data and workflow sharing in ClowdFlows, the labeling of examples can be distributed through crowdsourcing. The advanced features of ClowdFlows are demonstrated on a sentiment analysis use case, using active learning with a linear Support Vector Machine for learning sentiment classification models to be applied to microblogging data streams.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper addresses a data mining scenario at the intersection of active learning, sentiment analysis, stream mining and service-oriented knowledge discovery architectures effectively solved by on-line workflow implementation of the developed active learning methodology for sentiment analysis from streams of Twitter data.Active learning is a well-studied research area (Sculley, 2007; Settles, 2011; Settles & Craven, 2008), addressing data mining scenarios where a learning algorithm can periodically select new examples to be labeled by a human annotator and add them to the training dataset to improve the learner’s performance on new data. Its aim is to maximize the performance of the algorithm and minimize the human labeling effort. Sentiment analysis (Liu, 2012; Pang & Lee, 2008; Turney, 2002) is concerned with the detection of the author’s attitude, emotion or opinion about a given topic expressed in the text. The task of sentiment analysis is especially challenging in the context of analyzing user generated content from the Internet (Petz et al., 2012, 2013). Stream mining (Gama, Rodrigues, Spinosa, & de Carvalho, 2010) is an online learning paradigm, aiming to incorporate the information from the evolving data stream into the model, without having to re-learn the model from scratch; while batch learning is a finite process that starts with a data collection phase and ends with a stationary model, the online learning process starts with the arrival of some training instances and lasts as long as there is new data available for learning. As such, it is a dynamic process that has to encapsulate the collection of data, the learning and the validation phase in a single continuous cycle.This paper introduces a cloud-based scientific workflow platform, which is able to perform on-line dynamic adaptive sentiment analysis of microblogging posts. Even though there are many on-line platforms which apply sentiment analysis on microblogging texts, there is still no such pltaform that could be used for on-line dynamic adaptive sentiment analysis and would thus be able to handle changes in data streams and adapt its components over time. In order to provide continuous updating of the sentiment classifier with time we used an active learning approach. In this paper, we address this issue by presenting an approach to interactive stream-based sentiment analysis of microblogging messages in a cloud-based scientific workflow platform ClowdFlows.1http://clowdflows.org.1With the aim to minimize the effort required to apply labels to tweets, this browser-based platform provides an easy way to share the results and a Web interface for labeling tweets.ClowdFlows is a new open-sourced data mining platform designed as a cloud-based Web application in order to overcome several deficiencies of similar data mining platforms, providing a handful of novel features that benefit the data mining community. ClowdFlows was first developed as a data mining tool for processing static data (Kranjc, Podpecian, & Lavraci, 2012a, 2012b), which successfully bridges different operating systems and platforms, and is able to fully utilize available server resources in order to relieve the client from heavy-duty processing and data transfer as the platform is entirely Web based and can be accessed from any modern browser. ClowdFlows also benefits from a service-oriented architecture which allows users to utilize arbitrary Web services as workflow components. In this paper we present the adaptation of the ClowdFlows platform, enabling it to work on real time data streams. As a result, workflows in ClowdFlows are no longer limited to static data on the server but can connect to multiple data sources and can process the data continuously. One such data source is the Twitter API which provides a potentionally infinite stream of tweets which are the subject of sentiment analysis in this paper.The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the related work. Comparable data mining and stream mining platforms are presented and their differences and similarities with ClowdFlows are discussed. Related work concerning active learning in data streams is also presented. Section 3 presents the technical background and implementation details of the ClowdFlows platform. The architecture of the system is presented along with specific methods that allow stream mining in a workflow environment. The proposed sentiment analysis and active learning methods are presented in Section 4. The implementation details and the workflow enabling active learning for sentiment analysis are presented in Section 5. In Section 6 we conclude the paper by presenting the directions for further work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
