@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
FoDoSu: Multi-document summarization exploiting semantic analysis based on social Folksonomy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel multi-document summarization system that employs the tag cluster on Flickr.The FoDoSu detects meaningful words by exploiting tag cluster for summarizing multi-documents.We demonstrate the superiority of FoDoSu through experiments on TAC2008 and TAC2009.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-document summarization,Folksonomy,Tag cluster,Semantic analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi-document summarization techniques aim to reduce documents into a small set of words or paragraphs that convey the main meaning of the original document. Many approaches to multi-document summarization have used probability-based methods and machine learning techniques to simultaneously summarize multiple documents sharing a common topic. However, these techniques fail to semantically analyze proper nouns and newly-coined words because most depend on an out-of-date dictionary or thesaurus. To overcome these drawbacks, we propose a novel multi-document summarization system called FoDoSu, or Folksonomy-based Multi-Document Summarization, that employs the tag clusters used by Flickr, a Folksonomy system, for detecting key sentences from multiple documents. We first create a word frequency table for analyzing the semantics and contributions of words using the HITS algorithm. Then, by exploiting tag clusters, we analyze the semantic relationships between words in the word frequency table. Finally, we create a summary of multiple documents by analyzing the importance of each word and its semantic relatedness to others. Experimental results from the TAC 2008 and 2009 data sets demonstrate the improvement of our proposed framework over existing summarization systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid growth of the Internet and smart multimedia devices such as smart phones and tablet PCs allow users to find information easily through diverse media (e.g., documents, images, videos, and music). In particular, in the Web 2.0 environment, users can obtain general and common information from a Folksonomy system, such as Wikipedia, Flickr, or del.ici.ous. Folksonomy systems are classification systems derived from social tags assigned to multimedia content by everyday users. Web 2.0 has led to the development of large Web-based communities that support and facilitate collaboration among Internet users (Huang, Lin, & Chan, 2012). Folksonomies became popular on Web 2.0 as part of social tagging applications, such as social bookmarking and image annotations uploaded by users. Tagging, which is a defining characteristic of Web 2.0 services, allows users to collectively classify and find information. Some websites include tag clouds as a way to visualize tags in a Folksonomy. The most important and distinctive feature of the Folksonomy system is the creation of content by general users without restriction. Users are now able to create, share, and search multimedia content anytime and anywhere using their smart devices. As a result, the number of documents (news, blogs, Web pages, e-mails, etc.) created on the Web has been rapidly increasing day by day. In this environment, to find the necessary information, users must manually review all of the searched documents without any assistance from search engines, which requires too much time and effort. To address this problem, various document summarization techniques have been studied to efficiently summarize the core of a single original document. More recently, multi-document summarization techniques have been researched to summarize multiple documents sharing a common topic at the same time. This technique allows users to easily understand a topic by looking at a short summary.Over the past few years, multi-document summarization has received more attention and made much progress. However, various evaluations indicate that multi-document summarization is highly complex and demanding, and there is still much work to be done before automatic summarizers catch up with human beings (Dang & Owczarzak, 2008). Most existing multi-document summarization techniques analyze semantic relationships between words in a document by exploiting probability theory, machine learning techniques, and external knowledge-bases such as WordNet.1http://wordnet.princeton.edu/.1However, these techniques suffer from high computational costs in the learning and summarization processes. Furthermore, WordNet-based approaches fail to analyze proper nouns (e.g., a person’s name or the name of a product or firm) and newly-coined words because these words are not present in WordNet.In this paper, we propose a novel multi-document summarization system, called FoDoSu (Folksonomy-based Multi-Document Summarization), that employs the tag clusters used in Folksonomy systems to detect key sentences in multiple documents. For this purpose, we exploit the tag clusters used by Flickr, one of the most representative Folksonomy systems, for summarizing multiple documents. Using tag clusters, we analyze the importance of each word and the semantic relatedness among them, and finally make a summary of the documents.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we briefly review the related work. The proposed multi-document summarization system is presented in Section 3. In Section 4, we describe the experimental results using the TAC 2008 and 2009 datasets. Finally, we conclude our work in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose FoDoSu which is a novel multi-document summarization system using tag clusters from a Folksonomy system to detect the key sentences in multiple documents. Our proposed system uses Flickr to acquire tag clusters to analyze the semantics of words. It efficiently summarizes the documents by detecting meaningful words and their semantic relatedness. The advantages of our approach for multi-document summarization are as follows. First, when analyzing the semantics of words in the document, FoDoSu performed with low computational cost. Second, FoDoSu analyzed proper nouns and newly-coined words in the document, such as the names of people and products. Through various experiments on TAC 2008 and TAC 2009 datasets, our proposed system FoDoSu always performs better than the other systems. Also, we identified the ratio of words that could be analyzed in TAC 2008 and TAC 2009 using WordNet and Flickr’s tag clusters. We have shown that it is useful in efficiently analyzing the semantics of proper nouns and newly-coined words. Finally, we demonstrated that analysis using tag clusters from the Folksonomy greatly affected document summarization. In future work, we will explore better methods for analyzing the semantics of words that are difficult to analyze, such as proper nouns and newly-coined words. In addition, we will improve our proposed multi-document summarization.