@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Statistical comparisons of non-deterministic IR systems using two dimensional variance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose methods to compare non-deterministic IR systems.We show pitfalls in using standard significance tests to compare such systems.We verify the applicability of proposed methods using simulations and a case study.We show how to compare a non-deterministic IR system for equivalent effectiveness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information retrieval evaluation,Non-determinism,Randomization,Statistical analysis,Distributed IR,Personalised web search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Retrieval systems with non-deterministic output are widely used in information retrieval. Common examples include sampling, approximation algorithms, or interactive user input. The effectiveness of such systems differs not just for different topics, but also for different instances of the system. The inherent variance presents a dilemma – What is the best way to measure the effectiveness of a non-deterministic IR system? Existing approaches to IR evaluation do not consider this problem, or the potential impact on statistical significance. In this paper, we explore how such variance can affect system comparisons, and propose an evaluation framework and methodologies capable of doing this comparison.Using the context of distributed information retrieval as a case study for our investigation, we show that the approaches provide a consistent and reliable methodology to compare the effectiveness of a non-deterministic system with a deterministic or another non-deterministic system. In addition, we present a statistical best-practice that can be used to safely show how a non-deterministic IR system has equivalent effectiveness to another IR system, and how to avoid the common pitfall of misusing a lack of significance as a proof that two systems have equivalent effectiveness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The output of IR systems can be non-deterministic. This can be due to the use of sampling in randomized algorithms (Aly, Hiemstra, & Demeester, 2013; Callan & Connell, 2001; Callan, Connell, & Du, 1999; Kulkarni & Callan, 2010; Shokouhi, 2007; Si & Callan, 2003, 2004, 2005; Thomas & Shokouhi, 2009), or training based on user input (Finkelstein et al., 2001; Lawrence, 2000; Liu, Yu, & Meng, 2004). Evaluating the effectiveness of these systems can be difficult because each run can produce a different IR system instance, hence different results and effectiveness scores. Fig. 1illustrates this situation. How can the effectiveness of an IR system be measured if each run can produce a different output?An evaluation based on a single instance of an IR system may produce results which can change an experimental conclusion of whether one IR system has better effectiveness than another. The obvious solution is to generate many system instances and make statistically grounded inferences about the overall average effectiveness.Experiments in IR add another layer of complexity to the problem as retrieval effectiveness varies by topic (Voorhees & Buckley, 2002). Recall that the effectiveness of an IR system instance is characterized and compared using average effectiveness under whatever evaluation metric is employed across a set of topics. Differences are tested for statistical significance across a hypothetical population of topics using a significance test. However, standard significance tests only support one source of variability, in this instance the choice of topics. The use of non-deterministic IR systems introduces an additional dimension of variability. So, how can we determine that one IR system is significantly better than another when averaging across all topics and all possible IR system instantiations?In order to understand the uncertainty due to variability in more than one dimension, consider the following simulation. We consider the effectiveness of each topic on each non-deterministic IR system instance as composed of two effects. First, we randomly sample the “topical effect” between 0 and 1 from a uniform distribution for each topic. Next, we realize the effect due to non-determinism in the system capped between 0 and 1 from a normal distributionN(μ,σ2). Now assume that the simulated effectiveness for each topic on each system instance is the Euclidean distance (L2norm)1The Euclidean distance (L2norm) is the square root of the sum of the squares of each effect.1between the two effects, normalized to a value between 0 and 1. Consider another synthetic system with a deterministic output. We randomly sample the effectiveness between 0 and 1 for each topic from a uniform distribution for the deterministic system. For the simulation, we sample two sets of 50 topical effects, one for each system being compared and 100 system instances for a given μ and σ from the respective distributions. We then compare the effectiveness for each system instance with the deterministic system using a standard t-test, and note the mean of the number of significant differences over 100 repetitions of the above process as μ and σ are varied. This is equivalent to repeatedly comparing an instance of a non-deterministic IR system having two dimensional variance with a deterministic IR system. The results are illustrated in Fig. 2. The expected effectiveness for the deterministic system is 0.5. Similarly, the expected effectiveness for the non-deterministic IR system is 0.5 when μ is 0.5. Therefore, the majority of comparisons show no significant difference when μ is 0.5 with a small σ. When the standard deviation is increased, the majority of the comparisons with a μ less than 0.5 are not significantly different. However, a comprehensive analysis of the impact on a standard significance test due to variation in system instance effect for a non-deterministic IR system is not possible with the above simple simulation. The take home message from the simulation is that all comparisons derive the same conclusion when number of significant differences are 0 (darkest grey) or 100 (lightest grey). An intermediate shade of grey implies that conclusions derived using some instances contradict the conclusions from the rest of the instances when using the same non-deterministic IR system. For example, 50% of the comparisons show no significant difference at the centre of the grey scale, while the rest imply the opposite. So the gradual hill climbing pattern (from lightest grey to darkest grey) of the graph implies that experimental conclusions derived with certain system instances can be contradicted by the others and exemplifies the pitfalls in using standard significance tests to compare non-deterministic IR systems.In this paper, we extend our prior work on non-deterministic system evaluation (Jayasinghe, Webber, Sanderson, Dharmasena, & Culpepper, 2014). In our previous work, we used a linear model to evaluate non-deterministic IR systems, and a limited case study using a single evaluation metric (NDCG@10) on the TREC GOV2 dataset was presented. In this work, we include an alternative evaluation methodology based on the bootstrap, and show that the two evaluation methodologies produce similar conclusions. We also demonstrate the applicability of proposed solutions using a simulation in addition to the original case study. We also extend coverage to include more evaluation metrics (NDCG@10, P@10, MAP) and two different test collections (TREC GOV2, and ClueWeb ’09B).1.We propose a pair of methodologies, bootstrapping (Section 3.1.1) and multivariate linear modelling (Section 3.1.2) to solve the two-dimensional significance testing problem of comparing a non-deterministic IR system with a deterministic IR system. Both methods result in equivalent inferences (Sections 4 and 5.2).We extend the multivariate linear modelling approach to support the comparison of two non-deterministic IR systems (Section 3.2).We verify the applicability of the solutions in real world scenarios using a case study of common sampling algorithms – shard construction and centralized resource allocation in distributed IR (Kulkarni & Callan, 2010; Si & Callan, 2003) (Section 5).We present a methodology for comparing a non-deterministic IR system for equivalent or greater effectiveness with either a deterministic or another non-deterministic IR system using a two dimensional evaluation (Section 5.4).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
