@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
NESTOR: A formal model for digital archives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A set-theoretical formal model for digital archives is presented.The 5S model is extended for digital archives and concrete applications are given.Address EAD issues in the Web and with (compound) digital objects.Use cases based on OAI-PMH, OAI-ORE and annotation frameworks for digital archives.Properties and mappings between the tree and NESTOR are formally proved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Foundation,Digital archive,Digital library,Hierarchy,Set-based model,Application,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Archives are an extremely valuable part of our cultural heritage since they represent the trace of the activities of a physical or juridical person in the course of their business. Despite their importance, the models and technologies that have been developed over the past two decades in the Digital Library (DL) field have not been specifically tailored to archives. This is especially true when it comes to formal and foundational frameworks, as the Streams, Structures, Spaces, Scenarios, Societies (5S) model is.Therefore, we propose an innovative formal model, called NEsted SeTs for Object hieRarchies (NESTOR), for archives, explicitly built around the concepts of context and hierarchy which play a central role in the archival realm. NESTOR is composed of two set-based data models: the Nested Sets Model (NS-M) and the Inverse Nested Sets Model (INS-M) that express the hierarchical relationships between objects through the inclusion property between sets. We formally study the properties of these models and prove their equivalence with the notion of hierarchy entailed by archives.We then use NESTOR to extend the 5S model in order to take into account the specific features of archives and to tailor the notion of digital library accordingly. This offers the possibility of opening up the full wealth of DL methods and technologies to archives. We demonstrate the impact of NESTOR on this problem through three example use cases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past two decades, digital libraries have been steadily evolving and shaping the way people and institutions access and interact with our cultural heritage, study and learn (Borgman, 1999, 2003; Fox et al., 1993; Fox et al., 1995; Fox et al., 2012; Lesk, 1997; Marchionini and Maurer, 1995; Witten and Bainbridge, 2003). Nowadays, the reach of digital libraries goes far beyond the realm of traditional libraries and also encompasses other kinds of cultural heritage institutions, such as archives and museums. Nevertheless, these institutions are quite different from several points-of-view: they have different internal organizations and traditions; their resources are different in nature, structure, and descriptions; and their users have different information needs which call for different methods for accessing resources.Archives are not simply constituted by a series of objects that have been accumulated and filed with the passing of time – as usually happens with libraries that collect, for example, individual published books, journals, and serials. Instead, archives represent the trace of the activities of a physical or juridical person in the course of their business which is preserved because of their continued value.To this end, archives keep the context in which their records have been created and the network of relationships between them in order to preserve their informative content and provide understandable and useful information over time (Gilliland-Swetland, 2000). The fundamental characteristic of archives resides in their hierarchical organization. This expresses the context – i.e. the relationships and dependencies between the records of the archive – by using what is called the archival bond and it distinguishes archives from other objects in the realm of cultural heritage – e.g. books – which in general are perceived as individual, repeatable and unrelated entities (Vitali, 2010). Archives are in fact made up of series which, in turn, can be organized in sub-series formed of archival units, such as files, registers and so on. These archival units have a homogeneous nature and can, in turn, be divided into subunits containing items such as letters, reports, contracts, testaments, photographs, and drawings (International Council on Archives, 1999).Digital libraries benefit from the existence of sophisticated formal models, such as the Structures, Spaces, Scenarios, Societies (5S) model (Fox et al., 2012; Gonçalves, Fox, et al., 2004; Gonçalves et al., 2008), which allow us to formally describe them and to prove their properties and features. Despite the importance of archives, so far there has been no attempt to develop a dedicated formal model, built around their peculiar constituents, such as the notion of archival bond. Nor can we exploit the 5S model as it is for archives because, as we will discuss later on, it needs to be extended and adapted to archives.In this article we highlight the central role of formal models for the digital library, because integration and cooperation between these models can enhance the interoperability between the different facets of DL, including their community, methodology and technology. In this context a model for archives is sorely needed to formally define their characteristics and to prove that general digital library methods and technologies can be embodied in this field and respect archival practice.Therefore, we propose an innovative formal model for archives built around the notions of archival bond and hierarchy. The proposed model, called NEsted SeTs for Object hieRarchies (NESTOR), is based on the idea of expressing the hierarchical relationships between objects through the inclusion property between sets, in contrast to the binary relation between nodes exploited by the tree (Aho and Ullman, 1992).Then we exploit NESTOR to formally extend the 5S model to define a digital archive as a specific case of digital library able to take into consideration the peculiar features of archives. This defines an actual bridge between these two formal models which: (i) allows archives to exist and interact with other realities (i.e. libraries and museums); (ii) provides archives the possibility of exploiting the full wealth of digital library technologies and methods; and (iii) enables integrated access to heterogeneous contents.As concrete accounts of this and as substantial examples of their application, we apply NESTOR and the extended 5S model to three typical scenarios for digital archives and overcome well-known issues in the field. The first is called “detaching the archives” which is the case of interoperability between digital archives where we formally exploit the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH) to demonstrate how digital library technologies can be adopted with archives. The second scenario is called “unchaining the archives” which shows how archives modeled with NESTOR can form compound digital objects made available as Linked Open Data (LOD) (Heath and Bizer, 2011) on the Web adopting Open Archives Initiative Object Reuse and Exchange (OAI-ORE) as a working framework. Finally, the third scenario is called “socializing the archives” which describes how NESTOR together with the Flexible Annotation Semantic Tool (FAST) (Agosti and Ferro, 2008) can enhance the role of annotations in archives by helping both archivists and end-users in the description and interpretation of archival resources.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an intuitive overview of the principles underlying the two set data models composing NESTOR (i.e. the NS-M and INS-M) and a presentation of the main contributions of this work. In Section 3 we provide some background on archives, formal models for digital libraries and discuss the related work about nested sets methodologies. In Section 4 we formally present NESTOR along with its properties. Section 5 shows the equivalence between NESTOR and the archival trees. In Section 6 we introduce our extension to the 5S model via NESTOR and in Sections 7–9 we apply NESTOR and this extension to three case studies. We draw conclusions and point to future work in Section 10. In Appendix A we report all the proofs of the properties and theorems presented in Sections 4 and 5.The set data models composing NESTOR are well-suited for archival practice; indeed, the idea of “set” shapes the concept of archival division which is a “container” comprising distinct elements that have some properties in common. If we consider the Chinese boxes metaphor, a hierarchy is composed of a sequence of boxes contained one inside the other; if we look at an archive from the physical point-of-view, we can see that it resembles the Chinese boxes structure as there are boxes, folders, sheets, etc. contained one inside the other.Nested sets are closer to this view of reality than trees are. Indeed, although archival practice commonly considers archives as trees, a tree is actually a higher level abstraction than the nested sets as it only focuses on structural relationships. Indeed, NESTOR comprises both the structure and the content of the archive, where the inclusion relationships represent the structure and the elements belonging to the sets represent the content.To illustrate the basic ideas behind NESTOR, let us consider an archive composed of six divisions: a fonds, two sub-fonds, and three series.As shown in Fig. 1, the first model composing NESTOR – i.e. the Nested Sets Model (NS-M) – adopts a bottom-up approach: (i) each set corresponds to an archival division; (ii) the innermost sets are the leaves of the hierarchy, e.g. the series; and (iii) you create supersets as you climb up the hierarchy, e.g. the sub-fonds and fonds. In general, in Fig. 1 we can see that each node of the archival tree is mapped into a set, where child nodes become proper subsets of the set created from the parent node. Every set is a subset of at least one set; the set corresponding to the tree root is the only set without any supersets and every set in the hierarchy is a subset of the root set. The leaves are sets with no subsets. The tree structure is maintained thanks to the nested organization and the relationships between the sets are expressed by the set inclusion order. Even the disjunction between two sets brings information; indeed, the disjunction of two sets means that these belong to two different branches of the same archival hierarchy.As shown in Fig. 2, the second model composing NESTOR – i.e. Inverse Nested Sets Model (INS-M) – adopts a top-down approach: (i) each set corresponds to an archival division; (ii) the innermost set is the root of the hierarchy, i.e. the fonds; and (iii) you create supersets as you climb down the hierarchy, e.g. sub-fonds and then series. We can say that a tree is mapped into the INS-M by transforming each node into a set, where each parent node becomes a subset of the sets created from its children. The set created from the tree’s root is the only set with no subsets and the root set is a proper subset of all the sets in the hierarchy. The leaves are the sets with no supersets and they are sets containing all the sets created from the nodes composing the tree path from a leaf to the root. An important aspect of INS-M is that the intersection of every couple of sets obtained from two nodes is always a set representing a node in the tree. The intersection of all the sets in the INS-M is the set mapped from the root of the tree.Unfortunately, the representation of the INS-M by means of the Euler-Venn diagrams (adopted for the NS-M) is not very expressive and can be confusing for the reader (Agosti, Ferro, et al., 2009) – see Fig. 2. Nevertheless, we can exploit the “DocBall representation” (Crestani et al., 2004) – see bottom of Fig. 2 – which is composed of a set of circular sectors arranged in concentric rings. In the context of NESTOR a circular ring has to be seen as a set containing objects, where the outer rings are supersets of the inner rings. Each ring represents a level of the hierarchy, with the center (level 0) representing the root. In a ring, the circular sectors represent the nodes in the corresponding level. Therefore, the fonds is represented by the inner ring at level 0 of the DocBall. At level 1 we find the direct supersets of the fonds which are the sub-fonds; both these sets are represented as circular sectors comprising the inner circle. With this representation a subset is presented in a ring within the set including it. Indeed, we can see that the fonds is included by all the other sets. If the intersection of two or more sets is empty, then these sets have no common circular sector in the inner rings of the DocBall.From this description we can see that the INS-M can be associated to the top-down descriptive activity and the NS-M to the bottom-up one. The top-down descriptive activity is followed by the archivist when s/he has to describe an archive for which s/he knows the structure in advance. For instance, the archivist knows that there is a fonds divided into three sub-fonds and so on; in this case the activity is to describe these archival divisions and the documents they contain. We call this top-down because in this case the archivist knows a priori how to divide the documents (i.e. elements) into the archival divisions (i.e. sets). The bottom-up description activity works the other way around; the archivist starts to study the documents and s/he decides how to put them together in order to form an archival division, thus the archival hierarchy is built from the bottom. We call bottom-up approach because in this case dividing the documents into archival divisions is an iterative process: the archivist starts from the whole set of documents (i.e. the fonds) and s/he defines the subsets (i.e. subfonds, series, etc.) by construction, analysing the documents one by one.In the context of Libraries, Archives, and Museums (LAM) unifying a variety of organizational settings and providing more integrated access to their contents is an aspect of utmost importance. Indeed, LAM collect, manage and share digital contents; although the type of materials may differ and professional practices vary, LAM share an overlapping set of functions. Fulfilling these functions in “collaboration rather than isolation creates a win–win for users and institutions” (Zorich et al., 2008). Although the convergence between libraries, archives and museums has been a topic of much discussion in the digital library community, the emerging similarities between these three types of cultural heritage institutions are not yet evident in the proposed formal models, developed systems, and education of professionals (Trant, 2009; Timms and Fall, 2009).In particular, there are no state-of-the-art formal models for archives and this has prevented them from being fully integrated in digital library communities, methodologies and technologies. The definition of the set data models and their properties we give in Section 4 proves that the nested sets idea can be formalized as a proper data model which can be exploited to represent and manage archival hierarchies. Indeed, we show that it is possible to represent a hierarchical organization by means of the sets and then represent the objects belonging to the sets and formally establish relations between them.The formalization of NESTOR settles a common ground for dealing with hierarchies open to existing models, solutions and technologies; it exploits and enhances the state of the art in the fields of digital library, thus providing a further level of expressiveness and a theoretical environment that can be exploited for the definition of innovative systems, functionalities and services. Furthermore, as will also emerge later on, the nested sets models have several advantages over trees while remaining semantically equivalent, and even though they are well known in the field from an intuitive point-of-view, they have not been formalized before.We exploit the formal basis provided by NESTOR to extend the widely-known 5S Model (Gonçalves, Fox, et al., 2004) in order to explicitly enclose archives and their constraints in the reality it intends to model. Afterwards, we exploit a main feature of NESTOR which is the separation between the structural and the content aspects of the entities represented within the set data models to address concrete issues in the field of digital libraries. Specifically, in the field of archives the formalization of NESTOR allows us to address some known problems and, at the same time, to push the boundaries of the discipline. To this purpose we present three use cases. The first is called “detaching the archives”, the goal of which is to allow variable granularity sharing of archival metadata in a distributed environment; the aim is to free and exchange a specific archival description (or a set of descriptions) independently from the whole archive, since in any moment the context of this description can be reconstructed. This use case shows how NESTOR can address known problems regarding the state-of-the-art of digital archives; we consider the issues regarding interoperability between digital archives and metadata exchange. The 5S model has been used for modeling the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH) (Van de Sompel et al., 2003), which is the de facto standard for metadata sharing between digital libraries in distributed environments. The formal definition of NESTOR allows us to exploit the theoretical common ground with the 5S model to extend OAI-PMH and allow it to manage and exchange complex hierarchical data structure in a flexible way, thus overcoming a well-known problem affecting the current archival description standard. The extension of OAI-PMH will make possible the exchange of data belonging to a hierarchy with a variable granularity without losing the relationships between the other data in the hierarchy.The second use case is called “unchaining the archives”, the goal of which is to open up archival data in the Web by exploiting the potentialities of the Linked Open Data (LOD) (Heath and Bizer, 2011) paradigm and to enrich the archival descriptions with related digital objects. This use case shows how NESTOR helps to push the boundaries of the discipline by creating new possibilities for archives. Indeed, the reality of modern archival records creation is that documents may exist in “multiple contexts and have multiple and complex relationships that describe their significance and value” (Kaplan et al., 2010). Furthermore, new archival trends encourage the adoption of a “plural, provisional and interpretative perspective” (Light and Hyry, 2002) in the description of archives. This vision leads to the creation of multiple connected hierarchies of entities that must respect the archival rules and NESTOR, along with its relationships with the 5S model, addresses this aspect in a formal way with tangible outcomes. Furthermore, archival practice is experiencing a transformation process which promotes the definition of complex relationships between the resources of interest and the constitution of compound digital objects (Kaplan et al., 2010). For similar reasons, in the wider context of digital libraries we are experiencing a wide-ranging diffusion of the Open Archives Initiative Object Reuse and Exchange (OAI-ORE).1http://www.openarchives.org/ore/.1Archives as a meaningful part of digital libraries can take advantage of using the LOD approach instantiated by means of OAI-ORE (Kaplan et al., 2010); indeed, a methodology for representing archives in OAI-ORE would allow richer methods for modeling archival descriptions and can also provide additional and flexible visualizations of the documents that would not be restricted to the “old linear view inspired by the paper tradition” (Kaplan et al., 2010). At the same time, it is commonly agreed (Kaplan et al., 2010; Light and Hyry, 2002; Ross, 2007) that new approaches, such as the adoption of the OAI-ORE model, should add to, but not undermine, fundamental archival theory.The formal basis we define allows us to model an archive as an OAI-ORE instance while retaining its hierarchical structure and the archival bond (Ferro and Silvello, 2013b), and to propose a methodology to map archival descriptions into OAI-ORE by showing how it enables both the preservation of their original order and the definition of new types of relationships.The third use case is called “socializing the archives”, the goal of which is to assist archivists and general users in enriching, consulting, and understanding archives by means of annotations. This use case shows how NESTOR allows us to transform archives into a new type of information infrastructure that can be user-centered and is able to support content management tasks together with tasks devoted to communication and cooperation (Kani-Zabihi et al., 2010). The main way of reaching this goal is to support archivists by considering the way in which they work (Pearson et al., 2009; Siemens et al., 2011) and, as a consequence, by enriching archives through digital annotations. Indeed, annotations foster collaboration between archivists, researchers and general users by playing a central role both in the phase of creation and in the phase of consultation of archival metadata. In the creation phase archivists have to select and describe the archival material and annotations allow them to explain and discuss their choices, thus enabling users to properly access and consult the archival metadata. In the consultation phase, annotations are exploited to find relationships between different parts of an archive or between different archives; for instance, users can exploit annotations to move from one archive to another guided by the expertise of the archivists that annotated them.The archival community has developed “content and data structure standards” (Prom et al., 2007) to facilitate the description, management and access to the archival resources; however, these standards can be difficult for archivists to use (Discovery et al., 2007) and are often implemented in ways that can negatively affect their description activity (Yako, 2008). Therefore, there has been a proliferation of digital archival systems based on diversified descriptive methodologies and metadata; also from the annotation point-of-view a lot of research has been done that has led to the design and development of variegated annotation systems (Agosti and Ferro, 2008).This heterogeneity turns into an interoperability problem when we need to access and consult archival metadata managed by different digital archive systems and annotations created and handled by different systems. Moreover, annotations under certain conditions as well as archives can be opportunely organized in a hierarchical way. The 5S model extended through NESTOR allows for the formal modeling and managing of multiple hierarchies which are exploited to create a common basis between archives through the NESTOR model and annotations through the FAST formal model (Agosti and Ferro, 2008; Ferro and Silvello, 2013a).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
