@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Affective surfing in the visualized interface of a digital library for children

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Elucidation of children’s info-seeking behaviors using virtual retrieval interfaces.The use of SEM to explore the relationship between fun and uncertainty.Children prefer a virtual retrieval interface when at play.Text/sound channels are less definite but easier to use than icon channels.Children at play are willing to endure a high degree of uncertainty/control.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information seeking behavior,Emotional informational navigation,Human–computer interaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The uncertainty children experience when searching for information influences their information seeking behavior by stimulating curiosity or hindering their search efforts. This study explored the interactions and the usability of various search interfaces, and the enjoyment or uncertainty experienced by children when using them. Structural Equation Modeling was used to determine whether children feel uncertainty or a sense of control when using virtual game-like interfaces to search for information associated with entertainment or as a means to satisfy an assigned learning task. We then analyzed the weight relationships among three latent variables (information needs, interface media, and affective state) using statistical (path) analysis. Our results indicate that children prefer using a retrieval interface with situated affordance to satisfy entertainment-related information needs, as opposed to searching for information to solve specific problems. Furthermore, their perceptions of text and graphic icons determined the degree to which they experienced a sense of uncertainty or control. When searching for entertainment-related information, they were better able to deal with uncertainty and sought greater control in their search interface, compared to when they were searching for information related to assigned tasks. According to their information needs, children may regard a game-like interface as a toy or a tool for learning. The results of this study can serve as reference for the future development of information search interfaces aimed at arousing the interest of children. The use of virtual game-like interfaces to guide the IS behavior of children warrants further study.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Natural curiosity and the need to satisfy emotional desires have been shown to motivate children to search for information (Bilal, 2005; Cooper, 2002; Martens, 2012; Shenton & Dixon, 2004; Walter, 1994). For example, Druin (2005, p. 30) explained that children often seek books using keywords such as “happy” or “scary” to match their affective states. Children require information seeking (IS) skills as well as a suitable interface to help them find the information they need (Gossen & Nürnberger, 2013; Hourcade, 2007; Hutchinson et al., 2005; Large & Beheshti, 2005; Liu, Ito, Toyokuni, Sato, & Nakashima, 2012; Nesset & Large, 2004). Researchers in human–computer interaction (HCI) have investigated children’s interaction with virtual representations in order to make learning easier and more pleasurable (Allison, Wills, Bowman, Wineman, & Hodges, 1997; Faiola, Newlon, Pfaff, & Smyslova, 2013; Lee, Wong, & Fung, 2010; Scaife & Rogers, 2001). Researchers in IS behavior and computing research are well aware of the role played by affective play in interaction with information systems (Bilal, 2005; Julien, McKechnie, & Hart, 2005; Kuhlthau, 2004; Lopatovska & Arapakis, 2011; Nahl, 2004; Van Schaik & Ling, 2012; Wilson, 1999; Zhang, 2008). Concepts such as the virtual world (VW) have recently been introduced to the design of interfaces aimed at helping children seeking information (Wu, Tang, & Tsai, 2014; Beheshti, 2012; Dubroy, 2010). Understanding how playing and learning needs affect children’s choices when interacting with VW retrieval interfaces, as well as their cognitive states, could help researchers in the development of child-oriented game-like interfaces for the retrieval of information.Researchers in children–computer interaction have designed software for young children to support learning through playing (McKenney & Voogt, 2010; Mumtaz, 2001). Read (2005) classified software for children into three genres: enabling software such as word processors and internet browsers, entertainment software that includes game and media products, and educational software that is either linked to a curriculum or designed for assessing special skills. Though most educational software for young children includes games that assess special skills, such software also stimulates older children who are more interested in entertainment value than education (MacFarlane, Sparrowhawk, & Heald, 2002, p. 4). Thus, a critical problem is how to make software “fun” and thus stimulate learning interest in children. Many related studies have explored fun and the problem of usability, virtual worlds, and IS behavioral issues.Sim, MacFarlane, and Read (2006, p. 235) empirically studied fun, usability, and learning in educational software and found that “(for the tested software), learning was not correlated with fun or usability”, but “observed fun and observed usability were correlated (with each other).” Though Sim et al. (2006) demonstrated that children appeared to have less fun when their interactions with educational software had more usability problems, it is not clear whether usability of children digital libraries would have any effect on their levels of enjoyment.Bilal (2002a) collaborated with children as design partners in developing prototype interfaces of Web search engines. All of the children’s prototype drawings had educational and entertainment information, indicating that children desired to apply the engines to seek information for schoolwork as well as play game. Thus, children may treat a retrieval interface as a toy in searching for information as a form of entertainment or take an interface as a learning tool for problem solving. The way in which children have fun while searching for information and issues they may encounter with usability are topics worthy of further research.Virtual worlds (VW), defined as three-dimensional interactive environments where users may participate through their avatars, were initially developed to serve gaming communities (Messinger et al., 2009; Sutanto, Phang, Tan, & Lu, 2011). Ryan and Deci (2000) explained that the intrinsic motives of those intending to use the designed VW system are to create a pleasurable experience and provide self-fulfilling value. Gradually, VWs have started to shift to an instrumental role by enabling their users to perform rather utilitarian tasks, such as buying financial services, participate in courses, and co-creation of innovations (Hinrichs, Hill, & Patterson, 2010; Huang, Rauch, & Liaw, 2010; Kohler, Fueller, Stieger, & Matzler, 2011; Mennecke et al., 2008; Shelton, 2010).Bilal (2005, p. 204) stated that “in the children’s eye the visual design of a successful portal is one with a fun name.” To introduce visualized interfaces, including virtual environments to help children searching information, Druin et al. (2001, p. 403) designed SearchKids including the search options of a virtual zoo that children recognize images of animals to access media, a world area for children browsing the animal database by geographical criteria and a search area that provides functions to ‘‘visually specify and manipulate queries.’’ Beheshti (2012) designed a digital library and a virtual interface for children using the metaphor of a physical library with reading rooms, bookcases, and books. Search results are displayed as red dots on the floor plan of a library.Young children differ from adults in their literacy abilities, in particular in their understanding of metadata and classification schemes (Martens, 2012, p. 165) and motor skills (Hourcade, 2007). Virtual world interfaces offer users situated contexts to their learning, which is in accordance with Gibson’ Affordance Theory (Goel, Johnson, Junglas, & Ives, 2013; Lee et al., 2010). They can also increase learner motivation and positively impact on the cognitive load associated with the processing of information (Huang, 2011).Most virtual interfaces use icons to represent operations (i.e., searching). Information visualization theory purports that an icon can be characterized by aspects of the data associated with the object to indicate its meaning (Shneiderman, 2003). Koshman (2006, p. 206) analyzed iconic representations and metaphors of icon layout in visualization systems used for information retrieval, and suggested that such systems provide users “more visual and temporal control over the information displayed.” Leide, Large, Beheshti, and Brooks (2003, p. 937) developed a visual navigation classification scheme for domain novices (i.e. children). When novices search for information, they have specific directions but they do not have a specific search target. During the search, he/she will change his/her point of view based on what he/she has found, thereby establishing a specific knowledge map and modifying his/her search target and range. These novices have no special training or beliefs regarding search strategies. Therefore, children adopted the most intuitive searching methodology. A visual interface based on navigation experience is used to help users build mind maps. Comparing the mind knowledge map with the information they receive while searching for information produces uncertainty in the mind of the user regarding the means to navigate the visual space of the domain knowledge map (see Fig. 1). However, these uncertainties have not yet been explored.IS has been shown to influence learning. Marchionini (1995) suggested that learning and information-seeking are closely related and partially overlapping processes, both of which alter the individual state of knowledge. Kuhlthau (2004) considered learning as a process of construction that engages all aspects of an individual’s experience. She stated that negative affect, such as uncertainty, could stimulate users to be less willing to remain interacting with an information system (Kuhlthau, 1993). However, Bilal (2005, p. 203) stated that children are positive about their experiences with the web mainly because of the challenge, motivation, and increases in self-confidence. Ozcelik, Cagiltay, and Ozcelik (2013) revealed that uncertainty enhances learning.Tenopir, Wang, Zhang, Simmons, and Pollard (2008) suggested that search strategies and tasks induce negative feelings, whereas the use of a digital library when using effective navigation systems can produce positive feelings are associations. Furthermore, smaller collections of information can produce negative feelings and uncertainty about using the system. Chowdhury, Gibb, and Landoni (2011) evaluated uncertainty in information seeking and retrieval (IS&R) in academic environments, and found that the relationship between uncertainty and the formulation of search processes is non-linear and complex and increasing the number of information channels significantly increases the uncertainty associated with the search process. Chowdhury et al. (2011, p. 173) suggested that researchers identify positive/desirable uncertainty in contrast to negative/undesirable uncertainty and their impacts on the IS&R process.”Bilal and Kirby (2002) observed different IS behaviors and user experiences among adults and children. Adults employed advanced search syntax, but children did not. Adults applied a linear or systematic browsing style whereas children had a “loopy” style, in which they repeated the same actions repeatedly until they achieved their goal. Adults were more efficient in their navigations, and using fewer hyperlinks and backtracks than did children. Adults did not deviate from the designated targets whereas most children did. Adults could quickly recover from breakdowns in keyword searches, whereas children could not. Thus, Bilal and Kirby (2002) showed that children experience greater uncertainty than adults in their IS processes.Shenton and Dixon (2004) claimed that children differ from adults in controlling IS behavior: they tend to expend minimum effort to find sufficient information, they apply the same method repeatedly, they select a search strategy at the point of need, and they apply untaught, expedient IS methods. Children’s IS behavior involves self-exploration of an uncertain environment in a semi-structured manner (Cooper, 2002). Most development of digital libraries for children seek to simplify interfaces; however, children like to have fun and be stimulated (by positive uncertainty) in a game-like virtual environment.The reviewed studies illustrate aspects of the IS behavior of children and their affective states; however, there remains a lack of understanding related to the design of usable and fun/enjoyable interfaces when applying the concept of VW to a digital library. For children, it may be decomposed into two new dimensions, one is information need included of playing (diversionary) and learning (solving problem), and the other is affective state included of uncertainty and sense of control (ease of use) – usability. Whereas the VW retrieval interfaces that are characterized with different visual attractiveness function (channel) as connected factors between the information need and the affective state. The aim of this study was to fill the information gap regarding children’s need for information and their affective states. We also suggest a model that may be used to investigate what VW retrieval interfaces children prefer (choose) when searching for information for entertainment or problem-solving, the mixed affective states of uncertainty, and ease of use that they require. An understanding of how children use the VW interface as a toy and tool at the same time could facilitate the development of fun educational software.Although this study focuses on the relationships between Affective State, VW Retrieval Interface, and Information Need for children seeking to retrieve information, the observed variables for each latent variable must be further defined through literature review.As this study examines the relationship between Information Need and Interface Media, the studies of interface usability and the intention underlying the information-seeking behavior of children must be reviewed. Carroll (2004) suggested that the concept of usability should be extended to include fun. Massey, Weeks, and Druin (2005) also used fun to measure children’s responses to literature in a digital library. Gurland and Glowacky (2011), who discussed theories of motivation for children, noted that children were most interested in the rewards strategy. O’Brien and Toms (2008) discussed user engagement, established a conceptual framework for defining user engagement with technology, and made “emerging” one definition of engagement. In addition, Amichai-Hamburger, Kaynar, and Fine (2007) asserted that individuals with a low need for cognition (attention) prefer interactive sites over linear sites with deeper hyperlink levels. Case (2012) noted that an individual who senses a problematic situation and lacks the internal knowledge that is required to find paths to his or her goals is likely to seek information. Thus, “informative” and “useful” are two important factors for children solving problems. Thus, the observed variables for the latent variable of Entertainment Information Need (EN) are fun (Funy), motivation (Moti), engagement (Enag), and attention (Aten), whereas those of Problem-Solving Information Need (PS) are informative (Ifmv) and useful (Usfl).People frequently recognize a picture with a single glance and understand text and sound based on recognizing each component individually across a time sequence. Tzeng (2004) examined users’ responses to apologies for a computer game failure expressed through text and designed icons. Apologetic (sad) icons communicated more effectively than pure text. In addition, Bilal and Bachir (2007) underlined the importance of ‘representations’ and ‘meaning’ in information searches undertaken by non-native English-speaking children when using the International Children’s Digital Library (ICDL). Thus, the carrying of concept and expression of meaning are important functions of an icon in a graphic interface. Hu, Ma, and Chau (1999) suggested that “size” and “distance” may provide numerous effective and essential visual cues in communication of concepts from systems to users. While demonstrating that information visualizations support knowledge acquisition, Keller, Gerjets, Scheiter, and Garsoffky (2006) indicated that 2D information visualizations support knowledge acquisition processes better than 3D information visualizations. Hourcade (2002, p. 5) claimed that sizing visual targets appropriately would improve usability for children. Text in images carries a lot of useful and important information, such as in advertisements and road signs, and text recognition is widely used in content-based image indexing and the retrieval of video sequences (Yan, Li, & Gao, 2011). However, children often have difficulty recognizing text-forms in a complex background, e.g. a VW. Mandarin Chinese is encoded in a morphological format. When readers move their eyes across the text, visual acuity, visual crowding (Hautala, Hyona, & Aro, 2011), text layout (Li, Liu, & Rayner, 2011), and font size (Shu, Zhou, Yan, & Kliegl, 2011) may lead to saccade-targeting contingent on word segmentation processes. Font size and scene cues thus significantly influence interface functions.Taiwanese children in their first year of primary school must learn the Chinese phonetic alphabet, and the written phonetic alphabet then helps these children recognize the meanings of words. Brück, Kreifelts, and Wildgruber (2011) analyzed how humans extract information from voice tone. When children trigger an icon that initiates an audio narration, they are using a multimedia channel to receive information, which also helps them obtain information. Thus, the observed variables for the latent variable of a VW retrieval interface with text-sound (TS) are font size (Fnsz), text with the phonetic alphabet (Tpnb), phonetic alphabet (Pnab), and associated voice (Asvc), and those of a VW retrieval interface with graphic icon (GI) are scene cue (Sncu), concept carried (Cpcy), and graphic expression (Grep).Interface Media and Affective State are causally related, explaining why the observed variables of Affective State are based on investigations of the comments and feelings of children regarding their interface use.Many existing instruments have been developed to measure anxiety and uncertainty, such as the Scale for Intolerance of Uncertainty (Berenbaum, Bredemeier, & Thompson, 2008; Birrell, Meares, Wilkinson, & Freeston, 2011; Buhr & Dugas, 2002; Carleton, Norton, & Admundson, 2007; Helsen, Van den Bussche, Vlaeyen & Goubert,2013; Sexton & Dugas, 2009). Most previous research has focused on goodness of fit in either therapeutic psychology or the study of personality. This study focused on children in a state of uncertainty of unknowing when using a VW retrieval interface. We adopted some of the items from the Scale for Intolerance of Uncertainty, including partial concepts as frustrate, unforeseen, organize everything in advance in for the development of a scale specific to the context of this study.Several studies have assessed systems that communicate effect using emotionally expressive computer agents. Brave, Nass, and Hutchinson (2005) examined how emotionally expressive computer agents affect user perceptions of a computer game. Participants perceived empathetic agents with “perceived caring” – “trustworthiness” (non-confused) and “felt support” – “likeability” (not difficult). Westerman, Collins, and Cribbin (2005) identified information strategies in which participants adopt an “exhaustive” approach when seeking two-dimensional (2D) node arrangements and a “focused” approach when seeking three-dimensional (3D) arrangements. Kules and Shneiderman (2008) quantitatively analyzed searcher comments regarding eight criteria that participants typically adopt when using categorized overviews: “wonderful/terrible, easy to use/difficult to use, stimulating/dull, satisfying/frustrating, manageable/overwhelming, simple/complex, fast enough/too slow, and organized/disorganized.” Thus, the observed variables for the latent variable Anxiety and Uncertainty (AU) are difficult (Dift), confused (Cfus), and exhaustive (Ehtv), whereas those for Ease of Use (EU) are manageable (Mngb), satisfying (Stfy), stimulating (Stml), simple (Smpl), and focused (Focs).Table 1lists the observed variables and measured question statements for each latent variable.Researchers have presented different models of children’s information needs in a general form (Shenton & Dixon, 2005; Walter, 1994). Based on an information-need study of the online behaviors of 641 Taiwanese primary school students in grades 5 and 6, Lu (2010) noted that the children studied typically sought information as a diversion (40.8%), solve problems (30.8%), and escape daily pressures (20%). However, Betül Yilmaz and Orhan (2010) examined the motivations for Internet usage by high school students and found that superficial learners use the Internet more than deep learners but do so for non-educational aims. Scarpi (2012) noted that information-searching customers may act on momentary urges, be driven by fun and curiosity, or be goal-oriented, task-focused utilitarians. Thus, whereas this is an explanatory framework for children exhibiting different information-seeking behaviors (for example, learning and playing), children experiencing the emotional aspect of information need, such as for entertainment and problem solving, must be addressed to improve the information-seeking model of children. Thus we propose the following hypothesis:H1The Entertainment information need serves as a stronger preference motivator for children to start using/searching in VW retrieval interface of DL than does the Problem-Solving information need.Many researchers have studied the skills required when children seek information on the Internet (Dresang, 1999; Enochsson, 2005; Hultgren & Limberg, 2003; Large, Beheshti, & Breuleux, 1998). Hutchinson et al. (2005) identified the limitations of the information-seeking skills of young children, noting that they occasionally could not spell, type, read, navigate, compose queries, and/or select small objects.The fact that children aged 6–7years old like to read picture books, whereas children aged 11–12years old like to read books where text alone tells the story demonstrates that child reading ability changes with growth. As the literacy skills of children typically improve gradually up to adolescence, children of varying ages adopt different strategies for information retrieval.Paivio (2006) discussed dual-coding theory, which relates that visual and verbal information are processed differently and along distinct channels in the human mind. As the concepts from human perception theory were introduced in information retrieval works related to the visualization system user research (Koshman, 2006; Morse, Lewis, & Olsen, 2002; Yu, 2012), the iconic representations and layout on visual displays thus become critical to users to interpret and choose correct icons (information database) in different visual and textual forms to fulfill their information needs. Sadler-Smith (2011) stated that the correlation between the intuitive style and the visual style was statistically significant to learning and education from a dual-processing perspective. Hourcade (2007, p. 294) children in this stage are improving their visual capabilities and lack literacy skills; therefore, they prefer to conduct visual-based searches. Based on this evidence/literature, our H2 states:H2Children use a VW retrieval interface with icons more intuitively than a VW retrieval interface with text and sound symbols.Previous research revealed differences in IS behavior between users of text-sound interfaces and those using graphical icons. Morse et al. (2002) tested visual information retrieval methodologies by comparing textual, icon, graphical, and “spring” displays and found that user performance with the textual interface was superior to the other interfaces (p. 35); however, the graphical methods (icon, graphs, “spring”) were preferred by adult when the complexity of the task increased. While children have limited literacy skills, we can assume that children prefer visual interface to avoid difficulties in unknown text and searching related information. Thus, H3 was formulated.H3Children who use a VW retrieval interface with text-sound face more difficulty than those who use a VW retrieval interface with graphic icon.Martens (2012) addressed the development of interfaces for digital resources for children, ranging from icons to metadata and hierarchical approaches. The contexts of individual children, such as wildly differing affective states, and meaningful metadata for one child may be incomprehensible to another. Bilal (2001), Bilal (2002b) suggested that emotions can profoundly influence the overall effectiveness with which children use a Web search engine on research tasks (learning) and on fully self-generated search tasks (playing). Researchers have characterized student mental models of Web searches (Zhang, 2008) and developed affective systems able to recognize and appropriately respond to human emotions (Lopatovska & Arapakis, 2011), which ultimately improve the interface and make HCI experiences increasingly effective and pleasurable.Barendregt, Bekker, Bouwhuis, and Baauw (2006) conducted an experiment in which children encountered different types of problems during their first use and after they have practiced with a game. Usability problems caused by a lack of knowledge (anxiousness and uncertainty) were more often identified during first use (not ease of use). Fun problems related to a too-high challenge level (anxiousness and uncertainty) may disappear after some practice (ease of use). Thus, the anxiousness and uncertainty factor is negatively correlated with the ease of use factor, as it relates to child affective states. Based on these studies, we presented the relationships among anxiousness, uncertainty and ease of use through the formulation of the following hypothesis:H4Anxiousness and Uncertainty are negatively correlated with the Ease of Use as it relates to child affective states.While investigating the subjective variables involved in an information search process, Gwizdka and Lopatovska (2009) determined that a good mood before and during a search correlates with a subsequent good mood but also with poor search outcomes and reduced satisfaction. Thus, feeling some ‘pain’ during a search helps ensure ‘gain’ in the form of quality outcomes. We suggest that children seek information to solve their problem (studying) and wish to reduce the uncertainty that impedes their search for information. While seeking information for the sake of entertainment enhances ones’ ability to endure uncertainty. Thus we propose the following hypothesis:H5Children engaged in problem-solving searches experience less uncertainty and anxiety than those engaged in searches purely as a diversion.Blom and Monk (2003) suggested that users personalize their computers for emotional reasons, including sense of control, ownership, fun, and simple boredom. Yannakakisa and Hallam (2008) explored the Playware game and a control task and indicated two different classes of children: those that prefer constant energetic play with low mental/emotional load and those that report deriving fun from dynamic play that involves high mental/emotional load independent of physical effort. Thus, when seeking information as a diversion, the children hope for significant ease of use (less physical effort) over their affective state. In addition, when seeking information to solve a problem, the children can experience a sense of diminished control. Thus, we propose the following hypothesis:H6Children value ease of use more highly when engaged in a search purely as a diversion, compared to when they are seeking to solve a problem.Fig. 2presents the latent variables of the child-oriented IS model: Information Need, Interface Media, and Affective State. When examined using SEM, these latent variables can help in the development of an improved interface for information retrieval.Affective technology, affective computing, and emotional design are growing fields in computer science, human–computer interaction, and cognitive science. This study focused on building a model to explore children’s cognition of uncertainty and sense of control while searching for information using a VW retrieval interface. Thus, a well-designed VW retrieval interface may act as a toy or a tool.1.Which kind of VW retrieval interface is preferred by children with specific information needs (playing or learning)?What are the affective states experienced by children using a VW retrieval interface?What are the affective states experienced by children with specific information needs (playing or learning)?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study on IS was performed within a Taiwanese system using Taiwanese participants. The customized VW retrieval interface of the NLPI digital library helped children to overcome obstacles to their information-seeking behavior. The provision of a “fun” interface could change the way children view the VW information-seeking, causing them to see it not merely as a tiring tool but also as a toy for learning and play capable of helping them to enjoy the search for information. This important topic could help in the development of a VW retrieval interface suitable for children to use when searching for information.Statistical confirmatory analysis was applied to clarify the relationships among the latent variables (Information Need, Interface Media, and Affective State).(1)Children prefer using VW retrieval interfaces in the search for information as a form of entertainment, rather than when solving problems.In this study, the text–sound interface proved easier to use but increased the sense of uncertainty when used by children.Children searching for information as a form of entertainment were more willing to endure uncertainty and demanded more control than those searching for information with the aim of solving a problem.The children VW information-seeking model presents an alternative route that offers a new method of rechecking the information-seeking model and allows the researcher an opportunity to explore fun roles through which children can play with and learn from software. Furthermore, the relationships between the interface usability and bounded system and children affected modes in information studies may be explored by careful examination. This is the first study to identify the characteristics of an enjoyable, effective interface designed specifically to meet the needs of children searching for information.