@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal answerer ranking for new questions in community question answering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formally described the answerer ranking problem in CQA service.A novel model with tensor decomposition is proposed to solve the problem.The parameters of the above model are learned by maximizing the multi-class AUC.Introducing the asker dimension improves the answerer ranking performance.Our approach outperforms the previous methods on two real-world CQA datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Answerer ranking,Learn to rank,Tensor model,AUC,Community question answering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Community question answering (CQA) services that enable users to ask and answer questions have become popular on the internet. However, lots of new questions usually cannot be resolved by appropriate answerers effectively. To address this question routing task, in this paper, we treat it as a ranking problem and rank the potential answerers by the probability that they are able to solve the given new question. We utilize tensor model and topic model simultaneously to extract latent semantic relations among asker, question and answerer. Then, we propose a learning procedure based on the above models to get optimal ranking of answerers for new questions by optimizing the multi-class AUC (Area Under the ROC Curve). Experimental results on two real-world CQA datasets show that the proposed method is able to predict appropriate answerers for new questions and outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, Community Question Answering (CQA) services that allow users to ask and answer questions via the web have been successful on the internet. CQA portals such as Yahoo! Answers1http://answers.yahoo.com.1and Tencent Wenwen2http://www.wenwen.com.2(which is one of the leading CQA service providers in China) provide online platforms for users to post their questions and share their knowledge by answering others’ questions. Thousands of millions of questions have been resolved on these CQA portals. For example, in Tencent Wenwen, 207,469,570 questions have been resolved until October 30, 2012.3http://www.wenwen.com.3Although these CQA portals have brought significant benefits to users, there are still several drawbacks in current CQA systems. The most prominent problem is that lots of new questions cannot be solved by other users effectively. Previous survey (Furlan, Nikolic, & Milutinovic, 2012; Li & King, 2010) showed that lots of new questions actually cannot be answered efficiently (within 24h). On the other hand, since the amount of new questions increases rapidly, it is inconvenient for the users who are usually expert in a few domains to find the questions, which they are able to answer. This leads to a low participation rate of users on CQA portals (Guo, Xu, Bao, & Yu, 2008).To address this problem, several approaches have been proposed in both industry and academia. In the industry, for example Aardvark4http://vark.com/.4is a social search engine which routes new questions to the person in the asker’s extended social network (e.g. Facebook,5http://www.facebook.com.5LinkedIn6http://www.linkedin.com.6) who are most likely to be able to answer this question. The details of Aardvark are introduced in (Horowitz & Kamvar, 2010).In academia, lots of methods (Dror, Koren, Maarek, & Szpektor, 2011; Guo et al., 2008; Li & King, 2010; Li, King, & Lyu, 2011; Liu, Liu, & Yang, 2010; Zhou, Cong, Cui, Jensen, & Yao, 2009; Zhou, Lyu, & King, 2012) have been proposed. Traditional methods often focused on semantic relations between questions and answerers via language model or topic model as shown in left side of Fig. 1. Although such approaches could describe the answerer’s interests in questions or related topics, relations between asker and question, asker and answerer have not attracted enough attention. Actually, these relations indeed exist in online CQA portals. For asker and question, questions of the same asker are usually correlated. For example in Fig. 2which is a snapshot of an asker’s homepage on Yahoo! Answers, all questions were talking about Chrysler car, in categories of Maintenance and Repair, Chrysler. Thus, the information of asker is useful to understand questions. For asker and answerer, similar to Facebook where users can see their friends’ news in their homepages, the asker’s fans/followers are easier to find his/her new questions and more likely to answer them. A related example is shown in Fig. 3, which is a snapshot of a user’s contacts/friends webpage on Yahoo! Answers. Then in this paper, we incorporate the asker dimension as traditional topic-answerer model and propose a novel asker-topic-answerer model which is a 3-order tensor (Kolda & Sun, 2008; Lu, Plataniotis, & Venetsanopoulos, 2011) as shown in the right side of Fig. 1.Furthermore, CQA services allow askers to select the best one among all answers given by answerers. The corresponding answer is called the best answer. Traditional approaches (Li & King, 2010; Liu et al., 2010) usually consider only the best answers and answerers, ignoring the other answers and answerers, or treating them as the same. However, the information of other answers is also beneficial to solve questions and produces much more training data for learning procedure, e.g. more candidate answerers for predicting. Therefore, in our approach, we consider both the best and other answers as shown in Fig. 4. In the left side of Fig. 4 which represents the traditional approach, the blue grids show that asker2 was given two answers by the same answerer on two topics. There is no difference between these answers in traditional approach. However, actually the answerer achieved the best answer on the upper topic (symbol∘) and other answers (symbol×) on the below topic as shown in the right side of Fig. 4. It means this answerer may be more expert in the upper topic than the below one. Such useful information can be used to improve the ranking of answerers.Thus our intuition is that if an answerer, u achieved many best answers in some topics of a specific asker (i.e. best answerer), u should rank higher than other answerers who gave non-best answers or no answers for new questions in this topic of the same asker. Furthermore, if u achieved many other answers, u should rank higher than the answerers who did not give answers (i.e. non-answerer). Based on this intuition and quality of answers, we classify users into three categories: best answerer, other answerer and non-answerer. As demonstrated in the previous work (Yan & Zhou, 2012), maximization of AUC (Area under the ROC curve) can be used to optimize ranking of two-class problem (answerer and no-answerer). Thus in this paper, it is reasonable to solve the ranking problem of three-class by maximizing multi-class AUC which has been studied in previous researches (Hand & Till, 2001; Marrocco, Duin, & Tortorella, 2008; Toh, Kim, & Lee, 2008). Now the problem mentioned above can be treated as answerer ranking problem.In this paper, we formally describe the answerer ranking problem and propose a novel approach to learn optimal ranking for new questions effectively. The proposed approach consists of three stages: (a) learn topics of askers, answerers and construct asker-topic-answerer model; (b) optimize asker-topic-answerer model with tensor factorization by maximizing multi-class AUC; and (c) predict the final ranking of potential answerers for new questions. The main contributions can be summarized as below: (1) A novel model is proposed by combining tensor model and topic model to capture the latent semantic relations among asker, question and answerer simultaneously. (2) Based on this model, we propose a new learning approach with tensor factorization to perform the answerer ranking task, which outperforms previous related approaches on two real-world datasets.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present an overview of related work. Next, we formally describe the answerer ranking problem in Section 3. In Section 4, we describe the details of the proposed framework. In Section 5, we compare the proposed method with other baseline and state-of-the-art approaches and investigate the impact of model parameters. Finally, we draw conclusions and discuss the future work in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we formally described the answerer ranking problem and proposed a novel framework to learn the optimal answerer ranking for new questions effectively. We firstly learned the topic distributions of questions by LDA model, and constructed a 3-order tensor model based on the semantic relations among asker, question and answerer. Secondly, we adopted Tucker tensor decomposition to learn model parameters by maximizing multi-class AUC. Finally, we were able to predict the ranking of answerers for new questions. We conducted extensive experiments on two real-world datasets, which were crawled from Yahoo! Answers and Tencent Wenwen. The results showed that the proposed approach outperforms other previous methods in regards of four metrics, i.e. MRR, MAP, Precision and Recall. The generalizability of our approach is fairly well. Actually, this approach can be easily modified to solve any recommendation or prediction task which can be formulated as a multi-class (including two-class) ranking problem based on tensor model, such as interest-based friend recommendation, social tag prediction, etc. The main limitation of our method is that it is time consuming to deal with large-scale CQA forums, since the tensor model needs to process more parameters than traditional methods in the training process.In future work, we plan to utilize more information such as the answer ratings provided by users in CQA, which is considered to be useful feedback concerning the answers’ quality. In addition, while the timestamp of users’ answering activities is ignored in our current model, we want to introduce such information to further improve the ranking performance of our method. Furthermore, we hope to do some work to improve the scalability of current model in real-world scenarios with massive users.