@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A review of ranking approaches for semantic search on Web

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An exhaustive review of ranking approaches for semantic search on Web.We identified three stages of ranking in semantic search process.We identified criteria for the comparison of semantic search approaches.We examined some open issues relevant to efficient semantic search.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Semantic search,Ranking,Ontology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With ever increasing information being available to the end users, search engines have become the most powerful tools for obtaining useful information scattered on the Web. However, it is very common that even most renowned search engines return result sets with not so useful pages to the user. Research on semantic search aims to improve traditional information search and retrieval methods where the basic relevance criteria rely primarily on the presence of query keywords within the returned pages. This work is an attempt to explore different relevancy ranking approaches based on semantics which are considered appropriate for the retrieval of relevant information. In this paper, various pilot projects and their corresponding outcomes have been investigated based on methodologies adopted and their most distinctive characteristics towards ranking. An overview of selected approaches and their comparison by means of the classification criteria has been presented. With the help of this comparison, some common concepts and outstanding features have been identified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Web search is a key application of the Web where present search technologies rely on link analysis techniques that exploit the structure of Web to determine important documents. At the same time, they rely on simple term statistics to identify documents that are most relevant to a query. Mark-up languages such as (X)HTML are primarily focused to documents whose content should be interpretable by human interpreters and hence focused on document structure and its presentation. Little efforts are paid to the representation of the semantics of the content itself.The growing availability of structured information on the Web enables new opportunities for information access. Semantically oriented search engines and specifically that use ontologies as enabling technologies have gained considerable interest in the last decade. The ever growing amount of ontology-based semantic mark-up in the Web provides an opportunity to start working in the direction of a new generation of open intelligent applications (Motta & Sabou, 2006). Efficient search is one such major envisioned application of this next generation Web popularly known as Semantic Web (Burners-Lee, Hendler, & Lassila, 2001).Current Web search techniques are not directly suited for indexing and retrieval of semantic mark-up. Document is treated as a bag of words where words or word variants are recognized as indexing terms. The existing semantic mark-up is either simply ignored by many search engines for indexing purposes or not processed in a way that allows the mark-up to be used distinguishably from other text during the search.The upcoming Web search is no longer limited to matching keywords of the query against documents but instead complex information needs can be expressed in a structured way with precise and structured answers as results. The kind of search in which user’s information needs are addressed by considering the meaning of user’s query as well as available resources is referred to as Semantic Search (Tran, Haase, & Studer, 2009).Due to the ever increasing move from data to knowledge and increasing popularity of the vision of Semantic Web, there is equally increasing interest and work in automatically extracting and representing the metadata as semantic annotation to the documents and services on the Web (Shah, Finin, Joshi, Cost, & Mayfield, 2002). It seems that each Web page would possess semantic annotation that record additional details concerning the page itself. Annotations are based on classes of concepts and relations among them. The “vocabulary” for the annotation is usually expressed by means of ontology. The information contained in such agreed upon ontology is quite valuable for determining the relevance of the retrieved documents based on the “known” facts, relationships or the other data. Table 1shows a comparison of features of Traditional Keyword-based search and Semantic-based search based on various parameters.The two elements of the ontology are quite significant from the “relevant information access” point of view. The first element is the named entities such as names of persons, objects, countries, places, research articles, artists, and museum. Available techniques had been developed for entity oriented search of documents (Aleman-Meza, Arpinar, Nural, & Sheth, 2010). The second element is the relationships which provide meaning to the entity. The value of such relationships relies on the fact that those are named relationships. Relationships play a vital role in the relevant information access as the Web evolves continuously (Sheth & Ramakrishnan, 2007).Many users try to analyze information either by browsing information space or using a search engine. Search engine based systems generally locate documents based on keywords. Although they do return documents involving keywords inputted by user, a lot of retrieved documents have very less to do with user’s needs. The onus lies on the user to decide about the relevance of the retrieved documents using their mental model in order to obtain desired information. Efforts are consistently being made to extend or identify alternatives to traditional search mechanisms focused on finding documents based on keyword-based approaches. With the advent of the Semantic Web along with enabling technologies, a stage has been set which will facilitate in getting relevant documents from the massive data sources thereby assisting in information analysis.The premise of search technologies today is primarily centered on enabling search for entities or other Semantic Web resources. Different from traditional text-based information retrieval systems which exclusively retrieve and rank documents, semantic search systems retrieve and rank entities of various types in response to user queries. Semantics of relationships among entities are defined in schema ontologies (e.g., through the domain and range constructs in RDF(S) or OWL languages). It is increasingly possible to analyze metadata extracted from Web to discover interesting relationships. Possibly, just as document ranking is a critical component in present search engines, the ranking of complex relationships is likely to be important component in the upcoming Semantic search engines. But it is very unlikely that ranking schemes for ranking entities (documents, resources etc.) may be applied for ranking complex relationships among entities. Furthermore, heterogeneous relationships existing among entities embedded into semantic annotations can be effectively exploited to define ranking strategies for semantically annotated Web pages.One of the most impressive and popular Ranking model for the ordering of retrieved documents is PageRank (Page, Brin, Motowani, & Winograd, 1998). It looks at the Internet as a big graph where pages are nodes and hyperlinks are edges. It has been successfully applied to distinguish the popularity of different Web documents through analyzing the link structure in the Web graph. It is obvious that in the Web graph, all the Web pages involving same keyword(s) are not equally popular. E.g. only some top conferences pertaining to a research field are highly important with high quality research papers. In order to help users to quickly locate their pages of interest, popularity of retrieved pages is required to be calculated. The more popular a Web page is, the more likely the user is interested in it and hence the more important that page is. PageRank algorithm facilitates to accurately approximate such global importance for a given page. It is based on the intuition that more the number of random visitors/references to a page are, the more popular of the page is. In the process, query context is not taken into consideration for the purpose of ranking of the page pertaining to a given query.RDF datasets in the Semantic Web represented as graphs have unique characteristic i.e. heterogeneity of links. An entity is linked to other entities through different types of relationships e.g. In research domain, paper→cited_by→paper, paper→written_by→author, paper→published_in→conference/journal, similarly in health domain, medicine→cures→disease, medicine→manufactured_by→company, medicine→causes→disorder etc. Hence popularity of relationships along with popularity of entity is supposed to be considered for calculating the popularity score of entity. Traditional link analysis methods like PageRank treat all the links/relationships to be of same importance therefore directly applying these methods would result in unjustified popularity ranking. Some learning based approaches like (Nie, Zhang, Wen, & Ma, 2005) had been proposed for automatically finding the popularity of different types of relationships based on some partial ranking of entity objects manually given by domain experts.Another aspect is to exploit the relevance of relationships connecting two entities for searching or ranking documents based on various factors. An entity can be related with other different entities with relationships having varying degree of importance. Based on the relationships described among entities in domain ontology, it can be made possible to find the set of neighboring entities which are important with respect to seed entity. The entity that directly matches with the user query input can be referred to as seed entity. The score of a document can be determined based on how many of its annotations belong to such set. Unlike other link analysis methods like PageRank, documents are not required to be interlinked for the purpose of ranking. Also, this seems to be more inclined as query dependent approach which emphasizes on finding entities pertaining to the query terms rather than finding global importance of the entity.The research on ranking approaches for Semantic search on Web has been broadly classified into three categories in accordance with their stage of ranking. Also some distinctive features have been identified after careful analysis of the contemporary approaches. A detailed comparison of most of the distinct approaches has been made based on most distinctive characteristics towards ranking and presented in Table 2. Rather than discussing the varieties and the evolution of selected ideas, it has been preferred to present a wide spectrum of approaches pertaining to ranking for Semantic Search with a view to present the diversity of ideas.In terms of entity oriented search, the aim is to retrieve results that match the user input which might directly specify the entity of interest. Let the entity that match the user query be referred to as seed entity. This seed entity is associated with a number of neighboring entities existing in the ontology through one or more relationships. Also there is typically more than one path connecting two entities. Hence it is argued that closeness of two connected entities is required to be weighted through parameters like path length, path direction etc. This necessitates the ranking for closeness of seed entity with other neighboring entities to consider some threshold number of entities for subsequent search of documents based on the resultant set of entities. A survey of the approaches pertaining to entity ranking is presented below:RareRank: This is a Domain specific and query specific approach for approximation of popularity of a page/resource. While classical IR models exclusively rank documents based on content (relevance) and link analysis based methods emphasize link structures (quality), (Wei, Barnaghi, & Bargiela, 2011) attempts to integrate the two scores: relevance score and quality score coherently and with proper tuning of parameters which is often tedious and generally missing. Following a so called Rational Research Model, it has taken a Knowledge base in Research domain (consisting of instances such as publication, author, and journal or conference) which is represented as a directed graph. Then domain topic ontology is plugged into the graph. The derived Ranking score integrates both relevance (using Domain topic Ontology) and quality (using citation links).The model generalizes the previous link analysis based methods which only aims at ranking documents. Hence it can be utilized by semantic search systems for the purpose of ranking Entities. By doing so, it attempts to bridge the gap of domain specificity which used to remain unaddressed while using PageRank – like algorithm for semantic based ranking. There is a potential scope left in parameter tuning although tuning procedure adopted in the model is simple.Learning to Rank: The main objective of (Dali & Fortuna, 2011) is to explore Domain-independent and Query-independent features to approximate the popularity of a resource for Semantic based search on Web. Moreover it attempts to combine such features to reach out to more robust ranking model. PageRank (Page et al., 1998) algorithm is taken as a reference ranking model to determine its applicability in the RDF graph scenario. A set of domain – independent features along with an adapted PageRank has been combined and utilized to get higher correlation with the popularity of resources and to eventually get the better results. Where on one hand, author looks into ways of combining several features to reach to a more accurate and robust ranking model, on the other hand, it attempts to find out that to what extent the resultant ranking model is applicable to other datasets. DBpedia and YAGO, two popular RDF datasets along with a set of SPARQL queries have been used for the purpose. One important finding is that graph based features lead to bigger inconsistencies than those of text based features used for ranking purposes which makes it difficult to apply as a general ranking model. Although the present model with a combination of text based features and graph based features have shown favorable results on the sample datasets, it further needs to investigate the transferability of ranking model across different Linked Open Data (LOD) datasets representing different domains.RSS: A framework for enabling ranked semantic search on the Semantic Web (Ning, Jin, & Wu, 2008), on one hand, invokes heterogeneity of relationships to determine the global importance of resources. On the other hand, it exploits an extended spread activation algorithm to retrieve resources most semantically related to the query thus facilitating inference while searching. In the process, it becomes capable to provide users with properly ordered semantic search results. It is observed that search results can be greatly expanded with entities most semantically related to the query. Users are thus provided with most interesting and properly ordered semantic search results. The current approach has achieved this objective by combining global ranking values of the resources and relevance between the resources and query. However the step of assigning edge weights in the schema graph is required to be automated rather than performed manually. At the same time, its applicability needs to be evaluated on cross-domain platform although it is believed to be so by the author.ReConRank: SWSE (Harth et al., 2007) is a search engine for searching and retrieving entities and simple knowledge. ReConRank (Hogan, Harth, & Decker, 2006) is the ranking algorithm for SWSE. It is shown as using a 3 – phase computation for entity prioritization: (i) ResourceRank (ii) ContextRank (iii) ReConRank (a combination of earlier two). All these are variations of PageRank algorithm applied to semantic graphs. In the first phase, RDF data crawled from Web are transferred to directed labeled graph (entities are taken as nodes and predicates as labeled links), ResourceRank Algorithm is applied to compute rank scores of Web resources. In second phase, context graphs using the provenance of RDF data are extracted to further compute ContextRank scores. In the final phase, integrated resource context graph is derived based on predefined rules to further produce ReConRank scores which reflect the importance of a resource as well as its context (based on provenance data of entities). The performance in terms of scalability has been emphasized for the purpose of evaluating the results on a dataset with 15M triples.ObjectRank: (Hwang, Hristidis, & Papakonstantinou, 2006) has idea of ranking objects in relational databases based on the principle inspired by PageRank. A number of parameters have been proposed to improve the relevance of search results to the keyword based user query. One is specificity metric to measure the keyword relatedness of the resulting objects. The other is quality metric to measure the global importance of the object independent of the query keyword. Two more parameters: i) importance of the results actually containing the query keywords ii) weight assigned to each query keyword have been explored although its implementation and validation is not shown. One interesting augmentation has been proposed to exploit the domain knowledge related to the given query. Domain based ontology graph is proposed to be integrated into their ObjecrRank system which eventually enables to enhance the quality of query results. Although it seems to be a favorable approach but tested upon a relatively smaller dataset. It requires to be validated upon larger systems up to the scale of Web with ontology based approach.Although PageRank is one of the most popular ranking model for document-level ranking, (Nie et al., 2005) discards its validity for ranking Web objects because of the heterogeneous relationships existing between them. Web information for objects relevant to a specific application domain is collected and these objects are ranked in terms of their relevance and popularity to answer user queries. Unlike Web pages that are connected among each other to form a so-called Web graph, objects are related to each other through different types of relationships. Author asserts that traditional PageRank algorithm is no longer valid for object popularity calculation. Therefore a popularity propagation factor has been assigned to each type of object relationship. A learning based approach is proposed to automatically learn the popularity propagation factors for different types of links. This is done based on the partial ranking of objects given by domain experts. It seems to be a good attempt to rank Web objects based on their popularity and object relationship graph but query context as one of the significant criteria for ranking is missing. At the same time, present approach may prove to be domain-independent as claimed by author but cross-domain evaluation of the approach has not been presented.A hybrid approach for searching in the Semantic Web (Rocha, Schwabe, & Aragao, 2004) combines full text search with spreading activation search in ontology. Search starts with a keyword based query. Results to the full text search are instances from the ontology. Those instances are used to initiate a spreading activation search in the ontology to find additional instances. As claimed by author, it is not possible to devise universal formula that proves to be the best for all application domains. So it becomes a domain dependent approach for reaching to the relevant ordered set of results. Also, here all types of relations are considered to have same relative weight while the calculation of the weight mapping value for a relation instance can be context-sensitive depicting relative importance of relation types based on context.Contrary to the traditional IR approaches where the relevance of the search results is determined only by analyzing the underlying information repository in the form of content and hyperlink structure, (Stojanovic, Studer, & Stojanovic, 2003) presents an approach that exploits the explicitly shared semantics of the information supported by an ontology. It aims at ranking search results of a semantic portal. The approach combines the characteristics of inferencing process and the content of information repository for determining the greater relevance and ordering of search results. “Universal” and “user-defined” weights are assigned to each semantic relation, taking into account the context as well as other parameters like specificity and path length. These weights are combined into a global formula where multiplying constants are specified by the user. Specificity of the instance of a relation, which is higher, the less often the instances of the concepts in the relation are present in other instances of relations. In addition the inference process of the statements is taken into account for ranking results. Although the approach seems to be promising for large datasets related to any domain but it is shown to be tested on a small dataset of a particular domain. Query context as a dominating criterion for ranking purposes is missing. Author himself has emphasized the need to develop task-oriented strategies for calculating the relevance.In terms of relationship oriented search, one of the vital issues required to be addressed is how to determine relative importance of relationships found with respect to a user’s query context. This is important since it is very likely that number of relationships existing among two entities is very large. This may lead to create more acute information overload problem than currently exist on the Web. It is therefore imperative that techniques for ordering of search results with respect to relationships be developed in order to present results of highest importance first to the user. Although all the approaches for relationship ranking in the swiftly developing field of Semantic Search have not been looked into but it is hoped that basic ideas have been covered.OntoLook: The idea of (Li, Wang, & Huang, 2007) is that if a graph based representation of a Web page annotation can be provided where concepts and relations (along with their multiplicities) are modeled as vertices and weighted edges respectively, it becomes possible to define a series of cuts removing less relevant concepts from the graph. This allows for the generation of so-called candidate relation keyword set (CRKS) to be submitted to the annotated database which can significantly reduce the presence of uninteresting pages in the result set. The strategy behind OntoLook as named by the author only allows to empirically identify relations among concepts that are supposed to be less relevant with respect to user query. This information is used to reformulate the user query by including only a subset of all the possible relations among concepts which is later used to retrieve Web pages from the annotated database. Instead of using the whole semantic knowledgebase, they have used user query, page annotation and underlying ontology. This is expected to result in reduction in the cost of query answering phase. Because of decentralized and heterogeneous nature of Web, it seems impossible for all Web Pages to use same ontology. So, even on same domain, semantic communication among ontologies will be needed. Moreover the weight of relations in forming the property-keyword candidate set also needs to be considered. It seems that the absence of an effective ranking strategy has greatly limited the scope of user satisfaction. A concrete ranking criterion requires to be in place although concepts being explored are query dependent.In the direction of exploiting semantics of complex relationships for locating relevant pieces of data from Web, Aleman-Meza, Halaschek-Wiener, Budak Arpinar, Ramakrishnan, & Sheth, 2005 presents a flexible user-centric ranking approach to identify interesting and relevant relationships in the Semantic Web. Eventually, this is thought to be helpful for ranking the results of a query involving two entities in terms of interesting semantic associations. Semantic associations are generally sequence of properties that link various entities. E.g. two entities e1: Person and e2: Person are involved in a query; the result set involves the semantic associations indicating the different ways by which these two persons are related. An overall ranking criterion has been developed using a number of semantic metrics such as context, subsumption and trust and statistical metrics such as Rarity, Popularity and Association Length for ranking semantic associations. In semantic metrics, context is based on a blend of user perspective and ontological aspect, subsumption is purely based on ontological aspect and trust is purely based on user perspective. In statistical metrics, all the three Rarity, Popularity and Association Length are based on ontological aspects like number and connectivity of entities and relationships. This is thought to be one of the good approaches for Relationship ranking with wide set of parameters involved in computing rank scores. Although a wide range of features have been used for ranking but the idea of user involvement for assigning weights to different parameters may not be applicable to general user.SemRank: Different from contemporary views for ranking semantic associations or relationships that approximate the relevance irrespective of situation, (Anyanwu, Maduko, & Sheth, 2005) opines that relevance is situation dependent even for the same query and hence some flexibility should be built into the relevance models so that different orderings may be imposed on the same result set for the same query made in different situations. In this work, user is given flexibility for selecting the search mode from conventional search mode to discovery search mode based on his need. For the purpose, SemRank exploits a so-called “Modulative Ranking Model” that is capable of taking into account the particular context in which query is submitted.It goes on accounting for the specificity or uniqueness of the result based on intuition that commonly occurring association is more predictable than a rarely occurring association. Discrepancy is accounted by calculating the number of deviations in a path description connecting two resources which starts and proceeds along the direction as described in the schema layer, suddenly changes direction unrelated to schema because of multiple typing of a resource. Such deviations are not likely to be anticipated by users and hence unpredictable. Finally a semantic match of the results with the keywords optionally entered by the user along with query enhances the ranking value. SemRank formula combines all of these three factors to assign a rank to any semantic association, adapting itself as the mode changes. In nutshell, it presents a unified ranking model with a blend of semantic and information theoretic techniques to determine the rank of a semantic association. Although it provides a flexible ranking approach that offers a variety of result orderings to be chosen as per the needs of the user, the empirical evaluation was done using a synthetically generated data set rather than existing RDF data collections. Query context has been taken into consideration for ranking purpose.In terms of document oriented search, the number of documents may be present in the result set based on most relevant and complete set of entities of interest along with most relevant set of relationships existing among those entities. The documents may further be required to be sorted in their order of relevance. The concepts/entities and instances in the ontology are likely to be linked to the documents by means of explicit non-embedded annotations to the documents. Annotations may be assigned a weight that reflects the relative importance of instance in relation to the document meaning. Weight can be computed possibly automatically with an adaptation of tf∗idf algorithm. Alternatively the relevance score of a document can be made as the summation of the weights of paths from entities spotted in a document to the concepts of ontology.Semantic relationships have been taken as the exclusive resource for ranking documents in (Aleman-Meza et al., 2010). Unlike many other approaches, this approach does not exploit any specific structure in a document or links between documents for the purpose of ranking documents. Relevance of documents is determined using relationships those are known to exist between the entities in a populated ontology. A measure of relevance is introduced based on the traversal and semantics of relationships that link entities in an ontology. Actually the relevance measure is calculated based on the subjective knowledge by a domain expert who assigns “low/medium/high” scores to the relationship sequences by referring to the schema of ontology. Based on this score, degree of relatedness of so called match entity with other entities existing in the ontology is found out. Finally the score of a document is determined depending on how many of its annotations belong to such related entity set. Although it is a novel approach of exploiting semantics of relationships for finding the relevancy of documents, a poorly populated ontology may greatly limit the effectiveness of semantic annotation step and in turn the retrieval step. Moreover, a domain expert manually assigns the weights to relationship sequences. Although this is done for once, that too without the knowledge of end-user, still it is felt that automation of this process is required.The idea of a relation-based page rank algorithm is presented in (Lamberti, Sanna, & Demartini, 2009). The ranking criteria is based on an estimate of the probability that the keywords/concepts within an annotated page are linked one to the other in a way that is the same (or at least that is similar) to the one in user’s mind at the time of query definition. This probability measure is shown to be effectively computed by defining a graph based description of the ontology (ontology graph), of the user query (query sub-graph) and of each annotated page containing queried concepts/keywords (both in terms of annotation graph and page sub-graph). In other words, a ranking among semantically annotated pages is based on the intuition that larger is the number of relations linking one concept with the other in a page, given the total number of relations among those concepts in the ontology, the higher is the probability that this page contains exactly the same relations as desired by the user. Hence it is the most relevant page with respect to the user query. Only query dependent features have been explored for ranking semantically annotated Web pages. The cost of query answering seems to be reduced since only user query, the page annotation and underlying ontology are being used in the ranking process instead of whole semantic knowledgebase with billions of pages. Further efforts will be required to address scalability into future Semantic Web repositories based on multiple ontologies, characterized by billions of Web pages.Query-specific and domain independent ranking features have been explored in (Castells, Fernández, & Vallet, 2007). Author proposes an ontology based information retrieval model using full-fledged domain ontologies and knowledge bases to support semantic search in document repositories. Full documents rather than specific ontological instances are returned in response to a user query unlike Boolean semantic search systems. Once the list of documents is formed, the search engine computes a semantic similarity value between the query and each document. The added value of semantic information retrieval relies on additional explicit information-type, structure, relations, classification, and rules about the concepts referenced in the documents, represented in an ontology-based KB. The documents that are annotated with the returned instances are retrieved, ranked and presented to the user. The performance of the model significantly depends upon the amount and quality of information within the KB it runs upon. It is assumed by the author that annotations do not describe all the meaning conveyed by the document in a complete manner. Hence document retrieval phase leads to an approximate match. Further, independently developed and maintained cross-domain KBs can be integrated so as to deal with multiple heterogeneous data sets.Swoogle: A prototype of a semantic search engine is presented in (Ding et al., 2004) which helps to search and rank Semantic Web Documents (SWDs). This follows a query independent approach for ranking purposes. Four types of semantic links between SWDs have been explored and different weights are assigned to them: (i) Imports (A, B): A imports all the contents of B (ii) Uses-term (A, B): Instead of importing all the terms of B, A uses some of the terms defined by B (iii) Extends (A, B): A extends the definitions of the terms defined by B (iv) Asserts (A, B): A makes assertions about the terms defined by B. The ranking algorithm for the ranking of SWDs is termed as OntoRank (Ding et al., 2005). The ranking score of an SWD is computed using an adaptation of PageRank algorithm. The approach uses domain-independent and query independent features for ranking. Query context remains unaddressed for ranking purposes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
