@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Expanding mobile wireless capacity: The challenges presented by technology and economics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The three basic tools for deepening the capacity of mobile wireless networks are described.Historical growth in spectrum quantity, geographic reuse, and throughput efficiency is reported.The capability of 4G LTE and LTE-Advanced to further improve network capacity is projected.These projected capacity improvements are compared with forecasts of future U.S. mobile demand.U.S. networks will require an additional 560MHz of spectrum by 2022 to meet forecasted demand.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spectrum,Reuse,Mobile,Wireless,Network,LTE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As demand for mobile broadband services continues to explode, mobile wireless networks must expand greatly their capacities. This paper describes and quantifies the economic and technical challenges associated with deepening wireless networks to meet this growing demand. Methods of capacity expansion divide into three general categories: the deployment of more radio spectrum; more intensive geographic reuse of spectrum; and increasing the throughput capacity of each MHz of spectrum within a given geographic area. The paper describes these several basic methods to deepen mobile wireless capacity. It goes on to measure the contribution of each of these methods to historical capacity growth within U.S. networks. The paper then describes the capabilities of 4G LTE wireless technology, and further innovations off of it, to further improve network capacity. These capacity expansion capabilities of LTE-Advanced along with traditional spectrum reuse are quantified and compared to forecasts of future demand to evaluate the ability of U.S. networks to match future demand. Without significantly increasing current spectrum allocations by 560MHz over the 2014–2022 period, the presented model suggests that U.S. wireless capacity expansion will be inadequate to accommodate expected demand growth. This conclusion is in contrast to claims that the U.S. faces no spectrum shortage.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Expanding mobile wireless capacity in an economic and effective manner requires multifaceted efforts. The analysis presented in this paper has demonstrated the techniques that have been used to deepen mobile wireless networks. These include the allocation of additional spectrum; the development of more spectrally-efficient wireless technologies and the migration of customers to these technologies; increased reuse of available radio frequencies enabled both by cell site splitting and LTE-A support for enhanced small cell and Wi-Fi integration; and by tighter packing of offered data into available transmission capacity. But even though the analysis has tried to be generous in its projections of capacity growth and cautious in its projections of demand growth, it appears that U.S. mobile wireless markets will face capacity deficits possibly as early as 2014, and after 2016 these may be significant. In order to keep these deficits to manageable proportions, it will be essential for U.S. regulatory authorities to allocate quickly all of the 300MHz of increased spectrum that was proposed in the National Broadband Plan for exclusive mobile use. If less than this sum is allocated, or if allocations are delayed until towards the end of the decade-long prospective study period, shortfalls will be especially severe. Indeed, in order to keep U.S. wireless markets fully on their current trajectory of virtuous growth, the presented model suggests that 560MHz of additional spectrum will need to be deployed over the 2014–2022 period.