@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting associated statutes for legal problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In the legal domain, this method for statute prediction is a new research topic.We predict relevant statutes for the problem described by everyday vocabulary.The gap between lay terms and legal terms was remedied without using a synopsis.Employing the Normalized Google Distance, SVM and Apriori algorithms into TPP.The result shows the performance of TPP is accurately and effectively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text mining,Statute,Criminal judgment,Normalized Google Distance (NGD),Support vector machines (SVM),Apriori algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Applying text mining techniques to legal issues has been an emerging research topic in recent years. Although a few previous studies focused on assisting professionals in the retrieval of related legal documents, to our knowledge, no previous studies could provide relevant statutes to the general public using problem statements. In this work, we design a text mining based method, the three-phase prediction (TPP) algorithm, which allows the general public to use everyday vocabulary to describe their problems and find pertinent statutes for their cases. The experimental results indicate that our approach can help the general public, who are not familiar with professional legal terms, to acquire relevant statutes more accurately and effectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The law represents social norms, which protect civilian rights and maintain social order. To achieve these objectives, the legislature enacts legal provisions preserving people’s rights to life, property, and so on. As an increasing number of individuals’ rights have been violated, more and more litigation has occurred.When people have legal issues, it is critical to know which statutes are involved. Usually, because of a lack of legal knowledge, they may seek help from legal experts, such as attorneys, or from automatic systems. Since legal consultation is very costly, automatic systems are a much more affordable form of legal support. They involve utilizing search engines on the Internet or searching legal databases, such as Westlaw International (2013) and LexisNexis (2013). Although these automatic systems provide query methods, users cannot obtain pertinent statutes through simple case statements. This motivated us to propose a new approach that will help laypeople obtain relevant statutes by simply stating their problem or case using daily vocabulary, and without the help of legal experts. In Fig. 1, we show the proposed statute retrieval approach.The purpose of this research is to provide a statute retrieval method that will help people deal with their legal problems more effectively. It can be helpful to at least two types of people. First, for specialists, this method can reduce workloads and be used as a reference when dealing with legal cases. As the sheer number of legal cases increase, legal experts need to expend more time and energy in their work. This research provides an aid for efficiently processing cases. Second, for laypeople, this approach can reduce searching and consultation needs. When laypeople have legal issues, it is difficult for them to acquire related statutes though existing automatic systems because of their insufficient knowledge of professional legal terms. This results in incorrect search results and lengthens the searching process. With the help of our approach, this insufficient knowledge problem can be alleviated.In recent years, text mining research has gotten more and more attention. Basically, text mining is the procedure of uncovering salient features and information from textual data. Since most human knowledge is stored in text, abundant text mining applications and methods have been developed. Examples of these text mining applications include patent retrieval (Chen & Chiu, 2011; Tikk, Biró, & Törcsvári, 2007), e-mail security (Bergholz et al., 2010; Wei, Chen, & Cheng, 2008), news categorization (Calvo, 2001; Zheng, Milios, & Watters, 2002), authorship identification (Stamatatos, 2009; Zheng, Li, Chen, & Huang, 2006), scientific document retrieval (Kaur, Yusof, Boursier, & Ogier, 2010), document sentiment analysis (Li & Wu, 2010; Schumaker, Zhang, Huang, & Chen, 2012), document summarization (Goldstein, Mittal, Carbonell, & Kantrowitz, 2000; Li, Du, & Shen, 2013; Wang, Zhu, Li, & Gong, 2009), online advertisement recommendations (Thomaidou & Vazirgiannis, 2011; Wang, Wang, Duan, Tian, & Lu, 2011), search engines (Kawai, Jatowt, Tanaka, Kunieda, & Yamada, 2011; Yin, 2007), etc.Text mining has been applied in various areas. Although a few past studies applied text mining techniques to the legal domain (Chen & Chi, 2010; Chou & Hsing, 2010; Conrad & Schilder, 2007; Moens, 2001), all of them focused only on helping professional users retrieve or classify legal documents. None of them considered how to help laypeople retrieve relevant statutes from a case statement using daily customary terms. Therefore, this research aims to develop a framework for statute prediction that will remedy this problem. This framework is built with judgments and statutes. Judgments are included in the framework because they contain the facts of the crime and the cited statutes from the judge’s adjudication. From them, we can find the connections between the problem and the cited statutes. In turn, these connections help us to determine the most relevant statutes with respect to the user’s problem.The prediction method process is shown in Figs. 2 and 3, Batch and Online, respectively. In the Batch process, three outputs are generated to be used in the Online process. The first output is a classification model that classifies cases to statutes, and is produced by adopting a SVM (support vector machine) classifier. In the second output, all statutes are represented as statute vectors. The last output is a set of association rules, which show what statutes frequently occur together, and is generated from the training collection of judgments. In the Online process, the classification model is adopted to acquire the prediction of top k1 statutes for the user query. Then, the NGD (Normalized Google Distance) method (Cilibrasi & Vitanyi, 2007; Evangelista & Kjos-Hanssen, 2006) is used to perform terms transformation between the statutes and user query, and the top k2 most similar statutes are selected. Finally, by applying associative statute rules to the top k2 statutes, the statute weight computation metric is defined, so as to obtain the most relevant statutes for the user query.The advantages of our approach are that (1) ordinary users can express their cases using daily vocabulary, (2) a bridge is created between laypeople and legal statutes, and (3) the most pertinent statutes are recommended to users. This work acquires relevant statutes by developing a three-staged algorithm. In the first stage, we utilize the multi-label SVM text classifier to classify the cases into k1 statutes. Then, from these k1 statutes, the second stage selects the most similar k2 statutes, with respect to the user query, by employing the semantic relatedness measure (i.e., Normalized Google Distance method). Finally, from these k2 statutes, we select the final set of statutes by considering the associations among statutes. The contributions of this research are as follows.1.It is motivated by a real-world societal needs arose from general public. To our knowledge, this innovative approach to statute prediction in the legal domain has not been attempted in any previous research.It proposes an innovative approach, called TPP (Three Phase Prediction), to predict relevant statutes for the problem described by user. The core of the approach is to remedy the gap between lay terms and legal terms without using a synopsis.An evaluation metric (i.e., coverage) was adopted to confirm the performance of the proposed TPP approach. Experimental results show that it performs accurately and effectively.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The relevant literature is first reviewed and described in Section 2. The research design is then introduced in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss the experiment results and evaluations. Finally, conclusions and future directions are presented in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
