@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
POS-RS: A Random Subspace method for sentiment classification based on part-of-speech analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The rise of social media has fueled interest in sentiment classification.POS-RS is proposed for sentiment analysis based on part-of-speech analysis.Ten public datasets were investigated to verify the effectiveness of POS-RS.Experimental results reveal POS-RS can be used as a viable method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sentiment classification,Random Subspace,Part of speech,Ensemble learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the rise of Web 2.0 platforms, personal opinions, such as reviews, ratings, recommendations, and other forms of user-generated content, have fueled interest in sentiment classification in both academia and industry. In order to enhance the performance of sentiment classification, ensemble methods have been investigated by previous research and proven to be effective theoretically and empirically. We advance this line of research by proposing an enhanced Random Subspace method, POS-RS, for sentiment classification based on part-of-speech analysis. Unlike existing Random Subspace methods using a single subspace rate to control the diversity of base learners, POS-RS employs two important parameters, i.e. content lexicon subspace rate and function lexicon subspace rate, to control the balance between the accuracy and diversity of base learners. Ten publicly available sentiment datasets were investigated to verify the effectiveness of proposed method. Empirical results reveal that POS-RS achieves the best performance through reducing bias and variance simultaneously compared to the base learner, i.e., Support Vector Machine. These results illustrate that POS-RS can be used as a viable method for sentiment classification and has the potential of being successfully applied to other text classification problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rise of Web 2.0 platforms, personal opinions, such as reviews, ratings, recommendations, and other forms of user-generated content, have attracted significant interest from the research community (Pang & Lee, 2008). The sheer volume and exponential growth of this information provides potential value to governments, businesses, and users themselves (He & Zhou, 2011). There is an inherent property called sentiment involved in the vast majority of online-generated content. Sentiment is an opinion or feeling you have about something (Delacroix, 2007). In this study of sentiment classification, we focus on attempts to identify the sentiment polarity of a given text, which is traditionally classified as either positive or negative.In reality, sentiment classification has many application scenarios, such as applications to review-related websites, applications as a sub-component technology, applications in business and government intelligence, applications across different domains (Pang & Lee, 2008). Based on two surveys of more than two thousands American adults, it was found that people between 73% and 87% reported that online reviews had an important influence on their purchase among readers of online reviews of different services, such as restaurants, hotels (Horrigan, 2008; Pang & Lee, 2008). Moreover, consumers reported that they were willing to pay more for a 5-star-rated goods than a 4-star-rated goods (Horrigan, 2008; Pang & Lee, 2008). Additionally, sentiment classification not only is useful for customers, but also has an important role as enabling technique for other systems (Pang & Lee, 2008). For example, sentiment classification is a supplement to recommendation systems, as it might be proper that a system recommend items that receive a lot of positive feedback. Moreover, sentiment classification can also be applied in government activities. For instance, it is needed for the government to monitor sources in hostile or negative communications (Abbasi, 2007).Accordingly, sentiment classification has become a popular research topic in both academic and industry fields (Abbasi, Chen, & Salem, 2008a; Boiy & Moens, 2009; Chen & Yang, 2011). The sentiment classification problem was initially tackled granularly at the levels of document, sentence, clause, phrase, and word, depending on the specific objectives of applications. Heuristic-based methods and machine learning approaches were frequently employed in previous research (Abbasi et al., 2008a; Pang & Lee, 2008). Heuristic-based methods were primarily used in conjunction with linguistic properties and semantic features. For example, Turney used mutual information with predefined sentiment words to score other phrase tags, therefore identifying the sentiment of documents (Turney, 2002). In parallel, many studies focused on using machine learning algorithms to classify sentiment. For instance, Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Naive Bayes (NB) are commonly used to identity sentiment, due to their predictive power. Pang et al. conducted an empirical study in sentiment classification, concluding that SVM outperformed other classifiers such as NB (Pang, Lee, & Vaithyanathan, 2002). In recent years, there has been a growing interest in using ensemble learning techniques, which combine the outputs of several base classifiers to form an integrated output, to enhance classification accuracy (Polikar, 2006; Wang, Sun, Ma, Xu, & Gu, 2014). Furthermore, prior research have shown that Bagging, Boosting, and Stacking have performed better than singleton machine learning techniques for sentiment classification (Abbasi, Chen, Thoms, & Fu, 2008b; Wang et al., 2014; Whitehead & Yaeger, 2010; Xia, Zong, & Li, 2011). However, Random Subspace, an important ensemble method that has been successfully applied in other text classification problems, has been under-examined.In this research, a novel Random Subspace method, POS-RS, is proposed for sentiment classification based on part-of-speech analysis. Random Subspace mainly uses one parameter, i.e., subspace rate, to control the diversity of base learners. However, the performance of ensemble learning methods is influenced not only by the diversity of base learners, but also by the accuracy of base learners. From the perspective of multi-objective optimization, a collaborative mechanism should be considered to balance the accuracy and the diversity of base learners. Accordingly, based on part-of-speech analysis, POS-RS is proposed for sentiment classification, which uses two parameters, i.e., content lexicon subspace rate and function lexicon subspace rate, to simultaneously control the accuracy and the diversity of base learners. Ten public sentiment analysis datasets are used to verify the effectiveness of proposed method. Empirical results show that POS-RS achieves the best results among the compared methods. Moreover, POS-RS can reduce bias and variance simultaneously compared to the base learner, i.e., SVM, and yields the lowest bias among all the ten datasets.In summary, the main contributions of this paper are the following:(1)From the perspective of multi-objective optimization, a tradeoff mechanism is proposed to control the balance of the accuracy and the diversity of base learners based on the nature of the sentiment classification.Based on the proposed collaborative mechanism, a new Random Subspace method, POS-RS, is proposed for sentiment classification by simultaneously control content lexicon subspace rate and function lexicon subspace rate.A detailed comparison with the performance of other popular ensemble methods is provided.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work on sentiment classification. The newly proposed method, POS-RS, is described in Section 3. Next, Section 4 describes the experimental setup used for evaluating the proposed approach. Section 5 presents the results and discussions. Finally, Section 6 discusses conclusions and future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
