@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A scalable privacy-preserving recommendation scheme via bisecting k-means clustering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel bisecting k-means clustering-based privacy-preserving CF scheme is proposed.A two-level preprocessing scheme is suggested to enhance scalability and accuracy.Effects of scalability and sparseness challenges are alleviated considerably.Accuracy of the solution is significantly better than knn-based CF and PPCF methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Accuracy,Binary decision diagrams,Clustering methods,Data preprocessing,Data privacy,Recommender systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Privacy-preserving collaborative filtering is an emerging web-adaptation tool to cope with information overload problem without jeopardizing individuals’ privacy. However, collaborative filtering with privacy schemes commonly suffer from scalability and sparseness as the content in the domain proliferates. Moreover, applying privacy measures causes a distortion in collected data, which in turn defects accuracy of such systems. In this work, we propose a novel privacy-preserving collaborative filtering scheme based on bisecting k-means clustering in which we apply two preprocessing methods. The first preprocessing scheme deals with scalability problem by constructing a binary decision tree through a bisecting k-means clustering approach while the second produces clones of users by inserting pseudo-self-predictions into original user profiles to boost accuracy of scalability-enhanced structure. Sparse nature of collections are handled by transforming ratings into item features-based profiles. After analyzing our scheme with respect to privacy and supplementary costs, we perform experiments on benchmark data sets to evaluate it in terms of accuracy and online performance. Our empirical outcomes verify that combined effects of the proposed preprocessing schemes relieve scalability and augment accuracy significantly.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
From the beginning of the Industrial Age, lives of people have been constantly changing into fast-paced living styles by mechanical, electronic, and eventually software-based innovations. While modernization relaxes people as access to information gets easier, much more information appears to be needed to handle, called information overload problem, which in turn confuses people’s mind creating anxiety. Collaborative filtering (CF) algorithms emerge at such complicated circumstances by simplifying access to useful information (Shardanand & Maes, 1995).CF filters out irrelevant content and/or ranks items to be evaluated on other like-minded users’ preferences. Relying on the assumption that users having similar experiences on past items are tend to agree on new items, CF systems primarily attempt to predict a newbie’s ratings for available products operating on the collection of previous users’ rating information. Studies of researchers on CF show its success (Chen, Wang, & Zhang, 2009; Symeonidis, Nanopoulos, Papadopoulos, & Manolopoulos, 2008). There are also real-life deployments adopting this technique such as Amazon.com and Last.fm (Linden, Smith, & York, 2003; Symeonidis et al., 2008) and recently Cechinel, Sicilia, Snchez-Alonso, and Garca-Barriocanal (2013) proposed applying memory-based approaches for discovering specific context in learning object repositories.It has been a risky time to continue blithely using the Internet services with little regard for how personal data are treated. As e-commerce facilities advance, commercial competition among online companies causes privacy violations. Recently, Federal Trade Commission draws attention to privacy violations and thrilling increases in usage of mobile applications in a report titled “Mobile Apps for Kids: Current Privacy Disclosures are Disappointing”. Similar confidentiality issues can arise during online shopping such as price discrimination, profiling, or being subject to surveillance (Ackerman, Cranor, & Reagle, 1999; Cranor, 2003; Jensen, Potts, & Jensen, 2005). In terms of CF, implicit preferences and list of rated products are considered private. Due to such risks, customers either refrain from using those systems or worse, submit non-authentic data. However, accurate recommendations cannot be estimated on poor quality data, which gives escalation to research on privacy-preserving collaborative filtering (PPCF) to produce accurate predictions without violating individuals’ confidentiality (Ameur, Brassard, Fernandez, & Mani Onana, 2008; Canny, 2002a; Polat & Du, 2005).Providing privacy measures within CF applications help them being more preferable; however, inevitable costs and difficulties emerge concerning the deployment of PPCF systems (Acilar & Arslan, 2009; Bilge & Polat, 2012b). Due to continually enlarging structure of the Internet, number of users and/or items tend to be quite large in online shopping databases (often in terms of millions) (Chen et al., 2009). Consequently, calculating similarities among users requires unreasonably large amount of computations causing scalability problems (Zhang & Chang, 2006). Another problem arises with the increase in number of ratable products. Similarity between any two users can only be calculated over co-rated items. Since users are generally able to rate a very small fraction of all products, user-item matrices are typically highly sparse (Bilge & Polat, 2012b). Hence, it gets more unlikely to find co-rated items between users affecting accuracy and coverage adversely.Mainly, research on CF and PPCF can be classified into three categories according to the method they are based on, i.e., (i) memory-based, (ii) model-based, and (iii) hybrid approaches (Al-Shamri & Bharadwaj, 2008; Breese, Heckerman, & Kadie, 1998; Herlocker, Konstan, Terveen, & Riedl, 2004). Moreover, such approaches might take content into account. Memory-based algorithms typically operate on the entire data to produce recommendations. Model-based schemes, on the other hand, operate on a prototype derived from the original user-item matrix. However, although models are helpful in practice, it is relatively hard to fine-tune parameters and they often come with the cost of accuracy (Xue et al., 2005). Hybrid approaches utilize both schemes for improved performance.In this study, we propose a novel PPCF framework aiming at alleviating the problems of state-of-the-art k-nearest neighbor-based methods by applying a two-level preprocessing scheme. Initially, effects of sparseness on neighborhood formation is aimed to be relieved by a transformation of rating data into item features-based profiles (FBPs). Since number of item features is constant and extremely less than number of items, such FBPs function as a dimension reduction module. First preprocessing method focuses mainly on scalability issue and it is at the heart of the proposed framework. In this approach, a binary decision tree (BDT) is constructed by recursively clustering FBPs via bisecting k-means algorithm to locate the nearest neighbors in a significantly rapid and robust manner. Second preprocessing method is motivated to boost accuracy of scalability-enhanced scheme by enhancing discrimination skills of bisecting k-means clustering approach. For this purpose, clones of original users are reproduced by inserting pseudo-self-predictions (PSPs) into user profiles. Proposed preprocessing framework is evaluated in both CF and PPCF frameworks.Major contributions of the work are, as follows:1.A novel PPCF framework based on bisecting k-means clustering is proposed.A two-level preprocessing scheme is suggested to deal with scalability and accuracy problems.Effects of scalability and sparseness challenges are alleviated considerably.Prediction accuracy of the proposed solution is significantly higher compared to the k-nearest neighbor-based CF and PPCF methods.The rest of the paper is organized, as follows. We briefly describe previous related research in Section 2. We give a general background on CF in the next section. We deeply describe our novel scheme and the proposed preprocessing methods in Section 4. After analyzing our scheme by means of overhead costs and privacy in Section 5, we present experiments and their results in Section 6. Finally, we conclude the paper and give future research directions in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed a novel CF scheme based on two preprocessing methods, which can be performed off-line in order to improve online performance and accuracy. In the first approach, we offered to apply a bisecting k-means clustering algorithm on item-category based histograms of users to construct a BDT and utilized it to determine neighbors of new users, which improves scalability of CF systems significantly. The second preprocessing scheme focuses on enhancing accuracy of predictions produced by the first scheme by alleviating the effects of sparseness. We proposed to replicate original user profiles and increased their density by inserting PSPs into some randomly chosen empty cells. We also proposed a scheme to solve the privacy problem of the offered schemes by utilizing RPTs. Our privacy-preserving scheme hides users’ preferences and the items they rated. We performed experimental studies to evaluate the proposed schemes using benchmark data sets. Empirical outcomes showed that employing our proposed preprocessing schemes significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art k-nearest neighbor-based PPCF scheme in terms of online performance and accuracy, as demonstrated by significance tests. Although RPTs distort original data in order to achieve privacy, they might make accuracy worse because privacy and accuracy are conflicting goals. However, relative errors due to randomization are not significant and the proposed privacy-preserving scheme is able to produce predictions with comparable accuracy to original non-private scheme. Moreover, the proposed bisecting k-means clustering approach promises much better relative improvements on online performance as input matrix gets larger, which is vital to scale CF systems.In this study, we essentially tried to provide a different perspective on data configuration and recommendation production process. More important than observed empirical achievements, we claim that the proposed preprocessing ideas are modular and easy to manipulate, yet effective. They can be easily integrated into real life deployments by adjusting them to particular needs. In addition to user-based approach, an item-based BDT construction is also possible for online vendors marketing over diverse products.Other than numerical ratings, CF schemes also deal with binary rating-based data obtained by market-basket analysis and web logs. We are planning to explore effects of applying the proposed approaches on implicit preference based systems, employing other clustering algorithms, and fuzzy techniques on recursive approach. Also, rather than a single tree, we are planning to employ a random forest of BDTs to further improve performance. In addition, we are considering to study on what empty cells to be filled with PSPs and to combine our proposed schemes with previously proposed CF enhancing approaches such as data reduction techniques as future research goals.