@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Incorporating sentiment into tag-based user profiles and resource profiles for personalized search in folksonomy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a framework SenticRank to incorporate sentiment for personalized search.Content-based and collaborative sentiment ranking methods are proposed.We compare the proposed sentiment-based search with baselines experimentally.We study the influence of sentiment corpora by using some sentiment dictionaries.Sentiment-based information can significantly improve performance in folksonomy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Sentiment,User profiling,Folksonomy,Personalized search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In recent years, there has been a rapid growth of user-generated data in collaborative tagging (a.k.a. folksonomy-based) systems due to the prevailing of Web 2.0 communities. To effectively assist users to find their desired resources, it is critical to understand user behaviors and preferences. Tag-based profile techniques, which model users and resources by a vector of relevant tags, are widely employed in folksonomy-based systems. This is mainly because that personalized search and recommendations can be facilitated by measuring relevance between user profiles and resource profiles. However, conventional measurements neglect the sentiment aspect of user-generated tags. In fact, tags can be very emotional and subjective, as users usually express their perceptions and feelings about the resources by tags. Therefore, it is necessary to take sentiment relevance into account into measurements. In this paper, we present a novel generic framework SenticRank to incorporate various sentiment information to various sentiment-based information for personalized search by user profiles and resource profiles. In this framework, content-based sentiment ranking and collaborative sentiment ranking methods are proposed to obtain sentiment-based personalized ranking. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work of integrating sentiment information to address the problem of the personalized tag-based search in collaborative tagging systems. Moreover, we compare the proposed sentiment-based personalized search with baselines in the experiments, the results of which have verified the effectiveness of the proposed framework. In addition, we study the influences by popular sentiment dictionaries, and SenticNet is the most prominent knowledge base to boost the performance of personalized search in folksonomy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, there has been a rapid growth of user-generated data in collaborative tagging (a.k.a. folksonomy-based) systems (e.g., Del.icio.us,11http://delicious.com.Flickr22http://www.flickr.com.and MovieLens33http://movielens.umn.edu.) due to the prevailing of Web 2.0 communities. Facing such a large volume of data, people need an effective way to manage and explore them. To assist users to find their desired resources, it is critical to understand user behaviors and preferences. Tag-based profile techniques (Cai & Li, 2010; Noll & Meinel, 2007; Xie, Li, & Cai, 2012; Xu, Bao, Fei, Su, & Yu, 2008), which model users and resources by a vector of relevant tags, are widely employed in folksonomy-based systems. This is mainly because that personalized search and recommendations can be facilitated by measuring relevance between user profiles and resource profiles. However, conventional measurements neglect the sentiment aspect of user-generated tags. Let us take a look at the following example.Example 1Suppose user x is a dessert fan who has used the tag “dessert” once. Thus, the user profile for the user is constructed by the annotated tags and the tag frequencies as follows.ux→=<dessert:1>We have two kinds of food a (“puff”) and b (“watermelon”), whose resource profiles are:ra→=<sweet:1,yummy:1>rb→=<food:1,dessert:1,fruit:1>If user x wants to find out some desserts with cream and issues the queryq=<creamy,food>, resource j (“watermelon”) will be returned to the user while resource a is not likely to appeared in the search results. The reason is that resource profilerb→of resource b is more similar to query q and user profileux→thanra→(i.e.,rb→have more overlapping terms with q andux→thanra→). Because the conventional personalized search approaches take both query relevance (similarity between resource profiles and queries) and user interest relevance (similarity between resource profiles and user profiles) into account when they rank resources. The resource profile rbhave one overlapping terms/tags with user profile uxand another overlapping term with query q, which has obviously larger relevance than ra(have overlapping term with neither uxor query q). However, this is unreasonable as we can observe that resource a (“puff”) could be a good (even better) candidate than resource b to match the user’s intention on “find out some desserts with cream”.The problem in Example 1 is mainly raised by neglecting the sentiment aspect of tags. Although this problem may be relieved by mapping various synonyms to a unified term via WordNet,44http://wordnet.princeton.edu.user-generated tags can be very emotional and subjective, as users usually express their perceptions and feelings about the resources by tags. Therefore, it is important to build the sentiment links between tags such as “creamy” and “sweet” (or “yummy”) in above example. To achieve this aim, the following contributions have been done in this paper:1.We present a novel generic framework SenticRank to incorporate various sentiment-based information for personalized search embedding user profiles and resource profiles. In the framework, content-based sentiment ranking and collaborative sentiment ranking methods are proposed to sentiment-based personalized ranking. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work of integrating sentiment information to address the problem of the personalized tag-based search in collaborative tagging systems.We compare the proposed sentiment-based personalized search with baselines in the experiments, the results of which have verified the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Moreover, we investigate the influence of some parameters and possible measurements in the framework. The investigation further shows the proposed approaches are reliable and stable.In addition, we study the influence of sentiment corpora by using several popular sentiment dictionaries, and SenticNet is the most prominent knowledge base to boost the performance of personalized search in folksonomy.The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. In Section 2, relevant work and techniques are reviewed. The framework of incorporating various sentiment-based techniques for personalized search by user profiles and resource profiles is introduced in Section 3. We conduct the experiment upon a public dataset and analyze the experimental results in Section 4. Finally, the research in this work are summarized, and potential research directions are discussed in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
