@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Location-aware service applied to mobile short message advertising: Design, development, and evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Location-aware recommendation system for mobile short message advertising is proposed.System parameters are collected from storeowners and mobile phone users.Pull-oriented advertising model was used in the prototype system.Implicit content-based mechanism was embedded in the prototype for filtering and comparison.Evaluation on usefulness, mechanism, and privacy revealed acceptable, and feedbacks addressed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Location-aware,Location-based service,Recommendation system,Advertising,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The use of location-aware services to deliver short message advertisements requires an in-depth review of the literature in general and the applicable domains and needs and wants of both marketers and consumers in particular. This paper presents a location-aware service application that develops a recommendation system (RS) for mobile short message advertising (LARSMA). The LARSMA prototype is developed through two stages: system parameter consultation and system development. System parameter consultation involves the collection of advertising categories and their attributes from storeowners and current interests and preferences from mobile phone users. Using a pull-oriented advertising model, system development involves the creation of the LARSMA prototype system, which allows storeowners to create and directly send short messages and mobile phone users within the defined area to automatically retrieve short messages that depend on their inputs. The implicit content-based recommendation mechanism embedded in the designed LARSMA performs filtering and comparison to derive the final top N formatted advertising messages as outputs of LARSMA. An application case is used to demonstrate the proposed LARSMA system prototype. Validation and evaluation are conducted, and feedbacks are addressed.Location-aware services (LAS) or location-based services (LBS) integrate the technologies of geographical information systems (GIS), global positioning systems (GPS), multi-function mobile devices, and Internet network services (Gavalas, Konstantopoulos, Mastakas, & Pantziou, 2014; Junglas & Watson, 2008; Li & Du, 2012; Raper, Gartner, Karimi, & Rizos, 2007; Wu, Kao, & Yang, 2012; Zhou, 2011). LAS development and applications consider not only location-driven but also time- and preferences-driven services, covering a wide spectrum from marketing (e.g., delivery of advertising messages), monitoring (e.g., tracing logistic trucks), to searching (e.g., finding the nearest hospitals). Four tasks are generally required to model the LAS: context modeling and adaptation, location modeling, user modeling, and geospatial data modeling and processing (Junglas & Watson, 2008). Context modeling and adaptation address the information flow of the defined context (e.g., marketing within a time zone), which can be applied to characterize the situation of an entity for relevant communication (e.g., a person or an object). Location modeling specifies the context of the location (e.g., one-mile radius zone), which determines the information or services suitable to be delivered. User modeling develops a wide range of user properties (or preferences) for further attempts, such as the current state of users, information searching behavior, and online merchandising profile. Geospatial data modeling and processing manage and process geospatial information, which may be concisely delivered to users.A review of the literature indicates that advanced LAS and context-aware applications have increasingly attracted the attention of companies that aim to engage in business and develop their Internet communication channels for consumers (e.g., Li & Du, 2012; Sukaphat, 2011; Tussyadiah, 2012; Wilson, 2012). For example, Tussyadiah (2012) conducted an exploratory study that reports the increasing use of location-based social network marketing in the context of tourism and hospitality businesses. Li and Du (2012) demonstrated a targeted mobile advertising system that serves as platform for both merchants and consumers with context-aware advertisements. These findings imply that LAS with immediate information service flow has been extensively used to narrow the marketing gap between marketers and consumers. For example, one of the findings of Wei, Xiaoming, and Pan (2010) in examining the intentions of users in mobile advertising is that short message service (SMS) advertisements can be highly effective in encouraging purchases in the context of marketing services. “Immediate action” is particularly the common aspect that marketers focus on to improve service quality (e.g., responsiveness). The statement “I am going to tell my consumers some good news right now” expresses the common desire of storeowners to market instantly. Correspondingly, the statement “Is there anything suitable for me to buy around here now” expresses the common desire of consumers to acquire a particular product or service.Mobile marketing is generally highly customer-centered, message-straightforward, and privacy-sensitive (Abbas, Michael, Michael, & Nicholls, 2013; Raper et al., 2007; Wilson, 2012; Xu, Luo, Carroll, & Rosson, 2011). One of the main dilemmas in using LAS is location privacy, which may cause a considerable barrier to its adoption by users (e.g., Pingley, Yu, Zhang, Fu, & Zhao, 2012; Xu et al., 2011; Zhou, 2011; Chen & Hsieh, 2012; Abbas et al., 2013). However, Xu et al. (2011) reported that personalization somehow overrides privacy concerns for both covert- and overt-based location-aware marketing. One of the research findings of Zhu, Chang, Luo, and Li (2014) is that perceived control is significantly associated with the use intention of location-based recommendation systems (RS). Therefore, allowing consumers to dynamically define their needs and wants as they accept incoming information services may possibly overcome the disadvantage of the privacy barrier. An example is the following situation involving a marketer (or owner) and consumers. The marketer of a store picks up his cell phone, launches a location-based advertising service marketing system, types in the text “Buy anything and get any different thing for free. Come to the cheapest store xxx from 1:00pm to 4:00pm at address xxx. Come now!” The marketer then simply clicks OK to complete the advertising task, and the message is sent directly to the advertising message pool. Meanwhile, mobile phone users launch the location-based advertising message service system at any time, select “on” to accept incoming messages, and wait for recommended outcomes. Their location and time are detected, and as they move across a defined area within an identified time zone, they receive messages that match their interests and preferences. They can switch “off” these services to disconnect at any time.However, the review of literature indicates that mobile marketing, particularly the location-aware service, has not been developing a common understanding and regulations that mobile service providers can rely on to appropriately model both advertising behavior of storeowner and consumption behavior of consumer. The current research therefore develops the research questions that in the context of location-aware short message service what are the expectations and concerns of both storeowners and consumers? what if different, how to balance, and what the consequences are? It conducts a consultation of both storeowners and consumers to help system design and introduces a location-aware RS for mobile SMS called LARSMA. Several tasks are considered in the design and development of LARSMA: (1) consultation of expectations and concerns of both storeowners and mobile phone users, (2) system framework, (3) system input, (4) service mechanism, (5) output, (6) system test and validation, and (7) system evaluation. The system framework identifies the entities and their interrelationships. Based on the survey of both storeowners and mobile phone users using the system inputs as parameters, the system allows storeowners and/or advertisers to indicate marketing preferences and mobile phone users to indicate advertisement preferences. The effect of privacy risk on the willingness of mobile phone users to use LARSMA is considered during the data collection and analysis. The service mechanism processes and then receives inputs (e.g., location and time) to produce the outputs that define the contents delivered to users. System test and validation ensure that the prototype system is functional and that the outputs are correct. The system evaluation conducts an evaluation survey involving the mobile phone users, storeowners, and software development specialists and then provides a summarized report. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the related concepts. Section 3 presents the method and describes the design procedure and LARSMA framework, including the interface, data tables, and system mechanism. Section 4 presents the testing and evaluation of LARSMA. Section 5 provides the discussion and implications of the study. Section 6 concludes the research and addresses possible directions for future research.The main purpose of LAS is to allow content providers to deliver appropriate and relevant services to consumers at the right time (Gavalas et al., 2014; Tussyadiah, 2012; Wilson, 2012). These services are tagging, tracking, navigating, and mobile commerce (Ström, Vendel, & Bredican, 2014; Wilson, 2012). Based on the location, the tagging service provides information relevant to the targeted area, such as weather forecasting. The tracking service delivers information on the position of subjects or objects vis-à-vis the users or organizations that need it, such as roadside assistance, offender tracking, personal safety, tracker for family and friends, staff management, and vehicle tracking. The navigating service provides users with directions from one place to a target destination, such as route guiding and road finding. Mobile commerce service is used in various domains, such as the delivery of advertising messages from marketers to target consumers, mobile transactions, partition billing, and specific locations or events for billing (Tussyadiah, 2012; Wilson, 2012; Wu et al., 2012). The ultimate purpose of LAS in the mobile commerce service is to facilitate location- and situation-based service flows, which ultimately benefits both marketers and consumers.Aside from location, situation is used to explain the conditions related to a subject (e.g., a Facebook user), object (e.g., a building), or relationship (e.g., a Facebook friend). de Carolis, Mazzotta, Novielli, and Silvestri (2009) described two major types of situations. The first type includes situations related to user(s), such as persons surrounding the user(s) and their relationships and preferences. The second type includes the environment of the moving subject, such as space, date and time, weather, temperature, noise and lighting, and any useful resource. A situation-aware system is developed, which can analyze people, time, location, object, and their relations to the delivery of services. To date, situation-aware applications include food, entertainment, music, shopping, and traveling. The following are the purposes of these applications: (1) to provide users with information or services, (2) to automatically implement services that users need, and (3) to mark information regarding a situation on the original data for further use (e.g., searching preferred shops). However, to effectively enable these applications, recommendation mechanisms (RMs) embedded in situation-aware systems are necessary to derive information services suitable to the users’ needs and wants (Gavalas et al., 2014).A survey of the cited literature reveals two major approaches to the development of an RM: explicit and implicit (Wei et al., 2010). The former primarily asks users to indicate certain conditions in a questionnaire as the basis for subsequent recommendations, such as a user’s personal information and product and restaurant categories of interest. A salient way to do this is to allow users to participate in the scoring survey for potential recommended services. Based on the collected actual behavioral data, the information is analyzed instantly, and possible attractions are identified as the next recommended outcomes. For example, based on the preferred types of restaurants and sightseeing spots provided by a user and his or her current location, an implicit RM can recommend related restaurants and attractions by analyzing accessible advertising messages. To address the concern of user involvement, Gavalas et al. (2014) reviewed the literature, proposed a classification of RMs in the domain of mobile tourism, and provided insights on the services they offer. However, barriers that may influence the use of RM include the parameters used, inefficient extraction of the outcomes, personalization of needs and wants, and privacy risk, particularly when the mobile LAS model is considered.Push- and pull-based approaches are regarded as the typical approaches in using LAS in mobile advertising (Unni & Harmon, 2007; Xu, Teo, Tan, & Agarwal, 2009). The push-based approach actively delivers messages, which include text, multi-media, and a combination of both, to users without their permission. By contrast, based on the users’ consent and by actively asking to allow a link to a website, the pull-based approach adopts the approach of permissive marketing, which effectively conveys advertising messages to users through an interactive process to further understand the user’s habits and preferences (Barutçu, 2007). These two types of approaches These two types of approaches are applied in three models: the permission-based advertising model (PBAM), incentive-based advertising model (IBAM), and location-based advertising model (LBAM) (Wilson, 2012). PBAM is based on the pull strategy and enables advertisers to send specific messages about goods, services, or contents to eager users (Barwise & Strong, 2002). PBAM is used to reduce unexpected advertising interference, find potential consumers, and therefore achieve specific marketing purposes. Aside from the conditions of PBAM, IBAM sends special messages, such as information on discounts, bonuses, gifts, and vouchers to increase the eagerness of users to purchase. Based on the users’ location information, LBAM combines both pull and push strategies to send consumers advertising messages related to their location, such as travel discounts, on-sale goods, and local activities (Bamba & Bames, 2007; Tussyadiah, 2012; Wilson, 2012; Wu, Huang, & Peng, 2013; Wu et al., 2012). LBAM utilizes location positioning technology to send advertising messages related to specific areas and is one of the applications of location-aware mobile advertising services with permission-and-pull orientation and positioning, personalization, and real-time characteristics.Upon the users’ acceptance, the pull-oriented LBAM actively seeks services according to the consumers’ preferences and interests or provides different types of service messages according to their locations. The pull-based LBAM is regarded as a permission-based LBAM. By contrast, the push-oriented LBAM has two options. One is opt-in, which sends advertising messages only after obtaining the users’ permission; the other is opt-out, which directly sends messages without permission until the users refuse the receipt of the messages (Bruner & Kumar, 2007; Unni & Harmon, 2007). Based on one of their experimental findings, Unni and Harmon (2007) reported that consumers prefer the pull-oriented LBAM because of their concern on intrusiveness. In connection with this concern, Kwon, Choi, and Kim (2007) also suggested that psychological and ethical issues related to privacy and trust are important in examining the consumer acceptance of GPS systems. Moreover, Watson, McCarthy, and Rowley (2013) reported that the users’ acceptance can be significantly enhanced by a permission-based mechanism in the mobile marketing communications. On the one hand, privacy can be viewed as a security aspect, which implies that trade-offs among group interests are necessary. On the other hand, Xu et al. (2011) reported that personalization can somehow dominate privacy concerns. Ho (2012) also reported that the effect of personalization (e.g., intrinsic motivations) in the context of the location of individuals’ intention to use mobile services is significant. In their investigation of the factors that affect the use intention of social networking communities, Tan, Qin, Kim, and Hsu (2012) reported that, although privacy concern does not directly affect users’ acceptance, it moderates the usefulness toward users’ acceptance. To balance the personalization concerns and privacy drawback, the LARSMA developed in this study provides mobile phone users the options to switch on to accept or switch off to reject the messages at any time. Pull-oriented services are preset by the users’ preferences and/or by the query they forward.Consumers usually consider present situations (e.g., location, time, and instant likes) while proceeding with the next move, such as making actual purchase decisions. An RM generally consists of four main steps: collection, analysis, recommendation, and feedback (Billsus, Brunk, Evans, Gladish, & Pazzani, 2002; Schilke, Bleimann, Furnell, & Phippen, 2004). Collection involves gathering both users’ details (e.g., defined preferences) and actual behavioral historical data (e.g., accessed information service). Analysis involves the utilization of a pre-defined mechanism to compute the collected data. Recommendation involves the users’ utilization the analyzed results according to the designed mechanism, which determines whether or not the outputs match the pre-defined conditions. Feedback involves the solicitation of the likes or dislikes of users for the recommended options to update the historical data by popularity. To address the concept of RM, Herlocker, Konstan, Terveen, and Riedl (2004) indicated that an RS should focus not only on experienced data but also on current conditions to derive results from a task-focused decision. In support of this, Bose and Chen (2009) reported that, in addition to target locations, understanding the preferences of consumers is the key to the success of situation-aware applications in the mobile marketing environment. The literature has demonstrated various situational parameters (or factors) used to identify consumers’ preferences for particular purposes (e.g., Gavalas et al., 2014). These parameters are location, season, distance, weather, time, age, and gender. The number of situational parameters significantly affects the accuracy of returned recommended outcomes, and those who accept less parameters that partially match their preferences may be misled, particularly when efficiency is an issue. In their survey report, Wu et al. (2013) suggested that allowing consumers to select the parameters while the SMS is being delivered can be achieved by developing an LAS system. However, a trade-off issue occurs in the determination of parameters.For the mechanism used to derive the recommended service information for users, the literature indicates three main filters: content-based (e.g., Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005; Choi, Yoo, Kim, & Suh, 2012), collaborative (e.g., Kim, Ji, Ha, & Jo, 2010; Lee, Cho, & Kim, 2010), and blended filters (e.g., Liu, Lai, & Lee, 2009; Wei, Yang, & Hsiao, 2008). The content-based filter considers the degree of similarity between recommended options and interests, whereas the collaborative filter considers the degree of association between recommended and users’ opinions. The blended filter considers these two types of filter to derive results. Choi et al. (2012) summarized the pros and cons of their basic use, precisely introduced and confirmed a better hybrid online-product RS, and recalled by considering the use of implicit rating. However, the processing time required to derive the recommended outcomes was not examined or at least accepted by the users, particularly when the datasets are larger, which may limit their use from a practical perspective.Although the studies depicted in the literature present important aspects in general and mechanisms that can be used to recommend precise information in particular, these studies give only limited attention to the features of mobile information delivery service. Mobile SMS has its own characteristics, such as being dynamic, user-centered, instant, and history-independent (Wei et al., 2010), particularly when location and time are involved. For example, the outputs of content-based RM may simply be categories (e.g., food and clothes) with short messages that match the users’ current location, time, and likes, which may not be related to their past purchase details. In support of this concept, Ortega, Bobadilla, Hernando, and Gutiérrez (2013) reported that, although attempts have been made to aggregate available data to develop a better RM, system accuracy does not significantly vary according to the stage in which aggregation is performed. This is possibly because of the dynamic mobile needs of users, such as time, location, or instant emotion. Therefore, balancing the consumers’ preference, consuming behavior, accuracy of information delivered, privacy, and SMS characteristics by considering the needs and wants of storeowners, mobile advertisers, and mobile phone users is an important issue when RM-embedded LAS is designed and developed.The current study considers two types of contents: category and use contents. Category contents contain attributes that are from both/either the defined objectives and/or experts or category providers. For example, a restaurant can be classified under the food category, while its name, phone number, price level, star rating, type, and features are its attributes. With user characteristics, use contents reflect the users’ simple profiles, which contain their interests and preferences relative to their behavior (e.g., contacts, purchase, and evaluation). To implement similarity computation, a comparison is conducted between a user’s profile and category contents. Content-based RM is a dynamic system that considers mainly the updated use contents. However, a disadvantage that limits its use is the modification (i.e., add, change, or delete) of the defined categories and attributes when necessary. One of the solutions to this problem is the design of a system with a simple, category-selectable, and -addable mechanism. The current study addresses this need by conducting a consultation to derive the categories and attributes based on advertisers’ opinions, product interests, and preferences based on the responses of mobile phone users. Details are described in the following sections.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
