@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the impact of emotions on author profiling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We take into account emotions for author profiling.We model the six basic emotions with a novel graph-based approach (EmoGraph).We achieve comparable results to the best performing systems of the PAN Lab of CLEF 2013.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Affective processing,Author profiling,Emotion-labelled graphs,EmoGraph,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we investigate the impact of emotions on author profiling, concretely identifying age and gender. Firstly, we propose the EmoGraph method for modelling the way people use the language to express themselves on the basis of an emotion-labelled graph. We apply this representation model for identifying gender and age in the Spanish partition of the PAN-AP-13 corpus, obtaining comparable results to the best performing systems of the PAN Lab of CLEF.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Seth Godin11http://heidicohen.com/seth-godin-7-truths-at-the-heart-of-marketing-how-to-use-them.says “Marketing is no longer about the stuff that you make, but about the stories you tell”. In this sense, world is rapidly changing, social media are growing on daily basis and customers are becoming users looking for new experiences. Thus the need of automatically processing the affective content of social media is acquiring a growing importance in order to know what the users want and need.The potentiality offered by social media from many perspectives such as marketing, security or health is undeniable. But the information users include about themselves, if they include it, may lack of credibility. Age, gender, affiliation, likes…many users simply make them up. Getting to know the demographic and psychosocial profile of users on the basis of their writing style is an opportunity for organizations and companies, and a challenge for natural language processing technologies, due to the fact that the unique certainty we can have is what we can obtain from what the users write and share in social media.Studies like Koppel, Argamon, and Shimoni (2003) link the use of the language with demographics such as the gender of the author, but the vast majority of such investigations are limited to English. This investigation presents a method for automatically identifying emotions in social media, from a different perspective. Our hypothesis is that the way users express their emotions about topics depends on their age and gender. We aim at modelling the way they express them on the basis of a graph-based approach. The main motivation for using a graph-based approach is its capacity to analyse complex language structures. Pennebaker’s (2011) investigations are our main inspiration, where the style of writing is associated with personal attributes, such as demographics in our case. He employed a set of psycho-linguistic features obtained from texts, such as parts-of-speech, sentiment words and so forth. Our aim is to go further analysing the writing style from the perspective people combine the different parts-of-speech in a text, the kind of verbs they employ, the topics they mention, the emotions and sentiments they express (and where they do in the text), etc. Based on the differences between genders and among ages pointed out by Pennebaker (e.g. men used more prepositions than women because they tend to describe more in depth their environment), our intuition is that men will use more prepositional syntagmas than women, writing about different topics and with different emotionality, and this will confer a special importance to the sequence of preposition+determinant+noun+adjective. In this vein, we build a graph with the different parts-of-speech of user’s texts and enrich it with semantic information with the topics they speak about, the type of verbs they use and the emotions they express. We model the whole text as only one single graph, considering also punctuation signs in order to capture how a writer may start and end sentences (i.e., how she connects her concepts in sentences). Once the graph is built, we obtain several properties from the graph and used them as features for a machine learning approach. Although the focus of this work is on Spanish, the proposed methodology may be applied to other languages.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the related work on affective processing, author profiling and graph theory applied to text processing. In Section 3 we present our proposal for modelling the writing style to automatically identify emotions, age and gender (in Appendix A we analyse the complexity of the feature extraction). In Section 4 the evaluation framework is presented. Results are presented in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6, where we aim at identifying specific differences among age groups and gender with respect to used words, emotions and topics. In Section 7 we draw some conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we investigated the impact of emotions on gender and age identification. We proposed an EmoGraph to model the way people use the language and the emotions when writing. We compared the proposed model with state-of-the-art approaches obtaining respectively for age and gender identification the first and the second best results on the Spanish partition of the PAN-AP-13 corpus. We presented the most discriminating features showing the importance of graph-based features, mainly the eigen-features for identifying gender and betweenness-features for identifying age.We investigated further the obtained results in order to see whether it was possible to identify a different use of the language and the emotions. Females seem to make a higher use of emotional verbs (e.g. feel, want, love…) than males who instead use more language verbs (e.g. tell, say, speak…). With respect to the variation of the language and the addressed topics in the different age groups, it is interesting to highlight for instance how females in their 10s seem to worry more about sexuality than males.Although the presented approach was tested on Spanish data, it can be applied to other languages if tools and resources such as POS tagger, and emotion dictionary, are available. This is an interested research line to be investigated because no matter the ability of graphs to model and analyse language and emotions, the way people express their emotions could be not only language-dependent but also culture-dependent (e.g. the expression of emotions in oriental cultures (Harris, 1993)).As future work we aim at applying the proposed method to address other problems related to author profiling such as language variety identification (Zampieri & Gebrekidan-Gebre, 2012). We also plan to investigate further the graph-based representation. For example, building and analysing heterogeneous and multimodal graphs with the aim at mining morphosyntactics and semantics information separately.