@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improved sentence retrieval using local context and sentence length

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We extend the TF–ISF method to use local context.We extend the TF–ISF method to promote retrieval of long sentences.Context and promoting retrieval of long sentences both improves sentence retrieval.We also combine using context and promoting retrieval of long sentences.It is useful to use at the same time context and promoting retrieval of long sentences.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sentence retrieval,TF–ISF,Context,Sentence length,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we propose improved variants of the sentence retrieval method TF–ISF (a TF–IDF or Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency variant for sentence retrieval). The improvement is achieved by using context consisting of neighboring sentences and at the same time promoting the retrieval of longer sentences. We thoroughly compare new modified TF–ISF methods to the TF–ISF baseline, to an earlier attempt to include context into TF–ISF named tfmix and to a language modeling based method that uses context and promoting retrieval of long sentences named 3MMPDS. Experimental results show that the TF–ISF method can be improved using local context. Results also show that the TF–ISF method can be improved by promoting the retrieval of longer sentences. Finally we show that the best results are achieved when combining both modifications. All new methods (TF–ISF variants) also show statistically significant better results than the other tested methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The task of sentence retrieval is finding relevant sentences from a document base in response to a query. Sentence retrieval is used in tasks like novelty detection, question answering, summarization and opinion mining (Fernandez, Losada, & Azzopardi, 2010; Murdock, 2006). Sentence retrieval can be used as the first step of novelty detection. The possible application scenario is presented in (Harman, 2002). In this scenario the user uses a smart “next” button that allows him to walk down a ranked list of documents by highlighting next relevant and novel sentence. This way the user avoids non-relevant and duplicate information and saves time moving through the document collection. When used for question answering, sentence retrieval is used to find sentences that contain the answer to the user’s question. For example if the question is “How far is it from Earth to Mars” the aim is to find sentences like “The minimum distance from Earth to Mars is about 55 million kilometers”. Giving an answer in the form of a set of sentences is an improvement over the classic document retrieval where the user has to exploit whole documents. We expect that such functionality will be common in future search engines. When using for summarization sentence retrieval is used to find a number of sentences relevant to a query to create a summary of documents. For example sentence retrieval is used to create summaries from Wikipedia articles (Ganguly, Leveling, & Jones, 2012). In (Chen & Verma, 2006) a document summarization system is built specialized for medical domain which retrieves and summarizes up-to-date medical information from trustworthy online sources according users queries. We see that sentence retrieval can be used in various ways to simplify the end user task of finding the right information from document collections.Methods used for sentence retrieval are usually simple adaptations of document retrieval methods where sentences are treated as documents (Harman, 2002; Soboroff, 2004; Soboroff & Harman, 2003). The state of the art and most successful models for sentence retrieval are the vector space model (Allan, Wade, & Bolivar, 2003; Fernandez et al., 2010; Zhang, Xu, Bai, Wang, & Cheng, 2004) and the language modeling approach. Language modeling based methods were improved by taking into account local context made of surrounding sentences or the whole document, (Fernandez et al., 2010; Murdock, 2006). Attempt of improving the TF–ISF (Term Frequency–Inverse Sentence Frequency) method by taking into account context by Fernandez et al. was unsuccessful and had no statistically significant improvements (Fernandez et al., 2010).In addition to context usage, there is a new modification called “the importance of the sentence within the topic of document” or p(d|s) that managed to improve different language modeling based methods (Fernandez et al., 2010). The improvement appeared because of promoting the retrieval of long sentences (Fernandez et al., 2010). Our hypothesis is that it would be valuable to also try to apply modifications that would use local context of sentences and would promote retrieval of longer sentences to the TF–ISF method which showed good results in the past (Allan et al., 2003; Fernandez & Losada, 2009; Losada & Fernandez, 2007). The first modification consists of using local context (previous and next sentence) and second one is a component that promotes the retrieval of longer sentences. Related work is presented in Section 2. The corresponding new methods are explained in Sections 3 and 4. Other tested state of the art methods are explained in Section 5. In Section 6. we compare our new methods to other state of the art methods with good results. We conclude this paper with the conclusion in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
