@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Health-related information seeking: Is it worth it?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The idealized model suggests individuals will pursue rational search strategies.But people engage in avoidance and denial and other more irrational strategies.Six conditions are typed by effort and good, contingent, and bad outcomes.A health care system dependent on proactivity is more and more problematic.We should revisit policies and systems dominated by the idealized model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human information behavior,Information seeking,Health-related information seeking,Avoidance,Ignorance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In spite of often compelling reasons for why people should seek information, they persistently engage in lower levels of it than might be expected, at times seeking no information at all. The idealized model reflecting dogged persistence, pursuing rational search strategies, until a high-quality answer is found is often assumed in the design of information systems. However, many people confronted with health problems engage in avoidance and denial, making a health care system dependent on proactivity problematic. This essay explores six conditions, the idealized model, avoidance, bewilderment, serendipity, ignorance is bliss, and indolence, that arise from low and high effort strategies when typed by good, contingent, and bad health outcomes. Since a substantial proportion of the population does not act in accordance with our assumptions, it may be time for policy makers, system designers and researchers to revisit their approaches to facilitating health-related information seeking.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
7 Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and yeshall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you:8 For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seekethfindeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.(Matthew 7:7-8 King James version of the Bible)“All men by nature desire to know”: these familiar opening words of Aristotle’s Metaphysics (which, over the centuries teachers of the young have repeatedly had reason to question) continue to state the underlying rationale of university education (Pelikan, 1992, p. 32)There is a continuing puzzle in the information seeking literature. In spite of often compelling reasons for why people should seek information, they persistently engage in lower levels of it than might be expected, at times seeking no information at all. We tend to assume people will expend a lot of energy to attack important problems: when people are confronted with gaps this will result in tensions that provide the generative motor for information seeking (Dervin, 1998) and that they will also make sure of the quality of sources and of answers—but they clearly do not (Case, 2006, 2012; Johnson, 1996, 1997; Johnson, Andrews, Case, Allard, & Johnson, 2006; Johnson & Case, 2012; White, 2013).As in other areas of research, there are often hidden, latent ideologies that govern research questions that are explored in the human information behavior literature. So the idealized model for information-seeking behavior is dogged persistence, pursuing rational search strategies, until a high-quality answer is found as the norm for search strategies (see Table 1). Normatively, given Western attitudes to knowledge and progress, ignorance is viewed as something that needs to be overcome, in part, by increased attention to information seeking (Smithson, 1989). This model fits comfortably into the world view of most theorists who confront the world with a scientific model that implies exhaustive searching and testing to come to the correct conclusion. This is also the realm of curiosity (and even of obsession); something more characteristic of scientists than the general public.Undergirding this ideology, deeply embedded in Judeo-Christian thought, there is a presumption, especially among information technology enthusiasts, that the quest for information will be ultimately satisfied or that it can be satisfied—the information is out there—we just have to find it. In addition, we have a corollary that once we find it we will know what to do with it – we will use the information correctly. So, it is also often implicitly assumed that information seeking will result in positive outcomes: by acquiring knowledge one will engage in more appropriate actions and ultimately improve his or her life.Thus improved decision making and enhanced literacy will be outcomes of the information-seeking process. One of the dicta of consumer health information is the model of an informed decision maker weighing conflicting choices in consultation with a doctor (Spink et al., 2004); but while some patients prefer this model, many would just as soon not be presented with choices or conflicting information (Rimal, 2001) and the pragmatic limits of an eight minute consultation in the U.S. health care systems make it impractible in any case (Henwood, Wyatt, Hart, & Smith, 2003). However, there is also an increasing body of evidence that the act of health-related information seeking, something for which most individuals are inadequately trained, is as likely to lead to erroneous conclusions as it is to correct ones (Johnson & Case, 2012).In contrast with the idealized model, which has been remarkably persistent in the face of systematic attempts to debunk it tracing back at least to Zipf’s work on the principle of least effort (Case, 2005, 2012), and Miller’s (1987) description of monitoring and blunting information seeking styles, we have increasing evidence for an emerging empirical model of health-related information seeking (see Table 1). This model recognizes the seemingly irrational behavior that is all too common (White, 2013). So, some people only search long enough to find a plausible answer; others wait until they have corroborating information; while, sadly, others hope for inconsistency as an excuse for delaying action (Johnson & Case, 2012). The avoidance of health information, albeit sometimes only temporary while one assimilates the information one has gathered to date, can also result in outcomes that from the perspective of the individual may be positive. However, most seekers will stop searching when they discover the first somewhat plausible answer to their query. It may, indeed, be deeply rational to preserve ignorance, to experience its many benefits (Johnson, 1996). But, at least in Western cultures, avoidance is seen as almost cowardly, and at the very least slothful.This puzzle is all the more interesting when one recounts the many reasons why information seeking might be beneficial to the individual, particularly in terms of everyday information seeking in regard to their health. Much health behavior (e.g., breast cancer screening) involves acting on the basis of personal and informed judgment (Atkin, 1973). The scope and nature of the information on which to base these judgments, the repertoire of alternative courses of action known to the searcher, and ultimately the action taken are affected by individuals’ information-seeking behaviors. Often the argument runs that the harder we work to uncover information the more valued and, ultimately persuasive, it will be (Cialdini, 2001). The consequences of information carrier exposure and seeking are many, including information gain, affective support, emotional adjustment, social adjustment (Zemore & Shepel, 1987), attitude change, knowledge change, behavior maintenance (Anderson, Meissner, & Portnoy, 1989), a feeling of greater control over events, reduction of uncertainty (Freimuth, 1987), and compliance with medical advice (Epstein & Street, 2007).The public’s lack of health knowledge about causes, prevention, detection, and treatment is a significant problem. Limited health literacy is associated with higher rates of hospitalizations, poorer health, and higher mortality (Cameron, Wolf, & Baker, 2011). One-half of all deaths in the US can be attributed to preventable behaviors and social factors (e.g. diet, smoking, and alcohol abuse) (Wright, Sparks, & O’Hair, 2008). Only 12% of US adults have proficient health literacy and this is particularly problematic among those older than 75, with only 1% of them proficient (Health, 2010).If there is one truism to a variety of health concerns, it is that the chances of a cure, or at the least reduced morbidity, are significantly greater with early detection. Individuals who are active information seekers, who act on the information they gather, are more likely to confront problems, engage in preventive behaviors, and to seek prompt treatment. Seeking is associated with knowledge acquisition, healthy lifestyle behaviors, screening, as well as discussing information with physicians, and obtaining information useful in decision making (Shim, Kelly, & Hornik, 2006). Information seeking is associated with better outcomes post-treatment, better emotional well-being, and increased satisfaction with medical treatment (Eheman et al., 2009).Implicit in most style classifications of information seeking is a recognition that there are wide distributions of information seeking approaches (e.g., Miller, 1987). Ferguson (1991) has suggested a typology of health-activated, health-responsible consumers that is particularly pertinent. Passive patients generally approach problems with grim resignation. They feel that there’s little they can do to improve their health. When confronted with a terminal disease they are likely to give up without a fight. Concerned consumers sometimes ask questions and may occasionally seek a second opinion, but they almost always go along with what their doctor recommends. They are generally compliant with medical advice and receive average medical outcomes. Health-active, health responsive consumers represent a growing minority of clients. They have intense self-directed involvement, are motivated and demanding, and generally have the best health outcomes. They would regard a diagnosis of cancer as a challenge and an invitation to examine their lives. They have driven many of the changes in the modern health care system.Heavy users of the Internet are more likely to disintermediate, bypass, or downplay physician’s authority or middleman status by going directly to a source (Lowery & Anderson, 2002). Physicians may in turn view heavy Internet users as cyberchondriacs who are overly obsessed with their health (Lewis, 2006; White & Horvitz, 2009). While we have been focused on one side of the information revolution we have failed to recognize that in a 2011 survey 22% of adults in the US did not use the Internet, nearly 40% did not have high speed internet connections nor use mobile connections (Rainie & Wellman, 2012). However, our contemporary health care system, with shared decision making and consumer driven approaches to health is predicated on a literate, engaged populace (Johnson & Case, 2012).The contrasting empirical normative model, which seems to rest its hopes on serendipity, can be based on the following five generalizations derived from extensive reviews of the information seeking literature (Case, 2006, 2012; Johnson & Case, 2012). First, people seek out information that is the most accessible, with accessibility trumping such concerns as credibility and trustworthiness. What is most surprising is how little it takes for a source to be deemed inaccessible. Second, seekers are often unaware of sources and how to use them. Third, people follow habitual patterns in their information seeking exhibiting considerable inertia. Fourth, face-to-face, interpersonal communication is the preferred mode of communication for most information seeking. Individuals would prefer to turn to an individual that they know and trust for information who can digest it for them and present it in easily understandable messages. Fifth, different types of persons use different sources of information. Usually the more experienced, educated, and knowledgeable the individual, the wider the array of information sources consulted and the greater their access to professionals and organizations.Many people confronted with health problems engage in avoidance and denial, making a health care system dependent on proactivity problematic. So, a variety of studies have found that people are less likely to look for information as their distance from cancer decreases (Helmes, Bowen, Bowden, & Bengel, 2000). For example, Degner and Sloan (1992) found that while 64% of the general public felt they would want to select their own treatment if they had cancer, 59% of patients wanted physicians to make these decisions on their behalf.Thus, mirroring classic findings in the attitude literature, which find relatively low correlations among knowledge, attitudes, and behavior (Bettinghaus, 1986), there is a significant decline in the proportions of individuals who express the same desire when confronted with the possibility that they may actually have cancer (Bilodeau & Degner, 1996). Lerman et al. (1996) showed actual uptake of genetic testing within an at-risk population for hereditary breast-ovarian cancer was lower than anticipated from previous studies, with only 43% of all study subjects requesting test results. Welkenhuysen, Evers-Kiebooms, Decruyensaere, Claes, and Denayer (2001) also found that women with breast cancer relatives were much less interested in a predictive test than those without them. Others have found that family history of breast cancer was inversely related to interest in genetic testing (Andrykowski, Lightner, Studts, & Munn, 1997; Armstrong, Weber, Ubel, Guerra, & Schwartz, 2002). Helmes, Bowen, Bowden, and Bengel (2000) demonstrated that while many women were initially interested in a study of genetic counseling for breast cancer, “…higher cancer worry scores meant less likelihood of participation in the study” (p. 1379). In spite of prior studies that indicated 83% of the general population and 82% of first degree relatives of colon cancer patients were interested in receiving a genetic test, Lerman et al. (1999) found that only 43% of adults in extended HNPCC families chose to receive the results of tests they had taken.The decline in intent levels is directly linked to perceptions of the disease, with only 10% of clients seeking genetic tests when there is no efficacious treatment and/or it is fatal, 50% seeking testing for breast cancer for which there is hope for both treatment and prevention, and 80% seeking treatment for diseases with effective treatments (Marteau & Croyle, 1998). So, 13% of adults tested for HIV never received results (a figure that nearly doubled for those whose tests were not self-initiated) (Barbour, Rintamaki, Ramsey, & Brashers, 2011). For Huntington’s chorea, a particularly devastating genetic disease with no effective treatment, in principle, two-thirds of persons at risk expressed an interest in testing, while only 15% actually came forward to be tested when the test was available (Lerman, Seay, Balshem, & Audrain, 1995) and similar results found a decade later (Wahlin, 2007).While one would hope that doctors would seek answers to questions they have about patient care and treatment, in practice they may not seek the best available evidence for their questions. Partly because of time constraints, physicians pursue only about 30% of the questions that arise during their practice (Dawes & Sampson, 2003). When they do decide to seek answers, they tend to consult highly digested, easily accessible sources (Ely, 2005). In fact, it is a common finding that individuals will knowingly rely on inferior information sources for answers to their problems, because it would take too much effort to get authoritative information (Pinelli, 1991) even when it is easily available online (Sundar, Rice, Kim, & Sciamanna, 2011). Students also often limit their searches to the first page of links, which increases the chances of acquiring inaccurate information (Kortum, 2008). Less than 20% of the general populace followed up on referrals by information specialists to professionals or to institutions for answers to their questions (Johnson & Case, 2012).There would seem to be a set of empirical findings that fly in the face of the normative, idealized model for seeking information. The question then becomes what do people gain from not seeking. In this section we will explore six conditions that arise from low and high effort strategies when typed by good, contingent, and bad health outcomes (see Table 2).The first cell, high effort accompanied by good outcomes is, of course, the idealized model we have described at the outset of this essay. The central U.S. cultural value that good works will be rewarded is captured in this model. So, in learning organizations individuals are encouraged to try new things and take risks in what has been described as a panacea (Menon, Thompson, & Choi, 2006).People are happy when things fall in their laps, for many this would actually be the preferred condition. Most people hope for this set of conditions, or at least seem too given the amount of effort they typically are willing to spend on their information seeking. They rely on serendipity or as it is defined “2. luck, or good fortune, in finding something good accidentally” (Merriam-Webster, 2004).The most basic limit for most of us is time. The problem is often not in deciding to seek information, but in deciding when to stop. The ultimate goals of rationality, may be to develop a sense of coherence, and a simple one at that, with satisficing the standard rather than maximizing (Bates, 2005; Pirolli & Card, 1999). Indeed, some very prominent researchers choose to be irrational, or at least to develop highly novel approaches to information seeking, in the face of an overwhelming glut of information (Perrow, 1989). Accessibility of sources is often key determinant of their use (Bates, 2005), even for heavily rational engineers (Case, 2012).One possible explanation for the reliance on serendipity is related to the “costs” of information seeking compared to the value or benefit of the information sought, particularly in relation to decision making (March, 1994). These costs have been articulated in various “laws” of information-seeking behavior. The principle of “least effort” has been evoked to articulate why channels are chosen first that require less effort (Case, 2005). Mooer’s Law suggests an information source or system will tend not to be used whenever it is more painful and troublesome to have the information than it is not to have it (Culnan, 1983).The costs of information acquisition are many: psychological, temporal, and material. Most seekers appear to assume it is better to rely on easily obtained information (they have an answer after all) no matter how dubious, than to spend the effort necessary to get complete information. The costs in terms of extra time and effort for a complete information search, which also may result in delaying opportunities, complicating decision making and increasing information overload, are real. Some people do not want to bear the responsibility for conducting a faulty search, they would rather that responsibility be lodged with the physician, especially when they lack the skills and competencies to deal with medical information (Henwood et al., 2003).Avoidance is placed in high effort column since it requires active effort in censoring incoming information and the sometime hard work involved in avoiding often ubiquitous information. For example, one study reported up to 20% of women who had a mastectomy avoided any cancer-related information in their first year after treatment (Freimuth, Stein, & Kean, 1989). Delays in seeking treatment are very common and can stretch into several months. Interestingly, in a six-month follow-up study of symptomatic callers to the Cancer Information Service, one-third of callers had not been to a physician, did not know what illness they had, or had not yet received test results (Altman, 1985). It is not uncommon for individuals to avoid information that would force them to make a decision to overcome some problem; this is especially true for cancer-related information, HIV (Brashers et al., 2000), and genetic testing (Johnson, Case, Andrews, & Allard, 2005). It is also common in decision-making situations for individuals to avoid information that conflicts with chosen courses of action (Donohew, Helm, Cook, & Shatzer, 1987).Information seeking itself also can be a form of avoidance since it can be a substitute for more direct action in confronting problems (Swinehart, 1968). Ignorance can be used as a justification for inaction (Smithson, 1989), resulting in the rationalization, “I cannot do anything until I know more about the problem.”It may be perfectly rational to avoid information when there is nothing one can do with the answers one may obtain. If the threat is extreme, or if any potential responses are not expected to be effective, then an attractive alternative is to ignore the threat entirely—which in turn promotes cognitive consistency (Case, Andrews, Johnson, & Allard, 2005). In their quest to avoid disquieting information, individuals may seek to avoid situations and carriers where there is even a possibility that they may be exposed to discordant information, since accidental exposure can threaten effective uncertainty management (Brashers et al., 2000). So people will avoid going to a physician when they think they may have a serious illness (Hines, 2001). In an interesting twist to these findings, it has been found that high-efficacy, high-risk groups have more anxiety, which leads to higher motivations to seek, but lower ability to retain information (Turner, Rimal, Morrison, & Kim, 2006). People may also avoid information because the stress of a diagnosis, or the disease itself, limits their cognitive capacity for processing it (Brashers et al., 2000).At times the desperation of patients is related to the increased responsibility for treatment decisions that has been thrust upon them. They not only have to participate in the decision, but share the responsibility for how it turns out. As Barry Schwartz (2004) describes in another context, such a circumstance can easily lead to post-decision regret: patients must live forever after with the consequences of their choice, as it has become as much their responsibility as their physician’s. This is a far cry from the days when doctors made all the decisions for us.In the blissful ignorance condition people are unaware that their information is faulty. They often act as if they had good information – “I read it in the newspaper it must be true.” In a study involving science-magnet high school students focusing on Internet searches for vaccine information, it was found that students often left a search with inaccurate information from sites they perceived to be accurate (Kortum, 2008). Perhaps more disturbing, confidence is not a good predictor of accuracy (Lau & Coiera, 2008); searching online often results in incorrect, erroneous information (Sundar et al., 2011) in part because of prematurely ended searches. Even more surprising is the level of comprehension of individuals for the simplest of broadcast messages. A systematic program of research sponsored by advertising agencies has found that 97% of the public exhibited some degree of miscomprehension of messages, with a 30% misunderstanding of the core meaning of 60-s televised messages and 63% correct answers to magazine advertisements. The average accurate retention, measured by unaided recall, was 15%. In summarizing their results, Jacoby and Hoyer (1987, p. 50) suggested that “partial non-comprehension, however, is likely the most typical experience, particularly for communication with many meanings.”Consumers are not alone in their misunderstanding of information, although mistakes made by physicians and nurses are at a higher level of complexity than broadcast messages. Dr. William Hersh (2005, p. 147) in a commentary on his 25years of involvement with medical information retrieval, concludes that clinicians “. . . do not always find the best information, nor do they answer their questions reliably” and that “we cannot automatically assume that information resources. . .will automatically improve things” (p. 148). At least two studies (Hersh et al., 2002; Westbrook, Gosling, & Coiera, 2005) suggest that information retrieval systems answer clinician questions correctly only about half of the time. Perhaps worse is the possibility that misunderstood information from online databases makes physicians more confident in their flawed knowledge (Westbrook et al., 2005). Physicians vary widely in their assessments of the accuracy of health information on the Internet (Craigie, Loader, Burrows, & Muncer, 2002).An experimental study by Hersh et al. (2002) demonstrated that students of medicine and nursing were only partially successful in applying the results of medical-database searches to clinical questions. Subjects did the best in interpreting the implications of medical literature for prognosis, and worst in applying retrieved documents to questions of diagnosis and potential harm to the patient. The medical students did better than the nurses at online searching: however, both groups were able to improve their answers to medical questions through searching of online medical literature. An earlier analysis by Hersh (1998) of existing studies concluded that literature searchers exhibit poor recall of potentially relevant items, their results typically address only a small portion of physicians’ actual needs in practice, and overall the extent of the benefits of information retrieval for medical doctors are unclear.Many Americans report negative experiences with the high effort required for searches, the frustration involved, and they have concerns about the quality of information gathered as a result of their information searches (Arora et al., 2007). They experience lack of access, limited time, search results that are to broad; incomplete, inaccurate, inconsistent information; that is often difficult to interpret or understand (Jones, Schilling, & Pesut, 2011).There are also additional psychological costs, such as the loss of self-esteem and frustration that result from an unsuccessful search (Hudson & Danish, 1980), which may lead individuals to reject the use of frustrating sources of information (Horowitz, Jackson, & Bleich, 1983). Often we are driven to seek answers to questions when we are highly stressed, but stress, in and of itself, may impede our judgment and how we interpret any information we find (Brashers et al., 2000). Perhaps the more motivated we are the less we are actually likely to learn. Seeking help from experts is often costly, particularly in terms of feelings of incompetence and embarrassment (Hoffman, Lei, & Grant, 2009); those seeking consultation with genetic counselors and being counseled reported being more anxious about breast cancer than before (Lobb et al., 2004).To some degree, the failings of formal information systems may affect patients as well as medical professionals. Ferguson (2007, p. 24), in a report advocating the use of Internet-based communities of patients to provide advice and support, contrasts such efforts with a “top-down” project by physicians that provided targeted, electronic information to chronically ill patients. These patients showed gains in knowledge and social support, but they had no increase in self-efficacy, health-related behaviors and, disconcertingly, had worse outcomes then those who were left alone. Disturbingly White found that half of the answers to medical queries searchers settled on were actually incorrect (White, 2013).In situations of high fear and worry, efficacy becomes critical to insuring constructive responses to problems (Witte, 1992). An example of a dysfunctional outcome of information seeking is suicidal ideation and actual suicide in the case of Huntington’s Chorea (Wahlin, 2007). This darker side of information seeking becomes particularly apparent in the relationship between friends and family and seeking genetic-related information; especially since negative ties often have more impact on health than positive ones do (Pescosolido & Levy, 2002). Genetic information affects not only the individual seeking it, but his or her biological network. On the one hand, reactions to positive test results can cause feelings of extreme dismay or suicidal tendencies (Marteau & Croyle, 1998), and on the other, negative test results may have the unintended effect of people acting in unhealthy ways due to false reassurance or misinterpretation of results (Armstrong, Schwartz, & FitzGerald, 2002). Determining one’s predisposition to certain diseases can cause strains in familial relations, producing resentment by other family members (such as a daughter who learns she is predisposed to breast cancer) or leading to survivor guilt, where families ostracize a member who does not share the same genetic destiny (Marteau & Croyle, 1998).While consumers generally are not suspicious of the information they find on health-related websites, independent subject-matter experts find high levels of problems with missing and/or inaccurate information (Berry, 2007; Seidman, 2006). Repeated concerns have been raised about the accuracy of information encountered over the Internet, just as similar concerns have been raised in the past about information from the mass media, friends, and family (Johnson, 1997). Very few sites provide truly comprehensive information, in part because they often have very specific missions (Bhavnani & Peck, 2010). Culver, Gerr, and Frumkin (1997), for example, found that 89% of the messages they monitored on an online health discussion bulletin board were authored by persons without medical training, that one-third of the advice was “unconventional,” and that personal experience tended to be the source of the information provided; even the few medical professionals in the discussion group rarely cited published sources for their advice.Of course, additional sources of information add confidence in a course of action, if they corroborate each other. But if the sources do not provide consistent answers, a not-unlikely circumstance, then a person has complicated his or her decision making. In fact, more communication can result in greater ambiguity and uncertainty, not improved decision making (Rice & Shook, 1990). “Information does not need to be ‘correct’ to reduce uncertainty … (Brashers, 2001, p. 483), but it needs to contribute to a sense of coherence. While inconsistent information may often be a spur for additional information seeking to find a “tie-breaking” source, there is no guarantee that this additional source of information will not present yet another major alternative. So, it becomes easier to understand why there might be real benefits, at least in terms of the amount of effort expended, to consulting only a limited range of familiar sources.People often struggle with the amount of health information provided to them and, if they are to cope with it, need help in interpreting it (Lobb et al., 2004). Still, the consumer movement assumes individuals are increasingly sophisticated and can understand issues ranging from advanced cell biology to psychosocial adjustment to pain management. Individuals have free access to a world of health information. Over one million articles are published every year in the biomedical and technical literature. Unfortunately, doctors often do not pursue answers to questions that arise when treating patients, with estimates of up to two unanswered questions for every three patients they see (Hersh, 1998); given the pace and complexity of medical knowledge, this finding suggests that at times, clients may have more recent information than the doctors they visit. Many patients do not receive state-of-the-art treatments, partly because physicians cannot keep up with the information explosion—a growing concern within the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The overload of information on health professionals today forces decentralization of responsibilities, with increasing responsibility passing to individuals if they are going to receive up-to-date treatment. In effect, patients must often do the work of doctors, who cannot keep abreast of information related to specific treatments, especially for more exotic diseases. Recognition of the limits of health professionals also requires individuals to be able to confirm and corroborate information by using multiple sources; something that may result in bewilderment as often as it does in optimal answers.People do not typically put forward much effort in information seeking and can easily be deterred by obstacles (Case, 2012; Johnson & Case, 2012); as a result they often delay confronting problems with attendant consequences. This condition of indolence is all too common when people are confronted with serious health problems. Search problems are often related to the “costs” of information seeking compared to the value or benefit of the information sought, particularly in relation to decision-making and potential conflicts. But, this condition, especially in non-Western frameworks may reflect acceptance of ones’ fate.In many ways access related research contains some of the most compelling results in the social science literature. A consistent set of findings suggests that the threshold point where a source is considered inaccessible is very low. For example, people will not invest much of their time to learn how to use internet search engines and typically rely on a very limited number of commands (Markey, 2007).Accessibility outweighs quality in determining usage of information from particular sources. In fact, it is a common finding that individuals will knowingly rely on inferior information sources for answers to their problems, because it would take too much effort to get authoritative information (Case, 2012; Johnson, 1996). A number of studies document cases in which organizational members seek out information from inferior sources because of the reduced costs involved (Allen, 1977; Blau, 1954). Allen (1977), in his research stream involving communication in research and development laboratories, consistently found that even professionals will seek the most readily accessible source of information, both in terms of physical distance and comprehensibility, rather than the “best” sources, which offer more professionally authoritative information.Some might say that people in this condition get what they deserve: bad health outcomes follow from an unwillingness to engage in the effort to get good ones. Many doctors have legitimate concerns about self-diagnosis and patients possessing just enough information to be dangerous (Broadway & Christensen, 1993) and the general preferences of consumers may cause them to avoid unpopular, albeit effective, invasive procedures (Greer, 1994). So, some patients avoid information to prevent potential conflicts with their physician and others. For other patients, in part because of shame and stigma, people with low health literacy are reluctant to ask questions and reveal their ignorance, even to their physicians (Cameron et al., 2011). As more and more of us become responsible for our own care, in part because of the rise of outpatient treatments, home care, and hospices, these issues will only take on greater importance.Focusing on the idealized model has diminished our awareness of problems which become more pressing every day in an era where consumers increasingly are seen as responsible in a number of arenas for gathering information and then turning it into actionable knowledge. Policy makers and system designers both must develop a heightened appreciation for the different approaches people take to health information seeking. One of the difficulties in designing strategies to address these problems is the people most affected do not necessarily see them as problems; in fact, they often reap certain benefits (e.g., reduced effort, not having to face unpleasant situations). We must also understand the experience world of the individual and the many conflicting demands that they are faced with which leads to their settling for satisficing, minimal effort strategies; turning to bloggers, self-help groups as least effort gatekeepers from whom to seek answers.Most attempts by policy makers to assist people in their information seeking have focused on interventions associated with the idealized model, but we need strategies to effectively deal with all of the conditions. There should be less of a push for the informed consumer, partnership model favored by government health agencies (Henwood et al., 2003) and recognition of the various conditions. We need to confront the reality that often people do not want to know. Reasons for information avoidance are legion. At times people just need time to manage their uncertainty and once that is dealt with they may approach the problems more constructively. This may be part of the larger, natural healing process and at times they may just need to be given the space to muddle through.By and large if policy makers want to pursue more active approaches they are left with the alternatives of making things a lot easier and/or increasing an individual’s motivation and willingness to exert effort on their own behalf. To deal with serendipity one can increase the availability and access to information. For example, Telenovelas, popular entertainment show placements, and other campaign strategies can increase the ubiquity of information. Developing advocates in interpersonal networks to act as opinion leaders, as has been done for such issues as mammography screening, has also been a popular strategy. In short, we can make people lifes a lot easier. We can facilitate information access for them (Hoffman et al., 2009), since this is the primary obstacle for information seeking for many.Overcoming ignorance and indolence may require much more active strategies. So, we know, for example, that a substantial amount of information seeking is done by intermediaries on behalf of others who are either unable or unwilling to fend for themselves. We need to help these gatekeepers who are willing and motivated to reach out to people with appropriate messages. We can also provide incentives, such as those associated with preventive health programs increasingly present in insurance plans, as one way of breaking people out of their indolence.While we can increase self-efficacy, there also is a darker side to these trends: institutions lose control, and medical care can become less efficient as individuals perform the traditional work of health professionals. Most of our major life problems are associated with lack of knowledge, skills, or ability to assess risks. Information and the skills to acquire it are critical to surmounting these problems. The efforts to improve health literacy, then, are critical to addressing the needs of this group. Training programs that address optimal search behaviors (e.g., appropriate key word selection) and acquaint individuals with unfamiliar sources of information increasing their sense of self-efficacy. But it is not only seeking that is the problem, it is also processing and interpretation, with erroneous conclusions often arising from well-intentioned searches. Web searchers with high domain knowledge are less likely to pursue treatments in part because they can make better decisions about the relative urgency of their symptoms (White & Horvitz, 2014). We also have not confronted one of the central problems of the information age – the exponential increase in available knowledge. Literacy will inevitably decrease as a result of the rapid increase in knowledge and increasing change in our health care system.Our information systems are designed for (and by) hyper information seekers and the assumption that if we build it they will come. Focusing on the minimal effort conditions alerts us to the low threshold many people have for determining a search is worth it and the considerable assistance they may need to accomplish a successful search. One reason that people do not seek is that they are bewildered with what they find and become quickly frustrated with the difficulty of understanding and interpreting the information they uncover. People need to be more sophisticated about the quality of the information they gather and the persistence of their searches.Focusing on seekers is only one side of this situation, system designers need to be more sensitive to features that interact with them to actually make things even more problematic as White and his colleagues have argued in a compelling research program. They have found a strong relationship between web search and the actual utilization of health care (White & Horvitz, 2014). Disturbingly they have also suggested that biases in search engines (e.g., favoring a positive perspective, biases of systems to prior searchers’ focus on exotic, devastating diseases, larger proportions of information relating to serious illnesses vs. benign conditions, escalatory terminology) can interact with biases in searchers decision making (e.g., preference for positive information, base rate fallacies, availability bias, confirmation bias) to increase searchers anxiety (White & Horvitz, 2009); to lead them settle on incorrect answers around half of the time; and to increase the demand for medical services (White, 2009, 2013). Consumers can benefit substantially from help in query formulation such as providing alternative query terms given their limited knowledge of medical vocabulary (Zeng et al., 2006) and the underlying assumptions of search engines (Spink et al., 2004) assisting them by narrowing their common usage of broad search terms for example (Herskovic, Tanaka, Hersch, & Bernstam, 2007). Understanding these dynamics and being able to predict transitions from self-diagnosis on the web to health care utilization could increase efficiencies in an overburdened health care system (White & Horvitz, 2010).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
