@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Influence of human behavior and the principle of least effort on library and information science research

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Zipf's 1949 book focusing on principle of least effort is not cited in LIS articles until 1958.Zipf's 1949 book has a growing influence on LIS research.Zipf's concept of “Zipf's law” has had the largest influence.“Principle of least effort” is the second most cited concept.Information behavior researchers focus on concepts relating to principle of least effort.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Principle of least effort,Citation context,Library and information science,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study identified the influence of the main concepts contained in Zipf's classic 1949 book entitled Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort (HBPLE) on library and information science (LIS) research. The study analyzed LIS articles published between 1949 and 2013 that cited HBPLE. The results showed that HBPLE has a growing influence on LIS research. Of the 17 cited concepts that were identified, the concept of “Zipf's law” was cited most (64.8%), followed by “the principle of least effort” (24.5%). Although the concept of “the principle of least effort,” the focus of HBPLE, was not most frequently observed, an increasing trend was evident regarding the influence of this concept. The concept of “the principle of least effort” has been cited mainly by researchers of information behavior and served to support the citing authors’ claims. By contrast, the concept of “Zipf's law” received the most attention from bibliometrics research and was used mainly for comparisons with other informetrics laws or research results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The principle of least effort (PLE), a concept advanced by the American linguist George Kingsley Zipf, indicates that people complete tasks by choosing the way of least effort among various options (Zipf,1949). To prove that the PLE is an indication of human nature, Zipf analyzed numerous empirical data collected from various human activities including those related to language, geographic distribution of the population, economic activities, social status, and collaboration, and used mathematical formulae to explain his findings. Zipf explained the PLE in detail in his classic 1949 entitled Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort: An Introduction to Human Ecology (HBPLE).Opinions on the PLE are controversial. A few researchers have criticized the PLE for its oversimplification of human behavior (Cummings, 1977; Rapoport, 1957), whereas other researchers have supported and further explained the concept. Gratch (1990) stated that the PLE is the result of human experience and that exerting the least amount of effort is not equivalent to laziness. Case (2005) reported that people are willing to acquire lower-quality or less information to reduce their expenses.The PLE represents a common human behavior; it may thus be expected that the HBPLE has become visible in various fields and applied to various human activities. HBPLE was also compared with similar theories and was reconceptualized in the field of library and information science (LIS). For example, one study indicated that Mooers’ law was derived from the PLE (Bierbaum, 1990). Mooers’ law states that users would rather not have information if having that information is painful, which is true even for users who can efficiently access information by using information retrieval systems (Austin, 2001; Mooers, 1996). Saving readers’ time, one of the five laws of library science, is also similar in meaning to the PLE (Gratch, 1990). The LIS publications on PLE have indicated that the concept of the PLE is connected to various topics, such as cataloguing (Chrzastowski, 1999; Wei, 2005), citation (White, 2001), information services (Chrzastowski, 1999; Duan, 2004), information seeking behavior (Bigdeli, 2007; Bronstein, 2008; Kebede, 2004; Xu, Tan, & Yang, 2006), information retrieval (Chen & Liang, 2000; Kim, 1982; Wang, 2000), and the location of resources (Chrzastowski, 1995; Wang, 2001). This shows that HBPLE has established its influence on various subfields within LIS research. To understand the relationship between HBPLE and LIS research, this study examined the influence of HBPLE on LIS articles.Because the PLE is the core of HBPLE, I assumed that the PLE is the most frequently cited concept in HBPLE. Particularly, I assumed that the PLE is cited most by authors of information behavior articles because it has been regarded as an essential theory of information behavior according to the PLE being listed in the 2005 book, Theories of Information Behavior. Information behavior research is multidisciplinary and has been an essential subfield in LIS. Some theories of information behavior originating outside LIS have guided LIS researchers in advancing information behavior research, and the PLE is one example of these theories of information behavior. However, these assumptions required examination. I found that a few articles on the PLE did not cite the concept of the PLE in HBPLE and that certain publications not on the PLE cited the concept of the PLE in HBPLE. Furthermore, publications include numerous concepts. Apart from the PLE, HBPLE may consist of other influential concepts that have attracted LIS authors’ attention.To clarify whether the concept of the PLE has received the highest attention among all concepts in HBPLE, I examined which concept in HBPLE was most frequently cited by authors of LIS articles that were published between 1949 and 2013. This study also analyzed the citation functions that reveal the possible reasons why authors cite the concepts in HBPLE. Combining the analyses of cited concepts and citation functions can reveal the influence of HBPLE on LIS research in detail. In addition, I analyzed citation frequency trends and the research topics of citing articles to identify emerging trends in the influence of HBPLE on LIS research and to determine which topics in LIS research have involved applying the concepts in HBPLE. The assumption of whether information behavior articles cite the concept of the PLE most can be verified. The results contribute to the understanding how a classic book on linguistics has influenced LIS research from three aspects: the number of citations, cited concepts, and citation functions.This study answers the following research questions:(1)Does the concept of the PLE have the most influence on citing authors among all concepts in HBPLE?For the citing articles, what functions does HBPLE serve? What functions does the concept of the PLE serve?What research topics do the citing articles focus on? Is the concept of the PLE cited most by information behavior articles?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
