@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An architecture for Malay Tweet normalization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To observe features of Malay Tweets, three distinct corpus-based analyses are done.A rule-based architecture is developed based on results of the analyses.The architecture consists of seven distinct modules in a pipeline structure.Experimental results indicate high accuracy in term of BLEU score.The architecture outperforms SMT-like normalization approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Malay,Twitter,Text normalization,Noisy text,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Research in natural language processing has increasingly focused on normalizing Twitter messages. Currently, while different well-defined approaches have been proposed for the English language, the problem remains far from being solved for other languages, such as Malay. Thus, in this paper, we propose an approach to normalize the Malay Twitter messages based on corpus-driven analysis. An architecture for Malay Tweet normalization is presented, which comprises seven main modules: (1) enhanced tokenization, (2) In-Vocabulary (IV) detection, (3) specialized dictionary query, (4) repeated letter elimination, (5) abbreviation adjusting, (6) English word translation, and (7) de-tokenization. A parallel Tweet dataset, consisting of 9000 Malay Tweets, is used in the development and testing stages. To measure the performance of the system, an evaluation is carried out. The result is promising whereby we score 0.83 in BLEU against the baseline BLEU, which scores 0.46. To compare the accuracy of the architecture with other statistical approaches, an SMT-like normalization system is implemented, trained, and evaluated with an identical parallel dataset. The experimental results demonstrate that we achieve higher accuracy by the normalization system, which is designed based on the features of Malay Tweets, compared to the SMT-like system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Social Network Services (SNS) and Microblogs are an increasingly popular form of communication. The explosion of SNS and Microblogs has drawn the attention of researchers to this topic like opinion mining and sentiment analyzing (Thelwall, Buckley, & Paltoglou, 2011). However, one of the biggest obstacles to applying text-mining methods to User Generated Content (UGC) is the existence of noisy text. Most of the Natural Language Processing (NLP) and text-mining algorithms are designed to apply to clean texts. Along with more and more demand for UGC processing, the research in normalization, the process of cleaning noisy text, has become an increasingly important topic.This paper proposes an approach to normalize Malay Twitter messages. In 2012, Twitter, the most popular microblogging website in the world, had over 500 million registered users (Mislove, Lehmann, Ahn, Onnela, & Rosenquist, 2011). The reason for targeting the Malay language is the considerable usage of this language on Twitter. The Malay language is the fourth leading language that is practiced over Twitter (Hong, Convertino, & Chi, 2011).Incomplete or unavailable digital resources for the language (Noor, Sapuan, & Bond, 2011) lead us to put Malay in the less studied language category from a computational point of view. For example, to the best of our knowledge, currently there is no study on the Malay spellchecker and Named Entity Recognition (NER). The limited resources of the Malay language inspired us to follow a specific methodology to build the Malay Tweets normalization system. The methodology articulates three major phases: (1) performing analyses to scrutinize features and characteristics of colloquial Malay, (2) designing and implementing a normalization architecture based on the results of the analyses, and (3) evaluating the system and comparing it with other approaches.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents related works on normalizing noisy text. Section 3 discusses the analysis of Malay Tweets. Then, the proposed architecture is introduced in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the results of the evaluation. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper with a brief summary and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
