@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MuICE: Mutual Influence and Citation Exclusivity Author Rank

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A mutual influence and exclusive citations based method for author ranking is proposed.It considers effect of publications, citations, and publications as first author for authors and co-authors.It also considers exclusivity in citations received by an author.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Academic social networks,Ranking of authors,Author impact,Mutual influence,Citation analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With constant growth in size of analyzable data, ranking of academic entities is becoming an attention grabbing task. For ranking of authors, this study considers the author's own contribution, as well as the impact of mutual influence of the co-authors, along with exclusivity in their received citations. The ranking of researchers is influenced by the ranking of their co-authors, more so if co-authors are seniors. Tracking the citations received by an author is also an important factor to measure standing of an author. This study proposes Mutual Influence and Citation Exclusivity Author Rank (MuICE) algorithm. We performed a sequence of experiments to calculate the MuICE Rank. First, we calculated Mutual Influence (MuInf) considering three different factors: the number of papers, the number of citations and the author's appearance as first author. Secondly, we computed MuICE incorporating all three factors of MuInf along with the exclusivity in citations received by an author. Empirically, it is shown that the proposed methods generate substantial results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Analysis of academic social networks has considerable applications in academic recommendation tasks. Citation, co-citation and co-authorship networks are formed when researchers cite each other's work and work in collaboration. Some general activities in academic social networks are ranking of authors (Ding, Yan, Frazho, & Caverlee, 2009; Liu, Bollen, Nelson, & Van de Sompel, 2005), expert finding (Daud, Li, Zhou, & Muhammad, 2010; Zhang, Tang, & Li, 2007), author interest finding (Daud, 2012) and author name disambiguation (Shu, Long, & Meng, 2009). This study calculates the rank of authors with respect to their mutual influence on each other and exclusivity in their received citations. A novice researcher who may get an opportunity to collaborate with a leading researcher can have more chances to prosper in the future. Considering author's own contribution in a work, as well as the impact of influence of his or her co-authors, gives a comprehensive representation of the position of an author in an academic networks.Existing approaches find the rank of authors based on their in-links (number of nodes pointing to a node) information (Ding, 2011a; Ding et al., 2009; Gollapalli, Mitra, & Giles, 2011). The proposed method involves in-links information of a node, as well as it also considers out-links (number of nodes pointed to by) of an author. Co-author relationships from network are used to find the out-links information. This study considers a bibliographic network and presents three ways to find out the mutual influence of authors on each other, these are; with respect to the number of papers, the number of citations and the appearance of an author as first author. MuInf is based on PageRank (Brin & Page, 1998; Page, Brin, Motwani, & Winograd, 1999). We also tried to track the citations received by an author; i.e. Citations are received from how many exclusive sources. For this purpose, a bibliometric measure “f-index” (Katsaros, Akritidis, & Bozanis, 2009) is used. The term exclusivity here can be explained with the help of a simple example. Suppose there are two articles, if the first article receives three citations from three different authors and the second article receives three citations from the same author, then the first article must receive more weight as the citations received by it are from more exclusive authors. Due to the aforementioned reasons we are motivated to propose Mutual Influence and Citation Exclusivity (MuICE) Rank algorithm. Main contributions of this research are (1) finding the impact of authors based on their mutual influence on each other, with respect to the number of publications, the number of citations, the number of publications as first author and (2) ranking of authors by considering the exclusivity in their received citations along with their mutual influence.The study conducts a detailed experimentation which shows that proposed MuICE method generates satisfying results when compared to existing methods. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a review of link analysis based ranking methods in academic social networks. Section 3 gives an overview of the existing methods used as baselines and the details of our proposed method. Section 4 describes the dataset, performance evaluation, parameter settings with results and discussions and at the end Section 5 concludes the study.The following sets of terms are used interchangeably throughout the text, (academic social networks, bibliography network, co-author networks), (paper, article, publication) and (author, researcher) etc.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This research evaluates the influence of authors when they work in collaboration. We presented three different variations of Mutual influence method. These are: (1) MuInfP, which finds the mutual influence of authors with respect to their number of publications and ranks them accordingly. (2) MuInfC, which ranks the authors after finding their mutual influence with respect to their number of citations. (3) MuInfFA, which finds the mutual influence of authors on each other by considering the number of publications in which they appeared as first authors. Afterwards, we presented MuICE method to evaluate the effect of exclusivity of citations received by authors along with mutual influence. For finding the exclusivity in citations received by an author we used f-index (Katsaros et al., 2009). The results depict the authors are substantially influenced by the work of their co-workers, especially in the case if the collaborators are senior researchers.We computed all the methods with three different damping factors (d = 0.85, 0.5 and 0.15). For purpose of assessment, the ground truth is unavailable; thus, we computed the mean and standard deviation of publications as well as received citations of the top 25 authors for all approaches. We conclude that the proposed MuInfP method provides satisfying results when compared with baseline method W-PRp which uses the paper count as a weighting criteria. Analogously, when considering citations, results of MuInfc method are also substantial. The ranking criterion of the proposed MuICE is quite different from the existing methods and it involves a unique combination of different parameters instead of publication and citations count based weights. Hence, instead of comparing it with any existing method, we gathered the statistics of top authors of MuICE method from AMiner website and establish the fact that selected authors are the prestigious ones. These statistics make us conclude that only the number of publications or citations is not a sufficient criteria to rank authors. It is further concluded that collaboration has great impact on standing of an author and number of collaborators makes a difference. We also observed that MuICE produce the same results with all three values of the damping factor, however, the algorithm converges more quickly when damping factor is 0.15.In the future, we are planning to extend our work to incorporate the ranking of papers, along with the impact of time dimension. We are also interested in applying this method for topic specific author ranking. The dataset must be divided into topic specific clusters before applying these methods.