@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Differences in representations of Japanese name authority data among CJK countries and the Library of Congress

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
China, Korea, and LC have mixed headings in Kanji and other Chinese characters.Few organizations display correspondences between Kanji and their yomi.Romanized descriptions are different between organizations.Some names in hiragana might escape a search.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Authority files,Information retrieval,Name authority records,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study aims to compare representations of Japanese personal and corporate name authority data in Japan, South Korea, China (including Hong Kong and Taiwan), and the Library of Congress (LC) in order to identify differences and to bring to light issues affecting name authority data sharing projects, such as the Virtual International Authority File (VIAF). For this purpose, actual data, manuals, formats, and case reports of organizations as research objects were collected. Supplemental e-mail and face-to-face interviews were also conducted. Subsequently, five check points considered to be important in creating Japanese name authority data were set, and the data of each organization were compared from these five perspectives. Before the comparison, an overview of authority control in Chinese, Japanese, Korean-speaking (CJK) countries was also provided. The findings of the study are as follows: (1) the databases of China and South Korea have mixed headings in Kanji and other Chinese characters; (2) few organizations display the correspondence between Kanji and their yomi; (3) romanization is not mandatory in some organizations and is different among organizations; (4) some organizations adopt representations in their local language; and (5) some names in hiragana are not linked with their local forms and might elude a search.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sharing name authority data not only cuts down on labor and other costs but also increases convenience for national and international users. Hence, cooperative programs, such as the Virtual International Authority File (VIAF), are gaining significance both inside and outside of libraries. As is obvious, such programs are also important for libraries in Chinese, Japanese, and Korean-speaking (CJK) countries. However, in the current state of affairs, in which the LC/NACO Authority File (LCNAF) has only a short history in dealing with Chinese characters, and where most participatory organizations of the VIAF are from outside CJK countries, it is unclear whether authority data from CJK countries can be treated the same as that from Western countries; and if not, what is different and how we should treat it? It is crucial for libraries to consider sharing authority data, taking into account specific situations, such as the diversity of scripts for names in the Chinese character cultural sphere. This requires identifying the differences among the authority data within CJK countries.The purpose of this study is to compare the representations of Japanese personal and corporate names in Japan and mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, and the Library of Congress (LC), in order to demonstrate the differences between them, and to bring to light further issues in the sharing of name authority data among CJK countries and other countries. This is the first attempt to compare representations of Japanese authors’ name authority data that are created in a wide range of CJK countries, and to present problems to be solved when sharing Japanese authors’ name authority data. The word ‘representation’ in this paper means differences in writing systems as well as differences in spellings within a writing system.For this purpose, the author collected actual data, manuals, formats, and case reports about Japanese personal and corporate name authority data in CJK countries. Supplemental inquiries via e-mail and face-to-face interviews were also conducted. Subsequently, five check points considered to be important in creating Japanese name authority data were set. Then, using the collected information, each organization was investigated from the five perspectives. Vietnam writing systems are excluded from this study because of lack of information.After a summary of the backgrounds and relevant works provided in Section 2, a detailed methodology of this study is offered in Section 3. In Section 4, the existing conditions of authority control by geographic areas are provided. Following the main result of this study, set out in Section 5, a discussion section is presented in Section 6, and Section 7 is a summary conclusion of the analysis.In this study, ‘authority file’ and ‘authority database’ are treated as equivalents. ‘Authority database’ is used in general unless ‘authority file’ is used in cited references. ‘Authority data’ refers to all data included in the ‘authority database’; and ‘authority record’ refers to a unit of data to identify an entity in an authority database, including one or more authorized heading(s) with references and other information associated with the names in this study.In the Chinese character cultural sphere, an area including China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam, people use or used Chinese characters for their official writing systems. However, the languages spoken in Japan, Korea, and Vietnam are different from that spoken in China; therefore, these countries did not simply adopt Chinese characters, rather modifying their usage and character forms or inventing new characters to write their own languages.In Japan, hiragana and katakana syllabaries (known collectively as kana) were developed from Chinese characters during the early Heian period (794–1185) (Onishi & Miyamoto, 2009). Since then, Japanese has been written in a mixture of Kanji (Chinese characters), hiragana, and katakana. Japan also has invented original Chinese characters called kokuji, which literally means ‘Japanese characters’.Korea has had its own script, called Hangeul, since 1443 (ILCAA, 2005), and has used both Hangeul and Hanja (Chinese characters). Nowadays, Hanja is not used often by Korean people in their daily lives. However, their names can be written in both Hanja and Hangeul on birth registration forms or in official family registries in South Korea.1Article 37 of the Kajok kwan’gye ui tungnok tung e kwanhan kyuch’ik [The Rule of Registration about Family Relations] regulates types of Chinese characters used for names. Characters not covered by the rule should be described in Hangeul.1Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Macau use traditional Hanzi. On the other hand, mainland China has officially used simplified Hanzi since 1955 (Onishi & Miyamoto, 2009). This simplified script is less complex than the traditional script in that it contains fewer strokes. For example, the characters for ‘battle’ are written as ‘战斗’ in the simplified script and as ‘戰鬥’ in the traditional script. Both scripts are slightly different from Kanji or Hanja scripts. For instance, ‘battle’ is written as ‘戦闘’ in Japanese Kanji and ‘戰鬪’ in Korean Hanja.Romanization of a given Chinese character (an example would be the character meaning ‘forest’) can be different in Mandarin, Cantonese, Taiwanese, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese because of differences in pronunciation (Harrison, 1992). Even though some names in the Chinese character cultural sphere look the same because they have the same Chinese characters, their pronunciation varies from region to region; hence, their romanized forms also should be different.Since 1875, all Japanese people have had both surnames and given names. Nowadays, the number of Japanese surnames has been determined to be about 290,000 (Niwa, 1996), which is many more than the 23,813 surnames in China (Yuan & Qiu, 2010) and the 286 surnames in Korea (Korea, Statistics Korea, 2000).Kanji is used to write a large majority of Japanese surnames; a smaller number is written in hiragana or katakana (Niwa, 1996). Scripts for given names are officially recognized in Kosekihō sekō kisoku (the Ordinance for Enforcement of the Family Registration Law)2Kosekihō sekō kisoku is available at http://www.law.e-gov.go.jp/htmldata/S22/S22F00501000094.html (retrieved 27 August 2013).2for hiragana, katakana, and 2997 characters of Kanji. In those Kanji, 2136 characters are specified in Jōyō Kanjihyō,3The latest version of Jōyō Kanjihyō is available at http://www.bunka.go.jp/kokugo_nihongo/pdf/jouyoukanjihyou_h22.pdf (retrieved 27 August, 2013).3and the others are specified in an appended table of Kosekihō sekō kisoku.Jōyō Kanjihyō is a national list of Chinese characters in common use, which came into effect through Cabinet Notification No. 1 of 1981.4Cabinet Notification No. 1 of 1981 (the old version of Jōyō Kanjihyō) is available at http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/nc/k19811001001/k19811001001.html (retrieved 9 October 2013).4This list is based on Tōyō Kanjihyō, consisting of 1850 characters, a system which was established in 1946 for the purpose of simplifying the task of reading and writing Chinese characters (Yunoki, 2002). About 500 characters in Tōyō Kanjihyō were simplified compared to traditional forms. Characters included in Tōyō Kanjihyō at this time are called Shinjitai, which literally means ‘new letter shapes’, and those used before the Tōyō Kanjihyō was established are called Kyūjitai, which literally means ‘old letter shapes’ (Takebe, 1979).As Tōyō Kanjihyō was a list designed to restrict the number and forms of Chinese characters in general usage, it was inconvenient and inadequate for conveying Japanese people’s names. In order to lessen public discontent with this system, an appended table was established for Kanji, designated specifically for personal names, to which Chinese characters were added and continually updated (Takebe, 1979). In 1981, Tōyō Kanjihyō was abolished, and Jōyō Kanjihyō was established instead. Jōyō Kanjihyō was merely a guideline set by the Japanese government and, furthermore, did not restrict the use of characters (Yunoki, 2002). However, with regard to naming, only the characters listed in Jōyō Kanjihyō and the appended table of Kosekihō sekō kisoku remained officially permitted for use in given names (Maeda, 2002). In 2010, Jōyō Kanjihyō was revised and characters added. The appended table of the latest Kosekihō sekō kisoku shows characters specifically for personal names, along with variant characters (itaiji). Variant characters have different character forms from Jōyō Kanji, although their pronunciations and meanings were the same as in Jōyō Kanji. As regards Japanese surnames, character use is not restricted.The Ordinance on Commercial Registration has a policy regarding corporate names. Until October 31, 2002, the Ordinance banned the use of roman alphabets or Arabic numerals for corporate names, but it has been allowed since November 1, 2002 (MOJ, n.d.). Put simply, Japanese scripts for personal and corporate names became further diversified.Most Kanji has more than one pronunciation: so-called yomi, which are usually represented in either hiragana or katakana. People must provide yomi for Kanji when they submit birth registration forms or business applications to show how these names should be pronounced in Japan. In general, even when the same Kanji are used, they identify different individuals when their yomi are different. As just explained, for Japanese personal and corporate names represented in Kanji, yomi information is considered to be very important. In library catalogues, yomi is written principally in katakana.There are also several types of Japanese romanization systems, and controversy between the advocates of the rival systems has continued (Palmer, 1931). Two main romanization systems are used today in Japan: one is the Hepburn system, which is also called the modified Hepburn system in Western countries, and the other is the kunrei-shiki system. Kunrei-shiki is an official system that was originally designated in Cabinet Notification No. 1 of 1954, the so-called Rōmaji no tsuzurikata (a method of writing Japanese in roman characters).5Rōmaji no tsuzurikata is available at http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/nc/k19541209001/k19541209001.html (retrieved 27 August 2013).5However, Rōmaji no tsuzurikata states that spelling may also be determined by the Hepburn system when ‘international relations and situations with prior precedent in which a sudden spelling reform would be difficult’.On the other hand, Japanese people are obliged to romanize their names using the Hepburn system on their passports, in line with Ryokenhō sekō kisoku (the Ordinance for Enforcement of the Passport Act).6Ryokenhō sekō kisoku is available at http://www.law.e-gov.go.jp/htmldata/H01/H01F03301000011.html (retrieved 9 October, 2013).6The Hepburn system set forth by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan for Japanese passport applications (hereafter referred to as ‘MOFA Hepburn’7MOFA Hepburn is available at http://www.seikatubunka.metro.tokyo.jp/hebon/ (retrieved 10 April 2013).7) is slightly different from the usual Hepburn system; for example, it does not use macrons for long vowels. In fact, ‘the Hepburn system can be reasonably considered more as a set of principles, something that serves as the bedrock of a specific Romanization method, rather than as a fixed set of rules’ (Kudo, 2011), so it cannot be determined which is the usual or definitive Hepburn system. It can be said that there are no unified rules governing romanization systems for Japanese nomenclature.The LC/NACO Authority File (LCNAF) has been maintained by the Library of Congress (LC) and by National Authority Cooperative Program (NACO) participants. Non-Latin vernacular forms, such as Chinese characters, appeared in the ‘reference fields’ of authority records in LCNAF from 2008; however, the addition of non-Latin data was and is optional for NACO participants (LC, 2008a). Although participants in the CJK NACO Project contribute their CJK authority records to LCNAF, the numbers of records is still less than one per cent of all NACO members (Onnagawa, 2009). The numbers of records that can be used with no local editing for libraries in CJK countries still seem small.In 2005, an agreement was signed between OCLC and the Joint University Librarians Advisory Committee (JULAC), a consortium of academic libraries in Hong Kong, to make the JULAC Hong Kong Chinese Authority Name (HKCAN) authority file available to OCLC Connexion clients (JULAC, 2010). Unfortunately, the agreement was not renewed, and the HKCAN authority file has not been available in OCLC Connexion since April 7, 2013. One of the reasons that the agreement was not renewed was the inception and expansion of VIAF (Patton, 2013).VIAF is a system that links together authorized forms of names and titles among authority files of national bibliographic agencies and other regional agencies, and lets users search and display names of a given entity in various languages and scripts (Tillett, 2002). Although the National Diet Library (NDL) of Japan started to participate in VIAF in October 2012 (NDL, 2012a), other organizations in the Chinese character cultural sphere have not yet become involved. Furthermore, wrong links to Japanese names sometimes surface in the VIAF, as Fig. 1shows. In heading no.1, ‘Hayashi, Yoshitsugu’ is linked to two Japanese names ‘林, 宜嗣’ and ‘林, 良嗣’. However, although their birth years are the same, actually they are very different people. This shows that it can be difficult to maintain accuracy in linking names that use Chinese characters, and users in CJK countries cannot place full trust in the VIAF as of now.Aiming to develop a basis for Chinese name authority data sharing, the Cooperative Committee for Chinese Name Authority (CCCNA) was established by the China Academic Library & Information System (CALIS) Administration Center, the National Library of China (NLC), and JULAC in 2003 (CCCNA, 2003). CCCNA has launched the Chinese Name Authority Joint Database Search System, which can search authority records created by NLC, HKCAN, the Chinese Name Authority Database (CNAD) in Taiwan, and CALIS together.8The Chinese Name Authority Joint Database Search System is available at http://www.cnass.cccna.org/jsp/index.jsp.8In December 2011, the National Central Library of Taiwan (NCL) changed the bibliographic and authority format to MARC21 (NCL, 2011) and is currently reviewing the possible implementation of Resource Description and Access (RDA), which is based on Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) and Functional Requirements for Authority Data (FRAD) (NCL, 2012). NDL also changed their formats to MARC21 in January 2012 (NDL, 2010) and decided to adopt RDA for Western books beginning in April 2013 (NDL, 2013a). This development suggests that in time, RDA may promote unification of the cataloguing code in the Chinese character cultural sphere.Since many bibliographic databases support Unicode these days, the problems pertaining to character codes have been ‘almost solved’ already (Miyazawa, 2002). The appearance of VIAF and FRAD gave libraries all around the world full recognition of the significance of authority data sharing. Moreover, these developments certainly were a move toward sharing and linking the authority data of the Chinese character cultural sphere beyond national or regional levels.Although the need to understand the situation of authority control in CJK countries was recognized in the early 2000s, only very little research, limited to a specific area, has been carried out. Intending to provide OCLC with the necessary information to help it play a significant role in developing a Chinese Name Authority File, in a concerted effort with Beijing, Hong Kong and Taipei, and to meet the needs of the East Asian library community and OCLC CJK users, Yu (2002) made an evaluation and analytical study of three authority files under development in those three cities. Yu compared the scope, size, format, character code, headings, and rules of the three files, and then analyzed the compatibility and usefulness to OCLC CJK users of the three databases. Yu’s may well be the first detailed comparative study covering authority databases from Mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. However, it was mostly concerned with Chinese names. Hu, Tam, and Lo also presented features of authority files created by NLC in Beijing, CNAD of Taiwan, HKCAN, and organizations in Japan (Hu, Tam, & Lo, 2004).In South Korea, to develop a Korean authority database system for academic information, O compared certain aspects of four authority databases in South Korea (O, 2000). In another study, Yi sent a questionnaire survey to four university libraries in Korea and did a more lengthy comparison than O did, including forms of Japanese headings (Yi, 2012). As these studies pointed out, forms and contents of authority data differ in organizations and are not standardized in Korea. Yi also suggested that a national authority database and a cooperative structure are needed.As an initial attempt at sharing name authority data in CJK countries, a workshop titled ‘Authority Control among Chinese, Korean and Japanese Languages’ was held at the National Institute of Informatics (NII), Japan. The workshop was held three times between 2001 and 2002. In the workshop, specialists from the NDL and NII of Japan, the National Library of China, the National Library of Korea (NLK), the Korea Education & Research Information Service (KERIS), and LC reported their own methods for developing authority data (Naito, 2004). Unfortunately, further cooperation did not take place after the workshop. Naito showed how Japanese personal names are displayed in CJK countries in a short report on the workshop, and pointed out that these variations create and drastically increase a lack of integrity for retrieval precision (Naito, 2004).Kimura conducted a study to clarify the differences between representations of Chinese personal and corporate names in CJK countries (Kimura, 2013). With regard to Japanese names, comparative research on authority data created in a wide range of CJK countries has not yet been conducted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study revealed that representations of Japanese names differ from organization to organization. In particular, there are differences in romanization even in Japan, so that it is not an assured factor for identification. The main issues and possible solutions for sharing authority data among CJK countries and LC are as follows:(1)Databases from China and South Korea have mixed headings in Kanji and other Chinese characters. Adding correct Kanji headings might be beneficial.Few organizations display correspondences between Kanji and their yomi. The addition of yomi is an ideal solution, and corresponding relationships between yomi and Kanji should be shown. Using qualifiers or the linkage subfield might be possible.Romanization is not mandatory in some organizations, and the rules of romanization differ among organizations. Organizations that do not adopt yomi should at least consider adopting romanization. Differences among romanization rules that affect searching should be standardized.Some organizations adopt representations in their local language, but they are not linked to Japanese forms. To avoid being missed in searches, linkage should be provided during daily authority work.As noted earlier, the scope of this study is restricted to representations of Japanese name authority data. Representations of Korean and Vietnamese names will be studied in the near future. In addition, elements of authority data in the Chinese character cultural sphere should also be investigated. This study revealed four main issues concerning representations of Japanese authors’ name authority data for sharing. The results may also contribute to constructing authority data models for the Chinese character cultural sphere.