@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
QPLSA: Utilizing quad-tuples for aspect identification and rating

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose two novel aspect rating prediction approaches, i.e., Quad-tuple prediction and Expectation prediction.We analyze and investigate the performance of the proposed aspect rating prediction methods in contrast with Local Prediction and Global Prediction.We experimentally inspect the influence of aspect rating variance for different rating prediction approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quad-tuple PLSA,Aspect mining,Sentiment analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Aspect level sentiment analysis is important for numerous opinion mining and market analysis applications. In this paper, we study the problem of identifying and rating review aspects, which is the fundamental task in aspect level sentiment analysis. Previous review aspect analysis methods seldom consider entity or rating but only 2-tuples, i.e., head and modifier pair, e.g., in the phrase “nice room”, “room” is the head and “nice” is the modifier. To solve this problem, we novelly present a Quad-tuple Probability Latent Semantic Analysis (QPLSA), which incorporates entity and its rating together with the 2-tuples into the PLSA model. Specifically, QPLSA not only generates fine-granularity aspects, but also captures the correlations between words and ratings. We also develop two novel prediction approaches, the Quad-tuple Prediction (from the global perspective) and the Expectation Prediction (from the local perspective). For evaluation, systematic experiments show that: Quad-tuple PLSA outperforms 2-tuple PLSA significantly on both aspect identification and aspect rating prediction for publication datasets. Moreover, for aspect rating prediction, QPLSA shows significant superiority over state-of-the-art baseline methods. Besides, the Quad-tuple Prediction and the Expectation Prediction also show their strong ability in aspect rating on different datasets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the prevalence of the Web 2.0 technology, explosive growth of opinions are accumulating on blog posts, shopping sites or review sites (Bollegala, Weir, & Carroll, 2011). For such a vast amount of opinion corpora, it challenges both the producers and consumers to digest the opinions or make further decisions. As a result, automatic sentiment analysis that aims to facilitate means of large-scale investigation (Weichselbraun, Gindl, & Scharl, 2011), has received a lot of research interest. In particular, many sentiment analysis applications have been studied, such as sentiment polarity categorization (Dave, Lawrence, & Pennock, 2003; Pang, Lee, & Vaithyanathan, 2002), product feature extraction (Popescu & Etzioni, 2005), opinion retrieval (Zhang, Yu, & Meng, 2007) and opinion summarization (Lu, Zhai, & Sundaresan, 2009).Among these tasks in opinion mining, the problem of multi-facet rating of product reviews was firstly proposed in Baccianella, Esuli, and Sebastiani (2009), which aims to decompose online reviews into ad hoc aspects and rate these aspects.1In this paper, aspect, topic and product feature are used interchangeably.1To achieve this goal, 2-tuples of head and modifer are extracted for review aspect mining, where review aspects are firstly distilled and then rated utilizing the review overall ratings (Lu et al., 2009). Specifically, as illustrated in Fig. 1, review aspect mining includes two subtasks: (1) Aspect Identification and (2) Aspect Rating Prediction. Before we introduce the problem, we firstly give some definitions here.(1)Head: A head term h is a word (generally noun or verb) which indicates the aspect (Feature).Modifier: A modifier term m is a word (generally adjective or adverb) which reflects the sentiment/rating (Opinion) towards the head.Aspect Identification: Given a phrasef=(h,m)consisting of head h and modifier m, the goal of aspect identification is to find the mapping functionGthat correctly assigns the aspect labelAiforf:Ai=G(f). Specifically, for review aspect identification, the goal is to distill the product/service features.Aspect Rating Prediction: The goal of aspect rating prediction is to find the rating functionRthat predicts the aspect rating r given the phrase f and aspectAi. Formally, the rating function is given as:r=R(f,Ai). Specifically, for review aspect rating, the goal is to predict the aspect ratings for the product/service features.Such kind of review aspect mining is especially useful because different consumers may have different preferences to certain aspects of products or services (Lu et al., 2009). Another interesting work was proposed in Titov and McDonald (2008a), where the Multi-Grain Latent Dirichlet Allocation (MG-LDA) was firstly proposed based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003) for ratable aspect generation. Along this line, Wang et al. proposed a Latent Rating Regression (LRR) model for aspect rating (Wang, Lu, & Zhai, 2010), with subsequent work Latent Aspect Rating Analysis Model (LARAM) to generate ratable aspects without seed word supervision (Wang, Lu, & Zhai, 2011). As a matter of fact, such topic model based approaches represent reviews as bags of words and utilize word co-occurrences for aspect learning.However, the bag-of-words assumption seriously hampers the aspect segmentation capability of models, leading to inaccurate segments for the later rating analysis part (Wang et al., 2011). For example, two expressions such as “A great hotel in a horrible town!” and “A horrible hotel in a great town!” would receive identical bag-of-words representations, while expressing opposite sentiments of the hotel (Baccianella et al., 2009). As a result, how to effectively generate topic-sentiment mixture models has become a new challenge for bag-of-words methods. Fortunately, the widely accepted “Feature-Opinion” pair (e.g., movie-excellent) (Zhuang, Jing, & Zhu, 2006) is considered to contain interesting sentiment patterns and shed some light into review representation. Similar to the “Feature-Opinion” pairs, phrases (consisting of head and modifier, e.g., movie is the head and excellent is the modifier) are distilled from reviews, where head h indicates the aspect (Feature), and modifier m reflects the sentiment/rating (Opinion) towards the aspect (Lu et al., 2009; Luo, Zhuang, He, & Shi, 2012). Thence reviews are now represented as bags of phrases instead of regular bags of words.In this study, we observe that besides the 2-tuples of (head, modifier), each review is often tied with an entity and its overall rating. As shown in Fig. 1, a hotel name and an overall rating are given for the review. Thus, we can construct the quad-tuples of (head, modifier, rating, entity), which denotes that a phrase of the head and modifier appears in the review for this entity with the rating. For example, the review in Fig. 1 includes quad-tuples such as,(hotel, clean, 5, Quality Inn);(service, great, 5, Quality Inn);(location, good, 5, Quality Inn).With these quad-tuples from the reviews for a certain type of entities, we further argue that they contain more specific co-occurrence information than 2-tuples, thus provide more ability in differentiating ad hoc topics. Moreover, the types of entities e mainly enclose the aspects z, which are embodied by head h, while the modifier m and the rating r generally indicates the sentiments towards the aspects.Fig. 1 gives a detailed example of the multi-facet rating problem, which is separated into 2 subtasks– (1) Aspect Identification, and (2) Aspect Rating Prediction. In Fig. 1, the words for the same aspect are manually stained in the same color for better illustration. Given a review of a hotel (associated with the hotel name and the overall rating), through the Aspect Identification process, words sharing similar meanings are grouped into the same aspect. By virtue of Aspect Rating prediction, different aspects are rated with numerical ratings that quantify the customer’s attitudes towards specific aspects.In our preliminary work Luo et al. (2012), we proposed a quad-tuple PLSA framework in aspect identification that adopts quad-tuples in topic extraction among opinionated texts. The Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm is introduced for the derivation of our model. Additionally, systematic experiments are performed on a real-world dataset, and the results validate the effectiveness of quad-tuples in capturing topics for reviews. As a merit of the PLSA-based methods, QPLSA would not be influenced by the lexical form, and can handle unknown words (even spelling mistakes) or word-forms, provided they occur frequently enough (Brody & Elhadad, 2010).In this paper, we further apply the Quad-tuple PLSA (QPLSA for short) model to predict the ratings of the identified aspects. In summary, the main contributions of this paper include:•We propose two novel aspect rating prediction approaches, i.e., Quad-tuple Prediction (from the global perspective) and Expectation Prediction (from the local perspective).We analyze and investigate the performance of the proposed aspect rating prediction methods in contrast with Local Prediction and Global Prediction (Lu et al., 2009).We experimentally inspect the influence of aspect rating variance for different rating prediction approaches.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related work. Section 3 presents the problem definition and preliminary knowledge. Section 4 details our model Quad-tuple PLSA and the EM solution, moreover, the aspect rating prediction methods are also given. Section 5 gives the experimental results to validate the superiority of our methods and we conclude our paper in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
