@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
New journal classification methods based on the global h-index

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We argue that the h-index has a deficiency in comparing journals for ranking purpose.We propose the global h-index: Gh-index and its extensions to fix this problem.We apply the new indexes to produce an automatic journal classification without arbitrary cut-off points.The new ranking results are compatible with other peer reviewed based ranking results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Research evaluation,Journal ranking,The h-index,The Gh-index,Xj Class,Lj Class,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work we develop new journal classification methods based on the h-index. The introduction of the h-index for research evaluation has attracted much attention in the bibliometric study and research quality evaluation. The main purpose of using an h-index is to compare the index for different research units (e.g. researchers, journals, etc.) to differentiate their research performance. However the h-index is defined by only comparing citations counts of one’s own publications, it is doubtful that the h index alone should be used for reliable comparisons among different research units, like researchers or journals. In this paper we propose a new global h-index (Gh-index), where the publications in the core are selected in comparison with all the publications of the units to be evaluated. Furthermore, we introduce some variants of the Gh-index to address the issue of discrimination power. We show that together with the original h-index, they can be used to evaluate and classify academic journals with some distinct advantages, in particular that they can produce an automatic classification into a number of categories without arbitrary cut-off points. We then carry out an empirical study for classification of operations research and management science (OR/MS) journals using this index, and compare it with other well-known journal ranking results such as the Association of Business Schools (ABS) Journal Quality Guide and the Committee of Professors in OR (COPIOR) ranking lists.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Journal evaluation is a heated topic in bibliometrics. Previous studies have concentrated on journal evaluation approaches. Two major approaches have been studied theoretically and applied practically. The first approach is called peer review, whereby a survey or questionnaire is designed for collecting opinions from experts in bibliometrics (Chandy, Ganesh, & Henderson, 1991). A series of well-known journal ranking lists have been generated using this approach, such as the recently published COPIOR journal list (COPIOR, 2011), which was produced by the UK Committee of Professors in Operations Research. In total, 68 journals in operations research and management science (OR/MS) were categorized into 4 groups from rank 4 (the highest quality) to rank 1 (the lowest quality).The second journal evaluation approach consists of bibliometric methods, also known as quantitative methods. Journal impact factor (JIF), the most well-known and commonly used indicator to rank scientific journals, was suggested by Garfield (1972). The JIF indicator calculates the average number of citations for certain papers (articles, reviews and letters) published in specified journals over a two-year evaluation window. The JIF indicator has attracted much attention (Glänzel & Moed, 2002; Whitehouse, 2001; Yu, Wang, & Yu, 2005), and the well-known online database Web of Science’s (WoS) Journal Citation Report (JCR) employs the JIF indicator to select journals for input into the JCR database.More recently, the h-index was introduced. Currently regarded as a milestone method of research evaluation, h-index applications extend across multiple levels, from the assessment of individual researchers to academic journals. In 2006, (Braun, Glanzel, & Schubert, 2006) suggested and defined the h-index for journal evaluation as follows:“Retrieving all source items of a given journal from a given year and sorting them by the number of times cited, it is easy to find the highest rank number which is still lower than the corresponding ‘Times Cited’ value. This is exactly the h-index of the journals for the given year.”Braun et al., 2006In practice, the h-index is widely used for journal evaluation and is studied extensively in the literature (Harzing & van der Wal, 2009; Saad, 2006). Although an h-index can be computed by using one’s own publications of a person or a journal quite easily, its interpretation is clearer by using the so called h-core which has been much investigated in the literature. According to Burrell (2007), the h-index seeks to identify the most productive core of an author’s output in terms of most received citations. This most productive set we refer to as the Hirsch core, or h-core. In other words, h-core refers to all the publications whose citations are greater than or equal to the h-index.Clearly the problem with this kind of definitions is that the size of an h-core (e.g., the number of publications in an h core) may be greater than its h-index. In this paper unless specifically stated otherwise, we adopt the second kind definition: All publications ranked between rank 1 and rank h form the Hirsch core. If there are several publications with the same number of citations, one ranks the articles with the same number of citations in anti-chronological order so that more recent articles have a larger probability to belong to the Hirsch core than older ones (Cabrerizo, Alonso, Herrera-Viedma, et al., 2010; Liu & Rousseau, 2009). Thus an h-core consists of exactly h elements if using this kind of definitions.Using the h-core, we can further discuss some issues of the h-index. The main purpose of using an h-index is to compare the index for different research units (e.g. researchers, journals, etc.) to differentiate their research performance. However let us note that an h-index is defined by only making comparison among the citations counts of one’s own publications. This naturally raises one question: can h-index be reliably used for comparisons among different research units, like researchers or journals? For example, if two researchers or journals have the same h-index, does that mean that they will in fact be “equal” in terms of research quality? Clearly the answer is negative: Take an extreme example, unlike the other indexes such as citation counts, the h-index of a publication is always one! To make an h-index work, it needs peers for comparisons: the more and the better! Although its discrimination power gradually increases as the number of publications in the units does, this inherited weakness remains in the index. In this context we shall have a close examination of the citation distribution within the h-core. Suppose h-indexes of Journal A and B are 4 and 6 respectively, and their h-core papers have citations of 4;4;4;4 and 6;6;6;6;6;6 respectively. In this case clearly journal B dominates Journal A. However their h core papers could also have citations of 12;12;12;12, and 6;6;6;6;6;6 instead. In the 2ndcase it is unclear that Journal B should dominate Journal A. Clearly h-index itself could not tell which cases they are. However if we gather those ten papers together (we call it the global set) and re-compute the h-index (we call it the global h index) and rebuild the h-core (we call it the global h core), we notice that in the 1stcase the papers in the global h core have citations of 6;6;6;6;6;6 (12;12;12;12;6;6 in the 2ndcase), all from Journal B (two from Journal Bandfour from Journal Ain the 2nd case). Thus we may conclude that in the 1st case the qualities of the Journal A’s h-core papers are lower than those of the Journal B’s h-core papers, while in the 2nd case the qualities of the Journal A’s h-core papers are higher than those of Journals B’s h-core’s. It occurs to us that by comparing the number of papers within the global h core and its own h core, one can more reliably differentiate research performance among different research units (e.g. researchers, journals, etc.). This motivates us to introduce the global h-index and global h-core for research assessment, which will be discussed in details in the follows.This paper is organized as follows: in the next section, we discuss the definition and theoretical basis of the Gh-index; next, we extend the definition of the Gh-index to improve its discrimination power on large samples; we then consider how the Gh-index can be used for evaluating the quality of journals and carry out an empirical study of OR/MS journals, comparing our results with those generated by peer review in the ABS and COPIOR ranking lists. In particular we show how we can develop an automatic way of classifying journals into groups without having to specify arbitrary cut-off points by comparing the Gh-index with the h-index. A discussion and conclusion are given in the final section.As mentioned before, by building the global set and the global h index and global h core, we can have a clearer understanding on the individuals’ performance. Our idea is simply to integrate all assessed items (researchers or journals) as a global set and undertake the comparisons between the global h core and the original h core.In particular, we define the Gh-index as follows:Assuming all compared outputs are collected together and arranged in descending citation order, the global h-index and global h-core (i.e., the GH-index and GH-core) are calculated in the usual way. The Gh-index of unit i (i.e., Ghi) is then the number of unit i’s items included in the GH-core.Taking individual researchers as an example, we can formally write the formula of the Gh-index as follows:We assume{pi} is the publication set of researcher i;{c(pi)} is the citation set of {pi};hiis the h-index of researcher i;hi-core is the h-core of researcher i;GH is the h-index of the global unit (i.e.,∪i=1{pi});GH-core is the h-core of the global unit.Therefore, the Ghi-core and Ghi-index are defined as follows:(1)Ghi-core=pi:c(pi)⩾GHGhi=∑m=1nsing(c(pmi)-GH),wheresing(x)=1,x⩾00,x<0where n is the total number of publications of researcher i.Because all assessed units’ publications are integrated into a global unit, all compared publications share the same comparison reference (the GH-core). Obviously, this idea can be applied to other assessed units as long as they share similar characteristics, such as scientific journals in the same field. In the following section, we present some observations and a theoretical analysis of the relationship between the Gh-index and the original h-index to clarify this idea. Properly speaking, therefore, the Gh-index is always defined only for a particular unit whereas the GH-index refers to all assessed units.In this section, we investigate the empirical properties of the Gh-index. We use previously applied data (Egghe, 2006; Glänzel & Persson, 2005) based on several Price Medalists in bibliometrics that were formerly used to examine well-known bibliometric indicators such as the h-index and g-index. With the data provided, we can construct the GH-core shown in Fig. 1.Due to the large sample size, only part of the GH-core is visually presented in Fig. 1. From the definition of the GH-core and the graph, we see that the GH-core is actually built using publications from all assessed researchers. For this data, the GH-index is actually 60, i.e., taking all researchers into account, there are 60 papers with at least 60 citations. Fig. 2shows the citation profile of the top 20 papers of four representative researchers: Researchers 1, 3, 7 and 11. Let us now have a closer examination of how to calculate the individual Gh-indexes.At GH=60, it is not surprising that Researcher 11’s Gh-index is zero because his/her highest number of citations are below 60. On the other hand, the number of citations of each of the top 20 papers of Researcher 1 are higher than 60; therefore, these 20 papers are all included in the GH-core. We further calculated the Gh-index for each researcher as well as other indicators (e.g., the total publications N, the h-index and the g-index). The results are shown in Table 1, sorted in descending order of the h-index.First, a larger value of Gh index of Researcher 1 indicates that this researcher has more “high standard” papers included in the GH core than Research 2 comparing globally, although they have the same h indexes. We also notice that some researchers have more “less qualified” papers when comparing globally such as Research 7 and 8. On the other hand, we find that several researchers have low Gh-index, including zero. Note that these are top researchers; low values would be even more prevalent with a group of average researchers. Low values also occur very frequently when we apply the Gh-index to journals; indeed, many journals will share a zero value. The reason is that the number of publications may be significantly higher than the citation counts – an increasing number of papers are published, but the citation counts do not increase proportionally. This is partly because of the obsolescence effect – as they age, papers become less relevant and, thus, the number of citations decreases for these papers. The result is that the number of papers and the number of citations have different scales. For instance, for Price Medalists, the total annual publication number of the 14 researchers is 432, but the GH-index for these journals is 60, indicating that only 60 papers from 14 researchers are included in the global core. Thus, it is not surprising that many researchers have low Gh-indexes, including zero. One possible remedy is to reduce the rapid increase in the publication number by rescaling it. We can then introduce a modified Gh-index: the Ghadj-index. We define the GHadj-index as follows:(2)GHadj=n∗iffc(n∗)⩾(n∗)αandc(n∗+1)<(n∗+1)αwhere0<α<1Similarly, we can then define the GHadj-core and the individual Ghadj-index. The reason we use the parameter α is to allow us to alter the extent of the rescaling. Because α is between 0 and 1, it provides a way to reduce the speed of increase of the publication number and therefore leads to a larger Gh-index (the Ghadj-index). There is obviously an issue concerning what value to give this parameter and our suggestion is to adjust the α so that the GHadj-index is equal to the sum of the h-indices of all assessed units, so there is a fixed point related to the h-index values of the units under assessment. What we are essentially doing is reducing the number of citations that a paper needs to have in order to appear in the GHadj-core, thereby increasing the number of papers that are actually in the core. In the Price Medalists case, we increase the number of papers until the corresponding GHadj equals 250, the total of the h-indices of the researchers in Table 1. In this particular example, α is set to 0.5234, and the number of citations needed decreases to 18, see Table 1.It is clear that the new index is more discriminatory in comparison to both the Gh-index and the original h-index – all of the researchers now have a different value of the Ghadj-index. At the meantime, due to the increase of the adjusted GH core, more papers from individual researchers are included in the GH core by comparing globally, which are reflected from larger Ghadj indexes for all researchers. Furthermore, we find out the interesting relationship between one's h index and Ghadj index, some is larger (see Researcher 10), and some is smaller (see Researcher 1) and some is equal (see Researcher 5). This is not a coincidence and provides a mechanism for research output quality classification, which we will explore it in the following sections. Here let us emphasize that the main focus of this paper is not on the global h index itself but rather on combination of the global and the original h indexes to obtain extra performance information, as to be seen below.In this section, we explore the relationship between the h-index and the Gh-index and deduce the following two properties which are useful for our journal classification.Property 1For any two journals i and j, if Ghj<hj, hi<hj, we have Ghi⩽hi. The same relationship holds for the Ghadj-index.We will prove it by contradiction. We provide the proof for the Gh-index below; it also works for the Ghadj-index.ProofIf Ghi>hi⇒hi-core∪{phi+1}⊂GH-core(1)According to the definition the h-index∀pi∈hi-core⇒c(pi)⩾hi∀pj∈hj-core⇒c(pj)⩾hjNote that hi<hj. If hi=minc(pi)pi∈hi-core,Thenminc(pj)pj∈hj-core⩾hj>hi=minc(pi)pi∈hi-core(2)According to (1) and (2)hj-core∈GH-core∴ Ghj⩾hj, and this is a contradictionIfhi<minc(pi)pi∈hi-core,thenc(phi+1)⩽hi<hj⩽minc(pj)pj∈hj-coreThis and (1) imply hj-core∈GH-coreThis is in conflict with the assumptionEnd of Proof.For any two journals i and j, ifGhadjj>hj, hi>hjwe have Ghadji⩾hi.According to the definition of h-index∀pj∈hj-core⇒c(pj)⩾hj∀pi∈hi-core⇒c(pi)⩾hiNote that hi>hj. Ifhj=minc(pj)j∈hj-coreThenc(pi)pi∈hi-core≥hi>hj=minc(pj)j∈hj-core(1)∵Ghadjj>hj∴hj-core∈GHadj-core(2)According to (1) and (2)we have hi-core∈GHadj-core, ∴ Ghadji⩾hiIfhj<minc(pj)j∈hj-core,c(phj+1)⩽hj.SinceGhadjj>hj,hj-core∪{phj+1}∈GHadj-core.Thenc(pi)pi∈hi-core⩾hi>hj⩾c(phj+1).Thus we have hi-core∈GHadj-coreGhadji⩾hiEnd of Proof.The above proof shows the monotonic property of the Gh-index (Ghadj-index) that will be applied later in our journal classification.We next carried out an empirical study with a larger sample consisting of 64 journals in operational research and management science (OR/MS) using data from the Journal Citation Report (JCR2011). We collected five-year basic bibliometric data such as total publications (N), total citations (TC), the 5-year journal impact factor (JIF5), the h-index and the g-index from Web of Science for a long-term investigation. The collection occurred during May 2012. Furthermore, we calculated the Gh-index and Ghadj-index for each of the journals for comparison to well-known major bibliometric indicators. In our study, the sum of the h-indices of all 64 journals was 685, and α was adjusted to 0.4717. To ease the data collection, we adopted the first kind definition of the h-core. The results are shown in Appendix A, which is sorted in descending order of the JIF5, currently one of the commonly used indicators for journal evaluation.The Appendix A shows that the JIF5-based rank and the Gh-index (Ghadj-index)-based rank provide different views on journal quality assessment. In particular, the JIF5, which is essentially a citations-per-paper measure, ignores the number of papers and thus the overall total contribution, while all the variants of the h-index favor journals with large numbers of papers. We have highlighted the top 5 in each case, and the only journal in common is Management Science. The top 5 according to the JIF5 all have relatively few papers (less than 500), while four of the top 5 according to the Ghadj-index all have over 1000 publications. Some journals are ranked considerably lower according to the Ghadj-index, e.g., Manufacturing & Service Operations, Transport Research E, and OR Spectrum. We have calculated the correlation coefficients between well-known bibliometric indicators in Table 2.This confirms that the h-indices are all highly correlated with the total citation number and each other but are less correlated with the JIF5. The Ghadj-index is the most highly correlated with the other indices, but it is less correlated with the JIF5 than the others. We next compared the values of the h-index and the Ghadj-index for each of the journals and the result is shown in Table 3, ranked in descending order of the h-index.In terms of discriminatory power, we can see that the Ghadj-index is better, at least for the higher ranked journals. The h-index begins to yield tied values from approximately rank 12 onwards, while the Ghadj-index maintains discrimination until around rank 33 where the values approach zero.One can claim that there is no need to discriminate very closely between individual journals (or researchers) but that, rather, it is only necessary to categorize them into groups; thus, we will now introduce a method for doing this. By comparing the Ghadj-index with the h-index, it is interesting to observe that the Ghadj-indices of many top journals are larger than their h-indices. This indicates that their Gh-cores are larger than their h-cores due to the relatively higher quality of their publications in the global comparison. In other words, the better journals will have a greater proportion of the GH-core papers than the others. Thus, it should to possible to classify journals by the difference between their Ghadj-indices and h-indices; this will be discussed in detail below.Our idea for journal classification is to explore the relationship between the h- and Ghadj-index. In general, given that the GHadj-index is the same as the sum of the individual h-indices of all journals to be assessed, if journal i is a good one, it is likely that its Ghadj-index will be larger than its h-index. That is to say, its Ghadji-core is larger than its hi-core by global comparison to the others. Under this assumption, we propose an approach to classifying assessed journals into the four groups in Table 4.The advantage of this classification is that we do not need to artificially set up any cut-off points (like 5% of the total list).It is interesting to note that the classes here are quite compatible with but not completely identical to the groups found by ranking via the h-index. For example, if journal i is in Class 4 and the h-index of journal j is larger than that of journal i, then journal j is likely to be in Class 4, but it could also be in Class 3 in some (artificial) cases based on Property 2. According to Property 1, the same is true for the journals in Class 2.We can apply this approach to the same sample of journals for a new journal classification (denoted the Xj Class). We use the ABS journal ranking results (denoted the ABS Class), as shown in the ABS2010 Journal Quality Guide for reference purposes. The ABS Journal Quality Guide, produced by the Association of Business Schools in the UK, is the most well-known journal ranking system in Europe. Initial journal rankings are proposed based on the journal impact factor from the Web of Science database and modified by experts such as institute administrators, researchers, and journal editors (ABS, 2011). The 4 classes in the ABS2010 Journal Quality Guide are shown in Table 5.Given that both the ABS Class and Xj Class results include journals divided into 4 classes, we were interested in observing the relationship and differences between these two ranking results. The results are shown in Table 6, arranged in descending order of the ABS Class. Recently, the Committee of Professors in Operational Research (COPIOR) published its own ranking for OR/MS journals because they were unhappy with the ABS ranking. The latest list can be viewed from their official website.1http://www.copior.ac.uk/Journallist.aspx.1The COPIOR ranking result (noted as COPIOR Class) is included below for comparison purposes.By comparing these two journal ranking systems, we see they are quite consistent with respect to journal classification, although the ABS Class has a very small number of category 4 journals, which is one of the concerns of COPIOR. The journals that ranked highly in the ABS Class are also in the top of the Xj Class. Journals absent from the ABS Class, which we assume are either irrelevant to the business field or not as important as the others, are all ranked lower in the Xj Class. These findings encouraged us to further explore the correlations between these two journal classifications. The results are shown in Table 7.We can see from Table 7 that the Xj Class is more consistent with the COPIOR Class than with the ABS Class, although the COPIOR Class does not cover some of the non-OR journals. This suggests that our new journal classification is quite consistent with the views of OR professors, at least those in the UK. We also note that smaller sample sizes may lead to larger correlations.By observing the Xj Class journals, it appears that only a few are classified as Class 3. This reminds us that the definition of this class may not be suitable, as the equation Ghadj=h is not very robust. Thus we propose a more robust method for journal classification (noted as Lj Class) below.Using the Xj Class results, we remove all the journals in Class 4 from the total journal set. We then apply the above journal classification approach to the remaining journals. This time, the Class 4 journals in the remaining set are classified as Class 3 journals globally, and so on. Eventually, we can classify the journals into 4 separate classes and compare them with the Xj Class results, as shown in Table 8below.It is clear from Table 8 that the Xj Class and Lj Class results are consistent with each other. In fact, the Spearman correlation of the two classes is 0.88. Furthermore, Class 3 in the Lj Class seems to be more reasonable. It is clear that correlation analysis can provide information on the relationship trends of these rankings, but is not very detailed regarding the actual differences of these rankings. To this end, we carried out an analysis which examines the total difference (the absolute value) between two ranking systems and their average difference. For example, the journal EJOR is ranked 3, 4, 3, and 4 in ABS Class, COPIOR Class, Xj Class and Lj Class, respectively. The rank difference between the ABS Class and the rest of the three classes are 0, 1, 0, and 1, respectively. We repeat this counting for each of the 64 journals and calculate the total and average rank differences, as shown below in Table 9. Apparently, Lj Class and COPIOR Class are the most closely related. It seems that the Lj Class is more practical.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
