@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The appraisal and management of uncertainty: Implications for information-retrieval systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review the prevailing discourse around the concept of uncertainty.We describe a communication-based theory of uncertainty management.We explore how this theory can inform the design of information-retrieval systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Uncertainty,Information retrieval,Appraisal,Anxiety,Hope,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Uncertainty is an important idea in information-retrieval (IR) research, but the concept has yet to be fully elaborated and explored. Common assumptions about uncertainty are (a) that it is a negative (anxiety-producing) state and (b) that it will be reduced through information search and retrieval. Research in the domain of uncertainty in illness, however, has demonstrated that uncertainty is a complex phenomenon that shares a complicated relationship with information. Past research on people living with HIV and individuals who have tested positive for genetic risk for different illnesses has revealed that information and the reduction of uncertainty can, in fact, produce anxiety, and that maintaining uncertainty can be associated with optimism and hope. We review the theory of communication and uncertainty management and offer nine principles based on that theoretical work that can be used to influence IR system design. The principles reflect a view of uncertainty as a multi-faceted and dynamic experience, one subject to ongoing appraisal and management efforts that include interaction with and use of information in a variety of forms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Generally speaking, information retrieval (IR) encapsulates various activities and processes associated with acquiring information from some source (Norton, 2000). The design and use of computerized IR systems – those tools that organize, represent, and provide a means to access information electronically – have always been defining interests of the library and information science (LIS) field. Over the last 50years, different discourses on the analysis, design, and use of IR systems have emerged. In particular, scholars interested in understanding the nature and characteristics of the IR field often describe two different “orientations” or “perspectives” apparent in the accumulated literature. The first has been labeled in a number of different ways, including the “physical paradigm” (Ellis, 1992) and the “experimental mainstream tradition” (Ingwersen, 1996). At its core is the study of different IR methods – algorithms, indexes, vocabularies, representation techniques, and so on – through the use of experimental procedures in highly controlled settings. This perspective most clearly is manifested in what Ellis (1984) earlier called the IR model of a retrieval situation and what Bates (1989) later termed the classic model of IR.The second perspective on IR research is characterized by its focus on people, their cognitive activities and accompanying affective states, and how those states and activities can be represented in IR systems. Ellis (1992) referred to it as a “cognitive paradigm” and Ingwersen (1996) spoke of a “user-oriented tradition.” Ellis (1992) explained that work grounded in this alternative approach is “united by the underlying theme that an information retrieval system should reflect in its operations, in some way or other, the cognitive world of the user” (p. 53). Ingwersen (1996) described it as a younger tradition, one “rooted in communication theory and socio-psychological methodologies” (p. 11) in which “information is understood as a result of human interpretation of data sources during communication and information interaction” (p. 12).It is to this body of work on user-oriented approaches to IR that we seek to contribute a perspective on uncertainty from beyond the LIS field. The body of theoretical work we bring to this discussion was developed largely in the domain of health communication, specifically in studies focused on the role of communication and information in the management of health and illness. As we explain in the following, our perspective on uncertainty differs from many prevailing ideas and as such, may help cast a different light on users, IR systems, and interactions between the two. Our central thesis is that uncertainty is not something inherently negative, nor is it something always sought to be eliminated or resolved; rather, uncertainty is an object of ongoing appraisal and management. The goal of this paper is to describe how thinking about uncertainty, appraisal, emotion, and communication can influence ideas about IR systems. In the following sections, we (a) provide a brief overview of the prevailing discourse around uncertainty in the fields of communication and LIS, (b) describe a communication-based theory of uncertainty management, and (c) explore how uncertainty management principles can influence the analysis and design of IR systems. Over the course of our discussion we will use the expressions “information behavior,” “information seeking,” and “information searching” as Wilson (2000) defined them, information behavior accounting for the “totality of human behavior in relation to sources and channels of information,” information seeking referring to the “purposive seeking for information as a consequence of a need to satisfy some goal,” and information searching as the “‘micro-level’ of behavior employed by the searcher in interacting with information systems of all kinds” (p. 49).Uncertainty frequently is described as an anxiety-producing cognitive state that is managed through information-seeking behaviors (Berger & Bradac, 1982; Gudykunst, 1995; Kuhlthau, 2004). People may want to reduce the uncertainty they experience about many things: behaviors of their relational partners (Knobloch & Solomon, 2002); symptoms that signal an illness (Mishel, 1988); inconclusive disease screening results (Sah, Elias, & Ariely, 2013); rules and responsibilities in families, organizations, or communities (Kramer, 2004; Merry, 1995); positions of political candidates (Alvarez, 1997); and so on. Uncertainty can make for difficult problem solving or decision making, can lead to the perceived inability to predict (and control) one’s future, and can defy the search for meaning. Information often is considered the answer – in fact, Shannon and Weaver (1949), in their A Mathematical Theory of Communication, defined it as the amount of uncertainty a message eliminates. Information can clarify the nature of problems and provide possible solutions, it can help differentiate decision alternatives into better or worse choices, it can enhance our understanding of the likelihood (i.e., probability) that events will happen, and it can provide a basis for changing or altering our beliefs.Still others have portrayed uncertainty as a more neutral, or sometimes even positive, state. Researchers have described it as a natural rhythm to life (Mishel, 1990), as a fundamental characteristic of complex systems (Merry, 1995), and as an inherent quality of communication that is essential to meaning making (Baxter & Braithwaite, 2009). Some have noted circumstances in which uncertainty can be linked to hope or optimism (Brashers et al., 2000), in which uncertainty can extend the duration of positive moods (Wilson, Centerbar, Kermer, & Gilbert, 2005) and increase interpersonal attraction (Whitchurch, Wilson, & Gilbert, 2011), in which uncertainty is needed to inspire creativity (Anderson, 2006), and in which people prefer not knowing something to knowing it (Dawson, Savitsky, & Dunning, 2006; Wahlin, 2007). Moreover, uncertainty can be long-term and multi-faceted (as in chronic illness); in such situations, strategies such as seeking information may be inadequate or may serve only to temporarily manage it.A fundamental question, then, is what differentiates situations in which individuals will work diligently to seek information and (attempt to) reduce their uncertainty, and conditions in which they will tolerate, or even appreciate, uncertainty? For us, the idea that uncertainty can be evaluated or appraised is central to answering that question. Appraisal, a key component of psychological theories of coping and adaptation in stressful situations, highlights the emotional and situated nature of uncertainty.Our goal for this paper – to describe how thinking about uncertainty, appraisal, emotion, and communication can influence ideas about IR systems – is facilitated by examining how existing conceptions of uncertainty and information behavior fit within the user-oriented IR framework. In the LIS field, various models that represent interaction with and use of information explicitly account for the experience of uncertainty. Reviewing such models and asking what they can contribute to our understanding about interaction with IR systems brings us to a crossroad with the information-seeking literature. As Vakkari (1999) explained, findings from information-seeking studies have the potential to further our understanding of IR search processes and to benefit IR research more generally. In the following paragraphs, we briefly outline two widely-known models, Kuhlthau’s (1991, 2004) information-search process (ISP) model and Wilson’s (1999b) problem-solving process model.Through several studies of library users engaged in substantial projects, Kuhlthau (1991, 2004) developed a stage-based model of information seeking called the ISP. The ISP model holds that information seeking is a constructive process and that the experiences individuals have while looking for information can be understood as a series of six stages: task initiation, topic selection, pre-focus exploration, focus formulation, information collection, and search closure. Kuhlthau characterized each stage by detailing its associated thoughts, feelings, and actions, including uncertainty. In her “uncertainty principle,” Kuhlthau (1993) described uncertainty as “a cognitive state which commonly causes affective symptoms of anxiety and lack of confidence” (p. 347). The principle further holds that information seeking is initiated by uncertainty that is attributable to insufficient understanding, gaps in meaning, or inadequate constructs, and that the experience of uncertainty is likely in the early stages of the ISP model.For Kuhlthau, information services and systems that strive to account for the experience of uncertainty must actively and holistically attend to users over the course of their search process. In another paper, Kuhlthau (1999) explored how the understanding of uncertainty that has emerged from her work might inform the design of IR systems. In addition to urging designers to see uncertainty as a natural component of the search process, she called attention to when and how new information is presented to users, to the openness and desire users may or may not have for new ideas, to the relationship between uncertainty and the interest a searcher has in the task at hand, and to the inherent complexity that users perceive in that task. Over the years, aspects of Kuhlthau’s ISP model have been used to inform the design of intelligent IR systems. Cole (1998, 2001) and Cole, Cantero, and Sauve (1998, 2000), for example, used the stages of the ISP to determine classes of information needs and to test uncertainty expansion and reduction tools intended to support students engaged in the research and writing process.Another prominent stage-based model of the information-seeking process was developed by Wilson (1999b). The idea underlying his model is that the emergence of problems leads to uncertainty, which then in turn spurs efforts to seek and retrieve information. If the goal of a person confronted with a problem is to find a corresponding solution, in short, to resolve his or her uncertainty, then activities performed to that end should be understood as “goal-directed.” Wilson argued that individuals move through four stages in the problem-resolution process, each associated with increasing levels of certainty: problem identification, problem definition, problem resolution, and solution statement. If uncertainty cannot be adequately resolved at a given stage, individuals may find themselves tracing back through some of the previous stages. Wilson (1999a) along with his colleagues (Wilson, Ford, Ellis, & Foster, 2002) tested this model among academic researchers and found that the stage-based view of the problem-solving process resonated with participants and that their experience of uncertainty was indeed related to the stage of the problem-solving process they were at, as well as the extent of their domain knowledge.The work of Kuhlthau and Wilson highlights some prevalent thoughts about uncertainty. Both models view the experience of uncertainty as a fundamental phenomenon, frame it as a catalyst for information seeking, and treat it as something that diminishes with or is sought to be resolved through information seeking. These conceptualizations may be accurate, given the context surrounding a particular information-seeking event; however, as we move to explore the theory of uncertainty management in the paragraphs that follow, it will become clear that uncertainty, appraisal, and information share nuanced and complex relationships and that those relationships may also hold significant implications for the design of IR systems and our understanding of how such systems are used.Working in the context of HIV at a time when treatments and outcomes for the disease were rapidly evolving, Brashers and colleagues developed a theory to explain the role of communication and psychological processes involved in managing the experience of uncertainty (Brashers, 2001, 2007; Brashers et al., 2000). This theory elaborates uncertainty in illness theory (Mishel, 1988, 1990) and the theory of stress, appraisal, and coping (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), and complements work in problematic integration theory (Babrow, 2001; Babrow & Matthias, 2009) and the theory of motivated information management which holds that discrepancies between desired and actual levels of uncertainty are the starting point for information management (Afifi & Afifi, 2009; Afifi & Morse, 2009; Afifi & Weiner, 2004). It primarily has been applied in illness situations (e.g., Brashers et al., 1999), but also can be used more broadly (Brashers, 2001, 2007).Uncertainty about illness is a commonly studied topic in the health sciences literature. Mishel (1988, 1990) developed uncertainty in illness theory to help explain the antecedents to uncertainty (e.g., the trust a person has in his or her healthcare provider, the person’s level of education, the pattern of symptoms, the familiarity the person has with the healthcare system), as well as the mechanisms by which uncertainty is managed (e.g., creating positive illusions, seeking information). Brashers and colleagues extended Mishel’s work to develop their theory of communication and uncertainty management (Brashers, 2001, 2007; Brashers et al., 2000). Based on focus-group interviews with people living with HIV, Brashers et al. (2003) noted that uncertainty included three areas for this population: (a) medical uncertainty (also see Mishel, 1988) included insufficient information about the diagnosis and unpredictable disease progression or prognosis; (b) personal uncertainty included the potential impact of the illness on roles and financial resources; and (c) social uncertainty included the possibility for stigma and discrimination (see Table 1for a complete listing). These sources of uncertainty parallel Babrow, Kasch, and Ford’s (1998) descriptions of illness uncertainty. They argued that uncertainty arises from characteristics of situations, information, and individuals: Situations can be ambiguous, complex, unpredictable, or probabilistic; information can be unavailable or inconsistent; and individuals can feel insecure in their own state of knowledge or the state of knowledge in general.Uncertainty associated with various sources subsequently is appraised (Mishel, 1988, 1990). Lazarus and Folkman (1984) noted that “cognitive appraisal can be most readily understood as the process of categorizing an encounter, and its various facets, with respect to its significance for well-being” (p. 31). Appraisals can include goal relevance (“Does the event relate to me being able to obtain my goals?”), goal congruence or incongruence (“If the event is relevant to my goals, would it help or hinder my being able to obtain them?”), controllability (“Is the event mutable from outside sources?”), coping potential (“Do I have resources to help me manage the event to minimize negative impact on my goal?”), and so on (Lazarus, 2001). Appraisals then lead to emotional responses – for example, a chronic debilitating illness is an event that can interrupt a person’s work, relationships, or plans for the future, therefore it is goal relevant and goal incongruent. The illness may defy treatment and the person may lack social or economic resources to manage it, therefore low controllability and poor coping potential would likely cause anxiety and stress.One possible appraisal of uncertainty is that it represents danger, when not knowing something can lead to negative outcomes. Danger appraisals typically correspond to emotional reactions such as anxiety or fear. For example, a person experiencing symptoms might become anxious if unable to connect those symptoms to a cause, which might be highly variable in both source and corresponding degree of severity. A headache for a person with HIV disease could be associated with the virus, with infections or tumors, with medications taken to fight the virus or prevent/treat other conditions, or with stress of being ill. Being uncertain and anxious, the person might start seeking information to help determine a cause of the headache – perhaps searching the internet, reading books, or seeking advice from a healthcare professional.Uncertainty also can be appraised as an opportunity (Brashers et al., 2000; Mishel, 1990), when not knowing something is preferable to knowing it. Opportunity appraisals can be associated with hope or optimism. People sometimes, for example, avoid diagnosis of symptoms when they fear the outcome might be bad (e.g., people frequently delay seeking care when they experience symptoms of heart attack, see Alonzo & Reynolds, 1998). Opportunity appraisals can lead to people avoiding information to maintain positively valued uncertainty or seeking information that will increase uncertainty to a desired level.A third possible appraisal is a neutral orientation toward uncertainty. People may realize they have little information, or not know the probability of an outcome, but may feel ambivalent or unconcerned about that. It may be, for example, that they feel the uncertainty does not impact anything relevant to or incongruent with their goals, or that it does not represent a problem for which they have insufficient coping resources (see Lazarus, 2001 for theories of appraisal).The fact that uncertainty is multi-faceted and is appraised makes it a greater challenge to understand how it is managed. According to the theory of communication and uncertainty management, people both seek and avoid information to manage their uncertainty, and they often must manage interactions with IR systems as part of those activities. In addition, seeking information may be a collaborative effort, one helped or hindered by others. Two cases can demonstrate how uncertainty can be appraised and how that can influence communication and information strategies for managing uncertainty.Participants in Brashers et al.’s studies of people living with HIV described complex relationships between uncertainty and information (Brashers, Hsieh, Neidig, & Reynolds, 2006; Brashers, Neidig, & Goldsmith, 2004; Brashers et al., 2000, 2003). The following examples, drawn from that work, indicate the varied ways in which uncertainty and information impact individuals’ management of their illness. In one report, Clark reflected the experience of many faced with a life-threatening illness when he explained the pervasiveness of information seeking and searching. In addition to explicitly searching for information from internet sources and HIV publications, he also placed himself in information-rich environments in which he could passively acquire information. He noted:You know, I don’t search so much anymore, because I’ve put myself in a position to where the information’s coming to me now, whether I’m searching or not. You know, if I’m not searching out information, I’m usually at the AIDS coalition office or someplace like that, or a support group, or talking to my friends who live in other places and are in the same position, so the information is coming to me free-flowing now, so I don’t have to – and it’s daily, to answer your question, it’s gotten continuous. It’s a lifestyle. (Brashers et al., 2000, p. 71)On the other hand, information (and corresponding reduction of uncertainty) sometimes led to increased anxiety for participants in the study. Many described uncertainty as offering hope, and information as potentially threatening that feeling. For example, Randy described the stress of facing information about potential death and debilitating illness:With [AIDS] there’s an emotional attachment to it so more information leads to panic in some respects. You can’t keep reading over and over “You’re going to die.” “This is going to happen.” “You’re going to waste away.” You know, all these things. More information is not necessarily always good. (Brashers et al., 2000, p. 72)Others noted characteristics of information that were problematic, including inconsistent and contradictory information. Some described rapidly changing or high volume information as a source of anxiety. Clark noted, “Most of the information we’ve gotten over the years has been so, nothing has been definite. So you learn to live with things that aren’t absolutes. You know there are no absolutes when it comes to treating this” (Brashers et al., 2006, p. 233). Greg explained that the constant flow of information about HIV overwhelmed him, and that he needed a way to avoid it while at the same time keeping it available for future reference:At home I have a whole file drawer filled with HIV information and sometimes when I get new things in the mail, I don’t even read them. I just open them up and stick them in the appropriate file in the drawer. Because I just don’t want to read any more. I get too overwhelmed. I feel like everything I do in my life any more is HIV-related…. Sometimes I just want a little holiday. (Brashers et al., 2000, p. 73)Participants in the study also noted challenges to information seeking and avoiding that come from the social nature of information management (see Brashers, Goldsmith, & Hsieh, 2002). For example, as James and Victor noted, difficulty avoiding information may stem from support providers not understanding the goals of the support seeker:James: I do have a lot of people that are all too willing, because they love me, they are all too willing to volunteer what I should be reading.Victor: Sending you articles...James: Yes, you know, and I get the phone call from mom, or people at work will say “Oh, did you hear about this?” or “Did you read that?”“No, I haven’t yet, but I will now.” (Brashers et al., 2004, p. 317)In sum, Brashers et al.’s past studies of people living with HIV demonstrated that how people respond to uncertainty depends on features of the situation. Often people do want information, but that can be tempered by a need to maintain hope or optimism. We cannot assume, for example, that they will always find uncertainty disquieting, or that they will always seek information. People learn to live with chronic uncertainty, often by adapting their decision-making tasks (e.g., planning for short-term rather than long-term goals).One of the most profound changes in health care in the past few decades has been the development of genetic testing to detect disease or likelihood of disease. Patients increasingly are afforded the opportunity to predict whether they (or their offspring) are at risk or carry the gene for many different illnesses (Lerman, Croyle, Tercyak, & Haman, 2002). The advent of new technologies for screening, the increased knowledge we have about genetic links to illness, and developments in the ways that consumers can access genomic testing have changed healthcare practice and motivated research to help determine how people make sense of a complex and often uncertain algorithm for determining their likelihood of illness (Bloss, Darst, Topol, & Schork, 2011). The importance of understanding information about genetics and the complexity of that process led Johnson, Case, Andrews, and Allard (2005) to label genomics as the “perfect information-seeking research problem” (p. 323).Screening for Huntington’s disease was one of the earliest genetic tests available. The test predicts a degenerative neurological disease for which there is currently no effective treatment or cure, and which often manifests in a person’s mid to late 30s (Ramaswamy, Shannon, & Kordower, 2007). The genetic test for Huntington’s disease is considered definitive: Those who have a positive test know that, at some point in the future, they will develop the illness and experience its debilitating neurological symptoms.Because there is no cure or treatment for the illness, some question the value of genetic testing for carrier status. Wahlin (2007) reviewed the literature on predictive testing in Huntington’s disease, and noted that studies indicate that people have different needs for information about their risk. He remarked that “some carriers have the capacity to anticipate and arrange their future and manage to cope with carrier status, whereas others experience the new status as a threat and feel distress facing the future disease” (p. 280).Other illnesses for which genetic testing is available present even more of a challenge, because individuals can carry the genetic marker and never develop the illness. A meta-analysis of the likelihood of breast or ovarian cancer following a positive test for the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation revealed that “the average cumulative risks in BRCA1-mutation carriers by age 70years were 65% … for breast cancer and 39% … for ovarian cancer. The corresponding estimates for BRCA2 were 45% … and 11%” (Antoniou et al., 2003, p. 1122). Other factors could cause the risk to increase or decrease, including family history of cancer. Women considered at high risk may be encouraged to undergo prophylactic mastectomy or oophorectomy (Eisen & Weber, 2001). More recently, Tluczek, McKechnie, and Lynam (2010) demonstrated that similar to parents with infants who have definitive diagnoses, parents of infants with positive genetic newborn screens but equivocal diagnostic test results for cystic fibrosis experience uncertainty as part of a series of stages, and may appraise it as a threat to the infant’s well-being.In sum, genetic testing for the prospect of illness is one situation that can create uncertainty or anxiety for individuals when they receive information from those tests. For example, people who receive information that they are low risk sometimes still consider themselves at high risk (Michie et al., 2002). Others may misinterpret inconclusive results to mean that they do not have a genetic predisposition to a condition, and instead blame themselves and their lifestyle choices for their health status (Jenkins et al., 2013). Genetic testing also demonstrates that the reduction of one kind of uncertainty (e.g., “Do I carry the gene for Huntington’s disease?”) can lead to alternative forms of uncertainty (e.g., “When will I develop the disease?” “What would my life be like with Huntington’s disease?”), which may be even more stress-producing. Even when risk is less than 100%, individuals receiving genetic tests may need to make important decisions (e.g., prophylactic treatments) based on “incomplete” information. As Emery (2001) noted, “most information in genetic counseling is based on probabilities and uncertainties” (p. 81), which leads to challenges in helping patients manage anxiety. Recent work has examined the theory of communication and uncertainty management in relation to communication about genetic information, and has highlighted the theory’s relevance to this context (Skirton & Bylund, 2010).Considering broader conceptions of uncertainty and how it is managed invites us to think about implications for the design of IR systems. As the previous cases suggest, uncertainty may need to be supported by information searching, or incorporated into decision-making and problem-solving challenges. The following nine principles, which we have also discussed elsewhere (see Hogan & Brashers, 2009), provide a starting point from which to incorporate ideas of uncertainty management into IR systems.–Principle one: Uncertainty is a perception about insufficient knowledge, which has both cognitive and affective components. As conceptualized by Brashers (2001), “because it is primarily a self-perception about one’s own cognitions or ability to derive meaning, a person who believes himself or herself to be uncertain is uncertain” (p. 478). Further, extent of knowledge may be separate from self-assessment about one’s state of knowledge. A person may have a lot of information, possibly even all the information that is available on a topic, but may still feel uncertain. It is that perception of uncertainty, and the emotions associated with it, that becomes central to understanding the search goals and behaviors of IR system users.Principle two: There are many sources and forms of uncertainty. One experience or event (e.g., an illness) can involve multiple sources and forms of uncertainty. IR system users, therefore, may have a set of interconnected questions that they need to answer. This points to the importance of giving users ample opportunity to fully and richly articulate just what information they feel that they need. Simply plugging in a few query terms may not be enough to capture and represent the complexity of the situation with which they are faced. It also suggests that iterative, successive searching over multiple sessions (Spink, 1996; Spink, Wilson, Ford, Foster, & Ellis, 2002) may be a quite common phenomenon. The more complicated and interconnected the set of questions is, the more time it may take to search a system. On the other hand, it may be that some forms of uncertainty (e.g., when information is inconsistent or unavailable) require different kinds of search assistance.Principle three: There are many sources and forms of information. Individuals will encounter many different sources and forms of information, including those commonly indexed by IR systems (e.g., books, journals, and other reference materials). But they use that information in the context of what they obtain from other sources, including other people (e.g., friends, family, peers, and professionals), media, and their own experiences. That information may exist in print, verbal, or digital form, may reflect professional expertise or lay experience, may be authoritative or lack credibility, and so on. As such, interactions with IR systems must be understood within the total information environment in which people are situated.Principle four: The relationship between information and uncertainty is not straightforward. Traditional thinking suggests an oversimplified linear model (exemplified by Shannon and Weaver (1949)) in which uncertainty represents a lack of information, which leads to information seeking and searching, which leads to uncertainty reduction. Modern conceptions of information and uncertainty, however, suggest a more complex progression of events (Afifi, 2009; Case, 2012). Uncertainty does not always motivate information seeking and information can have any number of effects on uncertainty; it can decrease it, increase it by creating new alternatives or blurring the distinction between alternatives, or maintain it. It may be problematic then to assume that people come to an IR system with relatively uncomplicated uncertainty that is reduced by the time the search session ends.Principle five: Uncertainty is appraised for its meaning. This principle highlights the situated nature of uncertainty. Depending on the circumstances and the individual, uncertainty can be associated with a danger appraisal, an opportunity appraisal, or it may be appraised as irrelevant, inconsequential, or chronic. Emotions such as anxiety, hope, optimism, or ambivalence and behavioral actions such as information seeking or avoiding may follow. In addition, in the context of IR system use, we must remember that two levels of uncertainty appraisals proceed in parallel: first in the context of the situation that originally brought the individual to the system, and second, at the micro-level of the search interaction.Principle six: Interacting with information can reduce, maintain, or increase uncertainty. An assumption frequently made in research on information systems is that interacting with information will reduce uncertainty. Although this is certainly the case in a number of contexts (e.g., when trying to find the solution to a problem), the discussion and cases above show instances in which information is gathered to increase or maintain uncertainty. At issue here is the motivation behind information seeking and IR system use. A common assumption is that information is sought to decrease uncertainty and increase certainty, yet people can use information to strategically increase the ambiguity of a situation. Individuals can, for example, turn to an IR system to seek information that contradicts their current beliefs or adds new alternatives to increase uncertainty.Principle seven: Encountering new information fuels the re-appraisal of uncertainty. As an intended or unintended consequence of the search process and interaction with an IR system, information may be encountered that changes uncertainty; for example, it may encourage reappraisal so that uncertainty is no longer threatening, perhaps by coming to view chronic uncertainty as a normal rhythm to life or as an opportunity to maintain hope. Existing concepts in the information-behavior literature, such as those put forth by Erdelez (2004), are important in this regard as they highlight the potential influence that even the unexpected, accidental discovery of information can have on individuals and the perceptions they hold of their own situation. Reappraisals can lead to new perspectives and new uncertainty management goals as well. Unachieved goals or new forms of uncertainty lead to on-going appraisal and management.Principle eight: Gathering information is often a social process, and includes collaborators in an individual’s social network. As Wilson (2000) explained, information behavior and information seeking are larger, more global concepts than information searching. Information searching and IR system use can be a part of either of them, which encourages consideration of the potential relationships and interplay between sources. IR systems are but one source of information, and not necessarily the most effective or most commonly used. Supportive others can be sources of information as well, or collaborators in information gathering. Returning to the information-behavior literature, existing constructs like “information grounds” (Fisher, Naumer, Durrance, Stromski, & Christiansen, 2005; Pettigrew, 1999; Savolainen, 2009) have interesting potential for illuminating the kinds of environments from which information may be gleaned and combined with that from IR systems in an effort to manage uncertainty.Principle nine: Uncertainty is not inherently good or inherently bad, but something that is managed. As Brashers et al. (2000) noted, “Uncertainty can stir or calm emotions, disrupt or define self-image, and challenge or facilitate decision making” (p. 78). Uncertainty then can be either dreaded or valued, depending on how it helps or hinders day-to-day functioning. Assisting people with information search and retrieval, then, can include helping them understand and appreciate the role that uncertainty plays in their lives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
