@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Subtopic mining using simple patterns and hierarchical structure of subtopic candidates from web documents

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use only web document collection instead of query logs and external resources.Our simple patterns are based on noun phrases and alternative partial-queries.We maintain a balance between popularity and diversity of subtopics.Our method covered various search intentions of a query by its few subtopics.Our results were steadily improved by extracting more relevant and various subtopics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Search intention,Subtopic mining,Hierarchical structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The intention gap between users and queries results in ambiguous and broad queries. To solve these problems, subtopic mining has been studied, which returns a ranked list of possible subtopics according to their relevance, popularity, and diversity. This paper proposes a novel method to mine subtopics using simple patterns and a hierarchical structure of subtopic candidates. First, relevant and various phrases are extracted as subtopic candidates using simple patterns based on noun phrases and alternative partial-queries. Second, a hierarchical structure of the subtopic candidates is constructed using sets of relevant documents from a web document collection. Finally, the subtopic candidates are ranked considering a balance between popularity and diversity using this structure. In experiments, our proposed methods outperformed the baselines and even an external resource based method at high-ranked subtopics, which shows that our methods can be effective and useful in various search scenarios like result diversification.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The advent of smart devices has significantly influenced the web search environment. Unlike in the era of personal computers, enhanced searching services are required to obtain accurate search results because users tend to simplify queries for their own convenience. In fact, many web queries are short and unclear. Some users do not choose appropriate words for a web search, and others omit specific terms needed to clarify search intentions, because it is not easy for users to express their search intentions explicitly through keywords. This intention gap between users and queries results in queries which are ambiguous and broad. In the case of ambiguous queries, users may get results quite different from their intentions; as for broad queries, results may not be as specific as users expect.As one of the solutions for these problems, web search engines have provided query suggestion services such as autocomplete and related queries. Query suggestion gives new queries to help a user explore and express his information need (search intention) for a given query (Bhatia, Majumdar, & Mitra, 2011; Jones, Rey, Madani, & Greiner, 2006). However, query suggestion does not explicitly consider popularity and diversity of suggested queries. For this reason, as a new solution, subtopic mining is proposed, which can find possible subtopics (suggested queries) for a given query and return a ranked list of them in terms of their relevance, popularity, and diversity (Fig. 1).According to NTCIR-9 subtopic mining task (Song et al., 2011), a subtopic of a given query is a query that disambiguates and specifies the search intention of the original query. For example, if a query is “chocolate,” its hyponyms (sub-class words) “white chocolate” and “dark chocolate” can be a subtopic to specify one search intention “chocolate type.” In contrast, a hypernym (super-class word) of a given query is excluded from the subtopic candidates because it broadens the search intention. The popularity and diversity consider only the subtopics which are relevant to the query, and are estimated for each of the subtopics and the set of the subtopics, respectively.Subtopic mining can be used to improve the results of various search scenarios, such as personalized search and search result diversification. Especially, for an explicit approach to search result diversification, subtopic mining can be an important part to find as various subtopics as query aspects that are used to retrieve relevant documents for the query. The study of search result diversification is divided into explicit approach and implicit approach (Dang & Croft, 2012; Dang & Croft, 2013; Santos, Macdonald, & Ounis, 2010). The explicit approach finds explicitly the subtopics (topic-level) or relevant words (term-level) for a given query first, and retrieves relevant documents for each of them. As a result, the set of retrieved documents satisfies the diversity because they contain various contents for the query. The implicit approach retrieves various documents related to a given query without taking the step of finding the subtopics or relevant words for the query. Typically, the explicit approach does not directly focus on the diversity of subtopics or relevant words, whereas it focuses on the diversity of relevant documents considering the novelty (minimum redundancy) (Santos et al., 2010) and proportionality (popularity distribution) (Dang & Croft, 2012). Therefore, subtopic mining could be considered a breakthrough for the improvement of topic-level search result diversification.Most of previous methods relied on query logs to find subtopics (Baeza-Yates, Hurtado, & Mendoza, 2005; Beeferman & Berger, 2000; Fujita, Uchiyama, Dupret, & Baeza-Yates, 2010; Huang, Chien, & Oyang, 2003; Jones et al., 2006; Ma, Lyu, & King, 2010; Santos et al., 2010; Santos, Macdonald, & Ounis, 2011; Xue et al., 2011; Zhang, Lu, & Wang, 2011; Zhu, Guo, Cheng, Du, & Shen, 2011). The query logs are particularly useful resources for existing search engines to build bipartite graphs of 〈query, clicked URL〉, and thus to produce suggested queries. However, most of them are not available to external researchers, and data sparseness occurs because rare queries may be few or non-existent in query logs. Meanwhile, the previous methods focused more on the relevance to rank subtopics than the popularity (Fujita et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2003; Jones et al., 2006; Ma et al., 2010; Zhu et al., 2011), or made no distinction between them (Baeza-Yates et al., 2005; Santos et al., 2011; Xue et al., 2011). Though a useful factor for document ranking, the relevance does not reflect the popularity of subtopics because the relevance only checks whether a subtopic is similar or related to a given query. For example, if a query is “typhoon,” “eye of a typhoon” is the higher related subtopic than “typhoon damage.” However, general users get more interested in “typhoon damage” than “eye of a typhoon.” In other words, the relevance is the preceding condition to find subtopics, and afterwards the popularity is considered to rank them. Furthermore, as an essential issue, the popularity and the diversity are not proportional to each other. For example, if some subtopics belong to only a few search intentions with high popularity, their diversity is low. Good subtopics must be relevant to a given query and satisfy both the high popularity and high diversity.To solve these issues, we propose a novel method to mine subtopics using simple patterns and a hierarchical structure of subtopic candidates based on relevant documents. Our contributions are as follows:•Our method uses only web document collection instead of query logs and external resources.To find various relevant subtopic candidates, we extract as many “understandable” phrases as possible from the web documents, which fully or partially match the original query through simple patterns. These patterns are based on noun phrases and alternative partial-queries to the original query, and this approach is easily adaptable to other languages.Our work proposes a hierarchical structure of subtopics to maintain a balance between popularity and diversity. This structure has relatively small groups of subtopics, which cover a wide variety of search intentions of the query and also cover their more specific ones to improve the diversity. There is also an inheritance of popularity between subtopics. Using this structure, we get a ranked list of subtopics satisfying both the high popularity and high diversity.In Section 2, we review previous work and present evaluation measures. A description of our proposed method is given in Section 3. Our results are presented and discussed in Section 4, and we conclude the paper in Section 5.Subtopic mining is related to query suggestion because subtopics are similar to the results obtained by this approach. Typically, the query suggestion approach uses query logs. Query pairs that co-occur frequently in the same search sessions are regarded as relevant queries (Huang et al., 2003), and click-through data are used to find similar queries that share a large number of clicked URLs (Baeza-Yates et al., 2005; Beeferman & Berger, 2000). The similarity analysis between suggested queries in bipartite graphs of 〈query, clicked URL〉 is employed to improve the diversity of them (Ma et al., 2010; Zhu et al., 2011). Some approaches segment queries into phrases, and generate suggested queries using the phrases (Fujita et al., 2010; Jones et al., 2006). For example, a query “Britney Spears mp3s” is segmented into two phrases “Britney Spears” and “mp3s,” which are used to generate suggested queries such as “Britney Spears lyrics” and “music mp3s.” In addition to query logs, anchor texts and external resources (Microsoft web n-gram services) are used (Dang, Xue, & Croft, 2011; He, Hollink, & Vries, 2012; Kraft & Zien, 2004), and 〈anchor text, linked URL〉 is regarded as 〈query, clicked URL〉 to make up for data sparseness (Dang & Croft, 2010). Meanwhile, one study utilized only the co-occurrence of words in a web document corpus, and showed the state-of-the-art performance in the document-based query suggestion (Bhatia et al., 2011). This method suggests new queries which consist of the original query’s front words and the phrase (n-gram, n ≤ 3) containing the original query’s last word. To select the appropriate phrases, every phrase’s appearance ratio and the co-occurrence information with the query’s front words in the corpus are measured. However, these suggested queries could be incomplete phrases because of the n-grams of words.The NTCIR-9 subtopic mining task motivated various methods for the Chinese and Japanese languages. This task provided the web document collections for Chinese (SogouT) and Japanese (ClueWeb09-JA), but provided only the log for Chinese queries (SogouQ). To achieve high-level performance, participants used the suggested queries from major web search engines (Baidu, Bing, Google, and Yahoo!), and query logs (Santos et al., 2010; Santos et al., 2011; Xue et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011). However, the Japanese subtopic mining task achieved its best performance when it used only external web documents. ORG-S-J-1 (Song et al., 2011) used anchor texts and URLs extracted from external web documents, and did not depend on any other resources. To gather web documents, this method used Microsoft’s in-house web search platform, and achieved first place in the task. This method assume that if there are various domain names for a subtopic (anchor text), then the popularity of the subtopic increases. This method was well-defined and relatively easy to implement, but encountered data sparseness because these subtopic candidates had to fully match the query.The evaluation measures of the NTCIR-9 subtopic mining task were I-rec, D-nDCG, and D#-nDCG (Sakai, 2011; Song et al., 2011). I-rec (intent recall) is for diversity, D-nDCG for overall relevance and popularity across search intentions, and D#-nDCG for an average of I-rec and D-nDCG, respectively. The assessors manually clustered the collected subtopics with similar search intentions. These clusters were called intents, and each of them had a representative search intention as a cluster label. Each subtopic could belong to only one intent. Non-relevant or non-understandable subtopics were given relevance level 0. The popularities of intents were estimated by a popularity voting process involving ten assessors. If intents did not receive any votes, these intents were merged into a single intent labeled “others.”

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
