@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discovering topic time from web news

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a systematic framework for discovering topic time from Web news.We propose a new approach to determine the referential time for implicit temporal expressions.We devise a relation model between news topics and topic time for topic time extraction.We build a prototype system and conduct comparative experiments on real datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Temporal expression,Normalization,Topic time,Relation model,Web news,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Topic time reflects the temporal feature of topics in Web news pages, which can be used to establish and analyze topic models for many time-sensitive text mining tasks. However, there are two critical challenges in discovering topic time from Web news pages. The first issue is how to normalize different kinds of temporal expressions within a Web news page, e.g., explicit and implicit temporal expressions, into a unified representation framework. The second issue is how to determine the right topic time for topics in Web news. Aiming at solving these two problems, we propose a systematic framework for discovering topic time from Web news. In particular, for the first issue, we propose a new approach that can effectively determine the appropriate referential time for implicit temporal expressions and further present an effective defuzzification algorithm to find the right explanation for a fuzzy temporal expression. For the second issue, we propose a relation model to describe the relationship between news topics and topic time. Based on this model, we design a new algorithm to extract topic time from Web news. We build a prototype system called Topic Time Parser (TTP) and conduct extensive experiments to measure the effectiveness of our proposal. The results suggest that our proposal is effective in both temporal expression normalization and topic time extraction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Time plays an important role in many research areas, such as information extraction, document summarization, question answering, and Web search (Alonso, 2013; Alonso & Shiells, 2013; Whiting, Jose, & Alonso, 2014; Campos, 2013). Especially, knowing the precise time of a topic is crucially important for time-sensitive Web mining tasks such as news-topic evolution tracking. However, as a Web news page usually includes many temporal expressions with various forms, we have to deal with two challenging issues in discovering topic time from Web news:(1)How to normalize temporal expressions to a unified framework? Temporal information usually appears in Web news as temporal expressions, which can be typically classified into explicit expressions, e.g., “May 1, 2014”, and implicit expressions, e.g., “tomorrow”. Intuitively, explicit expressions can be directly found in a calendar, while implicit expressions need to be transformed into explicit expressions based on some referential time. For example, for the implicit expression “tomorrow” in a Web news page, first we need to find the current date according to the contents of the page, which can then be used as the referential time for resolving “tomorrow”. Presently, how to resolve implicit temporal expressions is still a challenging issue in temporal expression normalization (Zhao, Jin, & Yue, 2010; UzZaman et al., 2013).How to extract topic time from Web news? Determining the right topic time for topics is very important to many time-sensitive Web mining tasks because they usually need to use topic time as a key clue to track the evolution of news topics. Moreover, topic time is also useful for news search engines as they can provide temporal-textual search services and improve the search effectiveness of time-based queries. For example, to answer the query “Find the information about the World Cup this year”, a time-aware search engine can resolve the temporal word “this year” and consequently return news pages according to both textual and temporal relevance (Lin, Jin, Zhao, & Yue, 2012; Lin, Jin, Zhao, & Yue, 2014). However, as a Web news page may contain many sub-topics as well as many pieces of temporal information, we need to devise an effective model to describe the relationship between topics and time and then extract the right topic time for a Web news page.For the first issue (temporal expression normalization), the most important point is to select an appropriate referential time for each implicit temporal expression. Some early studies on this issue, including context-free approaches (Mani & Wilson, 2000; Wu, Li, Chen, & Lu, 2005a; Wu, Li, Lu, & Li, 2005b) and context-dependent approaches (Vazov, 2001; Jang, Baldwin, & Mani, 2004) either do not consider the context of referential time or use a strict reference-choosing mechanism for resolving implicit temporal expressions. Some recent works improve the context-dependent approach by considering document styles (Strötgen & Gertz, 2013; Strötgen, Zell, & Gertz, 2013) and the types of temporal expressions (Filannino, 2012; Filannino, Brown, & Nenadic, 2013). However, they employ tailor-made rules to determine the referential time for implicit temporal expressions. Such rules cannot adapt to various styles of Web news. For example, a Chinese news page usually has a much different style of content layout compared with an English news page. Rule-based mechanisms are also used by many participants in the TempEval competition (UzZaman et al., 2013), which focuses on evaluating the annotation on time expressions, events, and temporal relations.For the second issue (topic time extraction), we need to develop an effective approach to extract topic time for different kinds of news texts. For example, some news articles may only include one topic (see Fig. 4 in Section 4), while others may involve several topics (see Fig. 6 in Section 4). A simple solution is to regard the publication time of a news page as the topic time (Grandi, Mandreoli, & Tiberio, 2005; Berberich, Bedathur, Neumann, & Weikum, 2007a; Berberich, Bedathur, Neumann, & Weikum, 2007b). This approach is not suitable for many time-sensitive topics, such as financial news and disaster news. For example, suppose that a news article published on January 1, 2015 reviewed the event of “512 Earthquake in China” (an earthquake happened on May 12, 2008), the most appropriate topic time for this article should be “May 12, 2008”, rather than the publication time “January 1, 2015”. Some other works (Li, Wong, & Yuan, 2003; Schilder, 2004; Wu et al., 2005a) utilize the frequency of temporal expressions appearing in a news page to determine topic time. However, frequently-appearing time expressions may not always be the right topic time. For example, in a news article reporting the celebration of the National Day of China in 2014, i.e., October 1, 2014, may include many words of “October 1, 1949” as this is the founding date of the People’s Republic of China. However, here the topic time for the article should be “October 1, 2014” but not the most frequently-appearing time “October 1, 1949”.In this paper, we aim to propose effective solutions to normalize temporal expressions and extract topic time for Web news. Our basic idea for normalizing temporal expressions is to devise an adaptive mechanism for normalizing temporal expressions and exploit the referential relationship among temporal expressions to determine the referential time for an implicit temporal expression. In addition, we propose to model the relationship between topics and temporal expressions within a Web news page and then present the algorithm for topic time extraction. In summary, we make the following contributions in this paper:(1)We propose a new approach that can construct referential relationship among temporal expressions and further present an effective defuzzification algorithm for temporal expressions. Particularly, we classify implicit temporal expressions into global and local temporal expressions, and use different methods to construct referential relationship for global expressions and local expressions. For fuzzy temporal expressions that have vague meanings, we develop a new method to figure out the resolution of fuzzy temporal expressions (Section 3).We present a new algorithm to extract topic time for Web news. First, we propose a relation model between news topics and temporal expressions for different kinds of Web news. The relation model takes into account the positional dependency between news topics and temporal expressions as well as the topical dependency between them. Then, we introduce an adaptive approach utilizing a weight model and an unsupervised classification model to determine topic time for Web news (Section 4).We develop a prototype system called Topic Time Parser (TTP) to discover topic time from Web news and conduct extensive experiments on real data sets. The results suggest that our proposal is effective in both temporal expression normalization and topic time extraction (Section 5).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a novel and effective approach to discover topic time from Web news. In particular, we present the dynamic-choosing mechanism to determine the referential time for implicit temporal expressions, as well as a scenario-dependent time-shifting method for temporal expressions defuzzification. Further, we propose new relation models between topics and topic time and corresponding algorithms to extract the topic time for Web news. We conduct comparative experiments with different existing methods on a large real data set containing 1,033,679 Chinese news articles as well as a small real data set to measure the performance of our proposal, and the results demonstrate the superiority of our proposal with respect to various metrics.