@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Preferences in Wikipedia abstracts: Empirical findings and implications for automatic entity summarization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We empirically study how Wikipedians summarize entity descriptions in practice.We compare entity descriptions in DBpedia with their Wikipedia abstracts.We analyze the length of a summary and the priorities of property values.We analyze the priorities of, diversity of, and correlation between properties.Implications for automatic entity summarization are drawn from the findings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
DBpedia,Entity summarization,Feature selection,Property ranking,Wikipedia,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The volume of entity-centric structured data grows rapidly on the Web. The description of an entity, composed of property-value pairs (a.k.a. features), has become very large in many applications. To avoid information overload, efforts have been made to automatically select a limited number of features to be shown to the user based on certain criteria, which is called automatic entity summarization. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of extensive studies on how humans rank and select features in practice, which can provide empirical support and inspire future research. In this article, we present a large-scale statistical analysis of the descriptions of entities provided by DBpedia and the abstracts of their corresponding Wikipedia articles, to empirically study, along several different dimensions, which kinds of features are preferable when humans summarize. Implications for automatic entity summarization are drawn from the findings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Entity-centric structured data such as Google’s Knowledge Graph, Facebook’s Open Graph, and W3C’s RDF and Linked Data, has become an important component of the Web. It describes the attributes of and the relationships between entities. The description of an entity, or an entity description for short, is composed of property-value pairs, a.k.a. features (Cheng, Tran, & Qu, 2011), as illustrated by the right-hand side of Fig. 1. The value of a property could be a data value (e.g. an integer), another entity, or a class (usually being the type of the entity). The volume of such data increases rapidly on the Web. Entities are associated with more and more features. For instance, the RDF description of Sydney provided by Freebase1http://www.freebase.com/m/06y57. Last accessed: 08/31/2013.1contains several hundred features. When showing such an entity description to the user, to avoid information overload, practical applications like Knowledge Graph on Google’s search results pages present not all but only a limited number (e.g. top-k) of features, called a summary of this entity description, or an entity summary for short. Then, the problem arises as to which features are best for constituting an entity summary to be used in a particular application (or, how to rank features), and the term entity summarization was coined to describe this problem (Cheng et al., 2011).This emerging problem has received attention from researchers in the areas of information retrieval (Zhang, Zhang, & Chen, 2012), database (Fakas, 2011), and Semantic Web (Cheng et al., 2011). To develop an effective approach to entity summarization, a key issue to consider is how humans summarize entity descriptions by ourselves. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of extensive empirical studies on this topic, which motivates our work. In this article, we aim to explore, via a large-scale empirical analysis, which kinds of features are preferable when humans summarize entity descriptions for generic use. Implications for developing approaches to automatic entity summarization will be drawn from the findings.To achieve this, instead of inviting a few human experts to summarize entity descriptions, which can hardly be extended to a large scale, we intend to analyze millions of entity descriptions and the summaries thereof given by a large and representative population. Therefore, we choose DBpedia (Bizer et al., 2009), a well-known dataset at the center of Linked Data. It treats the topic of each Wikipedia article as an entity, and extracts its structured description from the article. The results are represented as RDF triples (Klyne & Carroll, 2004), each of which comprises an entity, a property, and a value, or in other words, a feature of an entity, as illustrated by the right-hand side of Fig. 1. Thanks to the encyclopedic topics and massive amount of information offered by Wikipedia, DBpedia has collected tens of millions of RDF triples describing several million entities. To obtain general-purpose summaries of these entity descriptions, we exploit the first section of each Wikipedia article (i.e. the text prior to the table of contents), called a Wikipedia abstract, which provides an abstract of the article and thus is regarded as a generic textual summary of the corresponding entity description, as illustrated by the left-hand side of Fig. 1. Then, we identify the features in each entity description that are mentioned in its corresponding Wikipedia abstract, as illustrated by Fig. 1, by using an automatic approach. The results constitute an entity summary, with which we can analyze and reveal humans’ preferences in choosing features. In particular, these preferences belong to not a small population but the large Wikipedia community, thereby making our findings more generalizable.Our major contributions are:•a large-scale multi-dimensional statistical analysis of humans’ preferences in selecting features into an entity summary, anda number of implications drawn for automatic entity summarization.To be specific, we will investigate the length of entity summaries, analyze the priorities of, diversity of, and correlation between properties in summarization, and explore the preferences in choosing property values. Based on the empirical findings, several heuristics are recommended to be considered in future research on entity summarization.The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 describes the dataset to use. Section 4 introduces and evaluates several strategies for identifying which features are mentioned in a Wikipedia abstract. Section 5 presents a multi-dimensional statistical analysis of the features mentioned in Wikipedia abstracts to explore humans’ preferences, from which implications for automatic entity summarization are drawn in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the article with a discussion of future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have collected more than one million entity descriptions from DBpedia covering a wide range of topics, and have identified the features in these descriptions that are mentioned in the corresponding Wikipedia abstracts. By analyzing these features in a statistical and comparative manner, we have characterized Wikipedians’ preferences in summarizing entity descriptions along several different dimensions. From the empirical findings, we have derived a number of implications for developing approaches to automatic entity summarization. Despite the limitations of our study, we believe that the heuristics recommended deserve to be considered in future research, when a few of them have been successfully incorporated into existing efforts. In future work, on the one hand, we will continue to investigate more dimensions to draw more implications, and on the other hand, we plan to develop a novel approach to entity summarization that will integrate these effective heuristics in a principled way.Prior to our analysis, to identify which features are mentioned in a Wikipedia abstract, we have implemented and evaluated a broad spectrum of strategies. The best-performing approach has achieved a significantly high accuracy, which has guaranteed the quality of the subsequent empirical findings and implications. However, there is still room for improvement, e.g. to disambiguate words when using WordNet, and to allow for variations when processing numerical values. In fact, we are interested in accurately capturing Wikipedians’ preferences, and based on this, establishing an extensive benchmark of entity summaries for evaluating approaches to entity summarization. We will also explore how to run our analysis on other datasets, where a major challenge is potentially a lack of available summaries, regardless of textual or structured.