@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring emotional expressions in e-word-of-mouth from online communities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper is one of the few papers to explore the role of emotion in eWOM.It includes a practical study of a business using eWOM and the data is analyzed.It provides recommendations on how to use emotion in eWOM to encourage participation and improve sales.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic word of mouth,Emotional expressions,Social media,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electronic word-of-mouth communication (eWOM) is an important force in building a digital marketplace. The study of eWOM has implications for how to build an online community through social media design, web communication and knowledge exchange. Innovative use of eWOM has significant benefits, especially for start-up firms. We focus on how users on the web communicate value related to online products. It is the premise of this paper that generating emotional value (E-value) in social media and networking sites (SMNS) is critical for the survival of new e-service ventures. Hence, by introducing a formal value theory as a coding scheme, we report a study on E-value in SMNS by analyzing how a Swedish start-up industrial design company attempted to build a global presence by creating followers on the web. The aim of the study was to investigate how the company's website design and communication can affect eWOM over time. This was done by capturing a series of “emoticon and value expressions” generated by community members from three different e-communication campaigns (2011–2012) with changing website content, hence giving different stimuli to viewers. Those members who expressed emotional value, often incorporating emoticons, displayed both shorter verbal expressions and reaction time. These value expressions, we suggest, are important aspects of eWOM and need to be actively taken into account. The study has implications for information management strategies through using eWOM.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Word-of-Mouth (WOM) by definition comprises the customer's informal communications directed at other customers about the ownership, usage, or characteristics of particular goods and services and/or their sellers (De Matos and Rossi, 2008). It is often operationalized as referrals, which, however, is only one among many aspects of WOM. Referrals include what customers say to other customers and can take the form of implicit or explicit recommendation (Reichheld, 2003). However, WOM has been found to include more than just recommendation. Much of what people say to each other is really about “what happened” (Söderlund & Mattsson, 2011). WOM can therefore be an important source of information for people talking to others (Herr, Kardes, & Kim, 1991; Patterson, 1998; Reichelt, 2013). For example, consumers rely on WOM when selecting purchases that require a high involvement level (Arndt, 1967; Brown & Reingen, 1987; Rosenbaum-Elliott, Percy, & Pervan, 2011).The relative impact of emotion in eWOM is still vague (Yin, Bond, & Zhang, 2014), hence this paper investigates the eWOM process by comparing the e-WOM outcomes of three different website design and communication attempts (waves) made by a start-up design company during three time periods 2011–2012. We hypothesize that more prevalent emotional triggers on the website and communication may lead to more emotional eWOM generated by the online community.A web site and its online environment representation in video, photographs, diagrams or text descriptions can engender an emotional response, which in turn can lead to eWOM. We often find this in discussion amongst consumers pertaining to a product and is equivalent to a ‘group think’ syndrome that forms a legitimating and persuasive force for individuals. Emotions are related from a psychological perspective to feelings which can be thought of as perceived physical/mental sensations (Roseman, Wiest, & Swartz, 1994).Action tendencies are impulses or inclinations to respond with an action (Roseman et al., 1994). In the case of a product, a person typically makes a comparison and judgment on whether they like or dislike the product. Given the range of likely comparative products this is typically not done in a rational, cost/benefits manner as this would take too long but rather ‘gut’ feel or intuition is used to quickly assess whether the product has value or more value than other products (Damasio, 1992). The person can then decide to make a decision to voice an opinion (negative or positive) about the product on an emotional basis of how the product, if owned, would make the person feel (Zeelenberg, Nelissen, Breugelmans, & Pieters, 2008). This can be communicated to others, through eWOM, in a form of emotional disclosure (Reynolds, Brewin, & Saxton, 2000). The intricacies of eWOM have become a topic of research in the information systems community in recent years (Mohammad, Zhu, Kiritchenko, & Martin, 2014; Sun, Wang, Cheng, & Fu, 2014; Verhagen, Nauta, & Feldberg, 2013).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
