@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Implicit search feature based approach to assist users in exploratory search tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a framework for evaluating exploratory search using implicit features.User search action sequences are also used to find behavior patterns.Show effectiveness with above 70% prediction accuracy for user search performance.Provide search process based recommendation to assist underperforming users.Demonstrate recommendation effectiveness both qualitatively and quantitatively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Exploratory search,Evaluation,User behavior,Implicit features,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Analyzing and modeling users’ online search behaviors when conducting exploratory search tasks could be instrumental in discovering search behavior patterns that can then be leveraged to assist users in reaching their search task goals. We propose a framework for evaluating exploratory search based on implicit features and user search action sequences extracted from the transactional log data to model different aspects of exploratory search namely uncertainty, creativity, exploration, and knowledge discovery. We show the effectiveness of the proposed framework by demonstrating how it can be used to understand and evaluate user search performance and thereby make meaningful recommendations to improve the overall search performance of users. We used data collected from a user study consisting of 18 users conducting an exploratory search task for two sessions with two different topics in the experimental analysis. With this analysis we show that we can effectively model their behavior using implicit features to predict the user’s future performance level with above 70% accuracy in most cases. Further, using simulations we demonstrate that our search process based recommendations improve the search performance of low performing users over time and validate these findings using both qualitative and quantitative approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Analyzing people’s online search behaviors has become a major topic of interest within the domain of Information Retrieval as well as within in the search engine industry in order to improve search and retrieval features. Examples of some recent studies include providing personalized search results based on geographical location and user profiles (Bennett, Radlinski, White, & Yilmaz, 2011; Sugiyama, Hatano, & Yoshikawa, 2004), re-ranking search results based on user’s past search behavior (Matthijs & Radlinski, 2011) and providing trending news and stories based on different factors (Al Bawab, Mills, & Crespo, 2012) using services such as ‘Google trends’ and ‘Yahoo Trending now’. Since the early 90s when the World Wide Web (WWW) was introduced, information seekers have greatly benefited from these technologies and the vast amount of information that could be accessed, which was a rarity up until that point in time. With the advent of Web search engines, users became accustomed to using a search engine to retrieve relevant information with keyword-based searches without having to sift through the vast amount of information repositories available on the World Wide Web.In any Web search there are two major constituents. One is the search system and the other is the user. User and system interaction has been explained in the stratified interaction model by Saracevic (1997). In an online Web search environment, usually the system is a Web search engine. Since each user is unique and the way people search varies depending on different factors such as information need, demographics, previous search experience, knowledge of the topic being searched on, cognitive abilities, personal traits, etc., understanding the user is a vital first step towards providing a personalized search experience. Understanding the user can be accomplished by building a user behavior model through observing his/her search activities and constructing a user profile to thereby make predictions and personalizations that help the user find relevant information.In the domain of user behavior modeling, past research has focused on deriving user behavior models and then building sequential models to capture behavior patterns. Fox, Karnawat, Mydland, Dumais, and White (2005) described user behavior patterns as sequences and identified correlations between behavior patterns and user satisfaction. White and Drucker (2007) investigated how different user behavioral sequences can be linked to different types of Web users such as navigators and explorers. They identified that users who exhibited consistent behavioral sequences among different search sessions were mostly navigators while users with variable behavioral sequences were considered explorers. This type of user categorization based on behavioral patterns exhibited in the user search logs gave rise to interesting dimensions of modeling user profiles that could be leveraged to personalize and also assist in the user’s search.Another interesting analysis was performed by Wildemuth (2004) to examine the search tactics of users when searching for information. Common search tactics were found among the study participants. It was also observed that tactics changed over time during a longitudinal study depending on the level of domain knowledge accrued using state transition matrices and maximal repeating patterns techniques.There has been some notable work on temporal modeling of user search behavior in order to capture how users interact with information and the system while conducting information seeking tasks. Azzopardi (2014) analyzed user search behavior by introducing a new economic theory-based model where the different interactions that could be performed by the users on the search interface were analyzed as a cost/gain model. This model considered eight interaction hypotheses pertaining to search interactions with the system and were found to be in line with past empirical observations and the expected user behaviors. Smucker and Clarke (2012) evaluated the search process more effectively using a time-based gain measure. Their work focused on assessing how a user evaluates a search results page over time and modeling the gain by viewing a document ranked at rank k. Their work provides a better evaluation framework for document ranking by accommodating aspects of the search process such as time, decay, and gain that are ignored by traditional effectiveness measures. Further work on search results relevance personalization was performed by Bennett et al. (2012) by analyzing searchers’ short-term (session) and long-term (historic) behaviors. They found that substantial benefits could be gained in search relevance at the beginning of a session using historic behaviors while session behavior contributes mostly in an extended search session. Another interesting finding is that the combination of both session and historic behavior outperforms using either factor in isolation in providing relevant documents, thus enhancing search personalization.Although, there has been work done to build meaningful user behavioral models, to the best of our knowledge there is a lack of research regarding the development of user behavioral models specifically for exploratory search tasks. Given that exploratory search is open ended, multi-faceted, and lacks clear boundaries, the way users behave during an exploratory search task is highly variable. The main aspects of exploratory search that make it complex and unique compared to other types of information searches such as known-item and fact-finding searches are uncertainty, creativity, innovation, knowledge discovery, investigation, and learning (Bawden, 1986; Marchionini, 2006; Foster & Ford, 2003). Also, since such tasks tend to extend over longer time spans or even multiple sessions, the importance of user search assistance and direction to improve the user experience and user goal achievement becomes paramount.Therefore, providing an approach one could use to reasonably analyze the behavior patterns of a user when performing an online exploratory search task would be extremely helpful in identifying how a user is performing. This would also provide much better recommendations and a more personalized information seeking experience, which in turn results in better user satisfaction and achievement of search goals.In this article, we develop a framework to understand the underlying search process by using the user’s search actions and implicit features to analyze exploratory search through a quantitative approach. Explicitly we try to address the following research questions.•RQ a: How effectively can we model different aspects of exploratory search such as knowledge discovery, creativity, exploration using implicit features extracted from the user search process to identify underperforming users?RQ b: How effectively can we provide search process based recommendations to improve user search performance?Analyzing a user’s search behavior when performing online search tasks could be used to discover insights that might enable one to assist the searcher in a more successful search experience. Out of the many types of online information seeking tasks that occur every second on the Web, this article only focuses on exploratory search tasks that usually require longer time spans with multiple search queries. Exploratory search is a specialization of information seeking, which describes the activity of attempting to obtain information through a combination of querying and collection browsing (White & Roth, 2009). Further, it is a search task with multiple facets, multiple queries, or even multiple search sessions. This allows the information searcher to find meaningful and useful information to extend a user’s knowledge about the task at hand.What makes exploratory search exploratory is that this type of information seeking requires users to undergo complex cognitive tasks that lead to learning, exploring, and acquiring, intellectual skills. The searching and browsing behavior of information seekers enables the searchers to learn and develop skills while conducting exploratory search tasks. Users conducting exploratory searches are generally (1) unfamiliar with the domain of their goal (i.e., need to learn about the topic in order to understand how to achieve their goal); (2) unsure about the ways to achieve their goals (either the technology or the process); and/or even (3) unsure about their goals (White & Roth, 2009).Most of the research conducted in the area of exploratory search has focused on building special exploratory search systems that help searchers conduct such tasks in an effective manner (White, Muresan, & Marchionini, 2006). Some examples of prominent exploratory search browsers are Flamenco (Yee, Swearingen, Li, & Hearst, 2003), mSpace (schraefel, Wilson, Russell, & Smith, 2006) and Relational Browser++ (Zhang & Marchionini, 2005) that support various levels of faceted browsing in addition to traditional keyword search capabilities. These browsers provide an enhanced experience for users looking to navigate a larger corpus of data in an organized manner.With the advent of such systems and enhanced browser capabilities that support exploratory search, the major emphasis has been placed on system-based evaluation to identify which systems are suitable for different search conditions. In such system-focused evaluations, factors such as the system utility in measuring how successful the system is in facilitating the key elements of search exploration, recall, and providing relevant documents based on user learning, are considered. Wilson, schraefel, and White (2009) provides a detailed inspection framework for the evaluation of such search interfaces to identify their strengths and weaknesses and to evaluate their applicability to support user search tactics and conditions when conducting a search.Although building new systems/tools or enhancing the existing system/tools for exploratory search by evaluating the system performance is of importance, it is also crucial to evaluate how an online information searcher is performing irrespective of a specific exploratory search system/tool. Focusing on the user’s search process would lead to a better understanding of searcher strategies and underlying intentions that are not captured in a system setting.Borgman, Hirsh, and Hiller (1996) stated that “The ability to study online searching behavior in all its complexity requires research methods that can capture the details of the search process, rather than just the product or output of a search session”. They suggested that building quantitative models of a user’s search process based on transactional log data would be beneficial in capturing user search behavior. Information theoretical models such as the ISP model by Kuhlthau (2004) describe the process of information seeking to accomplish a task goal from a user’s perspective with regard to six stages: initiation, selection, exploration, formulation, collection, and presentation. The types of search behaviors that are exhibited within each of these stages of the ISP model tend to vary in describing how the search process changes with time while conducting the search task. Vakkari (2001) developed a study to expand the ideas based on the ISP model by conducting a longitudinal study with student participants preparing a research proposal related to information search. These research findings revealed that it is productive to study information searching and information retrieval as a process in connection with the search task that generates that process. Further work by Liu and Belkin (2012) to analyze how search systems could help in search tasks found that although the task type and task session did not affect users task performance, their familiarity with the topic and experience level of conducting that task had an influence on users’ search performance.It is important to formalize an evaluation framework for exploratory search that is user-centric, focusing on the main aspects of exploratory search such as user learning, knowledge discovery, creativity, engagement, and investigation. One attempt to shift the focus of evaluating exploratory search to a user-centric analysis was done by Spink (2002) with the use of a new search tool covering aspects of effectiveness and usability by taking a qualitative approach. Another approach that is highly relevant to capturing and studying exploratory search behavior is information foraging theory (Pirolli & Card, 1999). With this theory, Pirolli and Card showed that using information cues that provide orientation, navigation, assessment, and information value are helpful to the user for making informed decisions. The authors showed users also estimate how much information they are likely to retrieve from a given search path and after comparing actual outcomes with their predictions (information scent) and when no added value is incurred for the cost of searching, they move on to other information sources. Nevertheless, the information foraging approach suggests how to optimize the information shown to the user such as Web pages and relevant snippets along with Web links to help users in their information seeking process. It has also been identified by Singh, Hsu, and Moon (2013) that it is essential to capture and represent the variability in the semantics of the information that may be relevant to a query and also to support efficient and effective interaction between users and the information even when the search goal in not well-defined early in the search process. The authors explained that such an approach requires user-centric capabilities rather than pure-syntactic query-retrieval to facilitate exploratory search. Their approach constructs a presentation-interaction paradigm based on content-pages correlations between Web pages to extract different information and perceptual cues to show results to users with varied perspectives in order to facilitate exploratory search. Further Ruthven (2003) found that only certain query expansions can lead to effectiveness where searchers use them to expand their search. Thus, past research has mainly focused on optimizing the results for query-based retrieval and showing those results in an improved manner to the users to facilitate exploratory search rather than analyzing the actual user-centric search process of when and how users got to that information.There is a gap in this research area of dynamic user-centric search evaluation for exploratory search that requires further investigation. Given that most current online searchers use search engines like Google, Bing, and Yahoo! for their day-to-day search tasks, it is extremely useful to understand their search performance when conducting an exploratory search task using easily available search engines. Evaluating the user search performance dynamically by analyzing search behavior over a period of time while making the user aware of their performance level would be an immense contribution to users as well as to the community of search engine developers and other exploratory search systems/tools. Therefore, a user-centric exploratory search evaluation framework would enable users to be more proactive and effective when conducting search tasks. This would ultimately lead to a better user experience and higher user satisfaction.The proposed approach attempts to build a framework to analyze the search behavior of individuals who are performing exploratory search tasks using a user-centric search process based approach. We try to incorporate different aspects that define exploratory search when evaluating the user search process over time and also apply user search behavior patterns in understanding the underlying process that guides the exploratory search. Since the underlying search process is unique for each individual, this proposed approach would try to provide a more personalized understanding and evaluation of the user search performance.In order to facilitate this approach, we propose to analyze the search process, which can be considered as a collection of actions a typical user would take when performing an online search task, including but not limited to the following.•Issue a query.Scan the search result pages.Visit a particular Web page.Bookmark or save the page for future use.Reformulate a query.Revisit a Web page.Collect a passage from a Web page.This approach would consider the search process as a sequence of actions a user performs when conducting an online search task. This would provide a means to understand why and how a user conducts a search as well as indicate whether that would lead to success in achieving his/her goal.We base our framework on the assumption that the actions and behaviors that users exhibit via different actions and decisions they make are results of the underlying cognitive process they undergo when conducting the search task.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
