@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Examination of relationships among serendipity, the environment, and individual differences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a three-factor scale to measure a serendipitous digital environment.Type of digital environment (e.g. social media, database) may influence serendipity.Digital environment characteristics such as trigger-rich may influence serendipity.Individual differences such as openness do not significantly influence serendipity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Serendipity,Scale development,Digital environments,Individual differences,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Under what conditions is serendipity most likely to occur? How much is serendipity influenced by what a person brings to the process, and how much by the environment in which the person is immersed? This study assessed (a) selected human characteristics that may influence the ability to experience serendipity (openness to experience, extraversion, and locus of control) and (b) selected perceptions of the environment in which people are immersed, including the creative environment, and selected characteristics (trigger rich, highlights triggers, enables connections, and leads to the unexpected). Finally, the study examined the relationships among these internal people-based and external, environmental, variables. Professionals, academics, and students engaged in thesis work (N=289) responded to a web-based questionnaire that integrated six scales to measure these variables. Results were analysed using principal components analysis, multivariate analysis of variance, and multiple regression. We found some types of digital environments, (e.g., websites, databases, search engines, intranets, social media sites) may be more conducive to serendipity than others, while environments that manifest selected characteristics (trigger-rich, enable connections, and lead to the unexpected) are perceived more likely to foster serendipity than others. However, the perceived level of creativity expected in work environments was not associated with serendipity. In addition, while extraverted people may be more likely to experience serendipity in general, those who are open to experience or have an external locus of control are no more likely to experience serendipity than their counterparts. Notable from our findings was a failure in identifying individual differences that may influence a person’s likelihood to experience serendipity, in contrast with our success in identifying how the environment in which the user is immersed may create a fertile environment for serendipity to occur.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Serendipity is often associated with luck, accident, and chance. But it is more than that – it is an experience marked by an interruption or discontinuity triggered by ideas, information, or phenomena that stops us in our tracks and prompts us to make connections that may have personal, organizational, community, or global outcomes (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). Despite serendipity’s association with events outside our control, it is serendipity’s positive impact that motivates people and organizations to find ways to nurture and facilitate it.In her Rice Centennial Lecture, Shirley Ann Jackson, President of New York’s Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, argued that funding basic research spurs serendipity and thus innovation “because without [serendipity], there is no vitality in the innovation ecosystem. Indeed, there is no innovation” (Jackson, 2012, n.p.). While Jackson suggested that basic research facilitates serendipity, companies such as Google design buildings and rearrange furniture to maximise the potential for serendipitous encounters among co-workers (Lindsay, 2013), and developers create mechanisms such as recommender systems to support serendipity for users in digital environments (Shani & Gunawardana, 2011). But despite a push to support serendipity and understand how it may be influenced (see for example, Makri, Blandford, Woods, Sharples, & Maxwell, 2014), we know very little about how the complex relationships among the traits and abilities of individuals and the environments in which they are immersed may lead to serendipity. Thus, we are blind to how we may facilitate serendipity through policy, education, or systems design.The purpose of our research is to examine whether selected characteristics of people, i.e., individual differences, and selected characteristics of environments influence likelihood of serendipity to occur, and whether some combination of the two interact to lead to serendipity. Before we can examine these relationships, we first need to develop a way to measure perception of serendipity and a way to assess whether an environment in which the user is immersed has the potential to facilitate serendipity. A perception of serendipity scale and a serendipitous digital environment scale were first developed so that relationships among serendipity, the environment, and the individual could be explored. Measuring an abstract, subjective construct such as serendipity is a difficult task. People have different notions of what serendipity means and what experiences they would describe as serendipitous (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). However, the lack of tools to measure serendipity hampers the ability to improve research policy, educational strategies, and digital environments. Without tools to measure serendipity, for example, we are unable to verify whether changes to the interface or algorithms of a digital environment supports or hinders serendipity.We define serendipity as an unexpected experience prompted by an individual’s valuable interaction with ideas, information, objects, or phenomena. In a study of how twelve scholars and working professionals experienced serendipity, a serendipitous experience was identified as a process consisting of five main elements: trigger, connection, follow-up, valuable outcome, and unexpected thread. Driving this process are the internal and external factors that are hypothesised to influence both the process and perception of serendipity (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). Erdelez’s (2005) model of an information encountering (IE) episode, often cited in the serendipity literature, is “an instance of accidental discovery of information during an active search for some other information” (p. 180) that illustrates the beginning of a potentially serendipitous experience, encompassing aspects of the trigger, connection, and follow-up.Our definition of serendipity and its complementary model (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press) share many of the features of previous definitions and discussions of serendipity in its emphasis on the unexpected and positive aspects of the phenomenon as well as the interaction that takes place between the individual and the environment that drives the experience. Merton, for example, postulated chance favours “those at work in microenvironments that make for unanticipated sociocognitive interactions between those [with] prepared minds;” what he referred to as the “serendipitous sociocognitive microenvironment” (Merton & Barber, 2004, pp. 259–260). Serendipity has also been defined as “the interactive outcome of unique and contingent ‘mixes’ of insight coupled with chance” (1996, p. 434), suggesting internal and external factors are at play. The main elements of serendipity have similarly been described as “a mix of unexpectedness and insight [that lead] to a valuable, unanticipated outcome” (Makri & Blandford, 2012, p. 684). McBirnie and Urquhart (2011) noted that their “accepted understanding of the phenomenon requires the internal (e.g., the prepared mind) and the external (e.g., outside context and events) to come together in the right way, with neither on its own considered enough for the classification of an experience as serendipity” (np). Each of these definitions and extrapolations extend the more basic notion of serendipity as an aptitude or a happy accident, embedding within them how and why serendipity unfolds.Interactions between individuals and their environments appear to be important for serendipity to occur but how can we deconstruct this? That is, what characteristics of the environment (external factors) and the individual (internal factors) may facilitate and influence serendipity?This research focuses in particular on the more stable characteristics of the individual’s environment rather than situational factors such as time pressures and information strategies, which are discussed elsewhere (e.g., Makri et al., 2014; McBirnie, 2008; Sun, Sharples, & Makri, 2011). We sought to understand what it is about digital environments that might facilitate serendipity, recognising that people do not interact with digital environments in a vacuum and experiences with their broader work environment may exert an influence on experiences of and perception of digital environments.While we know of no research that has tested whether the type of environment, digital or physical, influences the likelihood of experiencing serendipity, research does suggest that some environments are more likely to support serendipity than others (e.g., Björneborn, 2008; Toms, 1997). Settings more conducive to serendipity include those designed to deliver information such as libraries, lecture rooms, as well as unfamiliar environments where new information can be found (Sun et al., 2011). Equally, some features and functions of digital environments may be more conducive to serendipity than others. Toms (1997) found in her experimental study of 47 adults that navigational mechanisms in a digital newspaper to support browsing also supported serendipity by exposing users to useful news stories they did not intend to find. Björneborn (2008) examined the characteristics of the physical library space that lead to divergent behaviour. The information behaviours of patrons in two public libraries were observed over several months. A number of these patrons (N=118) were interviewed while eleven further participated in think-aloud sessions. Björneborn identified ten ‘serendipity dimensions’ of the physical library, for example: diversity of resources, activities, and physical spaces; curiosity-invoking displays of resources; imperfections in the library interfaces (e.g., misshelved resources); and explorability (i.e., users are encouraged to move around the library). While the research stops short of verifying whether the divergent behaviour prompted by the environment led to serendipity, the dimensions are significant, shedding light on environmental features that have the potential to support serendipity.Based on an investigative study of serendipity involving semi-structured interviews with twelve scholars and working professionals who shared specific experiences of work-related serendipity as well as prior research (e.g., Björneborn, 2008), McCay-Peet and Toms (in press) identified four main external or environmental factors that may facilitate the process of serendipity – an environment that is trigger-rich, highlights triggers, enables connections, and enables capturing. McCay-Peet, Toms, and Kelloway (2014) reexamined these four facets through a digital lens, proposed five facets of a potentially serendipitous digital environment, and developed a self-report questionnaire to measure how well a digital environment supports serendipity. The content validity of the scale was tested and content subsequently refined through an expert review by eight researchers experienced in serendipity-related research and further tested and refined using a web-based questionnaire in which 107 university students rated how well the items reflected each facet’s meaning. The five facets are defined below: enables exploration, trigger-rich, highlights triggers, enables connections, and leads to the unexpected (McCay-Peet et al., 2014).1.Enables exploration: the degree to which a digital environment supports exploration and examination of its information, ideas, or resources.Digital environments that enable exploration provide individuals with opportunities to bump into information and ideas they may not have otherwise found through mechanisms that, for example, allow users to browse content (Toms, 1997). The digital environment that enables exploration supports unimpeded and direct access, stopability, explorability, and multi-reachability (Björneborn, 2008).2.Trigger-rich: the degree to which a digital environment contains a variety of information, ideas, or resources that is interesting and useful to the user.Trigger is one of the main elements of the process of serendipity (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). A trigger is a verbal, textual, or visual cue that initiates or sparks an individual’s experience of serendipity. In digital environments, the information encountered must be interesting and useful to have the potential to be serendipitous. It must contain triggers. Just as “browsing depends on the ability of a piece of text to be recognised and examined” (Toms, 2000, p. 424), its textual affordances perceived, serendipity is reliant on an individuals’ interaction with text that can act as triggers of serendipity due to relationships to their own interests or needs, or what have been referred to as a person’s interest space or problem (Björneborn, 2008; Sun et al., 2011; Toms, 1997).3.Highlights triggers: the degree to which a digital environment brings interesting and useful information, ideas, or resources to the user’s attention.Face-to-face communication, visual saliency, noise, and emotion highlight triggers, bringing our focus of attention to information, ideas, or phenomenon we may not have otherwise noticed (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). Our visual attention, for example, is known to be guided by size, colour, motion, and orientation (Wolfe & Horowitz, 2004); therefore, applying these attributes to potential serendipitous triggers may help ensure they are noticed. Highlighting triggers through curiosity-invoking displays, striking contrasts, and pointers (Björneborn, 2008) has been found to prompt divergent behaviour in physical libraries and thus may also prompt serendipity. With this rationale, Max, a web-based system that emails users links to websites with unexpected and interesting information (Campos & Figueiredo, 2002), and Mitsikeru, an ambient intelligence system that calls attention to interesting or surprising content (webpage links) relative to the user through visual cues (Beale, 2007), were both developed to support serendipity.4.Enables connections: the degree to which a digital environment makes relationships or connections between information, ideas, or resources apparent.Connections is another main element of the process of serendipity; the recognition of a relationship between the trigger and the individual’s knowledge and experience (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). A serendipitous digital environment enables connections, something that may be possible through visualisation tools (e.g., Thudt, Hinrichs, & Carpendale, 2012) or social media sites that connect people to other people with interesting ideas and information.5.Leads to the unexpected: the degree to which a digital environment provides opportunities for unexpected interactions with information, ideas, or resources.Unexpected thread is an important element of the process of serendipity; the unexpected, chance, accidental, or surprising element that is evident in one or more of the trigger, connection, follow-up, or valuable outcome elements of the serendipitous experience (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). Therefore, an environment that is capable of leading to the unexpected may increase opportunities for serendipity. In physical environments, this may take the form of imperfections such as misshelved books in libraries (Björneborn, 2008). In digital environments, it may relate to the content encountered or how it was encountered; for example, an idea for a work project gleaned from a social media site primarily used for connecting with friends and family.These five facets characterise user expectation about what a serendipitous digital environment might facilitate. But, there is also research that suggests a connection between serendipity and one’s creative environment or characteristics of the environment that support a person’s creativity. There are many areas of convergence between creativity and serendipity research. Creativity, like serendipity, has been linked to environmental conditions (Mayfield & Mayfield, 2008). For example, one broad definition of creativity includes the environment: creativity is “a combination of interacting individual and environmental resources leading to the production of valuable solutions” (Mouchiroud & Bernoussi, 2008). The theme of flexibility in the creative environment research (e.g., Mayfield & Mayfield, 2008; Mouchiroud & Bernoussi, 2008) finds a conceptual parallel with divergence in the serendipity research (e.g., Björneborn, 2008; Heinström, 2006). With the right environmental conditions, an individual’s creative output may be enhanced leading to the creation of new products and ideas (Oldham & Cummings, 1996) or creative solutions to social problems (Mouchiroud & Bernoussi, 2008). Despite the potential for a creative work environment to support serendipity, no research to date has explored the relationship between the creative work environment and serendipity. Moreover, while many believe that, like creativity, support for serendipity is possible through education, practice, and tools, we know little of the relationships between the environment and serendipity.While the environment in which an individual is immersed is one part of the equation of serendipity, individual differences are another. It was not possible to explore all of the individual differences that might influence why one person has a propensity to have serendipitous experiences, while another does not. Therefore, we selected three individual differences that may be influential identified through prior research (e.g., Heinström, 2006; McCay-Peet & Toms, in press): openness to experience, extraversion, and locus of control.At face value, openness to experience and extraversion, two of the Big Five personality traits (McCrae & John, 1992), appear central to serendipity. Lexical studies of personality structure commonly describe those open to experience as “intellectual, creative, unconventional, innovative, [and] ironic” while extraversion is associated with people who are “outgoing, lively, extraverted, sociable, talkative, cheerful, [and] active” (Ashton & Lee, 2007, p. 154). Findings from serendipity-related research often point to these qualities and behaviours of individuals. For example, Dantonio, Makri, and Blandford (2012) found in interviews with 15 postgraduates that spending both time and energy creating, sharing, and exploring social media content and making an effort to engage in conversations on social media sites had the potential to lead to more opportunity for serendipity. As noted earlier, the creative environment may play a key role in serendipity, but it has also been posited that creative imagination is a necessary component of serendipity in science; scientists must not only draw upon their knowledge and experience (prepared mind) but also their ingenuity and creativity to provide an explanation for unexpected observations (Barber & Fox, 1958).In research on students’ incidental information acquisition (IIA) (Heinström, 2006), two studies (N=305 masters’ students; N=27 library and information science students) in which the NEO Personality Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1992) was administered found a significant relationship between extraversion and incidental information acquisition (IIA) – “acquiring (useful or interesting) information while not consciously looking for it” (Heinström, 2006, p. 580), but not between openness to experience and IIA. More empirical research is required to support these findings and explore their complexities. McCrae (1987), for example, was careful to point out that while research indicates a relationship between openness to experience and divergent thinking, practice over time or incentives may lead those with relatively low openness scores to do equally well on divergent thinking tasks as open individuals. Perhaps incentives can make us behave in an extraverted and open manner that may otherwise be out of character, increasing opportunities for serendipity by changing the quality and frequency of our interactions with information, ideas, and phenomenon.Serendipity is tightly associated with accident, luck, chance (Fine & Deegan, 1996) and its perception tied to a lack of control (Rubin, Burkell, & Quan-Haase, 2011). Consequently, the notion of trying to exert control over serendipity or facilitate it through the development of strategies (Makri et al., 2014) or the design of digital environments (André, Teevan, & Dumais, 2009) is somewhat paradoxical (see McBirnie, 2008). But some individuals appear able to reconcile control and lack of control in the context of serendipity, attributing their serendipitous experiences to both “luck and choice” or “chance and preparation,” for example (McCay-Peet & Toms, in press). However, locus of control exists on a continuum between internal and external and is defined as “the degree to which an individual sees himself in control of his life and the events that influence it” (Locus of control, n.d.). Therefore, some people may be more likely to attribute stumbling upon a new research idea to chance rather than preparation and knowledge in their field or a great job offer to luck rather than the series of life choices and hard work that led up to the opportunity. Many factors have the potential to influence locus of control making it a challenging construct to examine. This challenge is evident in conflicting research findings in which individuals with an internal locus of control perceived their career paths were less influenced by chance events than those with an external locus of control in one study (Bright, Pryor, & Harpham, 2005) while a later study (Bright, Pryor, Chan, & Rijanto, 2009) found no such relationship.In summary, while prior research suggests that both external and internal factors may influence serendipity and its perception, no research has empirically examined how different digital environments and their characteristics may facilitate serendipity. Likewise, while some prior research examined relationships between personality traits and concepts related to serendipity (e.g., chance events, incidental information acquisition), no research has investigated the influence of personality on the perception of serendipity in digital environments.Using a web-based survey, multiple questionnaires relating to the individual and the environment were administered to 289 professionals, academics, and graduate students. Our survey was designed to meet our main research objective:To test whether the type of digital environment and selected characteristics of the individual, the work environment, and the digital environment have the potential to facilitate or influence serendipity.To this end, several previously developed questionnaires were selected to measure individual differences and the work environment:•locus of control of behaviour (Craig, Franklin, & Andrews, 1984),openness to experience (Lee & Ashton, 2004),extraversion (Lee & Ashton, 2004), andcreative environment perceptions (Mayfield & Mayfield, 2010).But how can we reach our research objective without instruments to measure serendipity? Without tools to measure the perception of serendipity and the serendipitous digital environment, three main problems persist:1.Comparisons across digital environments are limited.Examining the potential interactions between the individual and their environment is problematic.Heuristics for the development of serendipitous digital environments are hit and miss.We met the challenge of a lack of measures through the development of self-report questionnaires for the purposes of this research.The serendipitous digital environment scale (McCay-Peet et al., 2014), which was in the process of development and refined through research reported here, was used to both help further its development (see Section 7) and test relationships among serendipity, the environment, and individual differences. The serendipitous digital environment scale followed scale development procedures (e.g., DeVellis, 2003) and was designed to assess the degree to which a particular digital environment has facets or characteristics that foster serendipity: (1) enables explorations, (2) trigger-rich, (3) highlights triggers, (4) enables connections, and (5) leads to the unexpected.In addition, we needed a measure of serendipity itself. A perception of serendipity scale was developed for the purposes of this study to assess how frequently individuals perceive they experience serendipity at three levels: in a specific digital environment, digital environments in general, and in general (see Section 4.1.1). Through the development of a tool to measure how frequently individuals perceive they experience serendipity – a global or direct measure of serendipity – we could then explore what variables may fuel these perceptions. Moreover, the perception of serendipity scale gave us the tool needed to test the construct validity of the serendipitous digital environment scale (McCay-Peet et al., 2014). While research supports the inclusion of five facets in the serendipitous digital environment scale and some current approaches to facilitate serendipity reflect these facets, research is needed to validate whether digital environments that better embody them are more likely to support serendipity than those that do not.The inclusion of the instruments described above allowed for the exploration of the relationships among factors including types of digital environment (e.g., social media versus databases). Three main research questions (RQs) guided our research:RQ1 How does the type of digital environment an individual uses influence serendipity?For example, do people experience serendipity more frequently in social media sites than databases?RQ2 How does the type of digital environment influence a user’s perceptions of its characteristics?In other words, are certain types of digital environments like databases more closely associated with characteristics such as leading to the unexpected or enabling connections than search engines?RQ3 What relationships exist among the perception of serendipity and the underlying facets of a serendipitous digital environment, creative environment perceptions, locus of control, openness to experience, and extraversion?Several hypotheses relating to these RQs were generated and are described in Section 8. Principal components analysis (PCA), multiple regression, and multiple analysis of variance (MANOVA) were used to analyze the data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
