@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Crime profiling for the Arabic language using computational linguistic techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Text mining system for extraction of information related to crime from Arabic texts.Local grammar used to extract information and build dictionaries automatically.Visualisation of clustering enhances ability to analyse crime information in corpora.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Arabic language,Crime domain,Pattern recognition,Clustering,Information extraction,Syntactic analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Arabic is a widely spoken language but few mining tools have been developed to process Arabic text. This paper examines the crime domain in the Arabic language (unstructured text) using text mining techniques. The development and application of a Crime Profiling System (CPS) is presented. The system is able to extract meaningful information, in this case the type of crime, location and nationality, from Arabic language crime news reports. The system has two unique attributes; firstly, information extraction that depends on local grammar, and secondly, dictionaries that can be automatically generated. It is shown that the CPS improves the quality of the data through reduction where only meaningful information is retained. Moreover, the Self Organising Map (SOM) approach is adopted in order to perform the clustering of the crime reports, based on crime type. This clustering technique is improved because only refined data containing meaningful keywords extracted through the information extraction process are inputted into it, i.e. the data are cleansed by removing noise. The proposed system is validated through experiments using a corpus collated from different sources; it was not used during system development. Precision, recall and F-measure are used to evaluate the performance of the proposed information extraction approach. Also, comparisons are conducted with other systems. In order to evaluate the clustering performance, three parameters are used: data size, loading time and quantization error.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, the volume of data in electronic form is increasing rapidly, whether it is structured or unstructured data. According to McKnight (2005), between 85% and 90% of data is held in unstructured form. Therefore, text mining is necessary to manage and extract useful information from unstructured sets of data, such as web pages and emails, using text mining techniques. Hence, text mining has become an important and active research field. It is well known that text mining techniques have been mostly developed for the English language because most electronic data are in English. However, the recent advances in localisation and expansion of non-English electronic text make it more imperative than ever to develop techniques to process other languages, such as Arabic.Moreover, in the Arabic language, like other languages, there is a multitude of specialist texts in areas such as the biomedical sciences, finance, politics and crime, some of which have not been investigated by researchers. This study focuses on the crime domain in the Arabic language for which no information system can be found in the literature. Therefore, there is a need to investigate the crime context using a text mining approach.Furthermore, text mining research relies on the availability of a suitable corpus. However, there is no available crime corpus in the Arabic language, and it is one of the contributions of this study to create such a corpus. The content of this corpus has been collected from the crime sections of different Arabic newspapers published in a number of Arabic countries.In our previous works, we developed a system to extract crime information from texts (Alruily, Ayesh, & Zedan, 2009). The approach is based on a dictionary that is created manually. Also, we were able to develop three dictionaries, for crime type, crime location and nationality, that were automatically built in order to be used in the information extraction (Alruily, Ayesh, & Zedan, 2010). Moreover, we developed the first system that was able to cluster Arabic crime news reports using the Self Organising Map (SOM) technique (Alruily, Ayesh, & Al-Marghilani, 2010). The current research represents a combination of our previous works (Alruily et al., 2010; Alruily et al., 2010). As a result, the system will be able to recognise phrases that contain information related to crime in a given document in order to extract the type of crime, crime location and nationality of persons involved in the event, and in order to generate a summary. Moreover, during the information extraction stage, dictionaries containing the crime type, crime location and nationality will be automatically created, which will also assist in the information extraction process. In this research, the extracted keywords (summary) will be utilised by a Self Organising Map (SOM) to perform the clustering and visualisation tasks. As well known, the extracted entities are keywords, which play an important role in many text mining tasks, such as clustering, summarisation and document retrieval, because they reveal the essential idea of the document or article (TeCho, Nattee, & Theeramunkong, 2008).The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, a background to the topic and a review of related work are presented. Section 3 provides an introduction to the Arabic language, focusing on the syntactic information that is related to this research. Section 4 presents the crime domain syntactic analysis. Section 5 provides an overview of the framework’s architecture. Section 6 presents the experimental results. In Section 7, the performance evaluation results are given. Finally, the conclusion of this work is presented in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
