@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A user term visualization analysis based on a social question and answer log

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A user-based diabetes subject directory was discovered in this study.Terms and their relationships in each of the 12 categories were visually displayed and analyzed.The relationships among the 12 categories were analyzed in a visual context.Descriptive statistic data on diabetes in the Q&A were revealed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Diabetes,Term analysis,Information seeking pattern,Visualization analysis,Social question and answers,Q,&,A,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The authors of this paper investigate terms of consumers’ diabetes based on a log from the Yahoo!Answers social question and answers (Q&A) forum, ascertain characteristics and relationships among terms related to diabetes from the consumers’ perspective, and reveal users’ diabetes information seeking patterns. In this study, the log analysis method, data coding method, and visualization multiple-dimensional scaling analysis method were used for analysis. The visual analyses were conducted at two levels: terms analysis within a category and category analysis among the categories in the schema. The findings show that the average number of words per question was 128.63, the average number of sentences per question was 8.23, the average number of words per response was 254.83, and the average number of sentences per response was 16.01. There were 12 categories (Cause & Pathophysiology, Sign & Symptom, Diagnosis & Test, Organ & Body Part, Complication & Related Disease, Medication, Treatment, Education & Info Resource, Affect, Social & Culture, Lifestyle, and Nutrient) in the diabetes related schema which emerged from the data coding analysis. The analyses at the two levels show that terms and categories were clustered and patterns were revealed. Future research directions are also included.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Diabetes is a chronic disease which causes high levels of sugar in the human blood. Diabetes can result in many complications such as heart disease and stroke, obesity, high blood pressure, blindness, kidney disease, and nervous system related diseases. According to a statistic report of American Diabetes Association (Diabetes statistics, 2012), 25.8 million people in the United States (8.3% of the population) have diabetes, diabetes cost totaled $174 billion in the United States in 2007, and 346 million people worldwide have diabetes (World Health Organization (WHO), 2012). It is not surprising that diabetes is listed as number 7 on the list of 10 leading causes of death in the US 2009 (Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2012).With a common and typical chronic disease, diabetes patients need to become their own managers and personal experts of their treatment (Nordfeldt, Johansson, Carlsson, & Hammersjo, 2005). The treatment of diabetes consists of self-care to be performed by the patients and their families (Brink, Miller, & Moltz, 2002). The studies suggest that the patients search for information about treatment, medicine, diet, and support related to diabetes. It is recognized, however, that there is a huge gap between health consumers (such as diabetes patients) and health information resources. Researchers have tried to bridge the gap (Milewski & Chen, 2010) and in one such study it was reported that there is a significant difference when medical professionals and common people use the same medical concepts (Zhang, Wolfram, Wang, Hong, & Gillis, 2008). In order to overcome the obstacle that prevents people from effectively accessing health information, their health information needs on a topic like diabetes should be analyzed, and their information seeking patterns should be identified and studied to empower health consumers to effectively obtain their own health information.Thanks to the Web 2.0 technology which provides an open user-centered environment for information sharing and information exchanging, patients of diabetes can create an open social Q&A discussion forum on diabetes where they can make contributions to the topic, receive assistance from the forum, and interact with each other in that community. Questions related to the topic can be asked and posted in the forum, and answers to these questions can be provided by other participants who have expertise and experience on the topic. The social Q&A forum has become an important information resource for people to seek information and obtain answers to questions on diabetes.Information visualization has enormous potential for researchers. Information visualization methods and techniques can be employed as: (1) an effective and intuitive means for people to explore and discover information in a visual environment; (2) an effective research analysis mechanism for researchers to better understand trends in complex data sets within a visual and meaningful display, and reveal hidden and complicated patterns in the data set; and (3) a unique and efficient way to interact with users as well (Zhang, 2008). Due to these reasons, the information visualization method is ideal for studying diabetes information seeking in the social Q&A forum and was used as a primary research method in this study.The purpose of this study is to use a mixed research method to investigate consumers’ diabetes term use patterns based on the log from a social Q&A forum, ascertain characteristics and relationships among terms related to diabetes from the consumers’ perspective, reveal term use patterns on diabetes, and discuss how term use patterns can be used to inform thesaurus and classification systems design. The overarching research question is whether consumer’s term use patterns on diabetes can be revealed from a social Q&A data set.Findings of this study can be used to: (1) better understand users’ diabetes term use behaviors in terms of the term associations in a social Q&A data set; (2) reveal and demonstrate hidden patterns of users’ term use that emerge from Q&A data analysis by the identified and illustrated semantic connections in the themes related to diabetes; (3) update and revise existing diabetes related thesauri, or subject heading systems, or classifications by recommending new related candidate terms emerging from this study to the thesauri, tinkering subject structures, and adjusting relationships between subjects in the subject heading systems and classifications; (4) organize and present diabetes related information in Q&A websites, or other diabetes related health portals, or patient-oriented electric medical information systems by using the emerging subject schema. In fact, the emerging schema as a subject directory can be directly employed to arrange contents of diabetes related websites which guides users to navigate the websites and portals effectively and makes them more user-friendly and user-oriented; and (5) present a new mixed research methodology, which can apply the Q&A data analysis method, coding analysis method, and information visualization method to similar research topics in the health information field.It is widely recognized that the Internet plays an increasingly important role in users’ health information seeking. The Web is an important source for people who are seeking healthcare information (Hesse et al., 2005). Due to the richness and availability of health information on the Internet some people would like to search in there rather than see a doctor (Milewski & Chen, 2010). The Pew Internet Project estimated that at least 75% of US Internet users searched for health information online, with 8 million Americans seeking health information online in a typical day (Fox, 2006, 2008).Diabetics like other health consumers increasingly use the Internet for their medical consulting and problem solving in addition to traditional information seeking channels such as readings, health literacy, magazine articles, patients’ medical records and health care providers. (Brink & Chiarelli, 2004; Milewski & Chen, 2010). Because of the inherent characteristics of diabetes as a long term self-care disease with a lot of available online health information it is no surprise that diabetics rely heavily on the Internet-based information (Nordfeldt et al., 2005). Diabetics seek medical and diabetes-specific information, as well as related information on diet, exercise and stress management, to control their disease (Longo et al., 2010). In addition, millions of non-diabetics, who have a family history of diabetes, who are overweight or who have symptoms similar to diabetes, also worry about their or their friends’ health conditions and use online Internet searching for diabetes information.Studies on diabetics information seeking have been widely reported. Recent research suggests that obtaining health information and staying informed is crucial for diabetics, pre-diabetics and non-diabetics to maintain self-care or to eliminate unnecessarily concerns. Searchers are still struggling with barriers to obtaining such information. Milewski and Chen (2010) concluded that lack of motivation, passiveness, inconsistent information, generality of information, and loss of information are five major barriers for seeking health information. In a study, Longo et al. (2010) identified how individuals with diabetes seek and use health care information. This study used 9 focus groups including 46 adults with diabetes and then analyzed the transcripts and notes from these focus groups. They found diabetics looked for credible sources for their unique needs and information fitting their own knowledge and experiences. Findings in a study (Nordfeldt et al., 2005) on young diabetics’ self-education showed that 42% of respondents had searched for diabetes information on the Internet, and 97% anticipated future online searching on the topic. Studies on patients’ and parents’ attitudes toward an online diabetes portal tailored to young patients with type I diabetes and their parents were investigated and the interactive online diabetes portals were preferred by young users (Nordfeldt, Hanberger, & Bertero, 2010). Studies on information seeking of diabetics not only benefit common people but also provide useful evidence for medical professionals to understand how diabetics receive or seek information (Longo et al., 2010). In the meanwhile, evaluation and assessment of the quality of diabetes consumer-information Web sites also attracts researchers’ attention (Seidman, Steinwachs, & Rubin, 2003).One popular source of online information is question and answer forums which are both social and interactive. Unlike traditional Q&A services where experts or authorities in a field of interest are responsible for answering questions from users, a social Q&A forum/site forms a community where its members can post questions, answer other members’ questions, and rate or rank other members’ answers to the questions (Roush, 2006). Questions and answers are usually organized under topical categories which, typically, are archived and searchable (Rosenbaum & Shachaf, 2010). Importance and preference of questions and answers can be ranked by users (Shah, Oh, & Oh, 2008). Not only is information shared in a social Q&A site, but also experience, opinion, and fun, indicating that the function of online communities is both informational and emotional support (Gooden & Winefield, 2007). Social Q&A sites have become some of the most popular destinations for online information seekers (Shah et al., 2008). From 2008 to 2010, the number of visits to the top five Q&A sites has increased by 889% (Rosenbaum & Shachaf, 2010). In particular, Yahoo!Answers has become the most popular Internet reference site in America (Alexa, 2012).The existing research on social Q&A forums is divided into content-centered studies (questions and answers) and user-centered studies (questioners, answerers, and the community in general) (Shah, Oh, & Oh, 2009). Gazan (2011) summarizes the major threads of emerging social Q&A sites research including user-generated and algorithmic question categorization, answer classification, answer quality assessment, user satisfaction, reward structures, motivation for participation, and trust and expertise.The astonishing size of the community, the great diversity of information exchanged, and the high quality answers in aggregation make Yahoo!Answers site a valuable research setting for understanding the general public’s online information seeking (Kim & Oh, 2009). The predictors of answers quality in Yahoo!Answers were studied through a comparative analysis (Harper, Raban, Rafaeli, & Konstan, 2008). In another study, topic categories based on answer characteristics and social network interaction were analyzed for 1month of activities in Yahoo!Answers. This involved 1.2 million questions and 8.5 million answers (Adamic, Zhang, Bakshy, & Ackerman, 2008). The relationship between reward for participants and quality of answers in social Q&A sites like Yahoo!Answers has also been studied. Rewards can make contribution to improvement of answer quality (Gazan, 2011; Shah et al., 2008). To better understand how people seek, share, and evaluate information in a social Q&A environment, Kim, Oh, and Oh (2007) identified the selection criteria people employ when they select best answers in Yahoo!Answers in the context of relevance research. Zhang (2010) explored contextual factors of consumer health information seeking by analyzing health-related questions posted on Yahoo!Answers. The findings show that consumers’ questioning behaviors were affected by the knowledge gap, disturbing feelings, and lack of social resources. Questioners tended to have different concerns at different stages of their health and illness. They also had both conceptual and lexical difficulties in formulating questions and sometimes, had high expectations for the quality of the answers. Kim, Oh, and Oh (2008) sampled a total of 700 comments from the Health category in Yahoo!Answers and found utility, socio-emotional value and general statement were the top three criteria in evaluating health-related answers.Data from social Q&A Websites were used to investigate basic components of image needs of people in daily life (Yoon & Chung, 2011), to examine the dynamics of an online Q&A community based on structuration theory and communities of practice (Rosenbaum & Shachaf, 2010), to evaluate Q&A data quality (Stvilia, Mon, & Yi, 2009), and to study community feedback (Jurczyk & Agichtein, 2007). Another research direction on Q&A is questioners and answerers. Along this line, Gazan (2006) characterizes answerers into specialists and synthesists and found that answers from synthesists were slightly more useful than answers from specialists. Raban (2009) found that the askers present themselves so as to motivate answerers to respond and make an effort to give a good answer while answerers present themselves to maximize the chances for positive feedback. Various research methods have been applied in social Q&A research such as content analysis and correlation analysis (Kim & Oh, 2009), and multinomial logistic tests such as link analysis (Jurczyk & Agichtein, 2007).Coding analysis has also been applied to Q&A research. This technique can convert a set of data into a meaningful hierarch consisting of a group of subject categories. Hidden themes in the data set can be revealed in the emerging subject structure which can be used to interpret the data set. Coding analysis method has been used for Q&A data analysis to distinguish information questions and conversational questions and assess their archival value (Harper, Moy, & Konstan, 2009). Raban (2009) used the technique to concentrate on the connection between social interaction and the potential value of information in Google Answers. Kelly et al. (2007) used coding as the main categorization strategy to identify evaluation criteria for interactive, analytical Question-Answering systems. Also using the coding method, McCray and Tse (2003) conducted a study based on a data set with 4700 queries from two consumer health sites (ClincialTrials.gov and MEDLINEplus) to analyze search failures, and Keselman, Browne, and Kaufman (2008) utilized the thematic coding method to predict consumer information seeking trajectories in key search strategies.Information techniques like the MDS (Multiple-Dimensional Scaling) method can be used to effectively illustrate relations among abstract objects, and demonstrate emerging clusters in a data set which is free of any data distributional assumptions. The MDS method can convert a high-dimensional vector space to a low dimensional space where objects in the high dimensional space can be projected onto the low dimensional space. Object relationships can be preserved, and objects and their relationships can be observed and analyzed. Due to the MDS uniqueness, it is applied to many fields of information science such as document co-citation analysis (York, Bohn, Pennock, & Lantrip, 1995), journal co-citation analysis (Hakanen & Wolfram, 1995), subject co-citation analysis (Small & Garfield, 1985) and Webpage co-citation analysis (Thelwall, 2002; Vaughan, 2006). The MDS method has been used to solve problems in health informatics. Users’ search behaviors on obesity were examined, and five related categories (obesity, diet, weight, fat, and food) were discovered in a health portal (Zhang & Wolfram, 2009). In another study, five topic terms (stomach, hip, stroke, depression, and cholesterol) and their related terms were analyzed, and clusters within each of the topic terms were identified in the MDS visual environments respectively (Zhang et al., 2008).In a study (Poikonen & Vakkari, 2009) a nutrition-related question–answer service designed for diabetics was investigated. The vocabulary differences between lay persons and professionals were examined; term semantic relationships such as equivalence relations, hierarchical relations, associative relations, and causal relations were analyzed; and the overlapping analysis between the term semantic relations from the question–answer data set and two professional thesauri was conducted. In another study (Eerola & Vakkari, 2008) a topic on cardiovascular diseases in a health-related question–answer forum was investigated. In the forum patients posted questions and physicians answered the questions. The differences between semantic expression of consumers and two thesauri on the topic of interest were examined. Zeng et al. (2005) focused their research on consumer-friendly terms identified from a NLM MedlinePlus query log.In summary, it is quite clear that studies on health consumer term use are many and diverse. They include topics of obesity, cholesterol, nutrition, cardiovascular diseases, etc. The raw data sources for these investigations vary from query transaction logs to a variety of Q&A logs. These research studies have different focuses which include comparisons between consumers’ term sematic relations and thesauri, consumer friendly terms, and term clustering analysis. Studies on diabetes term use behaviors based on Q&A data by using the mixed MDS technique and the coding method, however, are scant in the literature.Mixed research method (or blended research method, or integrative research method) uses quantitative and qualitative methods, paradigms, and techniques in a complicated study (Hesse-Biber, 2010). In a mixed research method a qualitative research paradigm can be employed in one phase of a research study while quantitative research paradigm can be applied in another phase of the study. Alternately, both qualitative and quantitative research paradigms can be used simultaneously in the same stages of the study. A mixed research method results in a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods which have complementary strengths and which overcomes weaknesses and limitations caused by a single research method. A mixed research method can be used for convergence and corroboration of results from different methods; elaboration, enhancement, illustration, and clarification of results from one method with results from the other method; discovery of contradictions and paradoxes; and expansion of the breadth and width of inquiry (Greene, Caracelli, & Graham, 1989).In this study, a mixed method of social Q&A log analysis, coding analysis method, and MDS visualization analysis method was used. The first phase used social Q&A log analysis where raw free texts were parsed, terms were extracted, term frequencies were tallied, and associations between terms and records were determined. The second phase employed coding analysis to a group of categories based on the Q&A log analysis results and the third phase applied MDS analysis, a clustering analysis, for the related terms in each of the categories.Log analysis refers to analysis on data gathered from a server that records users’ online activities. The record is known as a log. The data analysis methods which are applied to the log depend on the type of the log and the nature of the log data. Although there is an array of research methods available for users’ information seeking behaviors such as survey, interview, observation, experimentation, and query transaction log analysis and each of them has its strengths, the Q&A analysis method in addition to its strength is unique because:(1)It faithfully records people’s real information seeking data. Search tasks are real; information questions are real; and responses are real. In an experimental study the settings and tasks may be designed by researchers.Q&A data can be extracted and collected within 1day, 1week, 1month, and 1year from a Q&A log. Robust, reliable, and plausible results should be based on a sufficient data set, and an open social Q&A forum enables researchers to obtain enough data for a study.Q&A data are detailed. A Q&A record constitutes multiple sentences, paragraphs, and responses, the average number of words and average number of sentences per question in this study were 128.63 and 8.23 respectively. The average number of search terms in a health related query is around 3 according to studies (Spink et al., 2004; White, Dumais, & Teevan, 2008; Zeng, Kogan, Ash, Greenes, & Boxwala, 2002). In a search query, users’ information needs have to be generalized and presented by a few keywords. In other words, users’ information needs are “compressed” in a relatively short query and as a result, users’ information needs may not be fully expressed in a single query. In a Q&A record, users tend to include more information in their information needs question than in a similar keyword search query.Q&A data may reveal users’ motivation and background information which is missing in query data. Although not all Q&A records include detailed users’ motivation and background information, a few Q&A records contain this kind of information and other relevant user information. Information like education background, age, gender, reason for asking a question, and users’ feelings would be helpful to understanding users’ information seeking behaviors. Transaction log analysis based on query terms about users’ information seeking analysis lacks this kind of information.Q&A data have time stamp information. In other words, posting time of a question and responses to the question are recorded and can be traced in a Q&A record. If a research study requires time-sensitive data like a study on flu or allergy, time factor can be a useful dimension for the study.The Q&A data are diverse and comprehensive. In a Q&A forum, the format, type, and contents of a question from a user are not restricted. Users can post any messages related to a forum theme/topic. As a result, a Q&A log includes almost all aspects of a topic such as diabetes.The social Q&A log used in this study was Yahoo!Answers (2012). Yahoo!Answers is one of the most influential online social Q&A websites (Alexa, 2012). It includes more than 21 million unique users in the US and 90 million worldwide. It covers 26 categories ranging from Arts & Humanities to Beauty & Style, Social Science to Science & Mathematics, and Health. Each of these categories consists of more detailed subcategories. For instance there are 10 subcategories under Health: Alternative Medicine, Dental, Diet & Fitness, Diseases & Conditions, General Health Care, Men’s Health, Mental Health, Optical, Other-Health, and Women’s Health. Users can ask and answer questions on any topic in the categories. Advanced search feature enables people to search the Q&A log in a certain period of time, within a certain category, or in a specific field such as a question field, a response field, or both. In this study, the search query used was Diabetes, the search was limited to the question field, and length of time was 3months starting from August 10, 2011 to November 10, 2011. Notice that Yahoo also provides an API to facilitate the Q&A data collection. It can return a structural record where each attribute (question, response, or post time) is identified.After the data were harvested from the Yahoo Q&A log, a data cleansing process followed. During the data cleansing process, irrelevant and meaningless terms were removed; incomplete, incorrect, and inaccurate terms were modified and fixed; and useful terms were identified and reserved. Using stop lists provided by Fox (1989) the irrelevant and meaningless words were identified for removal. The incomplete, incorrect or inaccurate words refer to misspelled words extracted from the log. These words were identified and corrected by using the editing feature in Microsoft Word. Useful terms were all remaining words.Each Q&A record received an ID which was used to uniquely identify that record. A record consists of a question and its related responses. All terms from the Q&A records were extracted and tallied. Each term was associated with a corresponding record ID which can trace the term source and term frequencies within a record. All these terms formed a term master file.Next the term master file was edited for stop words and the remaining terms normalized. Superfluous, useless, and meaningless terms such as “a”, “an”, “the”, “of”, and “with” were removed from the term master file because these stop words don’t make any contribution to later terms analysis. In the term normalization process, verb forms were reduced to the infinitive, inflected forms of nouns were reduced to the nominative singular, comparatives and superlatives of gradable adjectives were reduced to the absolute form, misspelled terms were corrected, spelling variants were regularized, and apostrophes from the possessive form of words were discarded. The term process normalized the terms to make the later MDS analysis results more reliable and accurate. Finally, terms with low frequencies were also removed from the term master file because these terms made little contribution to the term visualization analyses.The data coding method can be used to categorize and classify a set of terms into sub-categories. Sub-categories which emerge as subjects are analyzed in the contexts of raw data, terms are classified, and the topic of a group of related terms is generalized. The data coding analysis leads to a schema which consists of a group of categories. This schema represents the emerging major subject themes and reveals their relationships from the investigated data set. At the beginning of the coding analysis for this study, a simple schema related to diabetes was selected by consulting the website of National Library Medicine (PubMed Health: Diabetes, 2013). The initial schema comprised the following subjects or categories (Causes, Incidence and Risk Factors; Signs and Tests; Treatment; Support Groups; Prognosis; Complications; and Prevention).Each of the terms in the master file was analyzed based on the contexts of the free-text and then it was classified into a proper category in the schema. As the coding analysis progressed, the schema was constantly revised and adjusted because the existing categories did not fit all the terms in the term master file. As a result, useless categories were removed, new categories were added, and existing categories were modified. After all the terms were analyzed, an updated diabetes schema emerged. The coding analysis process became a process of knowledge discovery.This coding analysis process prepares the data for an information visualization method such as the MDS method. Visualization methods are usually more suitable with a small or medium size set of data because a large data set would cause an overlapping display of the projected terms within the limited display space. The overlapping display may reduce the effectiveness of the term analysis and even result in a meaningless term analysis. The coding method reduces significantly the number of terms in a category/subcategory if a category/subcategory of the schema rather than the entire schema is selected for visualization analysis. It allows the researchers to conduct an MDS analysis with a reasonable size set of terms within the category/subcategory at a finer level of granularity and lays a foundation for the effective visualization analysis. The coding analysis for this study was manually conducted by the authors and a medical professional who holds an MD.Information visualization methods and techniques like the MDS method can effectively project complicated and abstract relationships among objects in a high dimensional space onto a low dimensional space. In the low dimensional space (a two dimensional or three dimensional space), the semantic relationships among the investigated objects can be observed and analyzed, theme patterns among the objects can be formed and discovered, object clusters can be identified and measured, and a rich and holistic picture of the objects can be provided. In addition, some information visualization techniques provide users with an interactive control mechanism. As a result, users can interact with the objects in the visual space, and observe an area of interest from different angles, etc. Due to these unique characteristics, information visualization methods and techniques like the MDS method are particularly suitable for revealing multiple semantic relationships among terms or keywords. The semantic relationships among terms were determined by term association (term co-occurrence) in a Q&A record, term association strength (term co-occurrence frequency), and the ultimate monotonic transformation process of the MDS in which the difference between connections among all the objects (terms) in the high dimensional space and the connections among all the objects (terms) in the low dimensional space reaches a minimum value. The connection between two objects can be measured by one of the Minkowski metrics (Zhang, 2008). That is, identified relationships among terms in the low dimensional space primarily depend on the optimal arrangements of the terms defined by a similarity measure in the low dimensional space. However, one weakness of information visualization methods is that the number of the displayed objects in the visual space is limited because the size of a visual space is limited. An overcrowded display in a visual space makes effective visual clustering analysis impossible and even meaningless.In the MDS analysis process, the dimensionality is reduced, the terms are projected onto a low dimensional space for observation. However, the relationships among the terms in the high dimensional space may not be faithfully illustrated in the low dimensional visual space after the projection. The inconsistence between the relationships among the terms in the high dimensional space and their relationships in the low dimensional space is inevitable. The MDS process minimizes this inconsistence. The degree of the inconsistence can be effectively measured by the stress value (S), which is defined in Eq. (1). The smaller a stress S is, the better the MDS result is; and vice versa. The stress value is used to measure the quality of an MDS result.(1)S=∑i=1n∑j=1n(f(Ti,Tj)-D(Ti,Tj)2∑i=1n∑j=1n(D(Ti,Tj)21/2In Eq. (1)n is equal to the number of all terms involved, D(Ti,Tj) is the Euclidean distance between two terms Tiand Tjin the low visual space, f(Ti,Tj) is the similarity between terms Tiand Tjin the high dimensional space, i and j are two indexes.The MDS requires a term–term proximity matrix as an input. The proximity matrix is an n*n matrix that describes the relationships among terms. The MDS analysis result provides a visual display where the projected terms are observed, terms are clustered, and term relationships are discovered.The MDS analysis can be enhanced using a hierarch clustering method which helps researchers identify and confirm resultant clusters from the MDS analysis. In the MDS visual display, some terms with similar characteristics may be projected onto the same spot in the MDS display. As a result, some of the overlapping terms may not be shown in the display. It causes unnecessary difficulty for clustering analysis in the MDS display. With the help of a hierarch clustering method, this problem can be easily solved. Secondly, in the MDS display all terms are presented in a 3-D space and the boundary between two clusters may not be clear if a viewing angle is not properly selected. A hierarch clustering method assists the researchers in identifying the boundary between the clusters and confirms the results from the MDS analysis. In this study the hierarch clustering method was applied to the same data set using the between-groups linkage clustering method.The MDS visualization analysis in this study consisted of two levels: visualization analysis with each of categories at a term level which enabled users to observe semantic relationships among terms within a category; and visualization analysis for all the categories at a category level. It demonstrated overall relationships among the identified categories. The software used for an MDS analysis was SPSS (Version 20).After the coding process, a group of categories emerges (see Eq. (2)). Here r is the number of the categories.(2)Schema={C1,C2,C3,…,Cr}Each category contains a set of related terms which can form a term–record matrix where its columns are Q&A records while its rows are terms. For instance, Cq is a category (1⩽q⩽r), and it can be represented in Eq. (3). In Eq. (3)n is the number of the Q&A records and k is the number of the terms in category Cq. Here aijis a cell in the matrix and the value of aijindicates frequency of the term i in the Q&A record j.(3)MCq=a11....a1na21....a2n……ak1....aknIn order to achieve a sound MDS result in this study, Mcqwas simplified by removing some columns with low frequencies. If the sum of cells in a column was lower than a predetermined frequency cutoff point, the column was removed from the matrix.This term–record matrix was converted to a term–term proximity matrix based on a similarity measure. There are many similarity measures available for this purpose. Selection of a similarity measure has a strong impact on the stress value of an MDS analysis result. The distance-based similarity measure (Zhang & Rasmussen, 2001) and Cosine similarity measure were considered in this study because of their good performances in a pilot study.(4)PMCq=b11....b1kb21....b2k……bk1....bkkThe proximity matrix PMcqis a k*k symmetric matrix and it served as input data for the MDS analysis.The category visualization analysis among all the categories provides an overall and holistic picture for all the emerged categories. The term visualization analysis within each of categories was conducted at a term level while the category visualization analysis among all categories was conducted at a category level. It was apparent that in this study the objects displayed and analyzed in the MDS configuration were the emerging categories rather than individual terms. To visualize these categories, the surrogates of these categories had to be clearly defined and properly represented in the high dimensional space.A centroid of a cluster in a high dimensional space can be defined to represent that cluster (Zhang & Wolfram, 2001). A centroid is located at the “center” of the cluster in the high dimensional space. If an identified category in the coding analysis is treated as a cluster in the high dimensional vector space, its centroid can be employed to represent it in the space.For the category Cq, its centroid can be defined as follows:(5)Centroid_MCq=∑i=1kai1k,∑i=1kai2k,…,∑i=1kainkSimilarly, all the categories can be represented by their centroids using Eq. (5).Using the centroid for each category, a category–record matrix was created and used to generate a category–category proximity matrix.(6)PMCategory=b11....b1rb21....b2r……br1....brrHere r is the number of the categories. An r*r symmetric matrix is formed with each row in the matrix representing a category. This matrix served as the input of the later MDS analysis for category visualization among all categories.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
