@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Why do urban legends go viral?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Urban legends are viral deceptive texts, in between credible and incredible.To be credible they mimic news articles while being incredible like a fairy tale.High level features: “who/where/when” of news, “emotional/readable” of fairy tales.Quantitative analysis and machine learning experiments for recognizing urban legends.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Persuasive natural language processing,Emotions in texts,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Urban legends are a genre of modern folklore, consisting of stories about rare and exceptional events, just plausible enough to be believed, which tend to propagate inexorably across communities. In our view, while urban legends represent a form of “sticky” deceptive text, they are marked by a tension between the credible and incredible. They should be credible like a news article and incredible like a fairy tale to go viral. In particular we will focus on the idea that urban legends should mimic the details of news (who, where, when) to be credible, while they should be emotional and readable like a fairy tale to be catchy and memorable. Using NLP tools we will provide a quantitative analysis of these prototypical characteristics. We also lay out some machine learning experiments showing that it is possible to recognize an urban legend using just these simple features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Urban legends are a genre of modern folklore consisting of stories told as true – and plausible enough to be believed – about some rare and exceptional events that supposedly happened to a real person or in a real place.Whether urban legends are produced by individual authors or emerge spontaneously, they typically spread “virally” across communities and tend to change over time with repetition and embellishment, like memes (Dawkins, 2006). For example the sewer alligator, that originally “appeared” in New York City (Coleman, 1979), also appeared in different cities to suit regional variations. Though it is considered synonymous of “false belief”, the term urban legend refers to a subtler and more complex phenomenon. The crucial factor is that the story is told as true in the absence of verification. Folklorists are generally more interested in the social context and meaning of urban legends than their truth value. From an NLP point of view, instead, it is interesting to computationally explore those linguistic characteristics that make them appealing and bring people to circulate them. With the advent of the Internet, urban legends gained new lifeblood, as they began to be circulated by e-mail.In Heath and Heath (2007), the authors discuss the idea of “stickiness” popularized by the book “The Tipping Point” (Gladwell, 2000), seeking to explain what makes an idea or concept memorable or interesting. They also focus on urban legends and claim that, by following the acronym “SUCCES” (each letter referring to a characteristic that makes an idea “sticky”), it is possible to describe their prototypical structure:•Simple – find the core of any ideaUnexpected – grab people’s attention by surprising themConcrete – make sure an idea can be grasped and remembered laterCredible – give an idea believabilityEmotional – help people see the importance of an ideaStories – empower people to use an idea through narrativeSuch features are allegedly placed at the core of persuasive and viral language; urban legends constitute an ideal framework with which to computationally verify these assertions. Table 1displays a few examples of urban legends claims.In particular we will investigate some of the prototypical characteristics that can be found in urban legends as compared to similar literary genres. In our view, urban legends are viral since they are stressed by a tension between credible and incredible: credible like a news and incredible like a fairy tale. We will focus on the idea that urban legends should mimic the details of news (who, where, when) to be credible, and they should be emotional and readable like the story of a fairy tale to be catchy and memorable. We will verify these psychological hypotheses – appeared in the literature – using NLP tools, to drive a quantitative analysis of these qualitative theories. For example, the idea that urban legends derive much of their credibility from details concerning the location where the situation took place, is presented in Brunvand (1981). Anecdotically, the television series “1000 Ways to Die” – that recreates unusual supposed deaths and debunked urban legends in a way similar to the Darwin Awards11The Darwin Awards are an ironical honor, granted to individuals who have contributed to human evolution by “self-selecting themselves out of the gene pool” via incredibly foolish actions; Darwin Awards explicitly try to disallow urban legends from the awards. See darwinawards.com.– introducing each story with the location and date of each supposed incident, to render it more credible.In the tension between credible and incredible, details should be neither too specific, like in the news, nor too few, as in fairy tales: effective urban legends should be credible but not verifiable. Similarly, emotions should be enough to make it sticky/catchy but not too much to render it not-credible. Finally urban legends should be easy to read, similar to fairy tales, to render them more memorable. As an example consider the following excerpt, taken from the “Kidney Theft” urban legend, as reported by snopes.com:Dear Friends:I wish to warn you about a new crime ring that is targeting business travelers. This ring is well organized […] and is currently in most major cities and recently very active in New Orleans. The crime begins when a business traveler goes to a lounge for a drink […] A person in the bar walks up as they sit alone and offers to buy them a drink. The last thing the traveler remembers until they wake up in a hotel room bath tub, their body submerged to their neck in ice, is sipping that drink. There is a note taped to the wall instructing them not to move and to call 911. […] The business traveler is instructed by the 911 operator to very slowly and carefully reach behind them and feel if there is a tube protruding from their lower back. The business traveler finds the tube and answers, “Yes.” The 911 operator tells them to remain still, having already sent paramedics to help. The operator knows that both of the business traveler’s kidneys have been harvested. This is not a scam, it is real. It is documented and confirmable. If you travel, please be careful.RegardJerry Mayfield.There is no very strong emotional wording in this example, it is the situation itself that is scary; on the contrary the email contains locations, the signature of a presumed Jerry Mayfield, and – noticeably – credibility is also explicitly addressed in the text with the adjectives “real”, “documented” and “confirmable”.In the following sections we first review relevant work that addresses the problem of deceptive language and behavior both in online and offline scenarios, followed by an overview of work that addresses the virality of online content. Then we describe the data collected for our experiments and the features extracted to model the aforementioned prototypical characteristics of urban legends. We use these features in both descriptive statistics and generalization tasks and we report the best performing features. Finally we discuss future research on further prototypical characteristics of urban legends.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have presented a study on urban legends, a genre of modern folklore consisting of stories about some rare and exceptional events plausible enough to be believed. We argued that urban legends represent a form of “sticky” deceptive text, marked by a tension between the credible and incredible. To be credible they should resemble a news article while being incredible like a fairy tale. In particular we focused on the idea that ULs should mimic the details of news (who, where, when) to be credible, while being emotional and readable like a fairy tale to be catchy and memorable. Using NLP tools we presented a quantitative analysis of these simple yet effective features and provided some machine learning experiments showing that it is possible to recognize an urban legend using just these prototypical characteristics. In the future we want to explore other prototypical aspects of urban legends like, for example, linguistic style (Louis & Nenkova, 2013; Pennebaker & Francis, 2001). With regard to sentiment, besides the simple word polarities we used, we will explore the emotions expressed in UL, FT and GN, using an approach similar to the one described in Strapparava and Mihalcea (2008). Exploiting knowledge-based and corpus-based methods, that approach deals with automatic recognition of affect, annotating texts with six basic emotions. We believe that fine-grained emotion annotation of urban legends could shed more light in the understanding the mechanisms behind persuasive language.