@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On modeling context-aware social collaboration processes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a modeling approach and a visual modeling notation for social collaboration processes.We consider collaboration processes as the evolution of a network of documents and people.The visual modeling notation is a fusion of statecharts and graph query languages.The approach is supported by a formal definition to enable automatic reasoning and verification.We present sensitive use cases to demonstrate expressiveness and usefulness of our approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Process modeling,Social context,Collaboration,Visual language,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Modeling collaboration processes is a challenging task. Existing modeling approaches are not capable of expressing the unpredictable, non-routine nature of human collaboration, which is influenced by the social context of involved collaborators. We propose a modeling approach which considers collaboration processes as the evolution of a network of collaborative documents along with a social network of collaborators. Our modeling approach, accompanied by a graphical notation and formalization, allows to capture the influence of complex social structures formed by collaborators, and therefore facilitates such activities as the discovery of socially coherent teams, social hubs, or unbiased experts. We demonstrate the applicability and expressiveness of our approach and notation, and discuss their strengths and weaknesses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Business process modeling (BPM) allows companies to describe and document their enterprise processes. If captured accurately, such knowledge allows to analyze, improve, and execute those processes with higher efficiency. Although a variety of techniques and tools have been introduced for BPM, modeling of highly dynamic non-routine processes, such as human collaboration, is still a subject of discussion in research and very few approaches have been proposed so far [1].While collaboration in general means working together to achieve a goal [2,3], with the proliferation of collaboration software, such as groupware or wikis, the manner of human collaboration has taken the form of incremental contributions to a network of shared documents, e.g., source code files, wiki pages and so on. Relations between documents, actors, and other artifacts may influence the collaboration process. For example, some tasks should be done by actors chosen based on social relations, actions on some documents should not be performed before related documents reach certain conditions, or a change in a related document might force to re-do an activity. Moreover, social structures formed by collaborators affect produced network of artifacts. Indeed, Conway's law suggests that “organizations which design systems are constrained to produce designs which are copies of the communication structures of these organizations” [4]. For example, socially coherent teams tend to produce more seamless solutions. Therefore, a proper modeling of collaboration processes must consider both semantic structures in networks of artifacts and structural formations in social networks formed by collaborators. Although artifact-based process models have already been researched [5–7], existing modeling approaches do not emphasize the relations between artifacts and actors, and are not capable of capturing complex social structures formed by collaborators.We thus propose a novel modeling approach and a graphical notation for collaboration processes. The key idea is to treat each document's evolution as an individual process that is explicitly influenced by the states of related documents and patterns in the surrounding social network. We propose to formalize the relations in line with the data from collaboration software, e.g., two developers can be considered related if they committed code to the same project folder in a source code repository. The amount of such data will grow with social computing pervading the enterprise IT,11http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1470115thus allowing process modelers to create richer models of people-intensive processes that support information-centric, bottom-up and context-aware and social modeling techniques for collaborative tasks.The main research contributions of this paper are (i) a novel approach for modeling context-aware social collaboration business processes, (ii) an expressive formalism that allows to define complex dependencies as network of artifacts and people, and (iii) a visual graphical modeling notation. The visual notation is a result of linking two threads of research in a novel way by combining graph query languages and control flow languages. Moreover, with the introduction of the notion of groups, this combination is further extended with fundamental concepts of social network analysis by allowing to express such advanced patterns as clique, k-plex, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality, structural equivalence and so on [8]. This paper substantially extends our previous work [9] by (i) introducing the notion of groups as first class citizen into the modeling approach, (ii) giving a more detailed discussion of the motivation and related work, and (iii) discussing additional use cases to illustrate the benefits of the concept of groups.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the motivation behind the modeling approach and presents a motivating example. In Section 3 we show the lack of expressiveness in existing modeling approaches with regard to the scenario at hand. Section 4 describes the proposed modeling paradigm and the corresponding graphical notation. Section 5 demonstrates the usability of the approach through realistic use cases. Our modeling approach is critically discussed in Section 6. The paper is concluded in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
