@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Nepotistic relationships in Twitter and their impact on rank prestige algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Micro-blogging services can develop into valuable sources of up-to-date information provided the spam problem is overcome.Finding “authoritative” sources/users is the main topic of this paper.Five rank prestige methods are compared: PageRank, HITS, NodeRanking, TunkRank and TwitterRank.Reciprocal links are most of the time “counterfeit currency” to increase followers count.The lower the ranking spammers reach (while relevant users remain atop), the better a method is.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social networks,Twitter,Spamming,Graph centrality,Prestige,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Micro-blogging services such as Twitter allow anyone to publish anything, anytime. Needless to say, many of the available contents can be diminished as babble or spam. However, given the number and diversity of users, some valuable pieces of information should arise from the stream of tweets. Thus, such services can develop into valuable sources of up-to-date information (the so-called real-time web) provided a way to find the most relevant/trustworthy/authoritative users is available. Hence, this makes a highly pertinent question for which graph centrality methods can provide an answer. In this paper the author offers a comprehensive survey of feasible algorithms for ranking users in social networks, he examines their vulnerabilities to linking malpractice in such networks, and suggests an objective criterion against which to compare such algorithms. Additionally, he suggests a first step towards “desensitizing” prestige algorithms against cheating by spammers and other abusive users.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Twitter is a service which allows users to publish short text messages (tweets) which are shown to other users following the author of the message. In case the author is not protecting his tweets, they appear in the so-called public timeline and they are served as search results in response to user submitted queries. Thus, Twitter can be a source of valuable real-time information and, in fact, several major search engines were including tweets as search results at the moment of this writing.Given that tweets are published by individual users, ranking them to find the most relevant information is a crucial matter. Indeed, at the moment of this writing, Google seemed to be applying the PageRank method to rank Twitter users to that end (Talbot, 2010). Nevertheless, the behavior of different graph centrality methods and their vulnerabilities when confronted with the Twitter user graph, in general, and Twitter spammers in particular, are still little-known.Thus, this paper aims to shed some light on this particular issue besides providing some recommendations for future research in the area. As it will be later discussed, user ranking in social networks cannot be an end in itself, but a tool to be used for other tasks. Hence, this author is not considering any a priori “good” ranking and, instead, he suggests measuring the performance of the different methods on the basis of two desirable features: on one hand presumed relevant users should rank atop – although the actual ordering among them is irrelevant; and, on the other hand, spammers should achieve lower rankings.The paper is organized as follows. First of all, a comprehensive literature review is provided. It deals with several rank prestige algorithms (some well-known and others lesser-known) which are applicable to social networks; their known vulnerabilities; and some partially related work and proprietary tools outside the scope of this study. In addition to that, Twitter spam is discussed with a focus on link spam (known as follow spam in Twitter). Then, the different strategies to fight spam in social websites are overviewed. Finally, the research questions are stated and the feasibility of “desensitizing” prestige ranking algorithms against follow spam is analyzed. After that, the experimental framework in which this study was conducted is described: the dataset crawled from Twitter; the elaboration of the subset of relevant and abusive users; and the straightforward nature of the evaluation. Afterwards, results obtained with each of the different ranking methods are discussed along with the implications of the study. Finally, an in-depth analysis of the collected dataset is provided in an appendix: it provides details on the nature of the social network, in addition to some demographical analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
