@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Query strategies during information searching: Effects of prior domain knowledge and complexity of the information problems to be solved

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three complexity levels of information problems are defined related to psychology domain.40 students in psychology and in other domains performed information problems with an online encyclopedia.Students in psychology performed better than the others, especially for complex problems.Students in psychologies used more relevant strategies than the others.These expertise-related differences are stronger for the complex problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information searching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study addresses the impact of domain expertise (i.e. of prior knowledge of the domain) on the performance and query strategies used by users while searching for information. Twenty-four experts (psychology students) and 24 non-experts (students from other disciplines) had to search for psychology information from the Universalis website in order to perform six information problems of varying complexity: two simple problems (the keywords required to complete the task were provided in the problem statement), two more difficult problems (the keywords required had to be inferred) and two impossible problems (no answer was provided by the website). The results showed that participants with prior knowledge in the domain (experts in psychology) performed better (i.e. reached more correct answers after shorter search times) than non-experts. This difference was stronger as the complexity of the problems increased. This study also showed that experts and non-experts displayed different query strategies. Experts reformulated the impossible problems more often than non-experts, because they produced new queries with psychology-related keywords. The participants rarely used thematic category tool and when they did so this did not enhance their performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Searching for information in e-documents is now commonly used for professional, educational, and personal purposes. Among these e-documents, the Internet both provides a large environment within which users can search for information and also offers many different tools for accessing information (such as search engines). Search engines can be general (e.g. Google, Yahoo), in which case they can be used to search a huge number of documents throughout the Internet, or they can be part of a website (such as the search engine of Amazon.com). In both cases, the use of search engines and the way of carrying out a search for information depend on various characteristics, such as those of the individual (e.g., experience in using the Internet, level of domain knowledge), those of the interface (e.g., layout organization) and/or those of the task (e.g., complexity of the information problem to be performed, nature of the problem).Among the factors underlying the information searching task, many studies have reported that prior domain knowledge is a major predictor of performance in information searching (e.g. Hsieh-Yee, 1993; Hölscher & Strube, 2000; Ihadjadene & Martins, 2004; Marchionini, 1995; Wildemuth, 2004; Willoughby, Anderson, Wood, Mueller, & Ross, 2009). These studies showed that experts formulated appropriate queries, their searches were successful and they were faster than non-experts (e.g. Dillon & Song, 1997; Downing, Moore, & Brown, 2005; Hölscher & Strube, 2000). On the other hand, some studies found that users tended to bypass complex information channels and advanced techniques in favor of ‘simpler’ web search and search engines (George et al., 2006; Makani & WooShue, 2006; Vezzosi, 2009). The level of expertise is particularly important in the educational field, since students are increasingly searching for information on the Internet to do their homework and/or to deepen their knowledge of an academic topic. Students with greater knowledge will use various and more efficient strategies than students with little or no existing knowledge. In addition, various studies have provided evidence that information searching performance depends on the level of complexity of the problem to be performed (Barsky & Bar-Ilan, 2012; Chevalier, Dommes, & Marquié, 2011; Dommes, Chevalier, & Lia, 2011; Dommes, Chevalier, & Rossetti, 2010).Consequently, what will happen if we manipulate the level of prior domain knowledge and the complexity of the information problems to be solved? Would a high level of domain knowledge allow the user to overcome difficulties in searching for information by reformulating unsuccessful queries? Would it increase accuracy? In order to provide some answers, this experimental study set out to investigate the impact of prior domain knowledge (i.e., the level of expertise of the participants) and the complexity of the information problems to be performed on the efficiency and the strategies used by the participants. We describe these two points in greater detail in Section 1.1. The objectives and hypotheses underlying the study are presented in Section 1.2. The method and results are described in Sections 2 and 3. The article ends with the discussion of the results we obtained (Section 4) and we present limitations as well as further insights (Section 5).Information searching activity can be defined as a complex cognitive activity involving problem solving, decision-making, and text comprehension processes. Several models have been developed (e.g., CoLiDeS developed by Kitajima, Blackmon, & Polson, 2000; Marchionini’s model, 1995; for an overview see Dinet, Chevalier, & Tricot, 2012). More precisely, with regard to information searching using search engines, Sharit, Hernandez, Czaja, and Pirolli (2008) developed a cognitive model, which involves three main stages:•Stage 1, planning and formulating the query. An individual has to produce keywords relevant to the objective of the search.Stage 2, evaluating and selecting the information provided by the search engine. An individual has to check and evaluate the relevance of the information provided by the search engine with regard to the keywords used. If the results do not match the objectives, the individual has to reformulate her/his query (and goes back to stage 1).Stage 3, processing information. If the results provided by the search engine seem to be relevant to the proposed objectives, the individual selects and then processes them at a deeper level.As an individual progresses in her/his search, s/he has to keep the search goal in his/her working memory, and compare it to the information provided by the search in order to obtain the information that is expected to solve the current information problem.In this study we focused on Stages 1 and 2, i.e. on the formulation and reformulation of queries. Stage 2 may be iterative if the individual does not find the expected information, and so it may be repeated throughout search activity.Various factors are involved in information searching, especially prior domain knowledge. Indeed, many authors have found that prior domain knowledge supported better search performance (e.g. more correct answers), higher search efficiency (e.g. fast search and more oriented by opening fewer pages) and more search flexibility (e.g. formulated more queries) (e.g., Ihadjadene, Chaudiron, & Martins, 2003; Ihadjadene & Martins, 2004; Sihvonen & Vakkari, 2004; Wildemuth, 2004). Ihadjadene and Martins (2004) and Ihadjadene et al. (2003) observed that only experts used thematic categories (provided by a search engine, such as sport, news) but they did so in an inefficient way that did not enhance their performance. Participants found that the category labels were not meaningful, they were also confused by the heading “categories”, and did not understand the difference between “keywords” and “categories”. Although prior domain knowledge is a relevant factor predicting search performance with search engines, Hölscher and Strube (2000) observed that only people with dual expertise (domain and web experts) modified their search strategies to develop a better one (by changing search engine) when faced with an impasse.In addition to prior domain knowledge, the complexity of the information problems to be solved also impacts searching performance and the strategies used. The definitions and viewpoints of task complexity are numerous (for a review see Liu & Li, 2012). In psychology, Campbell (1988) defined two dimensions of task complexity: (a) objective task complexity is characteristic of a task and independent of the individual and (b) subjective task complexity is a psychological experience or perception of a task by the individual who performs the task. Campbell (1988) also identified four complexity attributes: (1) multiple paths to achieve targeted outcomes; (2) multiple acceptable solutions may be provided to solve the task; (3) conflicting interdependence among paths and targeted outcomes; and (4) uncertain links among paths and targeted outcomes to solve the task.Hence, in the research field of information searching, problem complexity can be measured in different ways. For instance, Barsky and Bar-Ilan (2012) as well as Chevalier, Maury, and Fouquereau (2014) provided information problems for which keywords mentioned in the statement matched with the words displayed on the website vs. information problems for which words displayed did not match with keywords of the statement. Participants had to infer the correct link related to the information problem. For Chin, Fu, and Kannampallil (2009), complexity is defined with regard to the well-defined problem vs. open-ended problem. In well-defined problem, participants have to find a precise fact whereas in open-ended problem they have to collect various information (several websites may be visited and useful to solve the information problem). For Sihvonen and Vakkari (2004), a simple task presents specific and familiar concepts in the domain, whereas a difficult task includes terminology that requires greater domain knowledge. Bell and Ruthven (2004) developed a three-level model of complexity. A first level of complexity refers to tasks for which the information required the ways to find that information and assess its relevance are clear. At a second level, the goal may be clear but the decisions are required depending on each specific situation problem. At a third level, both goal and procedure to obtain relevant information are unclear (close to Chin et al.’s viewpoint). Search task complexity can also be defined by the level of cognitive complexity (i.e. level of elaboration, amount of cognitive processing, cognitive effort) required by the information search task (Arguello, 2014). In line with these different definitions, and particularly to the second level explained by Bell and Ruthven (2004), the present study examined objective task complexity rather than subjective task complexity, and took into account the amount of cognitive requirements imposed on participants while solving information problems. Problem complexity was operationalized by the presence, or absence, of instruction terms that were directly useful to reach the target information. The lack of the useful terms imposed inferences to produce new related terms that were necessary to find information. Among all the dimensions of complexity listed by Liu and Li (2012), the type of task complexity dealt with in this study tackled the “unreliability dimension”. It refers to inaccurate and misleading information to perform the task. More precisely, for our present study, the manipulation of complexity was similar to previous work by Dommes et al. (2011) and Chevalier et al. (2011). These authors instructed participants to carry out search problems after varying the keywords to be used to find the right answer. For the simple problems, the keywords required to obtain the right answer were included in the statement of the problem. In contrast, for the more difficult problems, the relevant keywords to obtain the correct answer were not included in the statement of the problem. The participants had to infer new related keywords to complete the task correctly (e.g., the word “vegetable” provided in the information problem statement did not lead to the correct answer, the participant had to infer “plant”). An additional category of problem was designed: impossible ones. These impossible problems contained elements that led the participants to believe that an answer could be found, when in fact there was none. Their results showed that participants performed better for the simple problems than for the difficult and impossible ones, i.e. they reached more correct answers and completed them within a shorter time. Participants also experienced more difficulty in reformulating unsuccessful queries while performing the difficult and impossible problems. Indeed, Dommes et al. (2011) found that for simple problems, participants mostly formulated a unique query that generally contained three keywords to obtain the targeted answer. Whereas in Jansen, Spink and Koshman’ study (2007), participants formulated 2 or 3 queries and no more than 3 words per query. But when the problem complexity increased, Dommes et al. (2011) observed that participants formulated more queries (means of 4 or 5 queries) and used more keywords (means of 6 or 7 keywords per query). These results were in line with those obtained by Aula, Khan, and Guan (2010) as well as Barsky and Bar-Ilan (2012).In Dommes et al.’s (2011) and Chevalier et al.’s (2011) studies, the authors focused on problems within a general domain knowledge (such as the name of an author and the name of a plant). They did not manipulate prior domain knowledge of a specific area. On the basis of these prior studies, we hypothesized that the participants’ prior domain knowledge (i.e. their level of expertise) would affect their information searching performance and the strategies used with regard to the complexity of the information problem to be solved. To do this, a new experimental study was carried out.This study investigates the interactions between level of prior domain knowledge (level of expertise) and level of complexity of the information problems to be solved both on performance and query strategies developed. We hypothesized that prior domain knowledge would play a substantial role, especially when participants had to perform difficult or impossible problems. In these problems, participants had to infer new keywords to find the relevant web pages, whereas in the simple problems the relevant keywords required to find the correct answers were provided in the problem statement. These difficult problems were expected to increase the difficulties experienced by the participants. Consequently, in order to get out of the impasse, the participants should produce new keywords or use the thematic category tool if they cannot infer new keywords (i.e. open up links provided by the website to find the targeted information). In solving complex problems (difficult and impossible problems), the participants with greater prior domain knowledge (experts in psychology) should be faster and more accurate than those with none (or very little) domain knowledge (non-experts in psychology). Furthermore, in line with the Hölscher and Strube (2000), experts were expected to produce more new keywords to solve complex problems; these keywords should be related to the domain of the problems to be performed. Finally, we expected that experts should have to reread the problems less often than the non-experts, meaning that the cognitive load in the working memory associated with the information search activity would be lower for the experts than for the non-experts. For the non-experts, this activity draws on too many cognitive resources, resulting in the loss of the search goal from the working memory, and the need to reread the problems more often, especially for the difficult and impossible ones.In our study, the participants could use two tools for information searching: a search engine and thematic category tool (based on semantic categories). Thus, on the basis of the studies of Ihadjadene and Martins (2004) and Ihadjadene et al. (2003), we hypothesized that all participants would experience difficulties in using categories in order to access information. We therefore expected that the participants would mainly use the search engine and reformulate queries in spite of using thematic category tool provided by the website.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
