@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Internet factors influencing generations Y and Z in Australia and Portugal: A practical study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Examine the influence factors of the Internet on Gens Y and Z.Empirical evidence was collected via an online survey in Australia and Portugal.This study composed new positive and negative factors of the Internet usage.Set of recommendations are raised to reduce the negativities of the Internet usage.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet influence factors,Generations Y and Z,Australia,Portugal,Positive and negative,Practical study,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This practical study aims to enrich the current literature by providing new practical evidence of the positive and negative influence factors of the Internet on generations (Gens) Y and Z in Australia and Portugal. The Internet has become a powerful force among these Gens in relation to communication, cooperation, collaboration and connection, but numerous problems from cognitive, social and physical developments' perspective are developed throughout the Internet usage. A quantitative approach was used to collect new, practical evidence from 180 Australian and 85 Portuguese respondents, with a total of 265 respondents completing an online survey. This study identifies new positive factors to the Internet usage, as problem-solving skills, proactive study, information gathering, and awareness globally and locally; communication and collaboration with their peers and family were improved and enhanced. Alternatively, this study identifies new negative factors as physical contact and physical activities were prevented, thinking, concentrating and memory skills were reduced, depressed and isolated, laziness having increased, nevertheless; the Internet encourages Gens Y and Z to play physical and virtual games (e.g. Wii). Finally, this study concluded that the Internet is becoming an essential part of the everyday routines and practices of Gens Y and Z.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Internet is a network of thousands of computer systems utilizing a common set of technical protocols to create a worldwide communication medium. Currently, the Internet has a population of “over 7,259,902,243 million” (Miniwatts Marketing Group, 2011a). In Australia the Internet has a population of “over 12.8 million” (Miniwatts Marketing Group, 2011b), while in Portugal it is “6.7 million” (Miniwatts Marketing Group, 2011c). The Internet is used by different generations, by Baby Boomers (Age: 53–61), Generation Jones (Age: 43–52), Generation X (Age: 30–42), and Generation Y (Age: 18–29), while Generation Z (Age: 17–3) (Genworth, Financial, n.d.).These massive groups of users access the Internet through their computers and terminals, via educational institutions, commercial Internet access providers and other businesses. The Internet provides numerous benefits to consumers in relation to access to information, entertainment, research, business and marketing. The Internet allows “consumers to educate themselves about the information or products at their own pace, and consumers can instantly access only that information which is pertinent to their needs” (Issa, 2008, p. 11,1999). The Internet “provide(s) a low-cost ‘gateway’ to the global market for companies intending to engage or engaging in exporting, especially for small-to-medium enterprises located in peripheral economies and those operating in global niche markets” (Dou, Nielsen, & Tan, 2002, p. 105). The Internet was invented by Tim Berners Lee, a scientist at CERN,11CERN: is the European Organization for Nuclear Research.in 1989, and the first implementation appeared in 1990 (CERN, 2002). He was examining various ways to make large amounts of data accessible without using complicated software. Finally, he found “the solution in plain text files, which we now know as HTML” (CERN, 2002; Gray, 1995; Hoekstra, 2000). Development of the Internet has provided the basis for implementation of the World Wide Web (WWW). “The World Wide Web contains a large and exponentially increasing number of websites, ranging from single personal homepages, to large corporate sites containing thousands of individual pages” (Cunliffe, 2000, p. 222).The growth of the Internet continued with the development of other opened and closed browsers such as Microsoft Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Safari, Opera, Google Chrome and Netscape Navigator. Many businesses and individuals nationally and universally are using these browsers to access their needs. In general the Internet has become the major component in any business, as it links millions of computers and tens of millions of users around the world (Teo, Lim, & Lai, 1997; Wellman, Haase, Witte, & Hampton, 2001). In addition, Internet usage brings enormous challenges to businesses and individuals, as many observers allege that the Internet is changing society (DiMaggio, Hargittai, Neuman, & Robinson, 2001). From the business perspective, new opportunities will be created for businesses to become more creative and innovative, increase their profit and reduce the cost of their marketing activities, as the majority of these activities are performed via the Internet. Beside the above, if the Internet facility is adopted in any business, a unique reputation will be developed, and they will become more successful and exclusive in the market segment locally and globally (Van Dijk, 2006).On the other hand, from the individual perspective, using the Internet will give them the opportunity to gain cutting edge knowledge, and more collaboration and communication with their family, colleagues, and friends. On the other hand, Internet usage will bring challenges, obstacles, and growing awareness of the potential impacts of the Internet, on cognitive development, social development and physical development (Sigelman & Rider, 2012; Verdick.org, 2011). In respect to cognitive development, individuals will face several problems, such as inability to concentrate in writing and reading, inability to remember (Bergquist et al., 2009; Huang & Lee, 2010; Levy, 2003; Nahl, 2005), and shallow minds, which lead to a lack of deep thinking, distraction and scattered attention, which makes it hard for them to complete their tasks in school or home on time (Carr, 2008). Internet usage also causes some problems with social development, such as health problems, stress, depression and isolation (Amstadter, Broman-Fulks, Zinzow, Ruggiero, & Cercone, 2009; Casale & Fioravanti, 2011; Selfhout, Branje, Delsing, Bogt, & Meeus, 2009). These influence factors will generate enormous challenges for the individuals, their families, and the community. Finally, from the individual perspective, using the Internet will harm their physical development, which means the absence and avoidance of face-to-face meetings between family, friends and colleagues, and a lack of physical exercise (Bargy & Mckenna, 2004; Kilvon, Togher, Power, & Turkstra, 2010; Vitak, Crouse, & LaRose, 2011).This study is intended to assess the extent to which Internet usage is influencing generations Y and Z in their social and academic life, especially in Australia and Portugal, and targeted Gens Y and Z to observe their behavior and attitudes toward the Internet. This study will answer the following question: What are the positive and negative influence factors of Internet usage by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal? To answer this question an online survey was distributed in Australia and Portugal; there were 180 responses in Australia and 85 in Portugal. This study will also make a valuable methodological, theoretical and practical contribution to the current literature review to the Internet usage by generations Y and Z globally and locally as new factors will be added to the current literature review to the negative and positive influence factors of the Internet. The study's new findings will assist several stakeholders including researchers, academics and personnel in the education sector, as well as families and government, especially the Australian and Portuguese. The new findings confirmed the literature review and identified several new factors. The negative factors that emerged should be addressed immediately by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal.This study is organized as follows: the influence factors of Internet usage, negative and positive influence factors of the Internet, research question, methodology, participants, results—independent T-test, results—factor analysis, comparison results: factor analysis and T-independent test, discussion, implications for theory, implications for practice, limitation and conclusion.The Internet has become the main channel for businesses and individuals (old and young) to connect, interact and communicate without geographical restrictions, to increase their social involvement nationally and universally. This tool has made the world become smaller and smaller through enabling people to access information, research, education, entertainment and so on. In addition, using this tool will create new relationships, social identities and types of commitment between disconnected people. Business report presentation by Internet facility is more effective, proficient and efficient compared with the traditional ways, and will reduce costs and increase profit for the business as most of its operations are completed via the Internet, such as correspondence and emailing attachments and documents (Amichai-Hamburger & Hayat, 2011; Bryne & Lee, 2011; Harris, 2010; Mitchell, Lebow, Uribe, Grathouse, & Shoger, 2011). Alongside the above, use of the Internet by businesses and individuals will reduce the emission of CO2, since the logistics behind mailing, travel, and other influence factors will be reduced as the Internet takes on these roles. Furthermore, people are becoming more aware in respect to issues of sustainability in the current century, and the Internet assists businesses and individuals to recognize their responsibilities toward the environment and natural resources (Gomis, Parra, Hoffmann, & Mcnulty, 2011; Orlitzky, Siegel, & Waldman, 2011; Smith & Sharicz, 2011).However, Internet usage by businesses and individuals is generating vast challenges and threats to their behavior, health and social development (Mueller et al., 2010; Shen & Chiou, 2010; Taragola & Lierde, 2010). Internet usage is unlimited to professional and older individuals; however, the younger generations are becoming more addicted to this tool, as they cannot live without it, in contrast to the traditional tools such as books, TV or radio. In this study, the researchers will examine how the Internet affects generations Y and Z, from two perspectives: negative and positive influence factors (see Fig. 1). Based on the previous studies, a general model for the influence factors of the Internet on Generations Y and Z (see Fig. 1) is developed in order to determine the positive and negative factors which Gens Y and Zs’ attitudes to Internet usage, and associated behaviors. This model of influence factors provides a rich map for researchers, academics and families, and illustrates the positive and negative influences of Internet use by Gens Y and Z.Generations Y and Z (also known as the Millennials) are the dominant users of the Internet, and their use is mainly to meet their work and study needs (e.g. answering e-mails) or to socialize (e.g. Facebook). Generations Y and Z, more than any other generations, are considered the leaders in the usage of the technology, as they spend an enormous time surfing and browsing the Internet to catch up with their friends, colleagues and family and complete their academic work. A study by Perez (2008) indicated that the majority of generations Y and Z prefer to absorb information in small chunks rather than long text from various devices (i.e. mobile phones, iPads, and laptops) when obtaining their latest desires from the Internet. Furthermore, generations Y and Z are working as well as studying; therefore, businesses should take into consideration the needs of these generations by introducing new tools such as Enterprise 2.0 to match their requests in the workplace. Another study by McCrindle (n.d) indicated that generations Y and Z are aware of global and local events, as they have lived through the age of the Internet, cable television, globalization, September 11, and environmentalism. Finally, these generations are obsessed with technology and new devices, in wanting to obtain the cutting-edge knowledge and skills around them (Freestone & Mitchell, 2004; Genworth, Financial, n.d.; McCrindle, n.d; Perez, 2008).Working with the Internet can offer challenges, opportunities and threats to generations Y and Z users, their social co-workers and their age group. These challenges, opportunities and threats can increase their knowledge and skills in their study and work, and make them more independent learners. On the other hand, it threatens to damage their health and to cause stress and depression. In Section 3, the researchers will explain these challenges, opportunities and threats of Internet usage with special reference to the literature review, and then examine whether generations Y and Z's perspectives match the reality.These challenges, opportunities and threats factors are divided into two categories, positive and negative. The former category includes is mainly focus on cutting edge knowledge, collaboration, involvement and communication. The latter category deals with cognitive, social and physical developments. This category will discuss distraction, lack of deep thinking, lack of concentration, shallow minds, scattered attention and other factors (Bergquist et al., 2009; Carr, 2008; Huang & Lee, 2010; Levy, 2003; Snyder 2010).Internet usage by generations Y and Z will assist them to perform searching, researching, and completing their tasks rapidly in a professional way (see Fig. 2). Via the Internet, generations Y and Z can communicate, collaborate, become involved, and gain new knowledge to become more aware of global and local issues. From the literature review it was noted that using the Internet rapidly will replace face-to-face interaction not only nationally but universally. Internet users interact and cooperate to meet people, develop relationships and maintain friendships (Sun, 2011). Tyler (2002, p. 196) indicated that using the Internet in our lives these days will enable users to work easily from home, and “form and sustain friendships and even romantic attachments from their home, to bank from their home, to vote and engage in political and social-issue-based discussion with others in their communities from home, and to pursue other social connections from their home”.Additionally, it was noted from the literature review (Baams, Jonas, Utz, Bos, & Vuurst, 2011; Mitchell et al., 2011; Savolainen, 1999; Subrahmanyam & Smahel, 2011) that the Internet facility will allow generations Y and Z to communicate and collaborate with their peers frequently, and, most importantly, will allow them to foster independent learning and become more self-regulating learners with the ability to solve their problems easily. In addition, the Internet will assist them to perform well in their studies and develop their personal, communication, reading and writing skills (Clark & Everhart, 2007; Pujazon-Zazik & Park, 2010). Finally, the popularity of the Internet has increased rapidly as a result of the positive factors that influence the way in which people collaborate, communicate, and exchange cutting edge information. Based on the earlier study, a positive influence factors model is developed to study and examine the current factors influencing Gens Y and Z. This model is intended to clearly illustrate the ways in which the Internet can benefit individual users as well as businesses. This study aims to discover any further positive factors associated with Internet use by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal.Negative influence factors can be easily identified in respect to the symptoms which are considered to be due to computer addiction. These symptoms will lead to depression, stress, isolation, and the neglect and weakening of social ties, since people have less reason to leave their homes and actually interact face to face (Tyler, 2002). A survey carried out by Kraut, Patterson, and Lundmark (1998) found that use of the Internet appeared to increase depression, loneliness, and stress among a sample of 169 adults. The study is called “Internet Paradox” means using the Internet facility would increase communication, on the other hand, would increase negative social and psychological effects. Even though the results actually reversed in a follow-up study published by Kraut et al. (2002) the initial study encouraged a significant amount of research designed to assess potential negative influence factors of the Internet use. Young and Rogers’ (1998) study was generating interest in the relationship between Internet addiction and depression.Therefore, this study aims to identify the new potential negative influence factors of Internet use from three perspectives: cognitive, social and physical developments (see Fig. 3). These symptoms are massive challenges to generations Y and Z as they are serious and can lead to severe situation i.e. divorce or suicide (Domokos, Cretu, Nagy, & Mihai, 2011). Furthermore, recent studies (Sigelman & Rider, 2012; Subrahmanyam & Smahel, 2011) suggested that Internet usage will influence users’ attitudes and behaviors, since generations Y and Z are spending more time in online activities on the Internet and less in sleep and physical activities. Rarer in sleep with reduced memory, increased heart heath, increased appetite and leading to weight gain.It was noted that, in the cognitive development category, Internet usage by generations Y and Z will reduce the individual's concentration in writing and reading and his/her communication skills, and this will affect not only their study but also their work. Several studies (Kearns & Frey, 2010; Lee, 2009; Mokhtari, Reichard, & Gardner, 2009; Shaw & Gant, 2002; Sun, 2011) indicate and echo that Internet usage will affect generations Y and Z's communication skills such as grammar, spelling, writing style and proofreading. This problem affects not only the education sector, however, but also the workplace, the community, the country and the world. The Internet should be used carefully since some materials on the Internet are incorrect or mistakenly presented (Carr, 2008; Harris, 2010; Mitchell et al., 2011).Furthermore, in this category, using the Internet will cause shallow minds in generations Y and Z; this means a reduction in their deep thinking, a tendency to be easily distracted, and scattered attention. Carr (2008) indicated that the Internet is having a detrimental influence on generations Y and Z's capacity to concentrate on reading or writing, as they can be easily distracted on the Internet, and this will result in the loss of their capacity for deep thinking, especially when reading books or articles or viewing items on the Internet. Schumacher (2010) indicated that the “bells, whistles and links that make up the web are ‘remapping the neural circuitry’ in our brains, making it difficult to do the ‘deep reading’ that once fuelled the exercise of serious thought”. By the same token, Naughton (2008) indicated that reading a book or article in the traditional way will allow users to focus and concentrate more; however, on the Internet, the reader will scroll through long stretches of prose, and their concentration often starts to drift after two or three pages. Another study by Hannula and Lonnqvist (2010) indicated that this problem is not limited to the education sector but also applies in the workplace, since employees spend a lot of time browsing sites which are unrelated to their job, and this will reduce their job productivity.The second influence factor of the negative Internet use is social development. Under this heading, Internet usage by generations Y and Z will initiate particular problems such as health problems, stress, boredom, and depression, but the most important factor is isolation. It was noted from the literature review that Internet usage assists generations Y and Z in communication, interaction, searching and researching; on the other hand, it can cause various problems and dilemmas including disease, isolation, and depression (Austin & Totaro, 2011; Ekizoglu & Ozcinar, 2011; Griffiths, Crisp, Christensen, Mackinnon, & Bennett, 2010; Hampton, Sessions, & Her, 2011; Hinton, Kurinczuk, & Ziebland, 2010; Jeong & Kim, 2011; Yao & Zhong, 2014). Several studies (Amstadter et al., 2009; Bargy & Mckenna, 2004; Casale & Fioravanti, 2011; Hausner, Hajak, & Spiebi, 2008; Selfhout et al., 2009) indicate that Internet usage by generations Y and Z will develop a huge gap in their relationships with their family, friends and community, since they are spending a great deal of time using online facilities, and this will lead to psychosocial problems such as loneliness and depression. These problems will leave generations Y and Z with a preference for online interaction, since they perceive that online communication might be the ‘Prozac of social communication’: less risky and easier than face-to-face communication because of its greater anonymity (Amstadter et al., 2009; Kim, LaRose, & Peng, 2009). Furthermore, these problems can influence the behavior and attitudes of Internet users which are similar to alcohol abuse and smoking cessation deceases (Lenahan, 2011). Finally in this category, health problems, the health issues caused by Internet interaction are very well known, and so is Internet addiction; as the majority of generations Y and Z spend more and more time searching, researching, playing games and interacting with their friends, continuing to act in this way will cause them to develop different manners and behavior toward others, and this can lead to suicide or sometimes to divorce.The third influence factor of the negative Internet use is physical development. Under this heading, generations Y and Z prefer to work online instead of working face-to-face. A study by Amichai-Hamburger and Hayat (2011) echoes and confirms that online Internet usage is associated with a decline in users’ face-to-face interaction with family and friends, and this will raise the alarm of depression and loneliness levels.The negative influence factors of Internet have a huge impact on both individuals and organizations. Internet is a source of information for most people locally and globally, however, people should use this tool in an efficient to improve the positive and reduce the negative as it creates the threat from cognitive, social and physical developments. A negative influence model is developed to examine the negative factors associated Internet use by Gens Y and Z. The current factors are serious and critical to Gens Y and Zs’ attitudes and behaviors, and this can lead to significant concerns now as well in the future. This study aims to discover any additional negative factors associated with Internet usage by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal.In summary, the positive and negative influence factor models provide a current inventory of published research into Internet usage by individual and businesses. Clearly, most of the current research is limited to studying several western countries only, and discusses the negative or positive influences of the Internet in terms of ethics, gender, physical and psychological effects, and health. With this gap in the literature in mind, this study aims to discuss the Internet factors which have negative and positive influences on Gens Y and Z from two different populations and continents in order to enrich the related literature and to raise the awareness among the Australian and Portuguese governments, higher education and families of the Internet factors negatively influencing Gens Y and Z. To address this gap, researchers will use an online survey in Australia and Portugal to determine Gens Y and Zs’ attitudes and behaviors regarding Internet use.This study will examine the relationship between Internet usage and Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal, and identify the relationship and correlation between the negative and positive influence factors on generations Y and Z in both countries. For this study the main research question is: What are the positive and negative influence factors of Internet usage by generations Y and Z in Australia and Portugal? This study will examine whether Internet usage will assist generations Y and Z to acquire more communication and interaction and enhance their behavior and attitudes; at the same time, it will examine the negative and detrimental influence factors of the Internet usage from three perspectives: those of cognitive, social and physical development.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
