@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Temporal information searching behaviour and strategies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Temporal information searching behaviour and strategies were investigated.Searching patterns were identified for past, recency and future search tasks.Implications for the development of temporal IR systems are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Temporal information retrieval,Information searching behaviour,Search strategies,User study,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Temporal aspects have been receiving a great deal of interest in Information Retrieval and related fields. Although previous studies have proposed, designed and implemented temporal-aware systems and solutions, understanding of people’s temporal information searching behaviour is still limited. This paper reports the findings of a user study that explored temporal information searching behaviour and strategies in a laboratory setting. Information needs were grouped into three temporal classes (Past, Recency, and Future) to systematically study their characteristics. The main findings of our experiment are as follows. (1) It is intuitive for people to augment topical keywords with temporal expressions such as history, recent, or future as a tactic of temporal search. (2) However, such queries produce mixed results and the success of query reformulations appears to depend on topics to a large extent. (3) Search engine interfaces should detect temporal information needs to trigger the display of temporal search options. (4) Finding a relevant Wikipedia page or similar summary page is a popular starting point of past information needs. (5) Current search engines do a good job for information needs related to recent events, but more work is needed for past and future tasks. (6) Participants found it most difficult to find future information. Searching for domain experts was a key tactic in Future search, and file types of relevant documents are different from other temporal classes. Overall, the comparison of search across temporal classes indicated that Future search was the most difficult and the least successful followed by the search for the Past and then for Recency information. This paper discusses the implications of these findings on the design of future temporal IR systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Predicting the future and remembering the past are very common cognitive processes of humans. Same as in real life, we should expect many search activities to be of a strong temporal character. Previous studies (Joho, Jatowt, & Roi, 2013; Nunes, Ribeiro, & David, 2008) have confirmed this fact and elucidated a relatively high number of search intents and queries that center on information associated to particular temporal scopes such as future or past. Regarding future-oriented search, users often need to know more about planned events, forecasted trends, possible scenarios, speculations, predictions and so on. This kind of information can effectively help them to be better prepared for events to come or tasks to be undertaken. Imagine a user who wants to purchase shares or futures of a particular company, and another user who plans a visit in Kyoto. Any predictions or speculations about the company’s future, its plans or forecasts and any information about forthcoming cultural events in Kyoto would be valuable in these scenarios. Similarly, the study of the past helps us to explain the present, to learn the background of the current course of actions or to form opinions on any trends and changes occurring over time. In general, we should be able to easily imagine a multitude of reasons on why someone would need to find future or past-related information.However the core interest of society centers on the present or, at least, on the near past. The Web, for example, abounds in rather up-to-date information that is mainly about “now” (Fetterly, Manasse, Najork, & Wiener, 2003; Ntoulas, Cho, & Olston, 2004). The information about more distant past or future tends to be buried in the wealth of data on the current topics and events. Intuitively, it may be difficult for an average user to extract content that is related to the future and to the past, especially, to distant future and past, for arbitrary queries. Such information is often scattered across many documents and expressed in a large number of different ways and is thus likely difficult to be extracted, merged, processed and understood by searchers. We would then expect the state-of-the-art search engines to offer some kind of support for those users who try to seek for time-related information. The academic community has already started developing methods for enabling the temporal search (Berberich, Bedathur, Alonso, & Weikum, 2010; Campos, Jorge, Dias, & Nunes, 2012; Jones & Diaz, 2007; Jatowt, Au Yeung, & Tanaka, 2013; Kanhabua, Blanco, & Matthews, 2011; Kanhabua & Nørvåg, 2010; Li & Croft, 2003; Metzler, Jones, Peng, & Zhang, 2009). What is still missing is the knowledge of how searchers actually filter out present-related information when they have search intents related strongly to either the past of the future. Empowered with such knowledge it will be easier to reason about the required level of support searchers should receive or about any temporal mechanisms that ought to be implemented for enabling effective temporal search. In this work we aim to fill in this gap and shed light on the actual behaviour of searchers who wish to find past or future-related information. In particular, we conduct controlled settings experiments with 30 participants who are asked to perform searches on variety of topics on the Web to find information related to particular time scopes. We then analyse their behaviour as well as feedback regarding the tasks and their difficulties. We report a large number of observations that have not been known to the community and which could have considerable implications on the design of temporal search mechanisms and search interfaces for facilitating retrieval of time-related information.The reminder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides the literature survey in temporal information retrieval. Section describes the design of user study we performed to capture information seeking behaviour of temporal search. Section presents the results of the user study. Section 5 discusses the implications of these findings on the design of future temporal search engines, followed by a conclusion and the outline of future directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper reported the findings of an exploratory user study that investigated people’s information seeking behaviour of temporal information searching. The study allowed us to gain insight into the current practice of temporal search, difficulties people tend to encounter, and implications on future temporal search systems. When contrasting search effectiveness across classes, we noticed that search for Future-related information is the most challenging and requires more support for users. On the other hand, searching for Recency-related content was easiest, most common and most successful for users. The suggestions from our study ranged from a prominent presentation of existing search control options in an appropriate context to intelligent interpretation of temporal control expressions in queries, application of expert finding technologies, and smooth linkage across temporal classes. This suggests that there are still many opportunities to improve the search performance and experience of temporal search in the future.There are several potential future directions for this research. One of them is studying the effect of topics on user search strategies and their behaviour. It is expected that certain topics are well-represented on the Web making it easy to find relevant information (e.g., there may be few documents on the past of genetically modified food but there could be quite much content that relates to future perspectives and predictions regarding this issue). Next, we plan to study the problem of vocabulary mismatch in greater detail. As events and topics evolve, different names can be used to refer to the same or similar objects. It is then interesting to study how users would try to find past information when the concept names and named entities differ greatly. Another future line of work is to investigate the relationship between temporal task familiarity and temporal orienteering behaviour. It is plausible that users which are less familiar with a particular temporal class might require a greater level of temporal orienteering. Therefore, behavioural analysis on temporal orienteering from the viewpoint of task familiarity can be an important aspect of temporal IR. Finally, a more detailed analysis following this exploratory study should be done to measure the probability of transitions between certain strategies, between browsing and searching as well as to quantify the effect of time duration on the search and its success.