@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating books finding tools on social media: A case study of aNobii

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A user study of the book finding tools on aNobii was conducted.A set of performance measures were tested on these exploratory tools.Browsing friends’ bookshelves was more conducive to novelty and serendipity.Users’ preference structure shown to impact on the performance of the tools.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social navigation,System evaluation,Reading preference,aNobii,Social media,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A user study of aNobii was conducted with an aim to exploring possible criteria for evaluating social navigational tools. A set of measures designed to capture various aspects of the benefits provided by the tools was proposed. To test the applicability of these measures, a within-subject experimental design was adopted where fifty regular aNobii users searched alternately with three book-finding tools: browsing “friends’ bookshelves”, “similar bookshelves”, and “books by known authors”. Other than the self-report user experience and search result measures, the “choice set” model was used as a novel framework for navigational effectiveness. Further analyses were conducted to explore whether three aspects of reader preference, “preference insight”, “preference diversity”, and “reading involvement” might influence the performance of the tools.Some major findings are as follows. While the author browsing function was shown to be most efficient, browsing friends’ bookshelves was shown to generate more interesting and informative browsing experiences. Three evaluative dimensions were derived from our study: search experience, search efficiency, and result quality. The disagreement of these measures shows a need for a multi-faceted evaluative framework for these exploration-based navigational tools. Furthermore, interaction effects on performance were found between users’ preference characteristics and tools. While users with high preference insight relied more heavily on author browsing to obtain more accurate results, highly involved readers tended percentage wise to examine and select more titles when browsing friends’ bookshelves.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The growing popularity of social media has captured the public imagination and attracted attention from academic and industry researchers. For information scientists, the study of social media carries a special sense of urgency as they have rapidly become the main venues where information is consumed and exchanged. Socially-enabled navigational tools embedded in social media afford novel modes of access beyond those of traditional bibliographic means. For example, on aNobii, a social networking site for avid readers, users can now explore previously unknown items through socially-enabled navigational tools such as browsing friends’ and system-generated similar bookshelves. These book-finding tools can greatly complement traditional subject access devices in two ways. Firstly, they are particularly effective when users’ information needs are ill-defined and inexpressible, such as is often the case in searching for leisure reading. Secondly, they greatly increase opportunities for serendipitous finds through associative browsing. Fellow readers’ comments and ratings can also provide important judgment cues for book quality.The newly emerging information environment on social media presents a fertile ground for information behavior research as new tools often engender new user information behaviors. Users now can rely on socially-enabled cues such as recommendations and reviews by others to come to know items of interest. Yet so far little research has been done to study users’ information behaviors in such a cue-rich environment, nor has there been a consensus on how to evaluate the tools embedded in these sites. The exploratory, as opposed to keyword-matching, mode of access on social media also presents a great challenge to evaluation methodology. It remains unclear what evaluative criteria, other than relevance-based precision and recall measures, can be used to validate the benefits provided by these exploration based tools. Other than search results, the user experience might be an important aspect of value provided by these tools. For example, researchers have pointed out exploratory systems can prove beneficial to support an interactive learning process beyond search results (Marchionini, 2006; White, Kules, Drucker, & Schraefel, 2006; White, Marchionini, & Muresan, 2008).Furthermore, what really matters in users’ searching of information items for leisure on these sites is users’ preference rather than topic relevance (Koolen, Kamps, & Kazai, 2012). While in marketing research users’ responses to customized offers have been shown to be influenced by their knowledge and involvement with the products (Franke, Keinz, & Steger, 2009; Kwon, Cho, & Park, 2009; Shen & Ball, 2011; Simonson, 2005). Yet little has been investigated, from a system evaluation perspective, on how different user traits might influence their seeking behaviors and system performance with these socially-based recommendation tools. In the book finding environment on social media, users are constantly exposed to novel and sometimes serendipitous items. Thus, their willingness and ability to explore items might turn out to be an important factor on the effectiveness of these tools. One can imagine that readers with a more refined preference mightreact differently than more casual readers. It might also be relatively more difficult to recommend novel and potentially interesting items for well-read readers and more resourceful readers who rely on their own information resources for book finding. Among cultural product consumers, a distinction is often made between sophisticated and casual consumers (Caves, 2002). When examining online DVD rental data, Elberse (2008) found that consumers who have ever chosen obscure products tended to consume a much wider range of alternatives, including popular items, while those who knew of few alternatives tended to stick with more popular offerings. It is reasonable to hypothesize that users’ knowledge and involvement with cultural products influence their response to customized recommendations. Therefore besides testing various evaluation criteria in this study, we also wish to explore how different aspects of users’ preference might influence user behaviors and tool effectiveness.In the following sections, we will begin with a discussion of the impact of socially-based book-finding tools on users’ access to readings for leisure, followed by elucidating the procedures and results of the experiment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
