@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Human activity data discovery from triaxial accelerometer sensor: Non-supervised learning sensitivity to feature extraction parametrization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The presented study performs two different tests in intra and inter subject context.A set of 180 features is implemented to be selected based on clustering performance.Our algorithm searches for the best feature extraction parameter.A new clustering metric based on the construction of the confusion matrix is proposed.A novel gesture recognition system based on data from a single 3 dimensional accelerometer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human activity recognition,Interactive knowledge discovery,Feature extraction,Dimensionality reduction,Clustering algorithms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background: Our methodology describes a human activity recognition framework based on feature extraction and feature selection techniques where a set of time, statistical and frequency domain features taken from 3-dimensional accelerometer sensors are extracted. This framework specifically focuses on activity recognition using on-body accelerometer sensors. We present a novel interactive knowledge discovery tool for accelerometry in human activity recognition and study the sensitivity to the feature extraction parametrization. Results: The implemented framework achieved encouraging results in human activity recognition. We have implemented a new set of features extracted from wearable sensors that are ambitious from a computational point of view and able to ensure high classification results comparable with the state of the art wearable systems (Mannini et al. 2013). A feature selection framework is developed in order to improve the clustering accuracy and reduce computational complexity.1The software OpenSignals (Gomes, Nunes, Sousa, & Gamboa, 2012) was used for signal acquisition and signal processing algorithms were developed in Python Programming Language (Rossum & de Boer, 1991) and Orange Software (Curk et al., 2005).1Several clustering methods such as K-Means, Affinity Propagation, Mean Shift and Spectral Clustering were applied. The K-means methodology presented promising accuracy results for person-dependent and independent cases, with 99.29% and 88.57%, respectively. Conclusions: The presented study performs two different tests in intra and inter subject context and a set of 180 features is implemented which are easily selected to classify different activities. The implemented algorithm does not stipulate, a priori, any value for time window or its overlap percentage of the signal but performs a search to find the best parameters that define the specific data. A clustering metric based on the construction of the data confusion matrix is also proposed. The main contribution of this work is the design of a novel gesture recognition system based solely on data from a single 3-dimensional accelerometer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The major achievements of this work are: the design of a gesture recognition system based solely on data from a single 3-dimensional accelerometer which finds the best free parameters and window sizes to clustering analysis; the new set of features extracted from wearable data able to ensure high classification results; and the clustering method application in intra and inter subject context.The experimental results presented here suggest that using only one waist-worn accelerometer can adequately identify user’s activities. Using only a minimal number of sensors in wearable activity recognition system can be a key for the success in system acceptance. Furthermore, the present study investigated several combinations of features used for activity recognition to find the best features able to distinguish physical activities. A new set of features has been taken into account and compared to the most commonly features used in literature for activity recognition (Mannini et al., 2013). The techniques that operate on the statistical, time and frequency domains, as well as on data representations that can be used to discriminate between user activities such as Horizon Plot were described. A set of 180 features is implemented and these are easily selected to test different groups of subjects and different activities. The implemented algorithm does not stipulate, a priori, any value for window length, or overlap percentage, but searches the best parameters that define the specific data. A clustering metric based on the construction of the data confusion matrix is also proposed. The results of clustering accuracy of human activities recognition with ARI in K-means application were very encouraging. An average person-dependent ARI of 99.29% and a person-independent ARI of 88.57% were reached. Compared to the subject-dependent case, the accuracy of all subjects for the Affinity propagation, the Mean Shift and the Spectral Clustering applications is much lower as it was expected from the previous results with K-means. The obtained results may be explained by the variations in human motion for different subjects.The authors declare that they have no competing interests.IPM carried out the human activity recognition studies, participated in the algorithm implementation, performed the statistical analysis and drafted the manuscript. ALG participated in the algorithm implementation, statistical analysis and in the manuscript composition. HG conceived the study, and participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. VBP conceived the study, and participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. RMC participated in the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.The algorithm described in the manuscript is available for testing by reviewers at: https://www.dropbox.com/sh/3fkil2tws7z101g/J0pTQTmCXw.