@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
University libraries as a model for the determination of the need for information specialists in knowledge industries? An exploratory analysis of the information sector in Austria

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Knowledge industries (KI) are the largest segment of the Austrian information sector.University libraries can serve as basis for estimating the need of info specialists in KI.The ratio information specialists to knowledge workers is 1–130 in KI in Austria.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information sector,Information specialist,University library,Input–output table,Industry-occupation matrix,Knowledge industry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In our paper we present an experimental study which investigated the possibility to project the need for information specialists serving knowledge workers in knowledge industries on the basis of an average university library serving their counterparts at a university. Information management functions, i.e. functions and processes related to information evaluation, acquisition, metadata creation, etc., performed in an average university library are the starting point of this investigation. The fundamental assumption is that these functions do not only occur in libraries but also in other contexts like, for instance, in knowledge industries. As a consequence, we try to estimate the need for information professionals in knowledge industries by means of quantitative methods from library and information science (Library Planning Model) and economics (input output analysis, occupational analysis). Our study confirms the validity of our assumption. Accordingly, the number of information specialists projected on the basis of university libraries is consistent with their actual number reported in national statistics. However, in order to attain a close fit, we had to revise the original research model by dismissing the split-up of information specialists into reader services and technical services staff.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays only few people would disagree with the assertion that we live in an information dominated era, where ‘…the information factor increasingly holds the key to growth, output and employment…’ (Martin, 1988, 69). Factors of production like land, labor and capital, the basic economic resources in the industrial society, lost economic importance and are increasingly replaced by the factor information. The rising significance of the information sector is undisputed. Drucker noticed the emergence of the new industry already in 1960, when he introduced the terms ’knowledge work’ and ’knowledge worker’ (Drucker, 1993, 5). Only 2years later Machlup published the first important study on the ‘knowledge industry’ which concluded that already in 1959 approximately 43% of the ‘potential civilian labour force’ could be assigned to the ‘knowledge producing industry’ in the United States (Machlup, 1962, 386).Another ground-breaking study was performed by Marc Uri Porat in 1977, who introduced the term ‘information economy’. The innovative aspect of Porat’s approach lies in the distinction between a primary and a secondary information sector. While the former includes information goods and services exchanged in a market context, the latter comprises ‘all the information services produced for internal consumption by government and non-information firms’ (Porat, 1977, 4). The significance of this study can be realized in the number of follow-up research related to it. This applies, for instance, to Rubin and Taylor (1981) who updated Porat’s data concerning the information economy; or to Apte and Nath (2004), whose aim was to measure the size and the structure of the US information economy and to compare the results with Porat’s study. Also the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development introduced an approach to measure the information sector which was strongly influenced by Porat’s work (OECD, 1981) and which triggered measurement activities in a number of OECD countries. As far as the authors know, the last and only study on the information sector in Austria was based on this approach (Schmoranz, 1980). In comparison to Porat, a wider suggestion dividing a national economy into a production sector and an information sector was used by Jonscher (1983). While the former covers the functions of creating, processing and handling of physical goods, the object of the latter is information.Besides approaches which tried to determine the proportion of the information sector on the basis of the value-added (gross domestic product), several occupational concepts were introduced in the past. Machlup (1962) was also the first who analyzed the occupational structure with regard to knowledge production in the United States though this aspect, in comparison to the so-called industry approach, comprised only a small part in his book. While Machlup (and most other authors) determined the number of knowledge producing occupations, Porat (1977) investigated the employee compensation of information occupations.In the early 1980s, the OECD (1981) introduced an occupation scheme for information workers, which was based on Porat’s suggestion. It distinguishes among four main categories (information producers, information processors, information distributors and information infrastructure occupations) and eleven subcategories. Dostal refined this scheme in that he did not entirely assign an occupation to an information worker category (or not). Moreover, he tried to measure information occupations based on the degree of their information activity (Dostal, 1986, 85). Wolff and Baumol (1987) grouped US workforce into six categories whereof knowledge workers and data workers were combined to so-called information workers. All these occupational approaches do not only differ with regard to the reference scheme used to define information workers but also with regard to the assignment of the various occupations to it and, as a consequence, the proportion of information workers/knowledge workers measured (30.7–53%) (Karlics, 2011, 149).As the studies by Boon, Britz, and Harmse (1994), Dordick and Wang (1993), Engelbrecht and Mahon (2003), Lal (2005), Lavoie, Roy, and Therrien (2003), Pyöriä (2005) and Shifflet (2001) show, the investigation of the information sector has attracted interest also in more recent years. Moreover, such investigations have been increasingly performed in countries other than the United States.In our research we investigate the possibility, to project the need for information specialist serving knowledge workers in knowledge industries of a national economy on the basis of an average university library serving their counterparts (scholars and research students) at universities. This should be performed by means of quantitative methods from library and information science (Library Planning Model) and economics (input output analysis, occupational analysis). Accordingly, the prime research question is:•Which is the need for information specialists in Austrian knowledge industries? Is it possible to project the staffing requirements for them on the basis of the number of librarians (performing information management functions) within universities?As a by-product of our study, we also try to answer the following questions:•Which is the size of the Austrian information sector both with regard to value-added and workforce?Which sectors use goods from the information sector in which amount? From which other sectors does the information sector receive its input?The key terms which derive from these research questions (‘information sector’, in particular ‘knowledge industries’, ‘information specialists’ and ‘information management functions’) are explained in the following.Up to now it has been common to divide national economies into three sectors which include agriculture, manufacturing and services. However, as was shown in the literature survey, there are several authors who suggested the introduction of an information sector due to statistical data, the general perception of the increasing importance of information and the computerization of society. Since the information sector was demarcated very widely in previous publications and since we intend to perform a more precise analysis, we follow a suggestion by Hayes (2001) in subdividing the information sector into the information technology industries segment, the information transaction industries segment and the knowledge industries segment.•Information technology industries: This segment includes industries that produce hardware and software for telecommunications, computers and a variety of other technologies that acquire, communicate and process data (such as medical and scientific instrumentation).Information transaction industries: This segment covers those industries in which the primary emphasis is on the computer-based processing of transactions which represent actions taken but have substantive value only in that processing. This includes telecommunication services, banking and related financial activities, retail and wholesale transactions, reservation services (such as for hotels, air travel, cars, tourism), and a wide variety of similar transaction processing contexts.Knowledge industries: This segment consists of organizations in which the substantive content of the information is significant. These industries mainly deal with the creation of new knowledge, the intellectual analysis of existing knowledge and/or the distribution of knowledge. They include education, research and development, the professions (law, medicine, engineering, architecture, etc.) and what traditionally are called ‘miscellaneous business services’ (for instance, consulting). Also libraries are an integral part of this segment.Traditionally, information management functions are well defined in libraries and information centers where they are performed by librarians or information specialists. Basically, they include of the following main tasks:•information selection,information acquisition,information description,information preservation,creation of information products and provision of information services.The methodology involved in this investigation consists of several analyses and various sets of data to which the models are applied.The Library Planning Model (LPM) (Hayes, 2001) is a means for estimating staffing requirements to meet identified workloads on information management functions in technical services and reader services. In fact, one of the primary tasks of the LPM is to divide library staff into these two groups of services, as they usually do not appear in this pure form in libraries. The input to this software are so-called workloads such as number of users, holdings and acquired materials. These data are provided from two different sources: university data (delivered from data warehouse uni:data which is maintained by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and Research (2011)) and library related data provided by Statistik Austria (2007). These input data are applied to workload factors which express the duration estimated to perform a transaction for the various information management functions. As a result (among others) the LPM offers estimates for the reader services staff and the technical services staff (see Fig. 1) which are used as a starting point for determining the staffing requirements for information management functions in the knowledge industries. To avoid random fluctuations and to adjust differences among different types of universities (for example, a technical university vs. a medical university vs. a universal university) we calculate these two indicators for the average Austrian university library.Input–output tables are elements of the national accounts and represent the intersectoral relations of products and industries within an economy. The input–output system comprises three parts: supply and use tables at basic and purchasers’ prices and symmetric input–output tables usually provided at basic prices. Whereas supply tables give a detailed picture about the supply of goods and services by domestic producers and imports, use tables (see Table 1 for a small excerpt) deliver insight into the use of goods and services for intermediate consumption and final use as well as the value-added and its components.In our project these tables had a size of 73 products (according to CPA product classification) by 73 industries (according to NACE industry classification system). Since we also wanted to determine the size of the information sector with regard to the value-added and to investigate the interrelations among the (sub)sectors, it was necessary to assign the various products/industries to these (sub)sectors (see Table A1 in the Appendix A) before being able to perform these analyses.Supply and use tables are created annually with a time delay of 3years. In our project the most actual version were the supply and use tables for the year 2005 (Statistik Austria, 2010). For reasons of comparability, we related all the other data also to this year.Occupational data were used to determine the size of the information sector with regard to workforce. They are collected in an annual micro census according to the labor force concept (Statistik Austria, 2011). Accordingly, it must be taken into account that only 0.6% of Austrian private households are included in that survey. Since we also wanted to identify the need for information specialists in knowledge industries and evaluate whether their number can be projected from the number of librarians, these data were required in two dimensions: by industry and by occupation. In Austria (and the European Union) the commonly used classification system at that time was the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88) which was approved by the International Labour Organization in 1988 (ILO, 2004).The tables from Statistik Austria (2011) were relatively detailed having been provided at a 3-digit level for both NACE and ISCO-88 (see Table 2for a small excerpt). As a consequence, the number of information specialists in the knowledge industries could be easily computed since the corresponding ISCO classes are ‘243 Archivists, Librarians and Related Information Professionals’ and ‘414 Library, Mail and Related Clerks’ (from which the latter were filtered out). Because of the close link between information specialists and knowledge workers which are the main beneficiaries of information management functions, we were also interested in the number of the latter. Their determination is not straightforward. We used the ‘OECD information worker scheme’ (OECD, 1981, 24) for this purpose assigning the following subcategories to them: scientific and technical workers, consultative services, educators and communication workers.As part of our research we tried to investigate whether it is possible to estimate the need of information specialists in the knowledge industries on the basis of university libraries. The underlying assumptions are as follows:1.Universities are a representative of the knowledge industries, information management functions within them are provided to a great extent by a university library.The staffing requirements of libraries are primarily determined by the factors media purchases (which cause the need for technical services staff performing the tasks of information selection, information acquisition, information description and information preservation) and the number of its users (causing the need for reader services staff who are in charge of the creation of information products and the provision of information services).The media purchases of a university/library have their rough equivalent in the input of publishing goods in the knowledge industries (though varying among industries), whereas the users of a university library (researchers and students1To consider the different workloads, we distinguished between graduate and undergraduate students and used different weighting factors for them.1) can be linked to the knowledge workers in the knowledge industries.This brings us to the underlying research model (see Fig. 2) which shows the general framework of our project. Basically, it can be divided into two contexts: the university/library context and the knowledge industry context (including universities and their associated libraries). Whereas the former is the starting point, the determination of information specialists performing information management functions in the knowledge industries segment is the intended outcome.In the university/library context two ratios are calculated: ‘technical services staff per million € media purchases’ and ‘reader services staff per primary library user’. These ratios are based on the output of the LPM, namely technical services staff in full-time equivalents (FTE) and reader services staff in FTE. After dividing FTE technical services staff by the expenses for media purchases (source: library statistics) the first ratio mentioned above is obtained. Similarly, dividing FTE reader services staff by primary library users (source: library statistics) results in the second ratio. These two ratios are the links between the university/library context and the national economy context since we assume that these ratios are applicable also to the knowledge industries.To estimate the staffing for information management functions in the knowledge industries segment (‘technical services staff’ and ‘reader services staff’), two factors need to be collected in the national economy context: ‘purchases of publications’ and number of ‘knowledge workers’. The input–output tables are used to identify how much knowledge industries spend on publishing products (called ‘purchases of publications’ in Fig. 2). The industry-occupation matrix allows the determination of the knowledge workers in the knowledge industries. The product of the factors ‘FTE reader services staff per knowledge worker’ and knowledge workers results in the number of reader services staff, the multiplication of the factor ‘FTE technical services staff per one million purchases of publications’ with purchases of publications shows the number of technical services staff. Finally, the sum of these two should approximately correspond to the real number of information specialists in the knowledge industries (research question 3). If our assumptions hold true, this value should approximately correspond with the number of information specialists collected from the industry-occupation matrix.As already mentioned, we computed the size of the information sector both by value-added and by workforce. As is shown in Figs. 3 and 4, the services sector was still the largest one according to both calculations amounting to nearly 38% of the total value-added and to 36% of the total workforce in 2005. Interestingly, the information technology segment has only a proportion of less than 2%. The largest segment of the information sector is constituted by the knowledge industries. Their higher proportion with regard to the workforce (25.8%) compared to the value-added (23.3%) indicates that these jobs are more labor-intensive which is not surprising according to the definition of the knowledge industries. The opposite holds true for the information transaction industries (4.8% vs. 8.9%).In this analysis we investigated the consumption of goods which consists of intermediate use, final consumption, gross capital formation and exports. As can be seen in Fig. 5, these components differ among the four sectors. The relevant consumption category for investigating the interrelationship among the sectors is the intermediate use which shows which sector (industry) uses goods from which (other) sectors (industries) in which amount. Its proportion had the same relative magnitude for information products, services and manufacturing products in 2005 (between 35% and 42%). Only for agricultural goods the proportion of the intermediate use was considerably higher (60%).When considering Table 3, which shows the use of goods and services by the various sectors in more detail, the most remarkable aspect is that there is a diagonal dominance. This means that industries from a particular sector are the main purchasers of goods produced in it. This holds also true for the information subsectors where more than half of the total intermediate consumption goes into the information sector (73% of IT goods, 59% of information transaction goods and 55% of knowledge industries goods). However, larger proportions of IT products are also used in the manufacturing sector (20%), larger proportions of information transactions goods are utilized in the services sector (26%) and larger proportions of knowledge industries goods are input in both manufacturing sector (20%) and services sector (23%).The prime focus of our research was the determination of the staffing requirements for information specialists in Austrian knowledge industries, and in particular whether their number can be extrapolated from university libraries. The number of information specialists (3477) could be easily calculated by means of the industry occupation matrix (see Table 4).The extrapolation on the basis of university libraries and, therefore, the verification of this number was done in line with our research model. As already laid down in Section 4, the starting point were the two ratios ‘FTE technical services staff per million € media purchases’ and ‘FTE reader services staff per primary library user’ which amounted to 16.54 and 0.004247 for the average Austrian university library. Multiplying the latter with the number of knowledge workers (337,7552Since students were partly regarded as knowledge workers in the university context (which is not the case in the micro census for which reason they are not included in the occupational statistics), we had to add their weighted number (114,117). The weighting considered different degrees of library use by graduate and undergraduate students according to Library Planning Model.2) (see Table 4), which correspond to the primary library users in the library context, gives the number of reader services staff in the knowledge industries (1919 FTE).In analogy, the former ratio (‘FTE technical services staff per million € media purchases’) was multiplied by the total amount of purchases of publishing products by the knowledge industries, which correspond to the media purchases by university libraries. The problem was, however, that the use table was not detailed enough (73 products×73 industries). As a consequence, we got the sum of publishing and printing products (‘Printed matter and recorded media‘ in Table 1) from the input–output table yielding to a need for technical services staff in knowledge industries which is much too high (35,815 FTE).However, it must be stated that this high deviation could also be attributed to the fact that assumption 3 (see Section 4) is not valid. Whatsoever, we had to revise the original research model. As can be seen in Fig. 6, we based the projection of the information specialists in the knowledge industries only on one ratio ‘FTEtotal library staff per primary library user’. Transferring this ratio, which amounted to 0.007733 to the knowledge industries context and multiplying it with the number of knowledge workers gives a staffing requirement of 3494 information specialists (in FTE). This number converges very closely to the number of information specialists according to the industry-occupation table, though the real difference is larger since the latter is reported in head counts and not in FTE. Nevertheless, this close approximation confirms our hypothesis that a university (library) can serve as a basis for roughly determining the need for information specialists in knowledge industries (in Austria).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It was the main goal of our study to investigate the possibility to project the need for information specialists serving knowledge workers in knowledge industries of a national economy on the basis of an average university library serving their counterparts (researchers and research students) at universities. This should be performed by means of quantitative methods from library and information science (Library Planning Model) and economics (input output analysis and occupational analysis). Due to the chosen approach, we are aware that our study is experimental to some degree.Though we could attain a very close fit between the projected and the actual number of information specialists in Austrian knowledge industries in the revised model, we do not want to conceal various problems which occurred in our investigation. One critical issue was the high aggregation level at which economical analyses are usually conducted. In our case, the use tables were only available as a 73×73 matrix. However, we would have needed the use table at a 3-digit NACE level at least in some cases to make a more precise demarcation of the (sub)sectors and to get the use of publishing products alone (CPA code 22.1). Due to this, it was not possible to prove the validity of our assumption that media purchases in a university library correspond approximately to the input of publishing products in knowledge industries.One further aspect, which was not considered in this study is the changing role of librarians due to the increasing importance of electronic resources. Even though a short survey concerning the workloads of electronic resources was conducted, the results did not prove to be useful for the LPM. Therefore, the consequences of electronic resources on staffing were not reflected in this study.The occupational table was available at a sufficient level of detail. The problem here were the small cell values for the information specialists. Since only 0.6% of all private Austrian households are covered by the micro census survey, cell values below 3000 lack significance according to an information by Statistics Austria. As already the total number of information specialists in knowledge industries was slightly higher, we met this requirement only narrowly. A further problematic issue was that the occupation table reports head counts while the projected value from our calculation corresponds to FTE. However, since our goal was to reach a sufficient congruence between these two values, this is not a critical issue.Finally, it must be considered that our projection of the need of information specialists in knowledge industries on the basis of university librarians was only conducted for the Austrian situation so far. To verify whether our results are coincidental, we are preparing a replication of the study for other EU countries.See Table A1.