@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Changes in the digital scholarly environment and issues of trust: An exploratory, qualitative analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Digital transition had resulted in changes in researcher behaviour.It is now easier for scientists to discover and disseminate research.The way scientists exercise trust has not changed.Metrics are less important than experience and personal recommendation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Trust,Scholarly communication,Citation,Authority,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper reports on some of the results of a research project into how changes in digital behaviour and services impacts on concepts of trust and authority held by researchers in the sciences and social sciences in the UK and the USA. Interviews were used in conjunction with a group of focus groups to establish the form and topic of questions put to a larger international sample in an online questionnaire. The results of these 87 interviews were analysed to determine whether or not attitudes have indeed changed in terms of sources of information used, citation behaviour in choosing references, and in dissemination practices. It was found that there was marked continuity in attitudes though an increased emphasis on personal judgement over established and new metrics. Journals (or books in some disciplines) were more highly respected than other sources and still the vehicle for formal scholarly communication. The interviews confirmed that though an open access model did not in most cases lead to mistrust of a journal, a substantial number of researchers were worried about the approaches from what are called predatory OA journals. Established researchers did not on the whole use social media in their professional lives but a question about outreach revealed that it was recognised as effective in reaching a wider audience. There was a remarkable similarity in practice across research attitudes in all the disciplines covered and in both the countries where interviews were held.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We sought to determine whether the way academic researchers assign and judge trustworthiness to the sources/channels they use, cite and where they publish has changed as a result of the digital revolution. Our main findings can be summarised as:(a)There were no substantial changes. ‘Publications’ were always perceived as journal articles by the researchers interviewed. The main impact of the digital revolution can be summarised as making life easier for researchers. Online content can now be accessed from the desktop and libraries were rarely visited. The only significant change in decisions about use was a greater confidence among researchers in the US and the UK in using personal judgement to decide on whether a particular journal or other information source could be trusted rather than using a proxy such as impact factors. Reliance on the judgement of other researchers known to the interviewees remained a central litmus test when using, citing and deciding where to publish.Open access journals have been made possible by the digital revolution. Almost all researchers considered the concept of open access as a positive development but they had doubts about the quality of open access journals. This was partly because the journals were relatively new and not well known to the circles of trust within which researchers worked. These new journals had yet to establish themselves as part of the list of trusted journals all established researchers had in mind. However the so-called “predatory” open access journals had led many researchers to a general suspicion which led to careful inspection in using, citing and seeking vehicles for publication. There was evidence that experience of open access journals, particularly publishing in open access journals, led to acceptance. There was a surprising lack of use of social media as a means of communication between researchers and as a channel for research information. Established researchers claimed they did not have time to tweet.During the research it became clear that it was important to ascertain not only how a researcher decided what to trust, but also to understand the context in which the researcher worked – the researcher's own research group and the other groups trusted by that group either as collaborators or as sources of trusted information. Rather surprisingly established researchers tended to come forward to be interviewed rather more than early career researchers or those with a foot on the ladder, but not yet reaching the top rung. This did enable interviewers to get a wider picture of such features of academic life as attendance at conferences (not being reduced in spite of the growth in digital communication) where initial trust decisions about people were made.This study was funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (grant no. 2012-6-21).Critical Incident Interviews1Over the course of your career have you observed any changes in citing and publishing behaviour, either personally or which you have observed?Questions 2–4 focus on the sources in the participant's last published publication (Critical incident).2We have randomly selected five of your citations, and we would like to go through each of them and discuss the reasons for choosing it.Prompting questions include:•What made you include this citation?We are not questioning the quality or trustworthiness of your sources, and we believe your sources are “good”, but we would like to know what made you consider this a reliable (authoritativeness, expert/competent nature, trustworthiness, reputation/brand) source?Do you remember how you found it?Was the source you searched (e.g. Web of Science, Google) a factor of trustworthiness?Now we would like you to select two of your citations, and discuss the reasons for choosing it.Prompting questions include:•What made you include this citation?We are not questioning the quality or trustworthiness of your sources, and we believe your sources are “good”, but we would like to know what made you consider this a reliable (authoritativeness, expert/competent nature, trustworthiness, reputation/brand) source?Do you remember how you found it?Was the source you searched (e.g. Web of Science, Google) a factor of trustworthiness?Did you share or consider sharing any of this content in other ways (e.g., blog, tweet, conference presentation, pre-print)?Why/why not?If so, why did you choose that particular format?If so, did you have a choice (e.g. mandatory request by funders, pressure from project leader)?Did you include links to data in your publication? Why?How do you view the use of social media in scholarly communication?Is there a link between formal and informal publishing (e.g. tweets referring to papers)