@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MEANS: A medical question-answering system combining NLP techniques and semantic Web technologies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a semantic question answering system (MEANS) for the medical domain.We introduce a novel query relaxation approach for question answering.MEANS integrates NLP methods allowing a deep analysis of questions and documents.MEANS uses semantic Web technologies and standards for data sharing and integration.Our experiments show promising results in terms of MRR and precision.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Question answering,Natural language processing,Semantic search,Medical informatics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Question Answering (QA) task aims to provide precise and quick answers to user questions from a collection of documents or a database. This kind of IR system is sorely needed with the dramatic growth of digital information. In this paper, we address the problem of QA in the medical domain where several specific conditions are met. We propose a semantic approach to QA based on (i) Natural Language Processing techniques, which allow a deep analysis of medical questions and documents and (ii) semantic Web technologies at both representation and interrogation levels. We present our Semantic Question-Answering System, called MEANS and our proposed method for “Answer Search” based on semantic search and query relaxation. We evaluate the overall system performance on real questions and answers extracted from MEDLINE articles. Our experiments show promising results and suggest that a query-relaxation strategy can further improve the overall performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing knowledge accessible via internet affects our habits to find information and to obtain answers to our questions. According to an american health survey1Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project: http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Health-online.aspx.1published in January 2013, 35% of U.S. adults state that they have gone online specifically to try to figure out what medical condition they or someone else might have. Asked about the accuracy of their initial diagnosis, 41% of “online diagnosers” (who searched for answers on the internet) say a medical professional confirmed their diagnosis, but 35% say they did not visit a clinician to get a professional opinion. 18% say they consulted a medical professional and the clinician either did not agree or offered a different opinion about the condition. 77% say that they start looking for health information using a search engine. However, while these search engines contribute strongly in making large volumes of medical knowledge accessible, their users have often to deal with the burden of browsing and filtering the numerous results of their queries in order to find the precise information they were looking for. This point is more crucial for practitioners who may need an immediate answer to their questions during their work.Ely et al. (1999) presented an observational study in which investigators visited family doctors for two half days and collected their questions. The 103 doctors saw 2467 patients and asked 1101 questions during 732 observation hours. Each doctor asked an average of 7.6 questions during the two half days (3.2 questions per 10 patients).Covell, Uman, and Manning (1985) studied information needs of physicians during office practice. In their study, information needs were obtained by self-reports from 47 physicians who raised a total of 269 questions during their half-day practice. The raised questions were very heterogeneous in terms of topics and highly specific to the patients. On average only 30% of their information needs were met during the patient visit, most often by other physicians having different subspecialities. As shown in their study, print sources were not used for several reasons such as inadequate indexation of books and drug information sources, age of the available textbooks, lack of knowledge about the relevant sources or the time needed to access the required information.In this context, we need tools such as question answering (QA) systems in order to respond to user queries with precise answers. Such systems need deep analysis of both user questions and documents in order to extract the relevant information. At the first level of this information come the medical entities (e.g. diseases, drugs, symptoms). At the second, more complicated level comes the extraction of semantic relations between these entities (e.g. treats, prevents, causes).Within an overall common framework, QA systems aim to provide precise answers to natural language questions. The answer can be a piece of text extracted from a document collection (Demner-Fushman & Lin, 2006) or the Web (Lin & Katz, 2003) as well as data retrieved from a database (Popescu, Etzioni, & Kautz, 2003) or a knowledge base (Rinaldi, Dowdall, & Schneider, 2004). In more rare cases, the returned answers are multimedia information (Katz, 1999). A question answering system can be composed of three main tasks: (i) analysis of the user question, (ii) analysis of the documents used to find the answers and (iii) answer retrieval and extraction. The second task is not required for systems that use databases or knowledge bases as answer sources. Methods used to analyze questions and/or documents can be semantic, surface-level or hybrid.In this paper, we address the problem of answering English questions formulated in natural language. We consider several types of questions, but we focus on two main types: (i) factual questions expressed by WH pronouns and (ii) boolean questions expecting a yes/no answer. An answer can be (i) a medical entity for factual questions or (ii) Yes or No for boolean questions. Moreover, for each answer extracted from a corpus, we associate a justification2We define a justification for an answer as the source sentence found by the question-answering system.2including the line containing the answer, the two previous sentences and the two following sentences. We focus on searching and extracting answers from scientific articles and clinical texts. However, the proposed approach can be extended to consider other resources like websites, textual corpora, Linked Open Data and ontologies.There are three main contributions in this paper:1.We propose an original system for medical QA combining: (i) NLP methods which allow a deep analysis of medical questions and corpora used to find answers and (ii) semantic Web technologies which offer a high level of expressiveness and standards for data sharing and integration.We introduce a novel query relaxation approach for QA systems that deals with errors or weaknesses of NLP methods in some cases (e.g. implicit information, need for reasoning).We experimentally evaluate our system, called MEANS, with a benchmark (Corpus for Evidence Based Medicine Summarisation) and we discuss the obtained results.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces related work and discussion about the main QA approaches with a particular focus on the medical domain. Section 3 describes the overall architecture of the proposed approach and its main three steps: offline corpora annotation using NLP methods (described in Section 4), online question analysis (described in Section 5) and answer retrieval based on semantic search and query relaxation (described in Section 6). Section 7 presents our experiments on a standard corpus and the results of our QA system MEANS. In Section 8, we discuss the combined use of NLP methods and semantic technologies, then we analyze the error cases for the boolean and factual questions. Finally, the conclusions are made in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
