@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The relationship between perceived value and information source use during KM strategic decision-making: A study of 17 Chinese business managers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine information source use during KM strategic decision-making.We revised De Alwis et al.’s typology of information source preferences.Organizational context is highly determinative of information source use.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information use,Information utilities,Knowledge management,Chinese business managers,Information source,Value,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The study explores the relationship between value attribution and information source use of 17 Chinese business managers during their knowledge management (KM) strategic decision-making. During semi-structured interviews, the Chinese business managers, half in the telecommunications sector and half in the manufacturing sector, were asked to rate 16 information sources on five-point Likert Scales. The 16 information sources were grouped into internal–external and personal–impersonal types. The participants rated the information sources according to five value criteria: relevancy, comprehensiveness, reliability, time/effort, and accessibility. Open-ended questions were also asked to get at how and why value attribution affected the participants’ use of one information source over another during decision-making. Findings show that the participants preferred internal–personal type of information sources over external–impersonal information sources. The differences in value ratings per information source were striking: Telecommunications managers rated customers, newspapers/magazines, and conferences/trips much lower than the manufacturing managers but they rated corporate library/intranet and databases much higher than manufacturing managers. The type of industrial sector therefore highly influenced information source use for decision-making by the study’s Chinese business managers. Based on this conclusion, we added organizational and environmental categories to revise the De Alwis, Majid, and Chaudhry’s (2006) typology of factors affecting Chinese managers’ information source preferences during decision-making.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research on information source use in decision-making has a long history. Its theoretical underpinnings are rooted in Simon’s (1955, 1956) bounded rationality theory. According to this theory, the essence of business decision-making for problem solving is correctly identifying the problem, compiling all possible alternative solutions and then selecting the alternative that is the best solution for the business situation at hand (Simon & Associates, 1986). However, even though these decisions can be of enormous importance, they can be urgent, requiring the manager to commit substantial human and financial resources but with little time to investigate the problem thoroughly (Mintzberg, Raisinghani, & Théoret, 1976). Consequently, in real situations, where decisions are made in uncertain environments, human rational behaviour is limited due to the absence of information about the problem, about all the alternative solutions, lack of certainty about all relevant events, and the inability of the business manager to anticipate all possible consequences of the decision (Newell & Simon, 1972; Simon & Associates, 1986).Strategic decision-making is a sub-set of decision-making. A business manager who makes strategic decisions is commonly in charge of at least one business unit for his or her enterprise with supervisory, policy development, and/or strategy development responsibilities, but can be in middle as well as upper management (Bower, 1970). They are strategic planners responsible for establishing broad policies, directions, and goals for an organization (Gorry & Scott-Morton, 1971), and providing contextual frames for the discussion of strategic issues within the company (Thomas & McDaniel, 1990). As well, strategic decision-makers are responsible for sensing the emergence and meanings of various threats and opportunities (Papadakis, Lioukas, & Chambers, 1998). Knowledge management (KM) is an obvious field to improve strategic managerial decision-making during high uncertainty.KM, in the business world, can be broadly defined as a series of activities undertaken by an organization to identify, acquire, retain, share, and re-use its knowledge-based assets with the aim of sustaining core competency and innovation capabilities. KM specifically targets procedural or “how to” information decision makers need that is already there in the corporation but is not recorded or codified – this is frequently referred to as tacit knowledge (e.g., Nonaka, 1994). As it is not written down, this tacit corporate knowledge is inaccessible except through face-to-face contact with people within the corporation. Other explicit knowledge may be badly codified or haphazardly stored by individuals on their computers without concern for subsequent access by others. Corporations acknowledge the importance of data bases of information gathered by its employees during past decision events – corporate information, industry information, etc. But KM must also render access to tacit and badly stored explicit knowledge to the manager at the moment of decision-making. One key problem for KM is to develop systems that facilitate the storage, organization, and access to sources of corporate knowledge via the addition of easy to use mechanisms specifically designed so that managers can more effectively make decisions.The general problem addressed in this study is to analyze the difficulty managers have in accessing tacit and explicit information to make decisions in high uncertainty situations, within the context of the Chinese corporate environment. Although KM has been applied and developed in the Western world for over two decades, certain researchers believe that the concept was not properly explained to China until the late 1990s (Lin & Kwok, 2006; Voelpel & Han, 2005). Even since then, KM has been poorly recognized and applied in China. Jian, Li-Hua, and Moffett (2007) conclude that the lack of empirical evidence supporting the benefits of KM has become a major barrier to the development of KM research in the Chinese academic community. Jian, Li-Hua, and Moffett (2007, p. 207) note that “a majority proportion of Chinese companies either lack [knowledge] of KM theory or still rest upon [i.e. are still stuck in the preliminary stage of] the discussion of KM theory per se [sic]” (for a review, see Lin & Dalkir, 2010).Information science expands on KM research in Chinese business practices and plays a crucial role in today’s information age. Finding the right information during all stages of a business manager’s decision-making process makes the difference between success and failure. What are the information sources for finding this right information? If we begin to describe what these sources are and how Chinese business managers evaluate these sources, we can establish a starting position for further research into developing retrieval mechanisms so that Chinese managers can efficiently access vital corporate information during high uncertainty decision-making.There is a paucity of research on the information sources used by Chinese business managers when they are engaged in KM strategic decision-making and how and why they attribute value to these sources. We started this study by asking the following questions:•What information sources are used by Chinese business managers when they make KM strategic decisions?What is the perceived value of these information sources by Chinese business managers when making KM strategic decisions?How and why do Chinese business managers attribute value to the information sources they use?This study, derived from a doctoral dissertation (Lin, 2011), extends existing research on Chinese business managers’ source use and source evaluation behaviour as well as on the influences of source characteristics on source use in strategic decision-making. The study seeks to advance current understanding about Chinese KM strategic decision-making situations by adopting an informational perspective. By defining the relationship between Chinese business managers’ attribution of value to information sources and information source use, the findings of this study can be used to help Chinese business managers make more informed KM strategic decisions, and thus contribute to the promotion of KM practices in China.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
