@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A recommender mechanism for social knowledge navigation in an online encyclopedia

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a knowledge navigation mechanism for an online encyclopedia.The system generates visualized knowledge map and reading sequence.The system discovers knowledge network, knowledge importance, and concept ontology.The mechanism effectively improves a knowledge seeker’s learning effectiveness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Online encyclopedia,Knowledge-sharing,Knowledge ontology,Recommender systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In today’s world, knowledge is important for constructing core competitive advantages for individuals and organizations. Recently, Web 2.0 applications and social media have provided a convenient medium for people to share knowledge over the Internet. However, the huge amount of created knowledge can also leads to the problem of information overload. This research proposes a social knowledge navigation mechanism that utilizes the techniques of relevant knowledge network construction, knowledge importance analysis, and knowledge concept ontology construction to generate a visualized recommendation of a knowledge map of sub-concept and knowledge of an article reading sequence for supporting learning activities related to a free online encyclopedia. The results of experiments conducted on Wikipedia show that the proposed mechanism can effectively recommend useful articles and improve a knowledge seeker’s learning effectiveness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
People exchange information and experiences to generate and enrich their personal knowledge. Knowledge is important for constructing core competitive advantages for individuals and organizations in today’s world (Foss & Pedersen, 2002). In recent years, Web 2.0 applications and social media have provided a convenient environment for people to share their personal knowledge on the Internet. Many people and enterprises also enrich their own knowledge by means of this convenient environment (Cole, 2008).Online collaborative encyclopedias are one of the most famous Web 2.0 applications for knowledge sharing (Leshed, Haber, Matthews, & Lau, 2008), and are well used by individuals and companies. For instance, Pfizer’s pfizerpedia, which is a wiki used in Pfizer’s research, provides an environment for the company’s employees and partners to build knowledge database (Libert & Spector, 2007). The Social Intranet Study 2011 notes that social media such as blogs, wikis and other tools appear on most of the corporate intranets: 61% have at least one tool available to some or all employees. Among the reasons for the popularity of online encyclopedias is that they can be edited frequently so that they remain up to date (wiseGEEK, 2012), and that the articles are of good quality (Giacomo, 2008). The shared content is also a good resource for knowledge learning.There are many online encyclopedias that provide a lot of knowledge, and people seek new knowledge from them every day. For instance, Baidu Baike is a Chinese collaborative online encyclopedia with more than 4.9million articles (Baidu Baike, 2012), surpassing Chinese Wikipedia in this respect. Hudong is the largest Chinese encyclopedia, news, and neologism website in the world. It is the largest wiki site in China with over 6.4million articles and more than 4.5million volunteers (Hudong, 2012). It is ranked 55 in China, and most of its readers are college-educated or browse this site at school (Alexa, 2012a). Wikipedia is a free encyclopedia with more than twenty two million articles. According to Alexa’s survey in 2012, it is ranked sixth in the world and its readers are often users who browse at work and school (Alexa, 2012b). This indicates the importance of online encyclopedias for seeking and sharing knowledge.Online collaborative encyclopedias still have several weaknesses, however, in terms of seeking and reusing knowledge resources, and many researchers have identified the disadvantages of online encyclopedias such as Wikipedia (Wu & Wu, 2011). For example, there are several questions which users ask, such as “Which article is important and worth reading?” “What is the concept in related articles?” “How can I get comprehensive understanding of new knowledge by reading just a few articles?” Lacking a practical way to reduce these disadvantages and improve performance, the results would be a waste of time and information overload. As a result, a recommender mechanism of social knowledge navigation which can support people to reuse the huge volume of available knowledge urgently needs to be established.In order to solve the above problems, this research proposes a novel social knowledge navigation system (SKNS) to support users in knowledge navigation of online free encyclopedias. This study proposes an innovative recommender mechanism of knowledge visualization and navigation which would contains related knowledge findings, judges the importance of knowledge, and offers a visualized knowledge navigation interface. It would construct a more comprehensive view of the knowledge map and highlight the important knowledge flows so people could find knowledge information efficiently. In the proposed system, a knowledge seeker could key in a word and the system would help to find the specific knowledge information required. If the query results were not in accordance with the users’ requirements, then the system would generate sub-concepts as suggestions which would direct the user to search again.The remaining parts of this article are organized as follows. Section 2 of this paper is a review of the related literature on the research topic. Section 3 details the social knowledge navigation recommendation system, which is combined with relevant knowledge network construction, knowledge importance analysis, knowledge concept ontology construction, and a knowledge visualization and navigation interface. An empirical experiment is described in Section 4. Section 5 provides comprehensive experiment results and evaluations. Section 6 concludes and suggests future research directions.In recent years, in the light of emerging trends and the growing popularity of social media, researchers have attempted to analyze the characteristics and enhance the practical uses of social media. Social media gives researchers an unprecedented research opportunity (Kwak, Lee, Park, & Moon, 2010). Social media are “a group of Internet-based applications built on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0, that allow the creation and exchange of user-generated content” (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010). The information created on the social media platforms can be divided into two categories; user-generated content and non-content information (for example the links between articles and user feedback ratings) (Agichtein, Castillo, Donato, Gionis, & Mishne, 2008). Both of these are widely used to extract knowledge and mine hidden information to solve the problem, decision-making, or predict the future (Agichtein et al., 2008; Choudhury, Sundaram, John, & Seligmann, 2008; Stein & Maier, 1995). This kind of content and information is termed ‘social knowledge’. For instance, Wikipedia is a form of output of social knowledge; it is a product generated from the wisdom of the crowd. Cheong and Lee (2009) apply artificial intelligence-based data mining approaches to analyze messages on Twitter to find activity trends. Choudhury et al. (2008) analyze the communication dynamics of blogs and use it to determine correlations with stock market movements. Stein and Maier (1995) discuss how to use online forums as a powerful tool for problem solving.The present research considers that social knowledge is not only a good resource for problem solving or decision-making, but that it also helps people to seek and learn new knowledge. Therefore, this study aims to improve learning effectiveness by utilizing the power of social knowledge in online encyclopedias.In today’s network environment, a huge amount of user-generated content and non-content information is created on social media platforms (Agichtein et al., 2008). It is important to alleviate information overload on a social media platform and to improve the seeking performance. In order to find the useful knowledge of user generated content, being able to identify high quality of information is an important. Traditionally, information retrieval (IR) techniques were used to improve search performance. Recently, network structure mining techniques, such as link mining, have been successfully used with web hyperlink data in order to evaluate the importance of web pages (Wu & Wu’s, 2011; Chiang, Chen, & Yang, 2008). Wu and Wu (2011) utilize internal link analysis to measure the importance of Wikipedia’s articles. He, Pei, Kifer, Mitra, and Giles (2010) propose a context-aware citation recommendation system for finding high-quality citation articles. Social network analysis (SNA) pays attention to the relationships between interactive social entities. Graph theory, theoretical concepts and matrix operations act as the foundations of social network analysis (Hage & Harary, 1983). Social rating mechanisms (Sarma, Sarma, Gollapudi, & Panigrahy, 2010), allow users to evaluate the quality of nearly anything (e.g. blog posts, books, movies, hotels, etc.). Agichtein et al. (2008) explores methods of using community feedback (ratings) to automatically recognize essential and high-quality content. Social rating systems are increasing in popularity among commercial sites (e.g. Digg.com, Amazon.com and Netfix.com).In our work, social rating theory is used as a theoretical foundation for social interaction (SI), and we use social rating mechanisms to evaluate which articles are worthy to read and learn in the knowledge network. The importance of social interaction (feedback rating) is measured by counting the views of the crowd and the experts.One of the most common approaches used to find the similarity between two Web contents is a text mining approach (Berendt, Hotho, & Stumme, 2002). There are three famous similarity measures which are usually used in the text mining process: cosine similarity, Jaccard similarity and Pearson correlation (Strehl, Ghosh, & Mooney, 2000). The technique of quantifying similarity between different objects and text documents can be used in many different modules and Web applications (Erk, 2007; Haveliwala, Gionis, Klein, & Indyk, 2002; Kim & Choi, 1999). For instance, Kim and Choi (1999) present a comparison of collocation-based similarity approaches to determine extra search terms support query expansion; Yuan and Sun (2005) present a structured cosine similarity (SCS) method for document summarization; Singh, Krishna, and Saxena (2009) propose an augmented Jaccard similarity function for the preservation of privacy.This research considers and integrates the methods of the above studies in order to construct a comprehensive method for analyzing knowledge relevance and importance, and aims to provide important and relevant knowledge articles for knowledge seekers.Knowledge visualization investigates ways of using visual illustrations to enhance knowledge sharing between two people or a group (Burkhard, 2004). In the light of Burkhard’s (2004) research, knowledge visualization can effectively reduce problems of overload, misinterpretation, and misuse.A knowledge map is one of the methods used in knowledge visualization, and can be defined as “a tool or technique that enables visualizing knowledge and relationship in a clear form via a way so that the relevant features of the knowledge can be clearly highlighted” (Vail, 1999). It can be applied to a number of different systems or mechanisms. For instance, in Ong et al.’s (2005) research, text mining and SOM categorization are used to construct a knowledge map for reducing the information overload on online news websites. Wang, Su, and Hsieh (2011) propose an implicit knowledge extraction mechanism to build a knowledge map in order to carry out more effective assessments. Other research summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the different display formats of knowledge maps (Lin & Yu, 2009). The three major display formats of a knowledge map are (1) hierarchical displays (Ong et al., 2005), (2) network displays (Liu, Ke, Lee, & Lee, 2008), and (3) map displays (Wu & Wu, 2011). According to Lin and Yu (2009), the map display format is the most suitable display format. It can help users find the major concepts and the relationships between different objects easily, but can still contain more information than hierarchical displays.A Knowledge flow fulfills people’s knowledge requirements and the referencing of the order of articles about the tasks conducted (Liu & Lin, 2012), and it can be defined as “a process of knowledge passing between people or knowledge processing mechanism” (Zhuge, 2002). It can offer task-related knowledge to help meet people’s knowledge demands quickly and effectively (Zhuge, 2002) and can be built up by focusing on knowledge needs (Kim, Hwang, & Suh, 2003; Xiangfeng & Jie, 2010). Other researchers find that a knowledge flow can be applied to offer recommendations to workers (Lai & Liu, 2009).Therefore, in order to avoid the information overload problem inherent in seeking new knowledge on online encyclopedia platforms, this study uses knowledge visualization to reduce it, and chooses a map display format for the visualization of knowledge articles. It also uses knowledge flow to help knowledge seekers view necessary knowledge effectively. If sufficiently supported by the information displayed on the knowledge map and a knowledge flow, people can seek new knowledge effectively.A framework of the proposed social knowledge navigation mechanism used in online encyclopedias is designed and presented in this section. Fig. 1depicts the main components and procedures of the proposed social knowledge navigation system (SKNS) architecture, which includes four main modules.The first component is a relevant knowledge network construction module; the aim of this component is to collect relevant articles from the online encyclopedia platform. The second component is a knowledge importance analysis module; the purpose of this component is to evaluate which articles are worth reading. The third component is a knowledge concept ontology construction module; it is used to find and construct sub-concepts contained inside special knowledge. The last component is a knowledge visualization and navigation interface. With this component, the study can help knowledge seekers to understand the information and knowledge in the knowledge network effectively.The aim of this module is to collect relevant articles from online encyclopedia platforms. In order to discover and learn new knowledge from online encyclopedia platforms, this system gathers relevant articles and filters out unrelated articles. The processes of the module can be divided into two steps.The first step is to construct the knowledge network, which includes articles relevant to the knowledge the users want to learn. This study uses the keyword as the input from a knowledge seeker, and regards it as the seeking target. The keyword search is one of the most common methods used to explore unknown knowledge, and the keyword search function is provided on almost all of the online encyclopedia platforms. Therefore, this study uses the keyword input as a knowledge seeker’s seeking target, and uses it to find the start page of the knowledge article.Almost all of the knowledge article pages contain internal hyperlinks, and a huge amount of reference and extension information can be obtained by accessing them. The internal hyperlinks may include sources about further readings related to this knowledge, so this research collects crucial internal hyperlinks (e.g. extended reading), which are contained in the knowledge articles, to find other relevant article pages. Those crucial internal hyperlinks represent the candidate articles which are closely related to the learning object of users. In this knowledge network, each article page is represented by a node and each internal hyperlink is represented as an edge. The knowledge network is constructed by expanding the hyperlinks and including the referenced articles recursively.The purpose of this step is to identify which articles included in the constructed knowledge network are highly relevant to the seeking target of a knowledge seeker. When a knowledge seeker wants to learn new knowledge on the encyclopedia platform, he/she is only interested in the articles matching his/her seeking target. To achieve this purpose, the technique of cosine similarity (Steinbach, Karypis, & Kumar, 2000) is applied to evaluate and remove less relevant nodes (articles) from the knowledge network. The formula of cosine similarity score is calculated as:(1)CSSSC=cosine(D→S,D→C)=D→S·D→C|D→S||D→C|,whereD→Sis the vector of the internal link term frequency (TF) of the start page (the keyword page on the encyclopedia platform), andD→Cis the vector of the internal link TF of a candidate page, which is retrieved from one of the internal links. By calculating the similarity between start page and candidate page, we can obtain the articles which are related to the learning object of the knowledge seeker.The purpose of the knowledge importance module is to find the articles which are worth reading and learn from the constructed in the knowledge network. This study combines the factors of social interaction and social structure to analyze the importance of an article. The importance of social interaction is measured by counting the views of crowds as well as experts. The importance of social structure is evaluated according to the node’s importance in the network structure.The importance of social interaction (SI) includes two parts, crowd rating (CR) and expert rating (ER), which stand for the aggregated feedback score of an article evaluated by crowds and experts respectively. Each article in this knowledge network has its own CR and ER scores. CRiis the crowd rating of article i aggregated from the feedback provided on the online encyclopedia platform. The formula of CRiis written as:(2)CRi=1n∑k=1n(crik/d),where k is the evaluation metrics in the encyclopedia platform. d means the crowd feedback as evaluated by a d-point Likert scale. For instance, if the platform’s user feedback uses a five-point Likert scale as the first evaluation metric, then d is equal to five.crikis the average score of metric k’s user feedback for article i. n is the total number of evaluation metrics. A higher CRiindicates the greater value of knowledge article i which the general users perceive.The encyclopedia platform can also recruit knowledgeable people as experts to rate the articles, so this study provides ER as the expert rating for a typical article i. The formula of ERiis written as:(3)ERi=1n∑k=1n(erik/d),whereerikis the article i’s average score of experts’ feedback on metric k.Combining the crowd and expert ratings measured above, the knowledge importance for article i, evaluated from the social interactions SIi, can be formulated as:(4)SIi=wr·CRi+(1-wr)·ERi,where wris the weight of CRi, and (1−wr) is the weight of ERi. This weight can be adjusted by the encyclopedia platforms.We can further measure the importance of an article from the aspect of knowledge network structure. This research considers the in-links, out-links, bidirectional links, and degree centrality of each article to measure the connection structure strength and the relationship tie strength between two different articles. We improve the structure strength analysis method used in Wu and Wu’s (2011) study. The formula of structure strength (SS) for article i is represented as:(5)SSi=|ΘB(ni)|∑ni∈KN|ΘB(ni)|+wI·|ΘI(ni)|∑ni∈KN|ΘI(ni)|+wO·|ΘO(ni)|∑ni∈KN|ΘO(ni)|·ΦD(ni),where KN is the set of the articles included in the knowledge network andwI+wO=1.ΘB(ni)is the set of bidirectional links between article i and the other articles in this knowledge network.ΘI(ni)denotes in-links of article i.ΘO(ni)denotes out-links of article i. wIand wOis the weight for in-links and out-links respectively. Also, because all of the links represent relevant articles inside this knowledge network, the study considers the degree centrality of each node. LetΦD(ni) denote the CDF (cumulative distribution function) of the degree of article i’s internal links. Note that SS for article i will be normalized before further score aggregation.Next, if articles i and j have a higher common in-links and out-links, the tie strength of relationship between them is stronger. A common in-link means two articles have the same source or reference information; conversely, a common out-link means they are used in the same application or method. The tie strength of the relationship between articles i and j is measured as:(6)RSij=12|ΘI(ni)∩ΘI(nj)||ΘI(ni)∪ΘI(nj)|+|ΘO(ni)∩ΘO(nj)||ΘO(ni)∪ΘO(nj)|.The self-loop link and the addition links will be detected and removed. Finally, the importance score for article i is formulated as:(7)KISi=12(SIi+SSi).The knowledge concept ontology construction module is developed to extract the sub-concepts and their relationship from the constructed knowledge network according to the user’s seeking target. Ontology is a structured knowledge base which describes the concepts and their relations in a domain (Cui, Lu, Li, & Chen, 2009; Liu & Lin, 2012). For the purpose of learning new knowledge effectively, this study builds seeking target-driven knowledge concept ontology.O=<NC,R>denotes a ontology, where NC is a set of knowledge concepts and R is the parent-child relation between two different knowledge concepts. Because all of the article nodes contain category labels in the online encyclopedia environment, the concepts can be extracted by NLP. For instance, the category labeled “Methods in sociology” will extract two concepts, “Method” and “sociology.” Also, if the title of the article is also a category, this category label should be considered as a concept, too. The set of concepts a typical article i involves can be expressed as:(8)Ωi={ci1,ci2,…,cini}.The set of aggregated concepts extracted from the knowledge network can be written as:(9)NC=⋃ni∈KNΩiTo construct this parent-child relation from the extracted concepts, this study uses the platform’s category and sub-category hierarchy relation of each article (Cui et al., 2009). The schema of knowledge concept ontology is illustrated in Fig. 2, in which a circle represents a unique concept, and the link represents their parent-child relationship. For example, c2 has a parent relationship with c1; on the contrary, c1 has a child relationship with c2.The construction process of the knowledge concept is illustrated by the following example. Assume a user wants to seek and learn the new knowledge “social networking service” and search for it on an online encyclopedia platform. This keyword “social networking service” is his/her seeking target. The system first identifies several relevant and important articles, such as the “social network analysis” and “social software” articles. Then, the system extracts the category labels in those articles, such as “category: social network” in the article “social network analysis” and “category: social networking service” in the article “social software.” Finally, according to the category tree established by the encyclopedia, the system finds that a parent-child relationship exists between the “category: social network” and “category: social networking service.” The relationship is built between c2 (category: social network) and c1 (category: social networking service) in Fig. 2.The aim of sub-concept finding is to construct the knowledge map satisfying the seeking target. The main steps needed for the sub-concept finding are as follows. The first step is to map the concepts of each article to the knowledge concept ontology. The second step is to calculate each article’s concept score by the concepts it has.The knowledge concept ontology is the forest-like structure in the encyclopedia platform. Each root of a tree in the forest represents a main sub-concept. The score of a sub-concept equals the number of nodes included in the path from article node concepts to the sub-concept nodes. The final step is to compare each article node’s score. The concept with the largest score represents this article node’s sub-concept. If there are two concepts with an identical score, those two concepts also can be regarded as this article’s sub-concepts. For instance, there are two main sub-concepts “social network” (node c3) and “social networking service” (node c4) in Fig. 2. Assume “category: social networking” and “category: social networking service” are the only category labels contained in the “social network analysis” article (node c2) and in the “social software” article (node c1). The score of the main sub-concepts (c3,c4) with respect to c1 and c2 is (3,3) and (4,0) respectively. Therefore, the sub-concept of the “social network analysis” article is node c3 (“social network”); and the sub-concept of the “social software” article is node c3 (“social network”) and node c4 (“social networking service”).In order to let knowledge seekers understand the information in the knowledge network effectively, this study builds a visualized social knowledge map and navigation interface with NodeXL, which provides a Microsoft Excel 2007 and 2010 template. It supports network analysis, popular SNA statistics, clustering, and the visualization features of the spreadsheet (Ahn, Taieb-Maimon, Sopan, Plaisant, & Shneiderman, 2011; Smith et al., 2009). The visualized social knowledge map can help knowledge seekers to view the article’s relationship (e.g. article’s sub-concept), and the navigation interface can suggest reading sequences for knowledge seekers. The following paragraphs describe how to build the knowledge map and reading sequence.This study uses a knowledge map to help users to understand the overall relationships and sub-concepts of target knowledge. The knowledge map is generated in the following steps. According to the knowledge concept ontology, we map the sub-concepts of each article in the knowledge network. Then, these sub-concepts corresponding to the article on the knowledge network are expressed by different symbols and colors. The knowledge map with the sub-concepts is shown by NodeXL. In this step, a knowledge seeker can see the sub-concept information related to the seeking target, such as “What are the main sub-concepts of this special knowledge?” With the support of this knowledge map, knowledge seekers can understand new knowledge effectively.In order to help knowledge seekers to learn the new knowledge effectively, a knowledge flow recommendation is generated for the seeking target. The knowledge flow recommendation is a reading path highlighted by the knowledge map. An article on online encyclopedia platforms is usually very long. Therefore, in order to reduce the number of articles to be read, this proposed system only recommends a few articles. Then, the system uses the evaluated knowledge importance, the article node’s link, and the knowledge concept ontology to build the sequence in the following steps.First, we use the keyword’s article node as the start node and locate the position of the keyword node’s concepts in the knowledge concept ontology. In the second step, we use in-links of the start node to find the cause of the learning object, and out-links of the start node to find the effect of the learning object. So we can determine the first cause node and effect node, the following two conditions must be met: the candidate nodes should be among the top five in terms of knowledge importance. The concept of the candidate nodes should have a parent relationship with the start node’s concept. The in-linked candidate node with the maximum number of related concepts is selected as the first cause node. The out-linked candidate node with the maximum number of related concepts is selected as the first effect node. By repeating the above rules, we can further define the cause of the cause node and the effect of the effect node until a few article nodes are produced to construct the reading sequence.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
