@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Relevance-based language modelling for recommender systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new recommendation approach based on the Relevance Modelling (RM) of the problem is proposed.The neighbour selection problem is improved by Posterior Probabilistic Clustering (PPC).Background information such as item popularity is successfully integrated by using RM models.Performance of the recommendation improves when more clusters are considered in the PPC technique.Combination of both contributions leads to an even better performance than their separate application.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Relevance models,Recommender systems,Collaborative filtering,Probabilistic clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Relevance-Based Language Models, commonly known as Relevance Models, are successful approaches to explicitly introduce the concept of relevance in the statistical Language Modelling framework of Information Retrieval. These models achieve state-of-the-art retrieval performance in the pseudo relevance feedback task. On the other hand, the field of recommender systems is a fertile research area where users are provided with personalised recommendations in several applications. In this paper, we propose an adaptation of the Relevance Modelling framework to effectively suggest recommendations to a user. We also propose a probabilistic clustering technique to perform the neighbour selection process as a way to achieve a better approximation of the set of relevant items in the pseudo relevance feedback process. These techniques, although well known in the Information Retrieval field, have not been applied yet to recommender systems, and, as the empirical evaluation results show, both proposals outperform individually several baseline methods. Furthermore, by combining both approaches even larger effectiveness improvements are achieved.Recommender systems have traditionally been a fertile research area due to the existence of a wide range of scenarios where users may benefit from automatic personalised recommendations. This research area has its roots in the eighties, and started to attract wider attention in the mid-1990 when the first works on collaborative filtering were published (Hill, Stead, Rosenstein, & Furnas, 1995; Resnick, Iacovou, Suchak, Bergstrom, & Riedl, 1994). Collaborative Filtering (CF) is one of the three classical approaches to recommendation (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005): content-based recommendation, based on the user’s history; collaborative filtering, based on the history of similar users; and hybrid approaches, based on combining content-based recommendation and collaborative filtering.In CF (Herlocker, Konstan, & Riedl, 2002), the input evidence about user preferences consists of data records collected from user interaction with items. In the simplest form, this evidence consists of explicit user ratings, which are graded relevance values assigned by end-users to items of interest. CF algorithms exploit the target user’s ratings to make preference predictions, and have the interesting property that no item descriptions are needed to provide recommendations, since the algorithms merely exploit information about past interaction between users and items. Moreover, CF has the salient advantage that a user benefits from others’ experience, being exposed to novel recommendations produced from the personal preferences of affine users.Two different types of CF approaches exist: model-based approaches, which learn user/item rating patterns to build statistical models that provide rating estimations, and memory-based approaches, which compute user/item similarities based on distance and correlation metrics (Desrosiers & Karypis, 2011). Memory-based approaches find either like-minded people for the target user (user-based approach), or pairs of items that are liked by common users. In the user-based approach, the set of similar-minded users are called neighbours, and their preferences are combined to predict ratings for the active user. In the item-based approach, items similar to the ones the user has liked in the past are recommended.The recommendation task has been traditionally formulated and evaluated as a rating prediction problem (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005). However, in practical terms, the effectiveness of recommendations depends on what items are presented to the user and in what order. Thus the ranking of recommended items, rather than the numeric system scores that determine this ranking, is the essential problem in common recommendation scenarios, whereby recommendation can be seen as an IR task – one where there is no explicit query. Considering this, several proposals have been recently developed to formalise and address the recommendation task as a relevance ranking problem (Bellogín, Wang, & Castells, 2011b; Wang, de Vries, & Reinders, 2006a, Wang, de Vries, & Reinders, 2008; Wang, Robertson, de Vries, & Reinders, 2008). The objective is to take advantage of well-studied and highly-performing Information Retrieval (IR) techniques to achieve effectiveness enhancements – and a better theoretical understanding – in recommendation tasks, upon principles of ranking for relevance. Authors in this strand of research have explored the adaptation of the vector-space IR model (Bellogín et al., 2011b), the extended Boolean model (Bellogín, Wang, & Castells, 2011a), the binary independence retrieval model (upon the probability ranking principle) (Wang et al., 2008; Wang & Robertson et al., 2008), and statistical Language Models (Wang et al., 2006a). However, to the best of our knowledge, no attempt has been made yet at a similar adaptation of so-called Relevance-Based Language Models (Lavrenko & Croft, 2001).Relevance-Based Language Models (or Relevance Models for short, RM) are among the best-performing ranking techniques in text retrieval. They were devised with the aim of explicitly introducing the concept of relevance, intrinsic to the probabilistic model of IR, in statistical Language Models (LM). Relevance Models achieve state-of-the-art performance in terms of effectiveness for the pseudo relevance feedback task (a.k.a. blind relevance feedback) (Lavrenko & Croft, 2001). In IR, relevance is a relation between a query and a set of documents. In common IR settings, the exact and complete set of relevant documents is generally unknown. Relevance feedback techniques work with approximations to this set, which can be obtained by a wide variety of approaches, such as asking the user (explicit relevance feedback), or just taking the initial output of a well-performing IR system as a good guess (pseudo relevance feedback) – this is the case in RM. Given a query and such an approximation to the set of relevant documents, RM selects good expansion terms from those present in the pseudo-relevant documents in order to formulate and run a better query.The adaptation of RM to recommendation is non-trivial as, to begin with, there are neither queries nor words in the generic recommendation task. A first problem we therefore address is to find an analogy between the elements involved in RM as defined in text retrieval (documents, queries, words, pseudo-relevant documents, expanded terms), and the variables handled by a recommender system: users, (black-box) items, and records of interaction between them. In this paper we propose one such analogy under which the RM can be adapted to recommendation, leveraging the effectiveness of the Relevance Models to estimate the probabilities of relevance, even when the probability distributions are not expressed in terms of words as originally proposed for text retrieval. Our approach involves, as we shall see, the selection of similar users as the equivalent of pseudo-relevant documents, resulting in a form of user profile expansion through the preferences of nearest neighbours.A good approximation of the set of relevant documents is critical to the effectiveness of pseudo relevance feedback methods. Analogously, a good selection of user neighbourhoods (as the equivalent of pseudo-relevant documents) can be expected to heavily influence the effectiveness of our approach. In the context of a probabilistically formalised framework as we intend to build, we investigate the use of Posterior Probabilistic Clustering (PPC) (Ding, Li, Luo, & Peng, 2008) as a rigorous probabilistic basis for neighbourhood formation, based on Non-negative Matrix Factorisation (NMF). Besides the probabilistic interpretability of this method, the NMF family of algorithms has proved to have a very good performance in terms of clustering effectiveness (Xu, Liu, & Gong, 2003). In this paper we explore the novel use of this particular probabilistic clustering in recommender systems, both in isolation (as an enhancement of neighbour selection in CF recommendation), and in combination with the relevance modelling of the recommendation process.The main contributions of this paper thus include:•A new recommendation approach based on Relevance Modelling under the Statistical Language Modelling framework, where the recommendation process is modelled as a profile expansion process. We produce new estimations for RM under the i.i.d. sampling and conditional sampling assumptions in recommender systems. We develop the probabilistic framework into computable terms, resulting in a novel, empirically effective recommendation method.The use of probabilistic clustering methods for the neighbour selection problem, in particular, the use of Posterior Probabilistic Clustering, for which we have produced the necessary document representation strategies to be able to use PPC for a task so different from that originally conceived (text clustering).The combination of both contributions, further enhancing the performance of their separate application. We find performance improvements of over 300% with respect to the best tested method from the state-of-the-art.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we present a study of the works related to our proposal. Section 3 presents the Relevance Modelling framework and its adaptation to the recommendation problem. In Section 4 we introduce our proposal for neighbour selection based on Posterior Probabilistic Clustering. Section 5 reports the empirical evaluation of the proposed approaches and analyses the results of different experiments. Finally, conclusions and future work directions are presented in Section 6.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a relevance modelling approach for the recommendation problem. Our proposal addresses the item recommendation task as a profile expansion problem, using the mechanisms for query expansion provided by the Relevance-Based Language Models. The adaptation of this IR model to the recommendation task is non-trivial, given the different nature – and even the number – of the input data spaces the systems handle in each case. We devise an adaptation where the recommendation variables (items and users) play different roles at different points in the model, thus resulting in a recommendation RM where the elements have a quite different meaning than intended in the original formulation for text IR. The development of the model into terms that link to available observations is quite different as well. Yet we still inherit the practical and theoretical advantages of language models in IR, such as the avoidance of an explicit relevance variable, which makes the resulting probabilistic framework easier to develop and bring to computable statistical estimations (e.g. no need for explicit relevance judgements in the recommendation model), while retaining a clear formal underpinning.The empirical evaluation of our proposal shows significant improvements in terms of effectiveness (measured by ranking quality metrics) against different related baselines. Furthermore, in order to obtain better neighbours for the memory-based recommendation, we proposed the application of the Posterior Probabilistic Clustering algorithm. This proposal by itself also achieves effectiveness improvements over traditional neighbour-based approaches, while at the same time it outperforms standard matrix factorisation algorithms and other probabilistic-based approaches. Furthermore, we show that the combination of both proposals improves the results of their individual application, demonstrating in this way that the better the neighbourhood (which acts as the pseudo relevance set in the explicit search scenario), the better the estimations of the underlying relevance model, and therefore, better item recommendations are produced as expansions of the user profile. This fact is consistent with previous results obtained in the application of RM on text retrieval.Several potential directions open up from this point to improve the recommendation effectiveness further. We plan to further study other options for the construction of the pseudo relevance set of users, not only techniques based on neighbours but also other approaches to produce an initial user ranking, as is standard in text retrieval. We will also consider alternative estimations and smoothing approaches to be applied in our formulation of the problem. We envision additional refinements of our methods, such as only considering positively rated items in the user profile when computing the user likelihood, or tackling differently the absence of rating for an item by the user in the PPC algorithm. We also plan to explore the use of our approach as a basis to address the problem of recommendation diversification. We envision the diversification of the recommended items in the expanded profile, as an equivalent problem to promoting divergent terms in the estimation of the relevance models (Parapar & Barreiro, 2011). Finally, we aim to study the formulation of the equivalent item-based recommendation modelling corresponding to our user-based proposal. This technique is known to perform better than the user-based in some situations, and thus, the relevance model approach might find performance improvements also in those scenarios.