@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of Taylor’s paper, Question-Negotiation and Information-Seeking in Libraries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The influence of Taylor’s 1968 article is mainly in library and information science.An increasing influence in non-LIS fields has appeared since 2003.Taylor’s concept of “four levels of information needs” has had the largest influence.Information retrieval researchers focused on concepts relating to information needs.Reference service researchers focused on concepts relating to reference interviews.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Question negotiation,Information needs,Citation context analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study uses bibliometric analysis and citation context analysis to identify the influence of the main concepts embedded in Taylor’s 1968 classic article entitled Question-Negotiation and Information-Seeking in Libraries. This study analyses articles published between 1969 and 2010 which cite Taylor’s article. The results show that Taylor’s article on a question-negotiation model is increasingly visible and its influence is not limited to the discipline of library and information science. Of the 14 cited concepts identified, the concept of “four levels of information needs” was cited most (31.7%), followed by “question negotiation” (20.5%) and “other concepts relating to information needs” (17.9%). The results indicate an increasing trend in the citations of “four levels of information needs” and this concept also received the most attention from information retrieval research. A decreasing trend was evident for the concept of “question negotiation” and this concept was frequently cited by reference service researchers. In addition, among the 10 citation functions, “related literature” was dominant (30.8%). Both “evidence” and “views” were in second place with the same percentage (18.7%), followed by “terms” (9.2%) and “background information” (7.2%). A decreasing trend was identified in the top three citation functions, whereas an increasing trend was observed in the “term” and “background information” functions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When people cannot solve problems using their knowledge, they usually seek information to fill this knowledge gap (Belkin, Oddy, & Brooks, 1982). A library is one of many information channels available to inquirers. Historically, libraries attempt to understand user information requirements and how users seek and use information to increase user access to desired information. This is why human information behavior has been studied in the field of library and information science (LIS) since the early nineteenth century (Wang, 2011).Research on information behavior is multidisciplinary and focuses on the interaction between users and information. Of the many topics related to information behavior, LIS researchers have mainly focused on information seeking and information use. Two major information behavior research perspectives dominated during different periods. Before the late 1970s, the system-centered view was dominant. This view treats information as a valuable resource that can resolve user uncertainty. Hence, libraries should provide large databases and improve system functions and interfaces to increase user access to information. However, better retrieval systems did not reduce user information problems. By the 1980s, the user-centered view—which focuses on user needs and acknowledges that user needs may change according to different contexts—emerged and became dominant (Wilson, 2000).During the transition from the system-oriented view to the user-oriented view, Taylor pioneered user needs. He published an article called Question-Negotiation and Information Seeking in Libraries in 1968 which developed the question-negotiation model based on interviews with reference librarians. Taylor (1962, 1968) identified four levels of information needs: visceral, conscious, formalized, and compromised. These levels were first introduced in The Process of Asking Questions (Taylor, 1962). Visceral need is an actual, yet unexpressed information need because inquirers are not conscious of any information needs. The conscious need indicates that inquirers consciously realize their information need. When inquirers can express their information need, they are in the formalized need level. Finally, the question of the inquirer must be adapted to the information system.The four levels of information needs also explain the process of question formation. Each information need level corresponds to questions with different characteristics. Usually, inquirers cannot express their real information needs to access relevant resources. Therefore, reference librarians attempt to assist inquirers by clarifying information problems through reference interviews. The reference interview is a process of question negotiation where reference librarians communicate with inquirers, and emphasizes the importance of interaction. Reference interviews assist inquirers in determining their actual information needs and subsequently build bridges between inquirers and available resources. To achieve successful question negotiation, Taylor (1968) suggested that reference librarians extract five types of information from the process, including the subject of the question, the motivation of the inquirer, personal characteristics, anticipated or accepted answers, and the relationship between the question and available resources.Although Taylor’s question-negotiation model was developed using a limited number of librarian interviews, it was highly valued because it was the first study to develop the reference interview process. The question-negotiation model has become a practical guide for reference interviews and has affected other information behavior theories (Edward, 2005; Nicolaisen, 2009). Taylor’s work is regarded as the foundation for understanding the psychological changes in information needs and user-oriented approaches to information retrieval studies (Bruce, 2005; Fidel, Pejtersen, Cleal, & Bruce, 2004; Xie, 2008). Taylor indicated that information needs may be unconscious and inexpressible. He also indicated that his 1968 article received attention because it helps with understanding the human–system interface in libraries and other information systems (Taylor, 1985). This indicates that the contribution of Taylor’s (1968) article on the question-negotiation model is not limited to reference services. Taylor’s user-oriented perspectives on users and information systems have also inspired related studies. Pikas (2007) indicated that Taylor’s article has influenced the education of information specialists, the design of information systems, and the advancement of related studies.The influence of a publication can be measured by counting its citation frequency. Bibliometrics state that the more an article is cited, the greater its influence. Influence represents visibility. When a publication is frequently cited, it indicates that it has been read by several authors. The citation frequency can be used to determine the importance of a publication, although it is controversial. Regarding citation frequency, a preliminary search of the Web of Science (WoS) database shows that Taylor’s question-negotiation article was first cited in 1969 and has been cited every year since. This indicates that it remains an influential article. However, this does not indicate which content from the cited article is most influential nor does it show the relationship between citing and cited articles. Citation context analysis can be used to measure these variables. Citation context analysis is a content analysis method used by researchers to analyze cited concepts and reasons for citation based on the text surrounding in-text citations (Small, 1978).To examine the influence of Taylor’s article, this paper uses a bibliometric method to analyze citation frequency trends, the distribution of citations among disciplines, and the research topics of citing papers. This helps identify disciplines that are influenced by Taylor’s article. In addition, citation context analysis is used to identify the cited concepts and the citation functions of Taylor’s article. This highlights the specific influential concepts and the reasons Taylor’s article was cited. In other words, this study measured the influence of Taylor’s article using three aspects: the number of citations, the content of the cited article, and the citation functions of the article. The results contribute to a deeper understanding of the influence of a pioneer in the area of human information behavior with a user-centered view.This study answers the following research questions:(1)Is the influence of Taylor’s article, Question-Negotiation and Information Seeking in Libraries, increasing?What disciplines do the citing articles belong to?What research topics do the citing articles focus on?Which concepts from Taylor’s article have the most influence on citing authors?What functions does Taylor’s article serve for the citing articles?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
