@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bankruptcy prediction using terminal failure processes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design traditional failure models using different classification methods.We estimate a set of failure processes.We design financial failure models that fit each process.We examine model accuracy using these two methods of designing models.Model performance is assessed using different samples and over different time horizons.Failure process-based models achieved better mid-term forecasts than traditional models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,Finance,Bankruptcy prediction,Failure processes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Traditional bankruptcy prediction models, designed using classification or regression techniques, achieve short-term performances (1 year) that are fairly good, but that often worsen when the prediction horizon exceeds 1 year. We show how to improve the performance of such models beyond 1 year using models that take into account the evolution of firm’s financial health over a short period of time. For this purpose, we design models that fit the underlying failure process of different groups of firms. Our results demonstrate that such models lead to better prediction accuracy at a 3-year horizon than that achieved with common models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For many years, a large number of studies have been focusing on how to improve the accuracy of failure models. Such models are used by financial institutions to assess their credit risk, that is to say the maximal credit loss they may be exposed to if their counterparties do not reimburse their debts. One of the components used to assess this loss is made up of the probability of default of each borrower, usually given a 1-year horizon. The accuracy of the estimation of this probability is a key issue for prudential purposes, since it allows financial institutions to determine the amount of capital needed to cover credit losses. But the accuracy of this estimation at a mid-term horizon (between 2 and 5 years) is also important since risks incurred by financial institutions still exist up until the maturity of the debts owed by their clients. However, most of the time, traditional models used to make mid-term forecasts lead to predictions whose accuracy decreases as the horizon of the prediction increases. One possible explanation of this weakness relies on the fact that these models consider failure based on an erroneous assumption. As these models rely on explanatory variables that are measured over a unique period of time, they assume that the bankruptcy process is the same for all companies, and as a consequence that the warning signs of failure occur in the same way, at the same moment and with the same magnitude for all firms (Laitinen, 1991). Reality, however, is slightly different. One knows that companies follow different strategies of decline, which explains why some firms will go bankrupt extremely quick although they appear to be in rather good health, some others slowly decline before going bankrupt, and yet others will manage to survive even though everything suggests they will not (D’Aveni, 1989).To improve model ability to correctly forecast the fate of companies not solely at a 1-year horizon, but also at a 2- or 3-year horizon, or more, some authors attempted to take into account these strategies of decline using measures of firm’s financial health over several years. Some of them used measures of variation of financial indicators over time (Altman et al., 1977; Dambolena and Khoury, 1980). Others designed multi-period models (Berg, 2007; Gepp and Kumar, 2008) that used indicators that were measured over several consecutive years. However, all these works have not led to conclusive results since they did not manage to achieve mid-term forecasts that are as accurate as short-term ones. Still others (du Jardin and Séverin, 2011; 2012) attempted to represent the different paths that firms follow during their lifetime, called trajectories – some leading to bankruptcy, some others not – to forecast their fate. This time, the results are fairly good as the forecasts are rather stable over time. However, this method has a major drawback because it requires a significant amount of historical data; indeed, the models are designed using financial ratios that are collected over 7 consecutive years and, in the real world, it is not uncommon that financial institutions are not able to collect so much data, either because some companies which are of interest are too young, or because data are simply not readily available. This is the reason why we study another way of designing bankruptcy models, using less data than the method mentioned above, but that still relies on this notion of “trajectory”. Models rely on a set of “terminal failure processes”. These processes represent prototype behaviors of companies that are measured over solely 3 years. Among companies that share the same process, some will finally go bankrupt, some others will not. Once these processes are estimated, companies are classified into groups that share the same process, and then a set of bankruptcy models are designed, one model for each group, using traditional modeling methods (discriminant analysis, logistic regression, survival analysis and a neural network). Thereby, for each combination of failure process and each modeling method, a forecasting model is designed. Models are then used with test data to assess their prediction ability over three time horizons: 1, 2 and 3 years. Results are then compared to those achieved with traditional models commonly used.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present a literature review that explains our research question. In Section 3, we describe the samples and methods used in our study. In Section 4, we present and discuss the results and, in Section 5, we conclude.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
