@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The uniqueness property for networks with several origin–destination pairs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the uniqueness property for networks with several origin–destination pairs.We find a necessary condition for the uniqueness property in terms of excluded minors.We characterize completely bidirectional rings with the uniqueness property.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Congestion externalities,Nonatomic games,Ring,Transportation network,Uniqueness property,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider congestion games on networks with nonatomic users and user-specific costs. We are interested in the uniqueness property defined by Milchtaich (2005) as the uniqueness of equilibrium flows for all assignments of strictly increasing cost functions. He settled the case with two-terminal networks. As a corollary of his result, it is possible to prove that some other networks have the uniqueness property as well by adding common fictitious origin and destination. In the present work, we find a necessary condition for networks with several origin–destination pairs to have the uniqueness property in terms of excluded minors or subgraphs. As a key result, we characterize completely bidirectional rings for which the uniqueness property holds: it holds precisely for nine networks and those obtained from them by elementary operations. For other bidirectional rings, we exhibit affine cost functions yielding to two distinct equilibrium flows. Related results are also proven. For instance, we characterize networks having the uniqueness property for any choice of origin–destination pairs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many areas, different users share a common network to travel or to exchange information or goods. Each user wishes to select a path connecting a certain origin to a certain destination. However, the selection of paths in the network by the users induces congestion on the arcs, leading to an increase of the costs. Taking into account the choices of the other users, each user looks for a path of minimum cost. We expect therefore to reach a Nash equilibrium: each user makes the best reply to the actions chosen by the other users.This kind of games is studied since the 1950s, with the seminal works by Wardrop (1952) and Beckmann, McGuire, and Winsten (1956). Their practical interest is high since the phenomena implied by the strategic interactions of users on a network are often nonintuitive and may lead to an important loss in efficiency. The Braess paradox (Braess, 1968) – adding an arc may deteriorate all travel times – is the classical example illustrating such a nonintuitive loss and it has been observed in concrete situations, for example in New York Kolata (1990). Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou (1999) initiated a precise quantitative study of this loss, which lead soon after to the notion of “Price of Anarchy” that is the cost of the worst equilibrium divided by the optimal cost, see (Roughgarden & Tardos, 2002) among many other references. Some recent researches proposed also ways to control this loss, see Bauso, Giarré, and Pesenti (2009) and Knight and Harper (2013) for instance.When the users are assumed to be nonatomic – the effect of a single user is negligible – equilibrium is known to exist (Milchtaich, 2000). Moreover, when the users are affected equally by the congestion on the arcs, the costs supported by the users are the same in all equilibria (Aashtiani & Magnanti, 1981). In the present paper, we are interested in the case when the users may be affected differently by the congestion. In such a case, examples are known for which these costs are not unique. Various conditions have been found that ensure nevertheless uniqueness. For instance, if the user’s cost functions attached to the arcs are continuous, strictly increasing, and identical up to additive constants, then we have uniqueness of the equilibrium flows, and thus of the equilibrium costs (Altman & Kameda, 2001). In 2005, continuing a work initiated by Milchtaich (2000) and Konishi (2004) for networks with parallel routes, Milchtaich (2005) found a topological characterization of two-terminal networks for which, given any assignment of strictly increasing and continuous cost functions, the flows are the same in all equilibria. Such networks are said to enjoy the uniqueness property. Similar results with atomic users have been obtained by Orda, Rom, and Shimkin (1993) and Richman and Shimkin (2007).The purpose of this paper is to find similar characterizations for networks with more than two terminals. We are able to characterize completely the ring networks having the uniqueness property, whatever the number of terminals is. Studying equilibria on rings can be seen as the decentralized counterpart of works on the optimization of multiflows on rings, like the one proposed by Myung, Kim, and Tcha (1997). Our main result for ring networks is that the uniqueness property holds precisely for nine networks and those obtained from them by elementary operations. For other rings, we exhibit affine cost functions yielding to two distinct equilibrium flows. It allows to describe infinite families of graphs for which the uniqueness property does not hold. For instance, there is a family of ring networks such that every network with a minor in this family does not have the uniqueness property.An undirected graph is a pairG=(V,E)where V is a finite set of vertices and E is a family of unordered pairs of vertices called edges. A directed graph, or digraph for short, is a pairD=(V,A)where V is a finite set of vertices and A is a family of ordered pairs of vertices called arcs. A mixed graph is a graph having edges and arcs. More formally, it is a tripleM=(V,E,A)where V is a finite set of vertices, E is a family of unordered pairs of vertices (edges) and A is a family of ordered pairs of vertices (arcs). Given an undirected graphG=(V,E), we define the directed version of G as the digraphD=(V,A)obtained by replacing each (undirected) edge in E by two (directed) arcs, one in each direction. An arc of G is understood as an arc of its directed version. In these graphs, loops – edges or arcs having identical endpoints – are not allowed, but pairs of vertices occurring more than once – parallel edges or parallel arcs – are allowed.A walk in a directed graph D is a sequenceP=(v0,a1,v1,…,ak,vk)wherek⩾0,v0,v1,…,vk∈V,a1,…,ak∈A, andai=(vi-1,vi)fori=1,…,k. If allviare distinct, the walk is called a path. If no confusion may arise, we identify sometimes a path P with the set of its vertices or with the set of its arcs, allowing to use the notationv∈P(resp.a∈P) if a vertex v (resp. an arc a) occurs in P.An undirected graphG′=(V′,E′)is a subgraph of an undirected graphG=(V,E)ifV′⊆VandE′⊆E. An undirected graphG′is a minor of an undirected graph G ifG′is obtained by contracting edges (possibly none) of a subgraph of G. Contracting an edge uv means deleting it and identifying both endpoints u and v. Two undirected graphs are homeomorphic if they arise from the same undirected graph by subdivision of edges, where a subdivision of an edge uv consists in introducing a new vertex w and in replacing the edge uv by two new edges uw and wv.The same notions hold for directed graphs and for mixed graphs.Finally, letG=(V,E)be an undirected graph, andH=(T,L)be a directed graph withT⊆V, thenG+Hdenotes the mixed graph(V,E,L).Similarly as in the multiflow theory (see for instance Schrijver (2003) or Korte & Vygen (2000)), we are given a supply graphG=(V,E)and a demand digraphH=(T,L)withT⊆V. The graph G models the (transportation) network. The arcs of H model the origin–destination pairs, also called in the sequel the OD-pairs. H is therefore assumed to be simple, i.e. contains no loops and no multiple edges. A route is an(o,d)-path of the directed version of G with(o,d)∈Land is called an(o,d)-route. The set of all routes (resp.(o,d)-routes) is denoted byR(resp.R(o,d)).The population of users is modeled as a bounded real interval I endowed with the Lebesgue measureλ, the population measure. The set I is partitioned into measurable subsetsI(o,d)with(o,d)∈L, modeling the users wishing to select an(o,d)-route.For a given pair of supply graph and demand digraph, and a given partition of users, we define a strategy profile as a measurable mappingσ:I→Rsuch thatσ(i)∈R(o,d)for all(o,d)∈Landi∈I(o,d). For each arca∈Aof the directed version of G, the measure of the set of all users i such that a is inσ(i)is the flow on a inσand is denotedfa:fa=λ{i∈I:a∈σ(i)}.The cost of each arca∈Afor each useri∈Iis given by a nonnegative, continuous, and strictly increasing cost functioncai:R+→R+, such thati↦cai(x)is measurable for alla∈Aandx∈R+. When the flow on a isfa, the cost for user i of traversing a iscai(fa). For user i, the cost of a route r is defined as the sum of the costs of the arcs contained in r. A class is a set of users having the same cost functions on all arcs, but not necessarily sharing the same OD-pair.The game we are interested in is defined by the supply graph G, the demand digraph H, the population user set I with its partition, and the cost functionscaifora∈Aandi∈I. If we forget the graph structure, we get a game for which we use the terminology nonatomic congestion game with user-specific cost functions, as in Milchtaich (1996).A strategy profile is a (pure) Nash equilibrium if each route is only chosen by users for whom it is a minimal-cost route. In other words, a strategy profileσis a Nash equilibrium if for each pair(o,d)∈Land each useri∈I(o,d)we have∑a∈σ(i)cai(fa)=minr∈R(o,d)∑a∈rcai(fa).Under the conditions stated above on the cost functions, a Nash equilibrium is always known to exist. It can be proven similarly as Theorem 3.1 in Milchtaich (2000), or as noted by Milchtaich (2005), it can be deduced from more general results (Theorem 1 of Schmeidler (1970) or Theorems 1 and 2 of Rath (1970)). However, such an equilibrium is not necessarily unique, and even the equilibrium flows are not necessarily unique.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
