@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective microzone-based vehicle routing for courier companies: From tactical to operational planning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The zone based vehicle routing problem is modeled as a multi-objective problem.A tactical plan is used as a starting point for creating an operational plan.The order in which microzones are placed in the start solution is less important.Combining microzones has a positive influence on the workload imbalance.Exchanging microzones between drivers reduces the workload imbalance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metaheuristics,Variable neighborhood tabu search,Workload balancing,Multi-objective optimization,Vehicle routing,Courier companies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Distribution companies that serve a very large number of customers, courier companies for example, often partition the geographical region served by a depot into zones. Each zone is assigned to a single vehicle and each vehicle serves a single zone. An alternative approach is to partition the distribution region into smaller microzones that are assigned to a preferred vehicle in a so-called tactical plan. The moment the workload in each microzone is known, the microzones can be reassigned to vehicles in such a way that the total distance traveled is minimized, the workload of the different vehicles is balanced, and as many microzones as possible are assigned to their preferred vehicle. In this paper we model the resulting microzone-based vehicle routing problem as a multi-objective optimization problem and develop a simple yet effective algorithm to solve it. We analyze this algorithm and discuss the results it obtains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Following the example of FedEx, many courier companies now organize their distribution system as a hub-and-spoke model (see FedEx, 2006; Lyster, 2012; Rodrigue et al., 2006; Waldheim and Berger, 2008). In this model, vehicles collect parcels and bring them to the nearest depot where they are consolidated and transported, through a chain of hubs, to the depot closest to their final destination. From this final depot, the parcels are brought to their destination by vehicles performing so-called milk-runs.This paper focuses on the last step: the delivery process from the final depot of a courier company to the end customers. On a daily basis, courier companies face a vehicle routing problem (VRP) that is not only among the largest in the logistics industry, but also highly dynamic. It is not uncommon for a courier company to execute several thousand stops from a single depot, using several hundred vehicles. Additionally, the list of pick-up locations changes throughout the day as customers call to order the pick-up of a parcel, and the list of drop-off locations is only available a very short time before the vehicles leave the depot. In order to deliver these parcels in an efficient manner, route planning software could in theory provide efficient solutions, but experience shows that such software is rarely used in practice.The fact that the distribution planning process in many courier companies is not automated can be ascribed to a number of reasons. Firstly, correct data on exact drop locations are often lacking, i.e., customer addresses can be incomplete due to sloppy writing, carelessness, or lack of information on behalf of the sender. Because deciphering these addresses is best done by people with an understanding of the geographical distribution region, this task is often left to the drivers or to other people in the final depot. Couriers therefore lack the possibility to generate the routes algorithmically without considerable investment in a centralized address-scanning-and-correcting service. Secondly, conventional route planning software requires all data to be available and correct before a final routing plan can be built. This implies that processes that depend on the final route plan, such as sorting and loading parcels into the correct vehicles, have to wait until all order entries are known. As this would extend the delivery time, one of the main competitive factors for a courier, it is considered an unattractive option.As the surplus in route efficiency achieved by route planning software would not compensate for the increased delivery time and the loss of flexibility, couriers rely on more stable organizational structures for the distribution of their parcels. A popular technique to deal with this flexibility requirement is to partition the area serviced from the depot into regions, usually one per vehicle. All customers that fall within a region are then assigned to the vehicle this region belongs to, which implies that the sorting of parcels per vehicle can start as soon as the parcel arrives at the depot. The final routing, i.e., determining the order in which to visit the customers in his11To avoid awkward formulations like his/her, we will refer to drivers in the masculine form and decision-makers/planners in the feminine form.region is then left to the driver. This way of working has the additional advantage that a driver has the possibility to get acquainted with his region.Fig. 1shows the parcel distribution process from the arrival of the parcels, until the departure of the vehicles. The left image shows the time consumed if all parcels are processed based on their destination address. The right image shows the time consumed if parcels are processed based on zones. The sorting of the parcels can start much earlier, which results in a reduction of time from the arrival of the parcels until the departure of the vehicle.In case of workload imbalances or vehicle capacity violations, drivers are sometimes allowed to swap individual packages among themselves. For this reason, the physical layout of the distribution depot sometimes resembles that of the geographical delivery region, in the sense that vehicles that serve adjacent routes are stationed close to each other.To diminish the main disadvantage of zone-based organization – the limited possibility to automate the planning process – several authors have proposed an alternative method, in which the geographical region is divided into smaller zones (“microzones”). In practice, each microzone corresponds to a bin or container into which the parcels can be dropped at the moment they arrive at the final depot.To ensure stability in the planning, the preferred assignment of microzones to vehicles is fixed in a tactical plan. When an estimate of the workload in each microzone becomes available, the microzones are reassigned to the different available vehicles, with a preference for the vehicle they are assigned to, in the tactical plan. The exchange between vehicles no longer happens on the level of individual parcels, but on the microzone level. In this paper, we present an approach to assign microzones to vehicles and determine the order in which the microzones should be traversed. We model this problem as a tri-objective vehicle routing problem and develop an efficient multi-objective metaheuristic to solve it.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a short literature overview, followed by the problem delineation in Section 3. Section 4 elaborates on the approach we used, the neighborhoods that are explored and the algorithm we developed. Finally Section 5 presents the results of our experiments. Our findings and conclusions as well as our ideas on future research are posed in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
