@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The determinants of efficiency and productivity in the Swiss insurance industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Efficiency analysis of Swiss life, property/casualty, and reinsurance companies from 1997–2013.Efficiency has improved with property/casualty and reinsurance, but not with life insurers.Life insurance firms with international business exhibit superior efficiency.Diversification in the European market is better than targeting markets outside of Europe.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Two-stage double-bootstrap,Internationalization,OR in insurance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Using state-of-the-art frontier efficiency methodologies, we study the efficiency and productivity of Swiss insurance companies in the life, property/casualty, and reinsurance sectors from 1997–2013. In this context, we provide the first empirical analysis of internationalization strategies of insurance companies, a topic of high interest in the business and economics literature, but one that has to date not been the focus of efficiency studies in the insurance sector. We find that productivity and efficiency have improved with regard to property/casualty and reinsurance. In the case of life insurance, productivity and efficiency diminished; however, life insurance firms with higher levels of international business exhibit superior efficiency levels. We observe that diversification strategies directed to the European market are more beneficial compared to those targeting markets outside of Europe.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As has happened in many other industrialized countries, the Swiss insurance market has undergone major changes over the last 20 years. Deregulation of financial services in the 1990s led to increased competition and internationalization of the insurance business. Capital market conditions changed substantially in a similar manner. Due to historically low interest rates, previously common strategies of significant “safe” bond holdings with long-term maturity and high interest rates were rendered problematic as bonds that came to term had to be replaced by such with much lower interest rates. Moreover, changing supervisory and legal frameworks, such as the Swiss Solvency Test introduced in 2006, resulted in the establishment of integrated risk management systems within the insurance companies.This paper provides an in-depth analysis of the efficiency and productivity development in Switzerland during this period of major changes. Efficiency measurement is one of the fastest growing areas in the business and economics literature and the insurance sector has seen particularly high growth in the number of studies applying efficiency methods (see Eling & Luhnen, 2010a for a review). The Swiss insurance industry, however, has been the subject of relatively little research in this context; to date, it has been considered only in a cross-country context, yielding ambiguous results.11A number of cross-country comparisons include Switzerland, but none take a detailed look at the Swiss situation. For example, there is no analysis of efficiency determinants in the Swiss insurance market. Moreover, the existing empirical results for Switzerland are very mixed, i.e., low, average, and high efficiencies are observed, providing no clear indication of productivity development in the Swiss insurance market. Thus, one of the goals of this paper is to provide clearer insight into the productivity situation in Switzerland. In Online-Appendix A we summarize the extant empirical evidence for Switzerland.Our study provides sharper insight into the level and determinants of efficiency in the Swiss insurance industry. But for two reasons the importance and scope of the paper stretches beyond the borders of Switzerland. First, while most efficiency studies are restricted to one sector and a relatively short time period, our dataset covers a long time period and all subsectors22On average, efficiency studies in the insurance sector analyze a time period of 7 years (see Eling & Luhnen, 2010a); we consider a time period of 17 years. About 67 percent of all efficiency studies only look at life, non-life, or specifically at property/casualty (Eling & Luhnen, 2010a); only one study looks at reinsurance separately (Cummins & Weiss, 2002). We analyze all these subsectors individually.of a market that is representative of many insurance markets in terms of development and penetration.33According to Swiss Re (2013), the Swiss insurance market ranks seventh in Europe (17th in the world), with premium volume of USD 61 billion in 2012. Moreover, in 2012 it ranked first regarding insurance density in Europe (second in the world), with USD 7604 premiums per capita, and fifth regarding insurance penetration in Europe (13th in the world), with premiums to GDP of 9.63 percent (see AXCO, 2013).The dataset thus provides an opportunity to compare and cross-check findings from other countries, across different time periods, and across different subsectors.44To our knowledge, we are the first to systematically test the robustness of the efficiency results across subperiods (before the first crisis, i.e., 1997–2001, between the two crises, i.e., 2002–2007, and for 2008–2013) and across all subsectors of the industry. In addition, we also distinguish our work from the existing literature with a systematic analysis of nonlinear relationships and interaction effects, all of which provide useful insight into the nature of efficiency in the insurance sector. We thus contribute to the growing number of innovative DEA applications, e.g., the inclusion of uncontrollable variables (see Huang & Eling, 2013; Yang & Pollitt, 2009), two-stage bootstrapping procedures (see Barros, Nektarios, & Assaf, 2010), relational two-stage DEA modeling (see Kao & Hwang, 2008, 2014), and cross-frontier analysis (see Biener & Eling, 2012).Second, the data allows us to investigate the internationalization strategies of insurance companies, an issue of high interest in the business and economics literature, but one that has not to date been the focus of efficiency studies in the insurance sector. Switzerland is a persuasive context in which to analyze internationalization strategies, since numerous Swiss insurers are active outside Switzerland, to such an extent that 67 percent of the Swiss premium volume is earned abroad (see Swiss Insurance Association, 2014) – a value substantially higher than in other countries (see, e.g., Altuntas & Gößmann, 2012; Theis & Wolgast, 2010).Our results show best practice technology improvements for Swiss property/casualty (p/c) and reinsurance firms, whereas for life insurance we observe an overall productivity decrease. Our findings suggest that the internationalization of the Swiss insurance business has a positive impact on life insurer efficiency, but not for p/c. In addition, we observe that entering the non-European market for Swiss life and p/c insurers is not as beneficial as entering into European markets. Moreover, we validate findings from other efficiency studies.55That is, for different subsectors and across a long time period we find that increasing the size of operation increases efficiency in life, p/c, and reinsurance (e.g., in line with Cummins & Zi, 1998). On organizational form, we reject the expense preference hypothesis (e.g., in line with Eling & Luhnen, 2010b, or Biener & Eling, 2012). We show that high debt ratios are detrimental for efficiency (e.g., in line with Luhnen, 2009).The results are useful for academics, insurance company managers, regulators, and policymakers seeking to better understand market structure and firm performance.The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In Section 2 we review the relevant literature on efficiency measurement and develop our hypotheses. The methodology and data are presented in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss the empirical results, separately for life, p/c, and reinsurance. Section 5 concludes.We test four main hypotheses, which we summarize in Table 1, and include further “classical” variables (i.e., organizational form, leverage, premium growth, and company age) as control variables in the later analysis, for which we do not state specific hypotheses.Deregulation and internationalization of the financial services industry, in conjunction with widespread economic changes such as low interest rates, have created significant competitive pressure for Swiss insurers. More competitive markets have forced the exit of those firms not able to adapt to state-of-the-art technology, especially because bad underwriting can no longer be compensated by high capital market returns. The observed changes in the last 20 years thus give reason to expect an increase in both productivity and efficiency (i.e., average productivity relative to the best firms in the industry).Productivity changes over time for the Swiss market are analyzed by Donni and Fecher (1997) in a cross-country sample. Small improvements of +1.00 percent p.a. for Switzerland are found over the period 1983–1991, while the sample's average annual productivity change amounts to +5.50 percent p.a. The Swiss improvement is the smallest among all analyzed countries. The authors indicate that the improvement is mostly due to best practice technology progress. Focusing on productivity growth in five European insurance markets (Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom), Bertoni and Croce (2011) investigate the main causes of productivity changes in life insurance for 1997–2004. Overall, they observe a significant TFP increase of, on average, 6.71 percent p.a. that is mostly due to best practice technology progress (on average +6.67 percent p.a.) and only partly accounted for by technical adoption (on average +0.04 percent p.a.). These authors, too, indicate that, in the observed countries, more technical progress occurred in the best practices firms, whereas the average insurer was not able to catch up.66Other studies examine the development of efficiency and productivity for other European markets such as Germany and the United Kingdom, and the U.S. market. For the German market, Luhnen (2009) finds an increase of productivity in the German property/liability market of about 8.20 percent over the period 1995–2006. The analysis shows that technological progress (+7.90 percent) is the main driver of this development. Hussels and Ward (2007) analyze German and U.K. life insurers for the period 1991–2002 and find small TFP changes over the whole period (+2.60 percent for Germany, –1.90 percent for the United Kingdom), which again are mainly accounted for by technical progress (Germany), and negative technical efficiency change (United Kingdom). Many other markets have been studied with regard to their TFP improvements for several time horizons, most of which find moderate productivity increase over time (see Fecher, Kessler, Perelman, & Pestieau, 1993 for France; Cummins, Turchetti, & Weiss, 1996 for Italy; Mahlberg & Url, 2003 and Ennsfellner, Lewis, & Anderson, 2004 for Austria; Barros, Barroso, & Borges, 2005 for Portugal; Cummins & Rubio-Misas, 2006 for Spain; Bikker & van Leuvensteijn, 2008 for the Netherlands; and Cummins & Xie, 2008 for the United States).Following the above line of reasoning and the existing empirical results, we expect that (hypothesis H1) efficiency and productivity in the Swiss insurance market will have increased over the sample period 1997–2013. From a theoretical point of view one might expect the productivity increase to be driven by best practice adoption—that is, less productive companies either improve productivity or leave the market—but the empirical literature for Europe indicates that improvements are more driven by technology progress.The European insurance market was deregulated in 1994, with the main purpose being to create a single insurance market in the European Union and thus improve the industry's competitiveness and efficiency. Opening the market increased both competition within countries and cross-border activity.77When analyzing efficiency development after 1994, several studies document that the deregulation influenced efficiency of European insurers. See, e.g., Cummins and Rubio-Misas (2006), Hussels and Ward (2007), Davutyan and Klumpes (2008), Bertoni and Croce (2011), and Vencappa, Fenn, and Diacon (2013).Switzerland is integrated into the European environment via bilateral agreements with the European Union. The simplified access to new markets provides significant expansion opportunities, especially for firms from countries with superior insurance market performance, whereas, at the same time competition from foreign firms in home markets requires more effort to retain competitive advantage. Numerous Swiss insurers are active outside Switzerland, to such an extent that 67 percent of Swiss premium volume is earned abroad (see Swiss Insurance Association, 2014); likewise, large international insurers have branches in Switzerland. Concurrently, there are several successful firms that exclusively serve the Swiss market. Switzerland is thus an interesting case for an analysis of the relationship between international diversification and efficiency in insurance markets.International diversification is extensively researched in the strategic management and international business literature (see, e.g., Capar & Kotabe, 2003; Hitt, Tihanyi, Miller, & Connelly, 2006). From a theoretical standpoint, international diversification is driven by economies of scale, access to new resources, average cost reduction, extension of innovative capabilities, knowledge acquisition, location advantages, and access to foreign markets (see Hitt et al., 2006), all of which imply that there should be a positive relationship between international diversification and firm performance. However, complexity and cost of coordination, especially for large foreign operations, and cultural differences between the home and the foreign markets (the so-called liability of foreignness) are viewed as major barriers to successful international diversification (see Hitt, Hoskisson, & Kim, 1997; Hitt et al., 2006; Zaheer, 1995). These diverse theories, on how international diversification influences firm performance, are reflected in empirical work (see, e.g., Hitt et al., 2006, for a review of the empirical literature). The conflicting findings of this research have resulted in the development of alternative models that incorporate the costs as well as the benefits of international diversification, for example, assuming u-shaped (see, e.g., Capar & Kotabe, 2003; Ruigrok & Wagner, 2003), inverse u-shaped (see, e.g., Hitt et al., 1997; Kotabe, Srinivasan, & Aulakh, 2002), and s-shaped (see, e.g., Lu & Beamish, 2004) relationships. There is no research on how international diversification impacts efficiency in insurance markets. The only study that is somewhat related (Altuntas & Gößmann, 2012), although it focuses on return on assets and not efficiency, finds a positive impact of German insurers’ international diversification on home market performance.88A study by Katrishen and Scordis (1998) focuses on the impact of international diversification on achieving economies of scale in a cross-country study for the years 1985–1992. The authors find decreasing economies of scale with increasing international diversification. Berry-Stölzle, Hoyt, and Wende (2010) analyze business strategies for insurers entering and growing in emerging markets and find that successful strategies involve a high growth rate, increased size, and more emphasis on life insurance. Moreover, lower financial leverage and mutual organizational form are associated with better performance. All these effects are also measured by our analysis. Another work of interest in relation to ours is Buch et al. (2014), who discuss productivity and internationalization decisions in the banking sector.Based on this first piece of evidence, we expect (hypothesis H2) a positive relationship between the level of international diversification and insurer efficiency. Note that the discussion of internationalization in this paper is limited to life and p/c insurers. The business model of reinsurance is to diversify risks globally, which is why every reinsurer by definition is internationally diversified; we thus cannot analyze variation in the degree of internationalization across reinsurance companies.Most studies find that there is a positive relation between size and efficiency. Expectation for increased efficiency from an increase in firm size, however, is only reasonable among firms operating under increasing returns to scale (see Cummins & Rubio-Misas, 2006). Those firms, mostly small or mid-sized companies that often represent the majority of data samples in empirical analyses can leverage significant scale advantages. Scale advantages result from average per unit output cost reductions when the volume of output increases. The most frequently discussed source of scale economies is the spreading of a firm's fixed production costs, such as computer systems and financial capital, over a larger volume of output. Similarly, scale economies may arise from the learning effects gained by managers operating at larger scale. In addition, in the insurance sector it is usually assumed that a larger scale of operation reduces income volatility, since risk pooling is more effective (see Cummins & Rubio-Misas, 2006). Once scale advantages are exhausted, firm efficiency no longer benefits from increasing size (i.e., they operate under constant returns to scales) or even exhibit scale disadvantages (i.e., decreasing returns to scale).Many studies find results in line with the theoretical predictions of a positive relationship between size and efficiency (see, e.g., Cummins & Zi, 1998; Eling & Luhnen, 2010b; Luhnen, 2009). However, some studies argue that the very largest firms suffer from diseconomies of scale (e.g., due to complexity) so that they are not as efficient as middle-sized insurers (see, e.g., Fenn, Vencappa, Diacon, Klumpes, & O'Brien, 2008). Diacon, Starkey, and O'Brien (2002) find, however, that large and small insurers are more (technically) efficient than middle-sized insurers, indicating a u-shape of efficiency values. While Yuengert (1993) concludes that size and efficiency are statistically unrelated, Zanghieri (2008) states that there is a nonlinear relationship between size and efficiency. For life and non-life insurance he shows concave relations between size and cost/profit efficiency (i.e., curvilinear and inverted u-shape). The only study including the Swiss market finds that a group of large Swiss insurers is less efficient than a group of small ones (Rai, 1996), although for each size group, the author observes a positive relationship between size and efficiency (i.e., overall a nonlinear relation). Until now, no unique relationship between firm size and efficiency has been identified. We follow the economic rationale and the most widespread empirical finding in the insurance efficiency literature and expect (hypothesis H3(a)) a positive relation between firm size and efficiency.Whereas an analysis of size and its effect on efficiency is informative about the level of efficiency relative to the size of operation, scale economies indicate whether efficiency differences result from a firm being too big or too small or whether an increase in operational size is likely to increase or decrease efficiency. In general, there are three types of scale economies: (1) firms not operating at optimal scale and potentially generating disproportionately high additional returns by increasing the size of operations (increasing returns to scale; IRS), (2) firms not operating at optimal scale and potentially generating disproportionately low additional returns by increasing the size of operations (decreasing returns to scale; DRS), and (3) firms generating proportional additional returns by increasing the size of operations (constant returns to scale; CRS). This pattern occurs because, while small firms can benefit from average cost reductions with increasing size, complexity of operation outweighs those advantages when firms become too large.Most empirical studies find that smaller insurance firms operate under IRS, while larger firms operate under DRS and some under CRS.99Yuengert (1993) finds increasing returns to scale for U.S. life firms with up to US$15 billion in assets, whereas Cummins and Zi (1998) find these only for firms with up to US$1 billion in assets. For U.S. property/liability firms, increasing returns to scale are documented up to US$137 million in assets. See also Fecher et al. (1991) for France, Hardwick (1997) for the United Kingdom, Hwang and Gao (2005) for Ireland, Cummins and Rubio-Misas (2006) for Spain, Qiu and Chen (2006) for China, and Luhnen (2009) for the German property/liability industry.We assume the same will be true for the Swiss insurance industry and thus expect that (hypothesis H3(b)) small and medium-sized insurers are operating under IRS, but that large firms mostly operate under DRS or CRS. A confirmation of these expectations will have important implications for managers, regulators, and policymakers because it will provide justification for mergers among small and medium-size insurers, but not for mergers among large insurers.Another factor that is analyzed, especially in the M&A context, is economies of scope. In the context of efficiency, a central question is whether a firm benefits more from specializing in one or a limited set of products, or from a broad diversification of the product portfolio. The two main hypotheses discussed in literature are the conglomeration hypothesis and the strategic focus hypothesis. The conglomeration hypothesis states that firms can take advantage of cost and revenue scope economies by operating in several business lines or offering a multitude of different products, resulting in superior efficiency compared to specialized firms. In contrast, the strategic focus hypothesis claims that specialized insurers generate superior efficiency by focusing on their core business where they exhibit competitive advantages.Evidence from the insurance literature is again not consistent. For example, Meador, Ryan, and Schellhorn (2000) find support for the conglomeration hypothesis from the U.S. life market for the period 1990–1995. Luhnen (2009) and Eling and Luhnen (2010b) observe that interacting in different lines of business is not always superior to focusing on core business activities. According to Cummins, Weiss, Xie, and Zi (2010), strategic focus is superior to conglomeration in the insurance industry. Berger, Cummins, Weiss, and Zi (2000) note that the conglomeration hypothesis dominates for some types of financial services (i.e., larger insurers with emphasis on personal lines and vertically integrated distribution systems) and the strategic focus hypothesis dominates for other types (i.e., smaller insurers with emphasis on commercial lines and nonintegrated distribution systems). Berry-Stölzle, Hoyt, and Wende (2013) confirm that the diversification-performance relationship for insurance companies depends on company size. This may explain the empirical puzzle of why generalists and specialists both appear to be competitively viable in the long run. The only Swiss-specific result in this area is provided by Rai (1996), who states that specialized insurers in Switzerland are more efficient than diversified insurance firms. This is in line with the strategic focus hypothesis and leads us to expect that (hypothesis H4) specialized insurers are more efficient than diversified insurers (strategic focus hypothesis). In the empirical part, we also interact specialization and size in order to also test the coexistence prediction by Berger et al. (2000).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We study the productivity and efficiency of Swiss firms active in the life, p/c, and reinsurance market from 1997–2013 using frontier efficiency methodologies. The Swiss insurance market has undergone major changes in the last 20 years, including deregulation, increased competition, changing capital market conditions, and changing supervisory and legal frameworks. These major changes are reflected in substantial productivity and efficiency changes.A summary of all results and a comparison with the extant literature is provided in Table 8. In the p/c and reinsurance markets, yearly average productivity increased slightly over the sample period due to similar degrees of improvement in both the technology frontier and efficiency. In contrast, we find a decline of best practice technology for life insurance firms giving rise to a decline in productivity. And yet, even though the best practice firms became less productive, the average insurer was not able to catch up to them. We interpret these findings as illustrating the difficulties experienced by the entire life insurance sector in adapting to the increasingly challenging business environment (e.g., low interest rates, increased competition from other financial services providers). Our results suggest that the internationalization of the Swiss life insurance industry as well as increasing the size of operation in the Swiss insurance industry have a positive impact on insurer efficiency. In addition, we observe that entering the non-European market for Swiss life and p/c insurers is not as beneficial as entering into European markets. Moreover, we find that stock firms are not more efficient than mutual firms, a rejection of the expense preference hypothesis (Mester, 1991).Our results also validate and help to better understand the determinants of productivity in the insurance sector. Organizational form has an impact on life and p/c insurers’ success. High debt ratios are detrimental to insurer efficiency. These findings underline the importance and appropriate definition of risk-based capital standards by regulators. We also want to emphasize the importance of analyzing nonlinear relationships and interactions between different covariates in achieving a better explanation of the true effect underlying the data.More research is needed on international diversification. An application to other markets and cross-country settings or an even more explicit analysis of the functional form of the relationship between international diversification intensity and efficiency (i.e., testing for u-, inverted u-, or s-shaped relations with continuous variables) will be worthwhile. The data sample for such an analysis should contain estimates for international diversification for which nonlinear relationships can be tested (e.g., international diversification measures that are not highly correlated with their higher orders). Mediating this relation with connected covariates might be also convenient. Also interesting is the interrelation between risk-based capital standards and efficiency, which has not yet been explored. Finally, it might be interesting to more closely analyze market-specific determinants in a cross-country context, that is, for instance, to measure the impact of changes in market conditions on efficiency (e.g., interest rate, concentration, inflation, etc.). One promising new tool in this context, which, however, would require a cross-country analysis, is the incorporation of uncontrollable variables in the efficiency analysis (see, e.g., Huang & Eling, 2013). Such an analysis can be especially useful for better understanding the productivity and efficiency decline in the life insurance industry. In the context of cross-country analyses also Stochastic Frontier Analysis (Fenn et al., 2008) might yield further insights, especially given that in contrast to DEA it permits to integrate both cultural and economic factors into a single model.Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2015.07.055.Image, application 1