@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intensity models and transition probabilities for credit card loan delinquencies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We estimate the probability of delinquency and default using intensity models.These semi-parametric multiplicative hazard models include time-varying covariates.Some debtors are better at keeping themselves in arrears without tipping over into default.Model is adept at predicting between delinquent and non-delinquent accounts.If wrong, model tended to err on conservative side, with a lower cost consequence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk analysis,Probability of default,Intensity modelling,Time-varying covariates,State space modelling,Retail loans,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We estimate the probability of delinquency and default for a sample of credit card loans using intensity models, via semi-parametric multiplicative hazard models with time-varying covariates. It is the first time these models, previously applied for the estimation of rating transitions, are used on retail loans. Four states are defined in this non-homogenous Markov chain: up-to-date, one month in arrears, two months in arrears, and default; where transitions between states are affected by individual characteristics of the debtor at application and their repayment behaviour since. These intensity estimations allow for insights into the factors that affect movements towards (and recovery from) delinquency, and into default (or not). Results indicate that different types of debtors behave differently while in different states. The probabilities estimated for each type of transition are then used to make out-of-sample predictions over a specified period of time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Risk models for retail portfolios of financial institutions, as well as within the academic literature, have not been developed as extensively as they have been in the corporate sector, mainly due to the availability and inaccessibility of the necessary data. However, with the financial crisis in 2008, awareness and the importance of credit risk management have increased, and new insights were gained, especially in terms of how correlated loans losses, debtor behaviour and the economic climate can be. In that, there has been work in the corporate sector, estimating Probability of Default (PD) and Loss Given Default (LGD) models with the inclusion of macroeconomic variables (for example, see Frye (2000a, 2000b) for PD; Gupton and Stein (2002, 2005) for LGD), but only recently has this been undertaken for retail loan credit models (for example, see Bellotti and Crook (2010), Pennington-Cross (2003) for PD; Bellotti and Crook (2012), Leow, Mues, and Thomas (2011) for LGD).Using a large dataset of credit card loan accounts provided by a major UK bank, we develop intensity models to predict delinquency and default. Our work differs from existing work in a number of ways. The majority of retail loans PD models currently in the literature are of static regression models (see Crook and Bellotti (2010) and Leow and Mues (2012)), where models predicting default are developed using loan application characteristics and are valid only within a specified outcome period, e.g. within 12months of opening. Such models are also unable to handle accounts that are active but have not (yet) experienced any event (known as censoring) or closed, so such accounts are usually deleted from the dataset used to develop such models. Furthermore, these models are only able to account for time-varying covariates at any single snapshot in time yet these indicators essentially change over time, so are unable to adequately incorporate the effect of macroeconomic variables. Subsequent work has been based on the use of survival models (see Banasik, Crook, and Thomas (1999), Stepanova and Thomas (2002) and Bellotti and Crook (2010)) for default risk, which will allow for a more dynamic prediction of events. Such models will predict not just the probability of whether an event will occur (and not limited to a pre-defined outcome period), but also the (conditional) probabilities of that event occurring over time. Although survival models can account for different types of events (via competing risks), they are based on the assumption that the risk of each event occurring is independent right up to when any event occurs, which might not necessarily hold true. For example, in the months leading up to the default event, there would be certain behavioural indicators which take on values to indicate two or more missed monthly repayments, and this should mean that the risk of default increases more than the risk of early prepayment. There have also been papers suggesting the use of Markov chains (see Ho, Thomas, Pomroy, and Scherer (2004) and Malik and Thomas (2012)), and although these have been useful in trying to quantify the behaviour of consumers, they have the complication of having to assume stationarity and finding the appropriate first, second or third order chain. We propose the use of intensity models to predict for delinquency and default, which have been previously applied to the estimation of rating transitions of corporate loans (see Jarrow, Lando, and Turnbull (1997), Duffie, Saita, and Wang (2007) and Lando and Skødeberg, 2002), but have not been used on retail loans yet. Also, other approaches for estimating transition probabilities have been applied to corporate loans, for example the standard unobserved latent factor model and Bayesian methods (see for example Stefanescu, Tunaru, and Turnbull (2009) and Kadam and Lenk (2008)) but in these papers only aggregated data was used.In this work, we do not just focus on the prediction of default. Instead, using both application and behavioural variables, we model time to delinquency, and then to default, based on how debtors have behaved throughout their loan period as well as how they might have handled previous experiences of periods in arrears. As such, we use an alternative definition of default here: three months of missed payments, but not necessarily consecutive; instead of the conventional one of defining default to occur when the debtor has missed three consecutive months (or 90days’ worth) of payments (The Financial Services Authority (2009), BIPRU 4.3.56 and 4.6.20). This then allows us to define four states chronicling the progression from up-to-date to default (to be defined in the following section), as well as when accounts move towards (or away) from default. Credit card accounts are tracked over a period of time where transitions between the various states could be affected by the individual characteristics of the debtor at time of application and how the debtor has managed their finances since gaining the credit account. Other external factors, like macroeconomic variables, could also be included but are not considered in this work. Each possible transition in this intensity model is modelled separately via a semi-parametric multiplicative hazard model with time-varying covariates (see Andersen, Borgan, Gill, and Keiding (1993) and Andersen, Hansen, and Keiding (1991)), which are then calibrated to get the probabilities of moving (or staying) between states. Although this methodology has been detailed in a number of academic papers including Andersen et al. (1991), Jarrow et al. (1997), Lando and Skødeberg (2002) and Berd (2005) among others, they focus mainly on the estimation of parameter estimates, and where predictions were done, they were only in the time-homogenous case. The models we advance allow one to estimate a complete matrix of transition probabilities between any two repayment states between any two duration time periods for each case (in our application each account). By applying cut-offs they allow the prediction of the numbers of cases (in a sample) that would be expected to transit from one repayment state in one time period to any other state in any other time period the analyst may choose.The models have several important advantages over cross-section regression models and over survival models. Compared with the former, the user can gain predictions of the probability of moving between states in any future time period, not just the time period chosen at the time of model estimation. Also, time varying covariates can be incorporated. Compared with simple survival models, intensity models give many additional types of predictions, for example predictions of entire transition probability matrices in any future time period for each borrower, rather than merely the hazard probability of default occurring in any specified duration time.Intensity models have several potential uses by practitioners in financial institutions. First, since intensity models allow the predictions of transition probability matrices in any future time period, they would be crucially useful to the computation of a financial institution’s economic capital in any future time period. Second, by developing a model that can predict the different states of delinquency, not only are we be able to get predictions for default over time, we are also be able to get more intricate predictions for each state of delinquency leading up to default. This would enable a lender to attain insights into the factors that affect movements towards, and recovery from, delinquencies, as well as factors contributing towards a move from delinquency into default. So a lender could identify those types of borrowers that are likely to progress to default, those likely to progress to merely two or just one payment in arrears and also those likely to recover from being in arrears. The models also allow the identification of when each borrower who is in arrears is likely to recover. Third, although we do not go into detail here, this work could also be used by a lender to predict default risk in low- or zero-default portfolios. The analysis conducted on a low-default portfolio could underestimate default risk, but this might be mitigated by taking into account, by using the models we advance, the episodes where accounts go into arrears but not default.The rest of this paper is structured as follows: The data and notation are described in Section 2. Section 3 describes the methodology, and Sections 4 and 5 detail results and predictions respectively. Section 6 concludes.Data was supplied by a major UK bank and were active credit card accounts from all parts of the UK. This large dataset of more than 49,000 unique accounts is a random sample of credit cards that were issued from January 2002 up to June 2005, as well as their monthly histories since the account was opened, up to June 2006 or the time at which the credit card account was closed, whichever is earlier. Accounts that were still active in June 2006 are said to be censored at that time. As part of pre-processing, accounts that do not have consecutive monthly observations were removed, as well as accounts where their history did not start from the time the credit card was issued. Account and debtor characteristics available are common application variables, including type of employment, length of time the debtor had been with the bank, time at address and age; and behavioural variables available on a monthly basis, including spending and repayment amounts, credit limit and outstanding balance.From accounts that were active during the period of May 2005 to June 2006, a random sample of unique accounts (20%), as well as all their respective monthly observations, were selected and kept separate as the validation sample. All other accounts were included in the training sample. Thus, the training and validation sets are kept completely separate.A minimum repayment amount is required for the assignment of states but this information was not directly available from the provider of the data. We define τ as duration time since an account was opened and we define the minimum repayment amount in duration month τ, Mτ, to be the higher of 1% of the outstanding balance in month τ−1 or £5. It is possible for the minimum repayment amount to be £0, if there is zero outstanding balance on the account. Also, if the account is in credit, the minimum repayment amount required is also defined to be £0.Four states are defined: state 0 means that the account is up to date; states 1–3 mean that the account is in one, two and three months in arrears, respectively. Note that these months in arrears do not necessarily have to be consecutive. State 3 is also known as the default state, so any account that enters state 3 is said to have entered default. For the purpose of this work, the default state is defined to be an absorbing state (i.e. accounts that enter the default state will not leave). States and movements between states are assigned as follows. Let Mτdenote the minimum repayment required from the statement from month τ, and let Pτdenote the repayment amount in month τ.•All accounts start in state 0, where the account is said to have an up to date repayment schedule.At any time during the observation period, if repayment amount, Pτ, is less than the minimum, Mτ, required, the debtor shall advance into the next immediate state (e.g. if the account is in state 0 in month τ−1, and failed to meet the minimum repayment amount in month τ, it will be said to have moved to state 1 in month τ).A debtor who has missed a repayment before (i.e. either already in state 1 or 2) but manages to make some repayment amount, Pτ, in the following month(s) shall remain in that state if the repayment amount meets the minimum repayment amount,2It is possible that the payment the debtor missed (and hence moved states) is not the previous immediate month, so it would not be fair to look at the previous month’s repayment amount to decide if the debtor will move to a lower state. For example, let’s say the minimum repayments (and actual payment amounts and state) of months 4 and 5 are £56 (£0, move from state 0 to state 1) and £84 (£84, remain in state 1) respectively. In month 6, the minimum payment is £62 and the debtor makes a payment amount of £120. Although this amount should be enough to cover the minimum repayment of the missed payment in month 4 (£62+£56<£120) and allow the debtor to move out of state 1 back to state 0, under our definitions, the debtor would have to repay at least the sum total of this and the previous month’s minimum payment (i.e. £62+£84=£146) before he is said to move out of state 1 into state 0.2i.e. Mτ<Pτ<Mτ+Mτ−1; or be moved to one lower state if the repayment amount meets the sum total of the minimum amount of the current and previous month but not the previous month’s outstanding balance, Bτ−1, i.e. Mτ+Mτ−1<Pτ<Bτ−1; or be moved to state 0 if the repayment amount is larger than the previous month’s outstanding balance, i.e. Pτ>Bτ−1.As such, it is not possible for any account to advance more than one state at any one time interval, but it is possible for accounts to drop more than one state (e.g. a debtor who is in state 2 and manages to repay his loan fully will be said to move from state 2 to state 0 in that month). Fig. 1displays the observed transitions of three example accounts, over the duration time of each loan: account A (in the bottom panel) went into state 1 twice before quickly going into default by month 16; accounts B and C (in the middle and top panels, respectively) did go into arrears but recovered, and both were up to date at the end of the sample period.The calculation of minimum repayment amount, the threshold for transition between states, and hence the transition to default, are defined in this work independent of the data provider. Also, the definition of default adopted here is such that an account is said to go into default once it goes three (not necessarily consecutive) months in arrears, so is not the conventional definition of default. The default rate at each time τ is then calculated as the number of accounts that go into default, at time τ as a proportion of the total number of active accounts, at time τ. Fig. 2gives an empirical distribution of this rate as observed in the training set, and we see that it is highest nearer the start of the loan and decreases with the age of the loan.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on a large dataset of credit card loans, we developed a set of semi-parametric multiplicative intensity models to predict delinquency. These models, which are based on survival models, are able to incorporate time-dependent variables, and are able to predict not just whether an event will occur, but also give probabilities of when it might occur, thus providing a more dynamic framework for prediction. It is the first time these models are being applied to retail loans, and we were able to achieve two main research outcomes in this work.First, interesting insights into the factors that affect movements towards (and recovery from) delinquency were made. By keeping the covariates unchanged for the different types of transitions, we were able to compare the effects of each covariate on the different transitions. We found that most application variables affect risk of delinquency similarly to what was previously established (based on credit scoring or behavioural models), but also that some groups of people are better in keeping themselves only in delinquency without tipping over to default. In particular, the self-employed and unemployed are at higher risk of going into delinquency as compared to those employed; but once in delinquency, the employed seem less able to recover and avoid the state of default. This phenomenon was again seen in one of the time-dependent behavioural variables, where we observed that those who frequently go into delinquency are more likely to go into delinquency again but not default. We theorised that debtors who are self-employed or unemployed are better at balancing their accounts, and thus more able to stay out of default, whereas those who are employed enjoy a stable income and thus are less successful at keeping out of default when confronted with an unexpected break in their income. The baseline intensities computed were also intuitive for all transitions.Secondly, the model was used for predictions in two parts, one to gain insights based on employment type, and the other to validate the model. In the first part, a typical account for each employment type was created and the matrix of transition probabilities was computed for time 6–12months after the account was opened. We found that the model produced plausible and intuitive results, where in general, accounts that were non-delinquent at time 6 are very likely to remain non-delinquent at the end of month 12, but did have a small chance of going into one of the different states of delinquency; and how delinquent the debtor was at time 6 would affect his chance of recovery, further delinquency or default. We observe that debtors of different employment types behaved differently when in different states. In particular, while in delinquency, debtors who are self-employed or unemployed seemed more adept at keeping themselves only in arrears without tipping over into default.In the second part, we applied the intensity models to all observations in the test set at time 6months into the start of the account and, using an algorithm and different cut-off values for different transitions, predicted for the state of each observation at time 12months. Three different scenarios were considered for the handling of accounts that were censored before the end of the observation period. From these predictions, we found that the model made fairly accurate predictions on an overall level, but was not able to do as well on the account level. The total number of accounts predicted to be in each state at the end of the respective test periods were reasonably close to what was observed, but while the model was able to predict for transitions, it did not seem able to predict the correct accounts transit. Overall, we found that the model is adept at predicting between delinquent and non-delinquent accounts as a high percentage of accounts were correctly predicted to be in state 0 at time 12; but did not do as well when predicting between delinquent states, i.e. states 1, 2 and 3. When the model got it wrong, it erred on the conservative side, by predicting the account to be in a state lower than it should be, than liberal, which is expected to have a lower cost consequence.We believe there is more research to be done in this area, especially since this is the first time intensity models are being applied to retail loans. One obvious addition to the model is time-dependent macroeconomic variables. While it is true that all debtors will be affected by changes in the economy, it is likely that different groups of debtors are affected to a variety of extents. An extension of this work would be to include some interaction terms between macroeconomic variables and some of the application covariates, as well as applying the model on more recent data, which could hopefully encompass the credit crisis of 2008. Another area of further work would be the way the probabilities of the model are translated into predicted events. Right now an algorithm involving cut-off values is used, and comparison of probabilities and cut-off values is based on a particular specified order of states, and this implicitly increases the likelihood of transition into one state over another. Further research would be to experiment with different cut-off values, or possibly a different method of predicting for transition.