@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A decomposition of profit loss under output price uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Output price uncertainty causes ex post profit loss.Loss is split into price misprediction, risk preference and technical inefficiency.Our theoretical model is implemented in a data envelopment analysis (DEA).A 2009 database of French fattening pig farms is used as an illustration.Risk preference and technical inefficiency are the main sources of profit loss.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Profit loss,Risk preference,Technical inefficiency,Data envelopment analysis,Fattening pig farms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, firm profit loss is decomposed as the sum of two terms related to the output price uncertainty (price expectation error and risk preference), plus one extra term expressing technical inefficiency. We then describe the implementation of our theoretical model in a robust data envelopment analysis (DEA) framework, which allows an effective and separate estimation of each term of the decomposition. In addition, we offer an operational tool to reveal producers’ risk preferences. A 2009 database of French fattening pig farms is used as an illustration. Our results indicate that risk preference and technical inefficiency are the main sources of profit loss.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In agricultural activities, long production lags imposed by biological processes, coupled with high price volatility (primarily due to inelastic demands), means that output prices are unknown when production decisions are made. Ex ante production decisions may thus differ from choices that would have been made had producers known ex post output prices. As a result, price uncertainty is one source of profit loss, since it creates a gap between the observed profit and the profit made in a situation when full information is available.Numerous studies have been dedicated to uncertainty (whether created by random input prices, random output prices, and/or random shocks to technologies) in agricultural economics. Models dealing with producers’ behavior in the context of output price uncertainty were examined by Sandmo (1971), Just (1974), Chambers (1983) and Chavas and Holt (1990), among others. Stochastic technology was considered by Just and Pope (1978) and Chambers and Quiggin (2002), while Chavas and Holt (1996) incorporated both price risk and production risk. More recently, Chambers, Hailu and Quiggin (2011) showed how estimations of efficiency performances in crop productions can dramatically change when stochastic elements not under the control of the producers are ignored in the technology specification. On a sample of Dutch arable farms, Skevas, Lansink and Stefanou (2012) evaluated the impact of stochastic elements on crop production. They found that ignoring the dynamics of production and the variability in production conditions, farmers’ performances are underestimated. Other studies inferred farmers’ risk attitude from their production decisions. For example, Just and Pope (1991) used US potato supply data to determine whether or not the absolute, the partial, and the relative risk aversions were constant. Likewise, Chavas and Holt (1996) and Kumbhakar (2002), respectively, used US farmers’ corn-soybean acreage decisions and Norwegian farmers’ salmon production data to evaluate farmers risk aversion. The association between risk preference in the presence of output price uncertainty on the one hand, and technical or allocative inefficiency on the other, has also been previously examined. On the basis of the old idea of an inverse relationship between price uncertainty and allocative efficiency, Wu (1979) empirically investigated whether farmers allocate their resources more efficiently when prices are less random. His results, based on the small scale of Taiwanese family farms, strongly suggest that price and output uncertainty cause profit loss.The present contribution complements the analysis proposed in these papers by developing a model that decomposes the ex post profit loss due to output price uncertainty into two terms: price misprediction and risk preference. Compared to the full information case where the profit is maximized, farmers' output is too high (resp. low) if the future output price they anticipate is higher (resp. lower) than the price at which they finally sell it. Therefore, price misprediction creates an ex post profit loss. In the same way, risk preferences lead to output decisions different than those that would have been made in the full information case (Sandmo, 1971). Again, this implies an ex post profit loss. Adding the technical inefficiency to the ex post profit loss due to price uncertainty, we obtain the difference between the profit firms make and the profit they could have made in the absence of output price risk.This structure of decomposition is common in efficiency analysis literature, where the economic inefficiency is separated into technical and allocative inefficiencies. However, we cannot directly interpret the profit loss as profit inefficiency. We favor the term profit loss because allocative inefficiency is decomposed here as the sum of price expectation error and risk attitude.22Note that other sources of allocative inefficiency (such as physical or financial constraints) may exist. They are not considered in this paper, but could be introduced.While the former can be considered as inefficiency, it is not the case for the ex post loss of profit due to risk preference. This loss is mainly due to a human preference, which affects the economic behavior of the producer, but is not a suboptimal choice per se.33We argue that this has gone largely unnoticed in previous studies on efficiency even if Skevas, Stefanou, and Lansink (2014) accounted for farmers’ risk preferences when measuring their productive performances. More specifically, with regards to producers’ decisions on risk they considered the risk decreasing or increasing nature of inputs such as pesticide uses and their impacts on benefit levels. Compared to their study focused on production uncertainty, our papers focuses on the profit loss only due to output price uncertainty.Therefore, a primary contribution of our model is that it considers allocative inefficiency as a consequence of price uncertainty and risk attitude, and not, as occurs in traditional profit inefficiency decomposition, as a residual (Färe, Grosskopf, & Lovell, 1985, 1994).We then go on to describe the implementation of our theoretical model in a data envelopment analysis (DEA) framework, which allows the separate estimation of each term of the decomposition. DEA is particularly relevant with regard to measuring inefficiency in production. Since its theoretical beginnings, described in the studies of Debreu (1951) and Koopmans (1951), moving through the seminal paper of Farrell (1957), and then into its operationalization by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), DEA has proved useful in modeling the efficient frontier of a technology, and in measuring the various inefficiencies (profit, allocative and technical44Technical inefficiency is related to misuses of inputs and/or wastes in outputs. Allocative inefficiency results from a misallocation of inputs and/or outputs when a price system and an economic objective like profit maximization is introduced. The sum of technical and allocative inefficiencies defines the profit inefficiency.) of observed production plans. As we introduce price expectation error and risk attitudes to the model, DEA allows us to measure the intensity of risk preference. However, while the DEA approach is appealing, since it imposes very few assumptions on the production set, its main drawback is the sensitivity of the frontier to outliers (Dervaux et al., 2009). We therefore adapted our model to the robust approach developed by Cazals, Florens, and Simar (2002). The latter is based on subsampling which computes partial frontiers instead of a usual full frontier and therefore allows for some outliers to be situated above the frontier. Impacts of outliers are therefore limited in the computation of inefficiency scores.In order to show the applicability of our approach, we provide an empirical illustration, using a sample of 149 French pig producers, specialized in fattening units, followed via the database Gestion Tecnhico-Economique from the IFIP (Institut de la Filière Porcine). Our choice of this industry was motivated by two main reasons. First, the fattening process starts months before pigs are sold and the pig-meat price is fairly volatile,55The mean of annual output price changes in absolute terms over a period of 50 years is around 9.5 percent for pig compared to 8.1 percent for wheat, 6.4 percent for cattle and 4.6 percent for poultry (see figure in Appendix A).meaning that output decisions must be made under price uncertainty. Second, unlike other agricultural activities or types of pig farms (breeder-fattener or breeder), pig fattening is not particularly subject to climatic risks, and mostly includes output price risk. This is why we consider that this is the only risk that affects their ex ante decision making. Pig farmers are also subject to several other risks66See Just and Pope (2002) for a classification.(technological risk, human resources risk, financial risks, legal and environmental risks, …). In our model, their effects are captured in the technical inefficiency component. For instance, piglet death during the fattening process (an example of technological risk) results in an output reduction (at an ex ante given input choice) which is included in the technical inefficiency.Our decomposition of the difference between the profits earned by pig producers and the profits they could have made in the absence of output price uncertainty offers two insights. First, it explicitly determines whether profit losses can be attributed to uncertainty, or to technical inefficiencies. Second, it identifies pig producers' risk attitude (whether they are risk-averse, risk-neutrals or risk-lovers), which is important information to possess when implementing risk management tools in this sector.This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 decomposes the profit loss into three terms: price misprediction, risk preference, and technical inefficiency. Section 3 introduces distance functions representing the production technology. These functions enable the isolation of profit loss due to price uncertainty and technical inefficiency. Section 4 is devoted to estimation aspects. It introduces the robust DEA approach to empirically estimate the technology frontier from which the three terms of the expected profit loss can be derived. Section 5 presents the sample and the specification of the empirical technology, tests the model, and discusses the different components of the profit loss decomposition. Finally, we draw our conclusions in Section 6.In this section, we show how ex post profit loss can be decomposed into three effects: (i) the loss resulting from output price uncertainty that may lead to inaccurate price anticipation; (ii) the loss resulting from preferences toward risk and; (iii) the technical inefficiency. Observe that terms (i) and (ii) are the consequences of the output price uncertainty, while term (iii) expresses the various inefficiencies related to the production process.To make things simple, suppose that firms produce a single output y using a single input x. The production process is assumed to display variable returns to scale, so it can be represented by an increasing and concave function: y = f(x) (with f'(x) > 0 and f''(x) < 0). The input and output markets are both competitive, so firms take the price of the input (denoted by w) and the price of the output (denoted by p) as givens. The output price is unknown when production decisions are made. If firms knew this price, they would maximize the following (full information) profit:(2.1)Π(p0,w0)=max(y,x){p0y−w0x:y≤f(x)}The first-order condition related to this program(givenbyf′(x*)=w0p0)defines the production plan (y*, x*), such that(y*,x*)=argmaxΠ(p0,w0)and the associated maximum profit is denoted by π*. This occurs at E* in Fig. 1. At this equilibrium, firms maximize profits since: (i) there is no technical inefficiency in the production process and; (ii) firms know the price at which the output will be sold. We attempt to explain the difference between this full information profit, and that resulting from the observed input and output (respectively denoted by xoand yo). This observed profit (denoted by πo) is given by:(2.2)πo=poyo−woxoThe ex post profit loss PL is defined as the difference between the full information profit and the observed profit:(2.3)PL=Π(po,wo)−(poyo−woxo)=π*−πoThree sources of ex post profit loss are considered. In addition to the technical inefficiency commonly computed, we consider the fact that firms could mispredict the price at which the output will be sold, and that they have risk preferences that may affect their output decisions. The following decomposition determines the three sources of ex post loss:(2.4)PL=π*−πo=π*−πa=(1)+πa−πt(2)+πt−πo(3)where πadenotes the profit made given the anticipated price and πtdenotes the profit made once farmers consider the output price uncertainty in their production decision.The different sources of profit loss are given by the following three terms.Term (1): Price mispredictionThe first term of the decomposition is the profit loss due to inaccurate anticipations of the output price. This loss corresponds to the difference between the profits made at points E* and Eain Fig. 1. To maximize profits, firms must correctly anticipate the ex post price, po. Suppose they instead anticipate another price (denoted by pa). The equilibrium is defined through the tangency between the iso-profit curve, the slope of which is wo/paand the production function. The selected combination of input (denoted by xa) and output (denoted by ya= f(xa)) given that price anticipation is represented by Eain Fig. 1. Although the production decision is based on pa, the output is finally sold at the ex post price po. The profit loss due to price misprediction is therefore the sole result of the output decision based on pa, rather than po. The full information profit and the profit made when pais anticipated must thus be evaluated at the same price, po. The latter profit (denoted by πa) is given by:(2.5)πa=poya−woxawhere(ya,xa)=argmaxΠ(pa,wo)The profit loss resulting from the inaccurate output price anticipation, term (1) in Fig. 1, is therefore given by:(2.6)π*−πaEq. (2.6) is positive (resp. equal to zero) if the expected price padiffers from (resp. is equal to) the actual price, po. In Fig. 1, we have represented a situation whereby the anticipated price is lower than the ex post price, thus leading to xa< x* and to ya< y*. The opposite occurs in pa> po. In both situations: πa≤ π*.Term (2): Risk preferenceThe second cause of profit loss due to output price uncertainty results from firms’ risk preferences. Even if firms knew the expected output price (the fact that they possibly do not correctly anticipate it is included in (2.6)), the risk on the output price may lead them to change their production plan. More precisely, using a single input–single output technology and a multiple input–single output technology, respectively, Sandmo (1971) and Battra and Ullah (1974) indicated that risky prices provide incentives to risk-averse firms to reduce, compared to the certainty situation, the output they produce. Since the combination xaand yais the risk-neutral choice in case the expected price is pa, the difference between yaand the output (denoted by yt) produced with the observed input (denoted by xo) indicates firms’ risk preference. We suppose that farmers maximize their expected utility,77Farmers are supposed to conform to the axioms of utility so that their preferences can be represented by a utility function.as a result, the production plan (yt, xo) is the result of the following program:(2.7)(yt,xo)=argmax{Eu(p˜y−wx):y≤f(x)}wherep˜is the price (random when the decision is made). Following Sandmo (1971) and Battra and Ullah (1974), we can state that:88In single input and in multi-input cases, respectively, Sandmo (1971) and Battra and Ullah (1974) indicated that risk averse firms reduce their outputs and their inputs when facing a risk to the output price. Hartman (1975) contradicted Battra and Ullah (1974) by demonstrating that in the multi-input case, risk averse firms do not necessarily reduce the quantity of each input demanded. However, as far as the output is concerned, risk averse (resp. seekers) produce less (resp. more) with a random price compared to the uncertainty case (so that Eq. (2.8) still holds).(2.8){yt<ya⇔riskaverseyt=ya⇔riskneutralyt>ya⇔riskproneThis result does not mean that preferences toward risk lead to wrong ex ante decisions as producers maximize their expected utility. However, these decisions would have been different had producers known the final output price. Therefore, risk preferences create a gap between decisions made in perfect and imperfect information situations and cause ex post profit losses.Unless firms are risk-neutral, the output choice is not at the tangency point of an iso-profit curve and the production function, since individuals do not maximize the expected profit, but rather the expected utility (that is dictated by individuals’ preferences) they obtain from this profit. However, the point reached (Etin Fig. 1) is still technically efficient (yt= f(xo)), so it lies on the frontier. The profit associated with this maximization problem (denoted by πt) is given by:(2.9)πt=poyt−woxoOnce again, even if the output choice is based on the available information (i.e., the anticipated average price) the impact of this choice on the profit is evaluated at the ex post output price.The ex post profit loss due to risk preference, term (2) in Fig. 1, corresponds to the difference between the profits made at points Eaand Etin Fig. 1 and is given by:(2.10)πa−πtThe situation represented in Fig. 1 is such that firms are risk averse and underestimate future output prices. Both effects result in the production of less output (compared to the certainty case), and therefore add to each other in the profit loss decomposition. This happens not to be the case if, as represented in Fig. 2, risk averse preferences partially compensate for overestimations of future output prices. In the same way, risk-loving preferences can compensate for profit losses due to underestimations of future output prices. Finally, profit loss resulting from risk-loving behavior and future output prices overestimations add up, since they both result in firms producing more than in the certainty case. We can conclude that term (2) is positive if firms are risk-averse or risk-loving, and nil if they are risk-neutral.Term (3): Technical inefficiencyThe third term in profit loss decomposition refers to the technical inefficiency that occurs when the output (denoted by yo) is lower than it should be, given the input used (denoted by xo) and the production function. Technical inefficiency (which is related to elements such as management skills, non-optimal use of inputs, waste of outputs, …) thus occurs in case yo< f(xo). This loss corresponds to the difference between the profits made at points Etand Eo(that does not lie on the production function since it is not technically efficient) in Fig. 1. It is given by:(2.11)πt−πoFandel and Lorth (2009) analyzed profit maximization under technical inefficiency, by establishing mathematical and economic conditions for the profit-maximization approach to yield a technically efficient or inefficient solution. However, they used a nonlinear inequality-constrained optimization framework to demonstrate that a profit-maximizing production may imply technical inefficiency. As we maintain a traditional framework, we exclude this case and all production plans that maximize profit are necessarily technically efficient.We first discuss how we implement the concepts defined in the preceding section into a general framework. We follow Shephard (1953, 1970), who developed a comprehensive framework to model production technology and all its dual representations (production function, cost function, revenue function, and profit function). Within Shephard's approach we can define the production function, its frontier, and a measure of technical inefficiency, such as the distance to the frontier. We can also model the profit function and find the profit-maximizing production plans relative to the observed and expected output prices.Our model decomposes the profit loss PL into three terms, namely the technical inefficiency TI, the price expectation inefficiency PEI, and the risk preference RP. The former is a quantity effect, which can be defined from a production frontier approach, while the latter two terms are price effects, which can be derived from a profit function approach.In order to assess technical inefficiency, we begin by considering production technology. Following Shephard (1953, 1970), the technology is modeled with a production set, in which a set of r resources (or inputs)x∈ℜ+ris used to produce a set of q outputsy∈ℜ+q. The production set is defined as the set of physically attainable production plans (y, x):(3.1)Ψ={(y,x)∈ℜ+q+r:xcanproducey}The boundary of this set (denoted by ∂Ψ) defines the efficient frontier where maximal output is obtained from a fixed input vector or, equivalently, where minimal inputs are used to reach a fixed output level. For any point (y, x) of the production set, the distance to the frontier can be defined by the output distance function:(3.2)θ(y,x)=min{θ:(yθ,x)∈Ψ}Following Farrell (1957), we can interpret the inverse of the Shephard output distance function as the technical inefficiency defined as the maximal feasible output increase, while maintaining a constant level of input. From this definition, the boundary of the production set can be defined by:(3.3)∂Ψ={(y,x):θ(y,x)=1}We interpret the boundary of the production set as the efficient frontier. Production plans on the frontier are efficient with a technical inefficiency θ−1(y, x) = 1, while inefficient production plans are below the frontier with a technical inefficiency θ−1(y, x) > 1.In order to assess the profit efficiency, we also consider input pricesw∈ℜ++rand output pricesp∈ℜ++q. Let(p,w)∈ℜ++q+rdenote a given output–input price vector, and the profit function is defined by:(3.4)Π(p,w)=max(y,x){py−wx:(y,x)∈Ψ}Therefore, for any observed production plan (yo, xo, po, wo), the profit loss PL is the difference between the full information and observed profits:(3.5)PL=Π(po,wo)−(poyo−woxo)In order to decompose the profit loss (3.5) into its terms, we compute a value-based measure of technical inefficiency TI:(3.6)TI=(poyt−woxo)−(poyo−woxo)=po(θ−1−1)yoBy denoting yt= θ−1yoand by including the costs, we can rewrite (3.6) in order to recover the technical inefficiency defined in (2.11):(3.7)TI=po(θ−1−1)yo=(poyt−woxo)−(poyo−woxo)=πt−πoConsidering now the expected output pricespa∈ℜ++q, we can define the optimal expected profit Π(pa, wo) and the associated production plan (ya, xa):(3.8)Π(pa,wo)=max(y,x){pay−wox:(x,y)∈Ψ}(3.9)(ya,xa)=argmaxΠ(pa,wo)The price expectation inefficiency PEI as defined in (2.6) is computed as the difference between the maximum profit and the maximum anticipated profit, both computed at the observed prices:(3.10)PEI=Π(po,wo)−Π(pa,wo)=Π(po,wo)−(poya−woxa)=π*−πawhere (ya, xa) is defined in (3.9). As shown in the preceding section, the optimal production plan related to the expected output price can differ from the observed production plan, due to the risk preference. A measure of the risk preference RP, as defined in (2.10), is given by the difference of profit between these two production plans:(3.11)RP=(poya−woxa)−(poyt−woxo)=πa−πtFinally, we obtain the following decomposition of the profit loss corresponding to (2.4):(3.12)PL=TI+PEI+RPIn order to recover the usual economic or profit inefficiency (PI) as traditionally defined in the DEA framework, we can rewrite (3.12) as:(3.13)PI=PL−RP=TI+PEIEq. (3.13) clearly indicates that risk preferences must be subtracted from profit loss (usually considered as economic inefficiency) in order to properly define the profit inefficiency. Along the same lines, only the price misprediction (PEI) is considered here as an allocative inefficiency, while the standard approach measures the latter as the sum of PEI and RP.As inefficiency measures involve comparison between actual and optimal performances located on the relevant production frontier, the production set Ψ, as well as the distance function θ(yo, xo), and the profit function Π(po, wo), defined in (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3), respectively, must be operationalized. As the true frontier is unknown, an empirical best practice frontier must be estimated. From that perspective, the DEA framework, developed by Charnes et al. (1978) in a seminal paper, is commonly considered to be one of the relevant models for analyzing such technical and allocative inefficiencies in a general multi-output, multi-input context. Compared to econometric techniques, the non-parametric nature of this linear programming approach enables avoidance of confounding of the misspecification effects due to an arbitrary choice of functional forms of the technology and the inefficiency components. Nevertheless, as mathematical programming techniques are inherently enveloping techniques, the main practical inconvenience of a basic DEA approach is the difficulty in incorporating a statistical error component as in usual econometrical approaches. Therefore, results are considered to be very sensitive to extreme observations of the reference production set, and can be considered as potential outliers. To avoid this major drawback, Cazals et al. (2002) developed robust alternatives to the traditional DEA inefficiency estimator. These alternatives lie in the concept of partial frontier, in contrast to the usual full frontier. With that in mind, this section is devoted to the estimation of the robust production frontier, and to the technical inefficiency and profit loss from a sample of observed firms. Notice that throughout the presentation of the theoretical model we have always assumed a well-defined technology frontier. However, in order to account for heterogeneity and exogenous factors in firms’ production, we allow for the presence of outliers (producing above the frontier) in the empirical research. We must therefore compute the expected maximal profit and the various expected inefficiency sources in a robust manner. We explicitly consider the presence of possible outlier observations by applying a variant of an approach devised by Cazals et al. (2002), hereafter referred to as CFS, which is actually the approach proposed by Kneip, Simar, and Wilson (2008), who proved the consistency of this estimator.Consider a sample of N observed firms for which input and output vectors for firm i (i = 1, …, N) are respectively denoted byxi∈ℜ+randyi∈ℜ+q. The input and output price vectors are respectively denoted bywi∈ℜ++randpi∈ℜ++q. Let Ψ be the production set, satisfying the core Shephard axioms (Shephard, 1953):•A1: (0, 0) ∈ Ψ, (y, 0) ∈ Ψ⇒y = 0 that is, no free lunch.A2: the set B(x) = {(y, u) ∈ Ψ: u ≤ x} of dominating observations is bounded∀x∈R+r, that is, infinite outputs cannot be obtained from a finite input vector.A3: Ψ is closed.A4: For all (y, x) ∈ Ψ, and all(v,u)∈R+q+r, we have ( − y, x) ≤ ( − v, u)⇒(v, u) ∈ Ψ (free disposability of inputs and outputs).A5: Ψ is convex.We adopt the standard assumption that all observed firms face the same technology Ψ, and that all observed production plans are feasible: (yi, xi) ∈ Ψ, i = 1, …, N. From the observed sample, and the set of axioms (A1–A5), the estimated technology can be represented by:(4.1)Ψ^={(y,x):x∈R+r,y∈R+q,∑i=1Nziyik≥yk,k=1,…,q,∑i=1Nzixil≤xl,l=1,…,r,∑i=1Nzi=1,zi≥0,i=1,…,N}Ψ^is an estimator of Ψ defined in (3.1). The estimated production set only relies on all the observed firms’ production plans and the maintained axioms.The output distance function (3.2) is easily derived from (4.1), and can be estimated with a linear program (LP):(4.2)θ^(xo,yo)=minz,θθs.t.∑i=1Nziyik≥θ−1yko∀k=1,…,q∑i=1Nzixil≤xlo∀l=1,…,r∑i=1Nzi=1zi≥0∀i=1,…,NFrom (4.2), the estimated production frontier is defined as the boundary of the estimated production set:(4.3)∂Ψ^={(x,y):θ^(x,y)=1}In the same manner, the profit function is derived from (3.4) and (4.1) as an LP:(4.4)Π^(po,wo)=maxz,y˜,x˜∑k=1qpkoy˜k−∑l=1rwlox˜ls.t.∑i=1Nziyik≥y˜k∀k=1,…,q∑i=1Nzixil≤x˜l∀l=1,…,r∑i=1Nzi=1zi≥0∀i=1,…,NWe can obtain estimates of the profit loss and each term of its decomposition from (4.2) and (4.4). This is the traditional deterministic approach. However, while this approach is appealing, since it imposes very few assumptions on the production set, its main drawback is the sensitivity of the frontier to outliers. To circumvent this problem, we use a variant of the CFS (2002) approach. We refer interested readers to Cazals et al. (2002) for all theoretical and methodological developments. For our purposes, we only provide an intuitive presentation of the approach.Estimations from (4.2) and (4.4) can be biased if outliers exist defining the estimated production set and the associated frontier. To avoid this problem, we select a large number of sub-samples, of a predetermined size, from the initial observed firms, and compute the final estimate as the average across the sub-samples. Therefore, since the estimated production set varies over the samples, the evaluated production plan is not always compared with potential outliers, but neither is the outlier completely ignored. We can interpret the final result as a robust measure of the inefficiency.We now describe how the computational algorithm works. First, for a given evaluated production plan (yo, xo), we repeat several Monte-Carlo replications to compute a robust output distance function. For each replication (b = 1, …, B), we draw a random sample of size M independently, uniformly, and with a replacement from the initial sample of observed firms. The associated production set is denoted byΨ^Mb:(4.5)Ψ^Mb={(x,y):x∈R+r,y∈R+q,∑i=1Mziyik≥yk,k=1,…,q,∑i=1Mzixil≤xl,l=1,…,r,∑i=1Mzi=1,zi≥0,i=1,…,M}Next, we compute the output distance function (3.2) relative to this sample:(4.6)θ^Mb(yo,xo)=min{θ:(θ−1yo,xo)∈Ψ^Mb}Finally, we repeat this for (b = 1, …, B), where B is the number of Monte-Carlo replications, and we compute the final robust output distance function as:(4.7)θ^M(yo,xo)=1B∑b=1Bθ^Mb(yo,xo)In the same manner, we compute the profit function relative to the subsamples:(4.8)Π^Mb(po,wo)=max(y,x){poy−wox:(x,y)∈Ψ^Mb}And the final robust maximal profit:(4.9)Π^M(po,wo)=1B∑b=1BΠ^Mb(po,wo)The difference between the CFS approach (4.5) and the traditional deterministic model (4.1) lies in the observations selected in the production set. While the entire N observed firms are in (4.1), only a subsample of size M can be found in (4.5). A direct consequence is that, in a deterministic approach, the evaluated production plan always belongs to the production set, therefore the output distance function is always less than or equal to 1. However, in the CFS approach, the sampling process used on the production set does not imply that the evaluated production plan is always in the sample. Therefore, the output distance function can be strictly greater than 1 if the evaluated production plan does not belong to the subsample.In order to develop the measure of efficiency under the CFS approach, we introduce two parameters; the number of replications B and the size of the sub-samples M. The number of B Monte-Carlo replications is not crucial, since, as in all Monte-Carlo processes, we can control the sensitivity of the results by making B sufficiently large. (The number chosen for the B replications is just a question of tractable computational time.) The size of the samples denoted by M is a more central issue in applied analyzes. From a theoretical point of view, by using M approaching infinity, we retrieved the traditional estimator (4.2), since the probability for each production plan in the initial observed sample belonging to each subsample approaches one. In using the robust version, we must choose the value of M between zero and infinity (or at least large enough values for M). Again, we can control the sensitivity of the results by making M vary in a sufficiently large range.To illustrate the idea behind the robust approach, Fig. 3summarizes the CFS model compared to a deterministic model. For the sake of simplicity, we restrict our example to technology with one output and one input. The distance function and the related measure of inefficiency is output-oriented and is measured along a direction given by the output vector. The dashed line frontier represents the deterministic frontier, while the frontier in bold represents the robust approach. It is clear from the illustration that four production plans (a, b, c, and d) determine the entire deterministic frontier, while points b, c, and d can be considered as outliers. However, the robust approach operates differently. First, we draw B random samples of size M with replacement. If B = 500 and M = 10, we draw 500 samples of 10 observations. Now the robust output distance function is computed for each subsample and the final result is simply the average. Note that, observations b, c, and d will be in some, but probably not in all, of the samples. If none of these observations are in a sample, the production plan (yo, xo) will be efficient, since it is not dominated by any other points. As a result, the evaluated production plan is not always compared to the outliers, and we obtain a more robust measure of the estimated output distance function and the related technical inefficiency.We are now in a position to provide the robust computation of each term of the decomposition of the profit loss:(4.10)PL=TI+PEI+RPwherePL=Π^M(po,wo)−(poyo−woxo)TI=po(θ^M−1(xo,yo)−1)yoPEI=Π^M(po,wo)−Π^M(pa,wo)RP=(poya−woxa)−(poθ^M−1(xo,yo)yo−woxo)where(ya,xa)=argmaxΠ^M(pa,wa).This section describes the data used, the technology specification and the farmers’ adaptive expectation process for output price. We then estimate, analyze, and discuss the profit decomposition and inefficiency scores.We use technical and accountancy figures from 2009 and related to a sample of 149 French pig producers who specialized in fattening units. These producers are followed by the IFIP organization, which is a French research institute for the pig industry. The database of technical and economic indicators enables us to analyze and compare the performance of pig producers. The farms are distributed among nine main different regions of France, with 40 percent being located in Brittany, which is the most concentrated area for pig production. Compared to the national average of fattening pigs per farm, which is around 620 pigs, the mean size of our sample is significantly higher (1859 animals). This is explained by two main elements. First, in France, 51 percent of farms with hog production raise less than 100 pigs and are not considered as professional fattening units. Considering only farms with more than 100 pigs (which concentrate 99 percent of the National livestock), their mean-size is around 1200 pigs. Second, comparing to the most frequent pig farming system which is the “breeder-fattener” structure, all producers in our sample are specialized in fattening units which are usually bigger in terms of pig number (French Ministry of Agriculture, 2013).General descriptive statistics of the sample are detailed in Table 1. Farms fatten an average of 1939 piglets, which represents 1859 final produced pigs, 217 tons of meat, and a total revenue of €284,264. The two main variable costs (feed and piglets)99Feed and piglet costs represent between 75 percent and 85 percent of the total production cost. Other costs such as energy, capital amortization and family labor do not respectively exceed 1 percent, 5 percent and 6 percent of the total cost (see, for instance, SPF Economie, 2010).have nearly the same level: €119,000 each, leading to a gross margin of €45,831. The sample contains some heterogeneity in production, with a standard deviation higher than 1300 pigs and an interval of variation of almost 7000 units. Since the gross profit accounts for both technical and managerial capabilities, its coefficient of variation is significantly higher than other indicators that are only related to the technical dimension.First, in order to compare farms independently of their respective heterogeneous sizes (which can be considered as fixed in the short run period), the retained variables in the technology and the associated gross profit function are expressed per pig. Second, given the fact that their respective capacity constraints are fully employed, producers are not capable of significantly adapting their production to the output price by changing the number of pig entries. However, output can be adapted through the duration in fattening days of each batch and the total number of batch rotations per year. This result in changes in the number of pigs produced annually, which is confirmed by the observation that there are few differences between the sizes of different batches within the same pig farm. In the data provided by IFIP, the range of pig entries in each batch is between 155 and 172. However, pig producers differ substantially in the number of days during which they fatten pigs. On average, the duration of the fattening period is 118 days in our sample, but varies from 93 to 140 days (see Fig. 4).Considering these elements, the fattening performance for pig farms can be analyzed through the usual criteria: Average daily gain (ADG), feed conversion (FC), and feed efficiency (FE). ADG is expressed as the ratio of the pig growth weight to the fattening days, FC is defined as feed consumption divided by weight growth, and feed efficiency (FE) is the corresponding productivity index defined as the ratio of ADG to FC. For a certain carcass quality, an efficient feeding strategy depends both on a rapid growth rate and a low feed conversion ratio. As shown by Quiniou, Gaudre, Pichodo, and Le Cozler (2004), this latter index is also influenced by the piglet weight entry.Beginning with this standard benchmark approach for pig producers, the retained technology and its associated gross profit function are therefore defined by the following variables (Table 2):(5.1)y=f(x1,x2)where y is the weight of one pig for slaughter (mean weight for the total number of fattened pigs per farm) divided per fattening days (kilogram/day), x1 is the feed per pig per day (kilogram/day) and x2 is the piglet post-weaning weight per fattening day (kilogram/day). The output price (p) is expressed in euro/kilogram of slaughtered pigs, the input unit costs are purchase feeding price (w1), and post weaning-piglet price w2 is also expressed in euro/kilogram. Finally, the profit (π) is the daily gross margin in euro defined by the difference between the value of meat (py) and the two input costs (w1x1 and w2x2, feed and piglet costs, respectively).(5.2)π=py−w1x1−w2x2Compared to the ADG and FC indices commonly used by zoo-technicians, our model offers a more general specification. First, we extend the FE partial productivity index to a global productivity index by accounting for both feeding and piglet weight entry. Second, while the ADG index relies on a linear relationship between entry and exit weights, our specification includes increasing, constant, or decreasing marginal growth rate of pig slaughter-weight.Table 3presents the descriptive statistics related to our model. For an average fattening period of 118.3 days, producers obtain a pig weight of 118.3 kilograms (a coincidence) for a cost of €99.6 (feed + piglet). As the initial piglet weight is 28.5 kilograms, the net fattening weight is around 90 kilograms, which means an average daily gain of 760 grams. Considering the observed sale price per kilogram of meat, the daily gross margin per fattening pig is €0.48. Table 3 presents all the data expressed per day.This section describes the way we model the output price expectations made by farmers. We assume that farmers’ output decisions are based on the expected prices extracted from the quarterly letter published by the IFIP, which provides output price forecasts for the following months (the extract of the forecast for 2009 is given in Appendix B). Farmers in the sample are all affiliated to the IFIP. It thus appears plausible to assume that farmers have these forecasts in mind when making decisions. Therefore, we are not constrained to making assumptions around the manner in which previous output prices enter the individual forecast made by farmers with regard to future output prices, for example, as in Chavas and Holt (1990). More precisely, the production plan decided in the mth months accounts for the most recent output price forecast (denoted by pm, m + 4) made for the (m + 4)th month (on average, piglets are sold approximately 4 months after their entry). If a more recent output price forecast (denoted by pm + n, m + 4) is available in the (m + n)th month (n < 4), farmers adjust their feeding process and, at the end of the (m + 4)th month, the overall production plan is made according to an expected output price (denoted bypm+4a), which is a weighted average of the two forecasts, that is,pm+4a=n4pm,m+4+(4−n4)pm+n,m+4. In order to illustrate this technique, we explain how we computed the price at which farmers, during the feeding process, expected to sell their output in April 2009. Pigs sold at this time had entered in the farm in January 2009 (i.e., 4 months earlier). At the entry time, farmers had expected to sell their output in April at €1.56/kilogram (according to the forecast made by the IFIP in November 2008, cf. Appendix B). In February 2009, farmers still expected to sell their output at the same price (according to the same forecast). A new IFIP newsletter was published in March 2009, indicating that the price of output in April 2009 should be €1.37/kilogram. The same price was considered in April 2009, the date at which the output was sold. Therefore, during the feeding process, farmers expected the output price of €1.56/kilogram for 2 of the months, and the output price of €1.37/kilogram for the two other months. The expected price accounted for in our calculation is therefore given by:1.56+1.56+1.37+1.374=1.465.In addition, we observe one different output price for each farmer. Differences among farmers’ output prices are explained by elements such as the quality of meat, the local market price or the farmer's reputation. These gaps between the individual prices and the average price of the sample are taken into account in our assessment of farmers’ price expectations. According to these assumptions, we evaluate an average expected price of €1.54, which is 17 percent above the mean value of individual observed prices.To wit, our estimation of the expected output prices is made up of two elements: (1) the output price forecasts published in the IFIP quarterly letter (the uncertainty component is related to this price since farmers know that this is a forecast) and; (2) the difference (observed in the past) between the market price and the price at which individuals farmers sell pigs; this difference is used to determine the effect that other variables have on expected prices.In order to reduce potential outlier influences on the final results, we develop a robust approach. Therefore, we estimate the production frontier and its associated profit function for B = 100 replications of each simulated production plan, with three different values of the M parameter: 33 percent, 50 percent, and 75 percent of the initial sample size, respectively.The daily average maximum gross margin per pig evaluated with the observed prices can reach around 61 euro cents. Therefore, producers could improve this margin by approximately 13 euro cents. Table 4indicates how this profit gap can be split between expectation, risk, and technical components, according to different M values. For instance, with an M value of 75 percent, the profit gap decomposition is established as follows: 0.4, 3.7, and 9.3 euro cents, respectively. It is worth noting that the magnitudes of profit gap decomposition remain constant, independent of the different scenarios of M values. Risk and technical components are consistently the main sources of overall ex post loss, while price expectation errors do not significantly affect profit losses.The technical component includes various factors, some of which are directly linked to inefficiencies such as technical and managerial farmers’ skills. However, others are due to specificities not included in the analysis, such as the pig type, its genetic quality, the feeding composition, or observed differences in the state of the housing units. As our framework aims to compare the relative shares of total ex post profit losses due to price expectation errors and risk preferences, it is important to explicitly consider the profit gap explained by technical inefficiency, and to project farms on the production frontier on which the profit function is defined.Beyond this profit decomposition, a by-product of our analysis is the assessment of farmers’ risk attitude. Eq. (2.8) (Section 2) predicts how risk averse, risk neutral and risk prone producers modify their production decisions when exposed to output price risk. These results rely on necessary and sufficient conditions. Therefore, we can use them to infer producers' risk attitude from their observed output decisions. Risk attitude is determined by the comparison of the profit-maximizing output (given the price expectation) and the expected outputs (given the input selected). As indicated in Section 2, if the former is greater than the latter, the farmer appears to be a risk-lover. Since a robust analysis has been developed, each farmer is evaluated in 100 different subsamples. Therefore, we can establish the frequency with which they appear as risk-lovers, risk-neutrals or risk-averse. For example, on average, farmers are risk-averse, risk-neutrals and risk-lovers in 58.1 percent, 1.2 percent, and 40.7 percent of the replications, respectively. As shown in Table 5, this conclusion holds steady independent of the three different simulation scenarios estimating the robust production frontier.Compared to several studies eliciting farmers' risk attitude, the proportion of risk seekers may seem quite high in our sample. Two reasons could explain this result. First, among the various farming activities, pig fattening is characterized by higher market risk due to the higher output price volatility (cf. figure in Appendix A and footnote 2). Thus, given the risky nature of the activity, there should be more risk seekers in this sector than in others. In addition, based on IFIP experts' opinions, the likelihood of finding risk seekers is even higher among farmers specialized in pig fattening than among pig breeders or pig breeders-fatteners. Second, given the fact that the methodology we adopted is empirical, it is unlikely – compared to experimental studies – to have many farmers classified as risk neutrals. One might thus suspect that farmers classified as risk neutral in experimental works are dispatched both in the risk averse and in the risk lovers groups in empirical works. Given this, our findings are in line with other studies which have indicated that there might be a relatively low proportion of risk averse farmers. For instance, Dillon and Scandizzo (1978) presented to Brazilian farmers hypothetical choices between risky and certain alternatives. They found out that when farmers' subsistence was not at risk, 35 percent of respondents were either risk neutrals (8 percent) or risk seekers (27 percent).1010When subsistence was at risk, only 17 percent of respondents were risk lovers.In their experiments meant to evaluate risk attitude among Australian farmers, Bond and Wonder (1980) indicate that 43 percent of respondents were either risk neutrals (24.5 percent) or risk seekers (18.5 percent).1111These figures only consider farmers who made choices that were consistently risk averse or risk prone. Twenty-seven percent of respondents (those who switched from risk aversion to risk prone choices or vice versa) are not taken into account in these figures.More recently, in an experimental study which objective was to elicit risk attitudes among French farmers, Reynaud and Couture (2010) reveal that the proportion of risk averse, risk neutral and risk lovers was respectively equal to 54 percent, 21 percent and 25 percent when low payoffs were at stake and was respectively equal to 61 percent, 21 percent and 18 percent when high payoffs were at stake. Finally, the experimental study led by Henrich and McElreath (2002) indicate that subsistence oriented farmers in Chile and Tanzania are mostly risk seekers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
