@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A survey of game-theoretic models of cooperative advertising

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review the literature on co-advertising in marketing channels using game theory.We find that a number of results carry over from static to dynamic environments.We also find that the work on static models is quite homogeneous.Few papers assumed both horizontal and vertical interactions.We identify directions for additional research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Co-op advertising programs,Marketing channels,Supply chains,Game theory,Nash and Stackelberg Equilibria,Vertical integration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper surveys the literature on cooperative advertising in marketing channels (supply chains) using game theoretic methods. During the last decade, in particular, this literature has expanded considerably and has studied static as well as dynamic settings. The survey is divided into two main parts. The first one deals with simple marketing channels having one supplier and one reseller only. The second one covers marketing channels of a more complex structure, having more than one supplier and/or reseller.In the first part we find that a number of results carry over from static to dynamic environments. We also find that the work on static models is quite homogeneous, in the sense that most papers employ the same basic consumer demand specification and address the same situations of vertical integration and noncooperative games with simultaneous or sequential actions. The work on dynamic problems of cooperative advertising also shows some similarities.The second part shows that models incorporating horizontal interaction on either or both layers of the supply chain are much less numerous than those supposing its absence. Participation rates in co-op advertising programs depend on inter- and intra-brand competition, and participation may not always be in the best interest of the firms in the marketing channel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cooperative advertising is an arrangement between a supplier and a reseller where the reseller’s expenditures on local promotional activities are partly paid by the supplier. For example, a retailer may receive one-half of the cost of advertising the supplier’s product or service, most probably subject to some upper limit (e.g., 10% of purchases in a given period). Another arrangement is one where the supplier pays an advertising allowance as fixed amount per unit sold of the supplier’s product. Lump sum payments have also been seen. Cooperative advertising is often used in consumer goods industries and monetary support from manufacturers is a major part of a retailer’s budget for local advertising.For a supplier, cooperative advertising is an instrument to increase immediate sales at the retail level. When engaging in co-op advertising, a supplier can take advantage of the lower local advertising rates (for newspaper space or television time) that apply to retailers. Moreover, the retailer usually has better information on local market conditions than the supplier. Such information is useful when designing a plan for local promotional activities.To understand the problems of cooperative advertising it is useful to keep in mind that members of a marketing channel (supply chain) in the vast majority of cases are independent business firms. This means that each firm is free to make decisions that are in its own best interest and need not be concerned with the interests of other channel members. It is well known in marketing channel and supply chain literature that such “uncoordinated” decision making most likely will damage the financial performance of the channel as a whole. The coordination problem asks the question if incentives or contracts can be designed such that, when implemented, they will induce channel members to make those decisions that are in the best interest of the channel.1Typically this is taken to mean that channel members’ decisions maximize the overall channel profit.1Many mechanisms have been suggested in the literature. In deterministic demand settings we see, for example, quantity discounts, profit or revenue sharing, advertising allowances (lump sum or a fixed amount per unit sold), local advertising cost-sharing, and two-part tariffs. If consumer demand is treated as random, mechanisms are available with the typical purpose of reducing the risk taken by resellers (by being under- or overstocked).The literature on co-op advertising has used two main approaches. The first approach is where (independent) firms in a channel, for any reason, do not wish to cooperate and implement a channel-optimal solution. Nevertheless, the supplier wishes to support retailers’ local advertising. Such problems are formulated as games, played by non-cooperating players. If no player knows the decision of her opponents when making her own decision, the game is one of simultaneous moves and the standard “solution concept” is the Nash equilibrium. However, it may happen that one player (the “leader”) has a first-mover advantage and can decide and announce her strategy before the other players (“the followers”) decide. In such games the standard solution concept is the Stackelberg equilibrium. The second approach is to assume a situation in which all channel members decide to collaborate and implement strategies prescribed by (typically) the joint profit-maximizing solution. Mathematically, this is a one-person optimization problem.The study of cooperative advertising in a marketing channel, using an optimization approach, probably originated with the paper by Berger (1972) although cooperative advertising had received the attention of researchers much earlier; see, e.g., Lyon (1932), Hutchins (1953), and Lockley (1957). Lyon’s paper on advertising allowances, although it did not contain a mathematical model, may be the first analysis of the problems of cooperative advertising. In practice there has been an increasing use of cooperative advertising. Nagler (2006) estimate the total expenditure in 1970 in the US on cooperative advertising to be $0.9 billion. By 2000 that amount had grown to $15 billion and estimates for 2007 report an amount of $25 billion (Chutani & Sethi, 2012b). Cooperative advertising support definitely is important for retailers: Dant and Berger (1996) report that 25–40% of retailers’ local promotion expenditures (including advertising) are funded by manufacturers.To present the literature we make use of the notation stated in Table 1. Notation (mainly Greek letters) not appearing in the table are nonnegative constants. We shall label a retailer byr∈1,2,…,Rand a manufacturer (or his brand) bym∈1,2,…,M. With a few exceptions, which are easy to see from the context, we use capital letters for variables and parameters pertaining to manufacturers and small letters for retailers. When time is involved, we denote it by t and time-dependent variables have t as an argument.2When the supply chain involves a single manufacturer and a single retailer there is no need for indices and superscripts.2The survey is organized as follows. Section 2 presents literature dealing with the simple marketing channel having one manufacturer and one retailer. This section is divided into two parts where the first one surveys static models. The second part concerns dynamic models, written in continuous time as differential games or optimal control problems. Each part makes a distinction between models with advertising only and models with advertising and other decision variables. Section 3 has the same structure as Section 2 and deals with more complicated models of marketing channels with multiple manufacturers and retailers. Section 4 concludes.Surveys that complement the present one are Sethi (1977) and Feichtinger, Hartl, and Sethi (1994) dealing with optimal control models in advertising, Erickson (1991), Jørgensen and Zaccour (2004) and Huang, Leng, and Liang (2012) are concerned with for differential games in advertising. Finally, He, Prasad, Gutierrez, and Sethi (2007) and Ingene, Taboubi, and Zaccour (2012) survey game-theoretic models in supply chains and marketing channels.This section deals with the simplest possible marketing channel where a supplier sells a particular product or service through a single reseller. In the literature it is customary to refer to the two channel members as the manufacturer and the retailer. Henceforth the manufacturer is a “he” and the retailer is a “she”. To motivate the assumption of a single retailer one may think of a situation in which the retailer is the manufacturer’s exclusive dealer in a certain market area. The two-firm marketing channel clearly is an extreme case as it disregards competition among manufacturers and among retailers. Also competition between channels is disregarded. More complex channels like these will be considered later on in the survey.We present the literature by making a categorization according to the time horizon of the cooperative advertising model. Section 2.1 is devoted to static models while Section 2.2 deals with dynamic models cast in continuous time.A static game model assumes that players (firms) decide for one period only. The environment – as reflected in consumer demand functions, profit functions, and the roles players have in the game – is fixed. The implications of current decisions on the players’ future situation and opportunities are left out of consideration. Despite its strong assumptions, a static model may be a reasonable modeling choice in circumstances where the decision environment is fairly stable and today’s decisions do not have significant consequences beyond the current period. Indeed, in game theory, economics, and operations research, valuable insights have been gained from the study of static models. Results coming from static models should, however, be put to the test in a dynamic setup where the environment no longer is stable, players can (if they wish) learn from the game history, stocks can be accounted for, and so forth.This section presents papers that consider advertising only and others that look at advertising and additional decision variables, typically pricing. We shall observe a considerable similarity among the papers, in terms of modeling, analysis, and results. To avoid unnecessary repetition we have chosen to report for each paper the principal model components (consumer demand function and profit functions of channel members), which decision problems are studied, and what are the novelties of a paper. For the benefit of the reader we have – at the end of Section 2.1 – consolidated the lessons that might be learned from the literature surveyed.A seminal paper in this area is Berger (1972) who considered a situation in which the manufacturer offers an advertising allowance to the retailer. The manufacturer produces at unit cost C and charges wholesale price W per unit sold to the retailer. The latter has a unit margin (before paying the wholesale price and before receiving the advertising allowance) ofπ. The manufacturer pays the retailer an advertising allowance of S per unit purchased.3As in all models of this section, the Berger model has deterministic demand which implies that the manufacturer’s production equals the quantity that the retailer purchases which equals quantity sold to the final customers.3The retailer decides her local advertising expenditure a while the manufacturer decides the advertising allowance S. Consumer sales are given by a strictly concave and increasing functionD(a). The manufacturer’s profit then isJm(S)=(W-S-C)D(a),while the profit of the retailer isJr(a)=(π+S-W)D(a)-a.The game is of the Stackelberg variety and to find an equilibrium one can proceed as follows. The manufacturer starts by announcing the advertising support rate S. Given S, the retailer chooses her advertising level a to maximizeJr(a|S). Whenevera>0, the first order optimality condition of the retailer isJr′(a|S)=0. Solving this equation yields the retailer’s best reply functiona(S). Then the manufacturer chooses S to maximizeJm(S), subject to the best replya(S). Berger shows that the total channel profit,π-CD(a)-a, which could be made if the firms cooperated (i.e., making decisions as if they were a single firm), exceeds the sum of individual profits obtained in the game equilibrium. This result is general and applies to many other marketing channel and supply chain contexts, pinpointing the advantage of coordinated (centralized) decision making.The profit function of the retailer,Jr(a), shows that the allowance S may be seen as a discount on the wholesale price. Therefore, instead of giving the advertising allowance, the manufacturer might consider to lower the wholesale price. However, in most of the literature that followed Berger’s paper, the manufacturer reimburses a percentage of the retailer’s local advertising expenditure.We use the setting to illustrate in the simplest possible way the rationale of this mechanism. Denote byΠandπthe constant profit margins of the manufacturer and retailer, respectively. Suppose that2Π>π, that is, the manufacturer’s margin is not “too small” compared to that of the retailer. Let A and a be the advertising efforts of the manufacturer and the retailer, respectively. The costs of advertising efforts are supposed to be quadratic and are given byC(A)=K2A2,c(a)=k2a2where K and k are positive parameters. LetS∈[0,1]denote the fraction of the local advertising cost a that the manufacturer will reimburse. Consumer demand D depends on advertising efforts only and is given by the linear functionD=α+βa+γA,in whichα,β,γare positive numbers. Profit functions areJm=ΠD-Ska22-12KA2,Jr=πD-(1-S)ka22.Three basic scenarios are studied in the literature and we describe briefly how they work. The first scenario is a Stackelberg game with the manufacturer acting as the leader, which means that the manufacturer moves first and decides and announces his (national) advertising effort A and the subsidy S. For any such announcement, the retailer chooses (local) advertising effort a so as to maximize profitJr. This yields the retailer’s best responsea=f(A,S). Finally the manufacturer chooses A and S to maximizeJm, subject to the best reply of the retailer.The second scenario is one where there is no leader and decisions are made simultaneously. One motivation for considering this situation is the empirical observation that manufacturers have lost bargaining power vis-a-vis retailers. Quite a few retail chains (national and international) have become very large, manufacturers’ formerly strong bargaining positions have deteriorated and it is no longer evident that manufacturers should maintain their former positions as channel leaders. (This argument has been used to provide a motivation for studying a Stackelberg game with the retailer as leader.) In the simultaneous move game it is natural to look for a Nash equilibrium and the equilibrium outcome is not hard to predict: The manufacturer’s decision is to not support the retailer’s local advertising.In the third scenario channel members jointly optimize their decisions. This means that they act as if they were a single decision maker. The situation here is the same as if the channel were vertically integrated. Having solved the resulting one-person optimization problem, channel members must agree how the joint optimal profit should be shared among them. It is important to note that having solved the joint maximization problem does not imply that firms necessarily will make decisions that achieves this maximum. This is the problem of coordinating, or obtaining efficiency in, the channel. It arises when actions (e.g., a retailer’s local advertising expenditure) are not observable to the manufacturer (moral hazard) or due to legal restrictions. In any case the issue is how incentives can be designed and implemented such that channel members act in the best interest of the channel, that is, the channel is coordinated/efficient? As we shall see, almost all papers in the survey did not address this pertinent problem.Solving the simple model introduced above under the three scenarios provides the results in Table 2. A first observation can be made by looking at the first-order optimality condition of the retailer in the Stackelberg game, namely,∂Jr∂a=πβ-(1-S)ka=0⇔a=πβk(1-S)=f(S).This is the reaction function of the retailer (the follower) to the leader’s announced advertising support. Clearly,f(S)>0andf′(S)>0which is the essence of an advertising cooperative program, to provide an incentive to the retailer to use positive and increasing effort, with the purpose of stimulating consumer demand.4The reaction function is simple as it only depends on S and not on A. This is due to the special structure of the model where a and A do not interact in the optimization problems.4Using superscript N for Nash, S for Stackelberg and∗for joint optimization, the results are summarized in Table 2 to which we offer the following comments:1.Advertising levels compare as follows:aN<aS<a∗,AN=AS<A∗,that is, both players use more effort, or the same, in a Stackelberg than in a Nash equilibrium, but less than in the joint optimization solution (vertical integration).Demands satisfyDN<DS<D∗which shows that consumers benefit from a cooperative advertising program, but would be better off under joint optimization.Profitwise, the players achieve their best outcomes in the joint optimization solution. This is expected. It holds thatJmN<JmS,JrN<JrSandJ∗>JmS+JrS>JmN+JrN.One issue is still pending, that is, how to share the joint optimal profitJ∗among the two players if they decide to cooperate and act as one firm. This can be done by negotiation or by a sharing principle. Cooperative game theory has a lot to say about this problem.We briefly summarize a number of other contributions. Berger and Magliozzi (1992) consider a situation in which a manufacturer sells through a direct marketer. The latter possesses a list of potential customers who can be mailed to inform them about the manufacturer’s product. The list is rank-ordered by customers’ purchase probabilities and the direct marketer decides the depth-of-file into which mails should be sent. The manufacturer can, however, influence the depth-of-list chosen by the direct marketer by sharing the direct marketer’s cost. Dant and Berger (1996) applies Berger’s model to a franchise system with a franchisor and a franchisee. The latter expends money on local advertising and receives support from the franchisor. Results are quite similar to those in Berger’s paper.Huang and Li (2001) study a model with non-linear demand given byD=α-βa-γA-δin whichα,β,γ, andδare positive numbers. The profit functions areJm=ΠD-Sa-A,Jr=πD-(1-S)a.Here, as in some other papers, a and A are advertising expenditures (not efforts) of the two firms. Huang and Li identify Pareto efficient sharing schemes by introducing channel members’ risk attitudes. Li, Huang, Zhu, and Chau (2002) consider the same model and problems as Huang and Li (2001), except the simultaneous-move game. The novelty in Li et al. (2002) is the analysis of a Stackelberg equilibrium in which the manufacturer optimizes his profit subject to a constraint that the retailer must be guaranteed a certain level of profit. Xie and Ai (2006) consider the Stackelberg game by Li et al. (2002) and look at a situation in which the manufacturer’s profit margin is “not large enough” and obtain results that are different from those in Huang and Li (2001).Huang, Li, and Mahajan (2002) employ the Huang and Li (2001) model. The new feature of the paper is the use of the bargaining model of Eliashberg (1986) to share the joint profit in the cooperative case.A closer look at the Huang and Li (2001) model reveals that demand D becomes negative for certain values of the decision variables. The problem of negative demand was acknowledged by Yue, Austin, Wang, and Huang (2006) who introduced two constraints,a⩾a¯andA⩾A‾, to fix the problem, but failed to take these constraints into account in the mathematical analysis. Ahmadi Javid and Hoseinpour (2011) and Ahmadi Javid and Hoseinpour (2012) show that taking the constraintsa⩾a¯andA⩾A‾duly into consideration may yield results that differ considerably from those of earlier papers that disregarded the nonnegativity constraint on demand. We observe that constraintsa⩾a¯andA⩾A‾are somewhat ad hoc and the problem of negative demand still awaits rigorous treatment.Some papers extend the advertising models to include decisions on wholesale as well as consumer price. Demand is in general given byD=f(a,A,p)where a and A are advertising expenditures by retailer and manufacturer and p is the retail price. Demand function f is concave and increasing in a and A, decreasing in p.Table 3summarizes the contributions in this area, using the notation SM for Stackelberg with manufacturer as leader, SR for Stackelberg with retailer as leader, S for a game with no leader but played as a Stackelberg game in two stages, N for Nash, and JO for joint optimization. We make the following observations.(i)In all cases – except Kunter (2012) in his first model – the demand function is multiplicatively separable in advertising and price:D=g(a,A)h(p). Technically, this is an appealing assumption.Yue et al. (2006), Xie and Neyret (2009), and Szmerekovsky and Zhang (2009) allow for interaction between the firms’ advertising expenditures.Demand in Szmerekovsky and Zhang (2009) is a special case of the one in Yue et al. (2006) (setp0=1).Demand in Xie and Wei (2009) is a special case of the demand in SeyedEsfahani, Biazaran, and Gharakhani (2011) (setυ=1).Aust and Buscher (2012) replace consumer price by the sum of margins,π+W, which has the interesting implication that demand becomes a function of the manufacturer’s wholesale price decision W.Kunter (2012) employs a general as well as a specified demand model. In the latter, the advertising part is as in, e.g., Xie and Wei (2009). Unlike Xie and Neyret (2009) and Xie and Wei (2009), the price term is separated and demand is linear in price.Authors used different mechanisms to share the total cooperative outcome, e.g., the Nash bargaining solution, an asymmetric version of this solution (see, e.g., Kalai (1977), and the bargaining procedure suggested in Eliashberg (1986)).Kunter (2012) seems to be the only paper that addresses the coordination problem. As shown in Table 3, most papers identify the joint maximization solution but fail to design an efficient contract, that is, one which solves the coordination problem. Kunter suggests a contract of royalty payments that suffices for channel coordination. The contract requires revenue sharing as well as mutual advertising support. The channel is coordinated if the following equalities are satisfied:Manufacturer’s share of the channel margin=the share the manufacturer pays of his own advertising cost=the share the manufacturer pays of the retailer’s advertising costs=the share of the retailer’s revenue that the manufacturer receives.The cost and revenue sharing contract has a spirit of cooperation and incentive provision, rather than transferring control to one member of the channel (Jeuland & Shugan, 1988). It turns out that there is a continuum of coordinating contracts but channel members can select one through bargaining over the wholesale price. A Stackelberg game is played such that in stage 1, channel members write a contract on a set of royalty payments to maximize channel profits. At stage 2, channel members maximize their individual profits.Three models differ significantly from those in Table 3, namely, Karray and Zaccour (2006), Yan (2010), and Karray (2013). Karray and Zaccour (2006) consider a marketing channel in which the retailer may sell a private label (a store brand) and analyze the impact of this decision on the manufacturer who produces and sells a national brand. Among other things, the paper investigates if it is profitable for the manufacturer to offer a co-op advertising program to a retailer, and if it is in the best interest of the retailer to participate in such a program. Demand functions for the private label (PL) and the national brand (NB), respectively, areDNB=α+δa-pNB+γpPL,DPL=β-δa-pPL+φpNB,in whichpl,l∈{PL,NB}are the consumer prices of the two brands, set by the retailer, andα>0,β>0,γ∈(0,1),δ>0,φ∈(0,1)are constants. Demand functions are additively separable, with advertising shifting up the market potential of the national brand fromαtoα+δa, and shifting down the demand for private label. A cooperative advertising scheme is a profit-improving counterstrategy for the manufacturer but the retailer would accept the scheme only if the NB competes strongly with the PL. The reason is that the scheme boosts local advertising effort for the national brand which, in turn, decreases the retailer’s profits earned from the private label. Ultimately these effects lead to lower retailer profits.Yan (2010) introduces as a novelty that the retailer is doing e-business. A product’s “web-fit factor” is a numberθ∈[0,1]that represents the degree to which the product “fits” with e-marketing. Ifθis zero the product is not compatible with e-marketing whileθ=1represents perfect compatibility. Consumer valuation of the product is V when the product can be physically inspected and the customer gets it straight away (as in a usual retail store). When a product is purchased from an e-retailer it can only be virtually inspected and the customer has to wait to receive the product. In the e-market, consumers’ valuation of the product isθV⩽V. All consumers having a valuationθVlarger than the retail price p will buy. The effects of national and local advertising are modeled as in, for example, Xie and Wei (2009).The demand function isD=(θV-p)lkra+kmA;p∈(0,θ),θ∈(0,1],l∈(0,1],where the constant l represents the degree of the differentiation between the e-retailer’s local advertising and the manufacturer’s national advertising. A large value of l corresponds to a small “overlap” between local and national advertising and local advertising is more efficient in stimulating demand. The authors study a Stackelberg equilibrium and the joint maximization solution. The two parametersθand l, introduced to adjust the demand model to e-marketing, are new compared to the earlier literature. Results pertaining to these parameters are intuitive: national advertising increases withθ(better web-fit) while local advertising increases withθas well as l (little overlap between the two types of advertising).Karray (2013) compares equilibrium results of different dyad models, when each player (manufacturer and retailer) can set simultaneously or sequentially his/hers marketing expenditures and price, under the leadership of either manufacturer or retailer. As one can expect in the case of a complex model like Karray’s, results are numerical and hence depend critically on parameter values. The main message of the paper is that the type of strategic interactions, in terms of leadership and timing of decisions, has a significant impact on the equilibrium profits and players’ preferences for the options available to them.As promised, we conclude this section with a summary of key results of the papers surveyed. We mainly report findings that are general, in the sense that they hold true whatever the values of the model parameters. (Other results are true only if certain conditions on parameter values are satisfied.) Some of these conditions are intuitive and the results they imply are not surprising.5To illustrate, Huang and Li (2001) and Huang et al. (2002) find that in a Stackelberg equilibrium with the manufacturer as leader, the manufacturer offers no local advertising support if the ratio between manufacturer’s and retailer’s unit margins is sufficiently small.5Other conditions are quite complex and cannot be economically interpreted. The references listed in square brackets are examples only; similar results appear in other papers as well.Result 1Total channel profit in the joint maximization solution is larger than the sum of profits in any of the noncooperative games (Berger, 1972; Berger & Magliozzi, 1992; Dant & Berger, 1996; Huang & Li, 2001; Li et al., 2002; SeyedEsfahani et al., 2011; Xie & Neyret, 2009; Yan, 2010).National and local advertising expenditures are higher in the joint maximization solution than in the noncooperative games (Aust & Buscher, 2012; Huang & Li, 2001; Huang et al., 2002; Li et al., 2002; SeyedEsfahani et al., 2011; Xie & Neyret, 2009; Xie & Wei, 2009; Yan, 2010).6Result 2 says that if advertising is provided collectively, more will be used than if it were provided individually. In this sense advertising works like a public good.6Retail price is lower in the joint maximization solution than in the noncooperative games (Aust & Buscher, 2012; SeyedEsfahani et al., 2011; Xie & Wei, 2009; Yan, 2010).7This result is due to the “double marginalization” phenomenon that has been extensively covered in marketing channel and supply chain literature. See, for instance, Ingene et al. (2012) for an explanation in a static setting and He, Prasad, and Sethi (2009) for one in a dynamic context. The name of the phenomenon refers to the practice where a manufacturer adds a profit margin to the production cost while the retailer adds a margin to the wholesale price.7If the manufacturer’s profit margin is sufficiently low, advertising expenditures of the manufacturer and the retailer in the joint maximization solution are not always larger than those of a Stackelberg game (Xie & Ai, 2006).The following principles were used to share the joint payoff: Nash bargaining model (Huang & Li, 2001; SeyedEsfahani et al., 2011; Xie & Neyret, 2009; Xie & Wei, 2009; Yan, 2010); Eliashberg’s bargaining scheme (Huang et al., 2002; Yue et al., 2006); asymmetric Nash bargaining model (Aust & Buscher, 2012).Result 5The more risk-averse, the lower a channel member’s share of the total channel profit (Huang & Li, 2001; Huang et al., 2002; Xie & Neyret, 2009).If firms have the same degree of risk aversion, the cooperative gain is split equally (Huang et al., 2002).Result 7The manufacturer offers no advertising support to the retailer when there is no channel leader (Ahmadi Javid & Hoseinpour, 2011, 2012; Huang & Li, 2001).The manufacturer expends more on national advertising in a Nash game than in a Stackelberg game with manufacturer as leader (Huang & Li, 2001).Retailer’s local advertising expenditure is lower in a Nash than in a Stackelberg (with manufacturer as leader) equilibrium if the ratio of retailer and manufacturer margins is sufficiently low (Huang & Li, 2001).Result 10Being a Stackelberg leader, it is better for the manufacturer to advertise nationally or lower the wholesale price instead of supporting inefficient local advertising. When retailer advertising is efficient, the manufacturer should push the responsibility for such advertising on to the retailer, but without subsidizing it (Szmerekovsky & Zhang, 2009).The retailer engages in more local advertising if the manufacturer offers a price discount directly to customers (Yue et al., 2006).Whoever is the leader, that firm can always induce the follower to invest more in advertising while the leader invests less (Xie & Neyret, 2009).The manufacturer offers a co-op advertising program to the retailer if the ratio of the manufacturer and retailer margins is sufficiently high. The higher the ratio, the higher the support rate (Huang & Li, 2001; Huang et al., 2002).Result 14The retailer prefers to be the Stackelberg leader (Xie & Neyret, 2009).The retailer prefers to be in conflict with the manufacturer rather than being a Stackelberg follower, even if the retailer’s local advertising is supported by the manufacturer (Xie & Neyret, 2009).The manufacturer prefers to be a Stackelberg leader, compared to a Nash game as well as a Stackelberg game with the retailer as leader (Huang & Li, 2001).The retailer prefers the Stackelberg to the Nash game if the ratio of retailer and manufacturer margins is sufficiently low (Huang & Li, 2001).The manufacturer prefers to be a Stackelberg follower rather than playing a Nash game (SeyedEsfahani et al., 2011).If the manufacturer’s profit margin is sufficiently low, the retailer prefers to play a Nash game rather than a Stackelberg game (Xie & Ai, 2006).This section surveys papers that use differential games to study co-op advertising. The papers have some assumptions in common. All except one employ the advertising goodwill model of Nerlove and Arrow (1962) as a description of the dynamics of the game. Let t denote time (which is continuous) and letG(t)be a state variable that represents a stock of advertising goodwill for a manufacturer’s brand by time t. The model is an ordinary differential equation for G and reads(1)Ġ(t)=dGdt=λA(t)-δG(t),whereλandδare positive parameters. The equation says that the rate at which the stock changes at time t is affected by advertising rateA(t)and the termδG(t). The latter represents an assumption that goodwill decays over time, at a rate which is proportional to the current goodwill level. Note that the smaller the parameterδ, the larger the carry-over effect of advertising. Compared to the static models, the inclusion of equations of motion like the one in (1) is the novelty of the dynamic models.All papers adopt an assumption of an infinite planning horizon and time-independent parameters. Technically, this is appealing because a feedback strategyA(G,t)then can be taken to be stationary, i.e.,A(G). The papers surveyed assume that firms use stationary feedback strategies. Indeed, some models generate strategies that do not even depend on G and thus strategies are constant over time.Jørgensen, Taboubi, and Zaccour (2001b) assume that the evolution of advertising goodwill is affected by the manufacturer’s national advertising expenditure only. The dynamics are(2)Ġ(t)=αA(t)-δG(t)and consumer demand is given byD(t)=βa(t)+λG(t)-γG2(t)which shows that demand is affected directly by the retailer’s local advertisinga(t)and indirectly (through (2)) by the manufacturer’s national advertisingA(t).8The assumption that demand is concave and increasing in G imposes the conditionG<λ/2γon demand D.8Advertising cost functions are quadratic:F(A(t))=μm2A2(t),f(a(t))=μr2a2(t)and, denoting byρ>0the common discount rate of the channel members, objective functions are(3)Jm=∫0∞e-ρtΠD(t)-μm2A2(t)-S(t)μr2a2(t)dtJr=∫0∞e-ρtπD(t)-(1-S(t))μr2a2(t)dtin whichμk,k∈{m,r}are positive numbers andS(t)∈[0,1]is the co-op advertising support rate. Two games are analyzed: A Nash game without co-op advertising support and a Stackelberg game (in which the manufacturer is the leader) with advertising support.9Recall from the static games that a manufacturer offers no advertising support in Nash equilibrium.9In the joint maximization solution the dividend of cooperation is shared according to the egalitarian principle. This requires side payments from one firm to the other.Main results of the paper are as follows. A co-op advertising program is Pareto improving because both firms benefit when the manufacturer takes the role of a Stackelberg leader. The manufacturer gains more than the retailer if the ratioΠ/πis sufficiently large.10This result carries over from the static models.10As expected, the retailer advertises more when her advertising is subsidized.In Jørgensen, Sigué, and Zaccour (2000) firms use more sophisticated types of advertising. Each firm may engage in short-term as well as long-term advertising in order to stimulate demand and to build up goodwill. Denote the advertising effort rates byAS(t)andAL(t)for the manufacturer andaS(t)andaL(t)for the retailer (where subscripts “S” and “L” refer to “short term” and “long term”, respectively). The evolution of goodwillG(t)is determined byĠ(t)=λmAL(t)(t)+λraL(t)-δG(t)and demand D depends on the short-term advertising expenditures of both firms and the current level of goodwill:D(t)=αmAS(t)+αraS(t)G(t)whereαmandαrare positive constants. Short-term advertising can be seen as in-store activities to stimulate demand, whereas long-term efforts influence the goodwill (reputation or brand equity) of the manufacturer’s product. This demand, which exhibits an interaction between advertising and goodwill, is concave in the latter. The implication is that if one wishes to increase sales of a brand with an already high level of goodwill, it may be better to increase short term advertising (a push strategy) rather than long term advertising (a pull strategy).The manufacturer decides the rates at which the retailer’s short-term and long-term advertising costs are reimbursed. The paper considers four scenarios. A Nash game with no support and a Stackelberg game with the manufacturer as leader and where both types of retailer advertising are supported. In the last two games, the manufacturer supports one type of retailer advertising only. Objective functions are of the same structure as those in (3), noting that now each firm must pay two costs of advertising.The paper shows that the short-term advertising support rate is the same in the full-support program and in the program where only short-term advertising is supported. Support is offered if the manufacturer’s margin is sufficiently large compared to that of the retailer. For any level of goodwill, both channel members prefer full support to any partial support program which, in turn, are preferred to the game with no support at all. Then it is clear which program should be chosen at the start of the game. A program offering full support has the desirable property of being dynamically stable which means that at no instant of time during the play of game, no channel member would wish to adopt another support program.In most papers using the Nerlove–Arrow model of goodwill evolution, a basic assumption is that advertising has a positive impact on the goodwill stock. Jørgensen, Taboubi, and Zaccour (2003) consider a situation in which a retailer’s advertising (or generally, promotions) may damage the brand image (goodwill). This could happen if excessive and frequent retailer promotions lead consumers to see such activities, for instance, as a cover-up for poor product quality. The aim of the paper is to see if a co-op advertising program is feasible under such circumstances. The goodwill stock evolves according to the dynamics(4)Ġ(t)=αA(t)-βa(t)-δG(t)in which all three parametersα,β, andδare positive. Then, if the retailer promotion ratea(t)is sufficiently large, the goodwill stock decreases.Two games are studied. The first one is a (no advertising support) Nash game where two situations are considered. In the first one the retailer is myopic; in the second she is far-sighted. A myopic retailer is one who disregards the dynamics in (4) when solving her optimization problem. Why would the retailer be myopic? One answer is that she does not know that her local promotions damage the brand image, that is, she is unaware of the mechanism, Eq. (4), that governs the evolution of goodwill. The second scenario is a Stackelberg game with the manufacturer as leader. The paper shows that a co-op advertising program is feasible (in terms of profits) if the initial level of goodwill,G(0), is sufficiently small or ifG(0)is “intermediate” and retailer promotions are not “too damaging” to the brand image (i.e., the parameterβis sufficiently small). Otherwise, no agreement can be made and the Nash game is played. In this game it is best for the retailer to be myopic and disregard the goodwill dynamics.Karray and Zaccour (2005) is a dynamic version of the static model in Karray and Zaccour (2006). The situation considered in these papers is a retailer who carries a brand of a national manufacturer and has the option of introducing a store brand (private label). The manufacturer may support local retailer advertising. The authors show that introducing the store brand always is harmful for the profit of the manufacturer. On the other hand, the retailer stands to benefit from the introduction if the initial level of goodwillG(0)is sufficiently large (the dynamics are those in (2)). Finally, a co-op advertising program is Pareto-improving for retailer as well as manufacturer and both channel members should accept the program.Jørgensen, Taboubi, and Zaccour (2006) deal with a situation in which the manufacturer (a Stackelberg leader) designs an incentive strategy to induce the retailer (the follower) to increase her local advertising. Two scenarios are considered. In the first one, the manufacturer wishes to induce the retailer to behave in accordance with the joint maximization outcome while in the second the manufacturer is only cares about his own profit. A comparison of the two scenarios shows that both channel members advertise the most in the joint maximization case. If the manufacturer decides to support the retailer’s local advertising, the promotion allowance is highest in the joint maximization scenario.In this category, He et al. (2009) include the consumer price as an additional decision variable. De Giovanni (2011) introduces the manufacturer’s quality improvement effort while Zhang, Gou, Liang, and Huang (2013) consider the consumer reference price as an extra decision instrument. The paper by Zhang et al. (2013) is the only one which has more than one state variable while the paper by He et al. (2009) paper is the only one to assume that demand is random.He et al. (2009) consider local advertising only. The retailer decides the ratea(t)of this effort as well as the consumer pricep(t). The manufacturer decides the wholesale priceW(t)and the co-op advertising subsidy rateS(t). A random variableY(t)∈[0,1]represents the fraction of consumers in the market who are aware of the product at time t. To describe the evolution ofY(t), the following Itô equation is employed:dY(t)=τa(t)1-Y(t)-δY(t)dt+σ(Y(t))dz(t)in whichτandδare positive parameters,σis a function, andz(t)a Wiener process. Consumer demand depends on price and is given byD(p(t)). Letting E denote the expectation operator, objective functions are given byJm=E∫0∞e-ρt(W(t)-C)D(p(t))Y(t)-(1-S(t))a2(t)dtJr=E∫0∞e-ρt(p(t)-W(t))D(p(t))Y(t)-S(t)a2(t)dt.The paper determines equilibria in two Stackelberg differential games with the manufacturer as the leader: one with a co-op advertising program and one without a program. In addition, the joint-maximization solution is found.The authors also study a more complex setup in which a co-op advertising program is combined with a revenue sharing contract. Under such a contract, the retailer pays a fraction of her sales revenue to the manufacturer. The manufacturer reimburses the fractionS(t)of the retailer’s local advertising expenditures and charges wholesale priceW(t)to the retailer. The objective functions for this case can be found by replacing in the profitJrthe termp(t)-W(t)by(1-S(t))p(t)-W(t)while inJmone replacesW(t)-CbyW(t)-C+S(t)p(t). One coordinating contract prescribes that the manufacturer receives a constant fraction of the retail revenue and contributes the same fraction towards cooperative advertising. For a similar result, see Kunter (2012).As expected, the manufacturer will not offer a co-op advertising program when the retailer’s margin is sufficiently higher than that of the manufacturer.11The paper looks at various demand functions and finds that co-op advertising is more likely with linear demand compared to isoelastic demand.11In the absence of a co-op program, a decentralized channel has higher prices and lower advertising than a centralized one.The objective of the paper by De Giovanni (2011) is to study the outcome of combining an operations decision (manufacturer’s quality improvement effort) and a marketing decision (retailer’s local advertising), in the setting of a co-op advertising program. No national advertising is done by the manufacturer and the goodwill stock evolves according to the equationĠ(t)=εa(t)+γQ(t)-δG(t),in whichε,γ, andδare positive numbers andQ(t)is the manufacturer’s quality improvement rate. In addition toQ(t), the manufacturer decides the wholesale priceW(t). The retailer decides her advertising ratea(t). The manufacturer obtains an increase in production cost, due to quality improvement, which is represented in the manufacturer’s objective by subtracting a termCQ(t). The consumer demand function is given byD(t)=α-βηW(t)+θG(t)in whichα,β, andθare positive parameters andηis the retailer’s constant and multiplicative markup of the wholesale priceW(t). Objective functions then are as follows:Jm=∫0∞e-ρtW(t)-CQ(t)D(t)-S(t)a2(t)2dtJr=∫0∞e-ρtη-1W(t)D(t)-(1-S(t))a2(t)2dt.First, a Nash game is analyzed and, as expected, the manufacturer does not subsidize the retailer’s advertising cost. Next, a Stackelberg game with the manufacturer as leader, and including a co-op advertising support program, is considered.The author finds that the impact of advertising,εa(t)(marketing effectiveness) is more important for the adoption of a co-op program than the impact of quality improvement,γQ(t), (operational effectiveness). Given that a co-op program is offered, the manufacturer faces a trade-off between supporting the retailer’s advertising and moving from an operations to a marketing strategy when operational effectiveness is low. However, the manufacturer does not stop improving quality but reduces his expenditures. The benefits of a co-op advertising program to the manufacturer only accrue if advertising effectiveness is sufficiently large which is intuitive.Zhang et al. (2013) includes in their model an extra state variable, viz., the consumer reference price. The goodwill stock evolves according to(5)Ġ(t)=kmA(t)+kra(t)-δG(t)while the reference priceR(t)evolves according to(6)Ṙ(t)=β(p-R(t))+μmA(t)+μra(t).In (6), p is the actual consumer price (assumed to be constant) andβis a “memory” parameter. A high value ofβreflects that consumers have short memories. Demand D is given by(7)D(t)=α(p-R(t))+G(t)+λMA(t)+λRa(t).National and local advertising expenditures have two effects on demand: a direct effect through the right-hand side of (7) and an indirect, through (5).In a Stackelberg game, the manufacturer is the leader who fixes the support rate s. Next advertising effortsA(t)anda(t)are determined. Since advertising efforts affect the reference price, cf. (6), the steady state reference price will usually be higher than the market price.12This result contradicts the findings of earlier papers in which the two prices are equal.12If the reference price has a significant impact on demand, more efforts should be expended on national advertising. In addition, a two-way support program is suggested such that the manufacturer pays support rateSrto the retailer who pays support ratesmto the manufacturer. These support rates are fixed before the game is played and do not change over time. It is not obvious why channel members should implement such a two-way arrangement. Anyway, in the two-way program the retailer does pay part of the manufacturer’s national advertising cost if the retailer has the greater part of channel profits.This section deals with situations where the marketing channel involves more than one retailer and/or more than one manufacturer. This configuration allows one to account not only for vertical interactions between the firms but also for horizontal interactions, i.e., competition at one or both layers of the marketing channel. Section 3.1 is devoted to static models while Section 3.2 deals with differential game models (see Table 4).Karray and Zaccour (2007) consider a market with two manufacturers and two retailers and propose a model that accounts for brand and store substitution effects generated by retailers’ promotional efforts. The efficiency of a co-op advertising program is investigated by comparing equilibria of four non-cooperative games; one where manufacturers do not offer any promotional support, one where manufacturers do offer support, and two scenarios where only one manufacturer offers a co-op program. An important assumption is that transfer and retail prices are given.Denote byarmretailer r’s local advertising for brand m. The demand rate for brandm=1,2at retail outletr=1,2depends on local advertising efforts at both outlets for both brands and is given by(8)Drm=1+arm-γ(1-θ)a3-rm-θ(1-γ)ar3-m-θγa3-r3-m,m,r=1,2whereθ,γ∈[0,1). Parameterθmeasures the degree of product substitutability andγthe degree of store substitutability.13Karray and Zaccour assume that the local advertising activities have an aggregate marginal positive effect, i.e., the direct marginal effect of advertising is higher than the marginal brand or store substitution effects:1-γ-θ+θγ⩾0.13More insights into the structure of (8) can be obtained by considering three reduced demand models:Reduced model 1 corresponds to what has been extensively studied in the literature, i.e., a dyad marketing channel. The second model assumes that demand for a brand is a decreasing function of local advertising for the competing brand. This model fits a case where products compete within a store and where competition between outlets is irrelevant (for instance, because stores operate in non-overlapping markets). The last reduced model represents a situation where competition is between stores selling the same product. This model could fit a case where consumers are committed to a brand and the only decision is where to buy it. The full model in (8) accounts for both substitution effects and apply to mass distribution industries where substitutable brands are sold in competing stores.Karray and Zaccour obtain the following results. For each manufacturer, it is a dominant strategy to offer a co-op advertising program. If the brand substitution rate is “too high”, co-op programs have the characteristics of a prisoner’s dilemma. Support rates offered by manufacturers increase as brand competition intensifies and store competition decreases. Co-op advertising programs increase retailers’ local advertising levels. This result extends to more general setting the result obtained for a simple, dyad channel; Co-op advertising programs increase retailers’ profits only when the store substitution rate is not “too high”. Finally, consumers are better off when a co-op program is implemented.Wanga, Zhou, Min, and Zhong (2011) consider a marketing channel formed of one manufacturer and two competing retailers. As in Karray and Zaccour (2007), retail and transfer prices are fixed. Wang et al. assume that demand depends on local advertising expenditures by the retailers and national advertising by the manufacturer:Dr=αr-βar-μa3-rν(1+A)γ,r=1,2whereαr,β,μ,ν, andγare positive parameters. The authors characterize and compare the results of four types of games: Stackelberg–Cournot, Stackelberg–Collusion, Nash–Cournot and Nash–Collusion.14Cournot means that the retailers play noncooperatively, whereas collusion refers to the case where retailers jointly maximize their profits. The paper also considers a case of centralized decision making with a cost-sharing contract.14Numerical experiments reveals that contrary to a main message of the literature, a manufacturer acting as leader may not always support retailers’ advertising. (However, this may be due to the functional form of demand.) When the support rate is positive, all players prefer a leader–follower game to vertical-Nash game. When retailers collude in a Nash game they achieve higher profit than when they compete, by inducing the manufacturer to use more national advertising and by themselves using less local advertising.Bergen and John (1997) note that empirical studies indicate that cooperative advertising schemes offer quite different support in terms of their key feature: the fraction of a retailer’s advertising costs (called the participation rate) that a manufacturer reimburses. Since most retailers carry products of multiple and competing manufacturers, the authors include intra-brand competition among retailers in the model. The paper contends that retailers are unable to target their local advertising only to their own customers: competing retailers in the same area carrying the same brand may profit as well. In this respect, local advertising takes the form of a public good. Hence a retailer may be tempted to free-ride on the advertising done by other retailers. Bergen and John show that cooperative advertising plans can mitigate both intra-brand issues by offering higher participation rates. In particular, higher support rates are needed if media are less targetable, retailers are less differentiated, and brands are more differentiated.Solving a one-retailer, one-manufacturer differential game may be hard enough and could be expected that the literature considering more than one player at either layer of the marketing channel is sparse. In fact, only four papers – all recently published – consider a dynamic and competitive marketing channel.He, Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, and Sethi (2011) consider a marketing channel in which a single manufacturer sells his product through one retailer (retailer 1). Retailer 1 competes with retailer 2 who sells a substitute product. The manufacturer supports retailer 1’s advertising efforts. The market share of retailer r at time t is denotedxr(t), withx1(t)+x2(t)=1. To simplify notation, definex(t)as the market share of retailer 1. Then1-x(t)is the market share of retailer 2.The market-share dynamics correspond to the extension by Sorger (1989) and Prasad and Sethi (2004) of the monopolistic model of Sethi (1983) to a duopoly. The dynamics are given byẋ(t)=αa1(t)1-x(t)-αa2(t)x(t)-δx(t)+δ(1-x(t))whereαis the efficiency of advertising andδis the churn parameter. Churn is the process by which customers switch between competing firms. Objective functions areJm=∫0∞e-ρtΠmx(t)-S1a12(t)dtJ1=∫0∞e-ρtπ1x(t)-(1-S1)a12(t)dtJ2=∫0∞e-ρtπ2(1-x(t))-a22(t)dtwhereΠm,π1, andπ2are the margins per unit of market share of the manufacturer and retailers 1 and 2, respectively. He et al. assume that retailers are symmetric such that only their margins differ.The sequence of events in the game is as follows. The manufacturer decides a support rate strategy as the feedback ruleS1xand next the retailers choose – competitively – advertising effortsa1anda2. Main findings of the paper are as follows. The presence of a rival retailer leads the manufacturer to support his own retailer at a higher rate. The threshold value of manufacturer marginΠmat which the manufacturer supports his retailer in the presence of competition is lower than that without competition. As expected, the retailer benefiting from a co-op program increases her advertising with the support rate.He, Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, and Sethi (2012) employ the same dynamics as those in He et al. (2011). The setting is again a manufacturer and two competing retailers, with the former supporting the local advertising effort of only one of them. More interestingly, the authors also study the case where the retail market is oligopolistic (has n retailers) and analyze the impact of retail competition on the subsidy rate. A main message is that compared to the case of a single, rival retailer, the manufacturer supports his own retailer under a wider range of conditions when the retailer operates in a oligopolistic market. Support decreases as the number of retailers in the market increases from two to infinity and support converges to the monopoly result asn→∞. However, support is always higher than in the monopolistic case.Chutani and Sethi (2012a) also consider a marketing channel with one manufacturer and two retailers who compete for market share. Now both retailers sell the manufacturer’s product. The market-share dynamics of retailer r (due to Sethi, Prasad, & He (2008) and Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, & Sethi (2010)) are given byẋr(t)=αrar(t)1-x1(t)-x2(t)-δx(t),xr(0)=xr0∈[0,1],r=1,2and objective functions areJm=∫0∞e-ρtΠ1x1(t)+Π2x2(t)-S1(t)a12(t)-S2(t)a22(t)dtJr=∫0∞e-ρtπrxr(t)-1-Sr(t)ar2(t)dt,r=1,2.Note that the model allows the manufacturer to offer retailers different support rates. The authors study this case, that is,S1≠S2and the symmetric one,S1=S2=S. Also, they provide (numerical) results for symmetric as well as asymmetric retailers. The equilibrium concept is the feedback Stackelberg equilibrium with the manufacturer as leader and the retailers as followers. Chutani and Sethi identify the regions of a parameter space where the manufacturer supports both retailers’ advertising, supports only one, or supports none. The authors also (numerically) compare the outcomes of two noncooperative games (with and without a co-op program) to a vertically integrated channel. Surprisingly, it is not always the case that the vertically integrated solution is the one that is preferred by the members of the marketing channel.Sigué and Chintagunta (2009) consider a franchising system consisting of a franchisor (denoted F) and two franchisees (denotedf=1,2). Demand at each franchisee’s outlet depends on retailers’ local and manufacturer’s national advertising. Main questions are: Which advertising plan should F implement to maximize his profits (i.e., should he do himself both types of advertising or should he let the franchisees handle these activities) and what is the impact of horizontal advertising cooperation among the franchisees on franchisor and franchisee profits? Three business models are considered by the franchisor: (i) decentralization of all advertising activities; (ii) decentralization of local advertising only; (iii) centralization of all advertising activities. For each of these models, an equilibrium is computed for two cases: when franchisees cooperate and when they do not. In all of the six resulting configurations, a Stackelberg game is played with the franchisor being the leader and the franchisees as followers.The impact of cooperation or noncooperation of franchisees on the franchisor varies with the business model. In case of decentralization of all advertising activities, the franchisees are better off cooperating, but the scheme is agreeable to the franchisor only under some further conditions. When the franchisor decentralizes local advertising, he makes a lower profit when the franchisees cooperate than when they do not. Findings concerning the support rates depend on the nature of interaction among franchisees. When the latter play noncooperatively, horizontal free-riding on the brand image occurs and the franchisor needs to support the franchisees at a higher rate to compensate for this. Still, the franchisees invest more in national advertising when they do not cooperate and receive a higher support rate. On the other hand, the franchisor’s support of local advertising decreases with the intensity of competition at the retail level. The franchisees’ local advertising efforts, at a given level of goodwill, are higher when they do not cooperate.In Chutani and Sethi (2012b) a manufacturer sells a durable product which is a new feature in cooperative advertising literature. The manufacturer acts as a Stackelberg leader and supplies two retailers who are followers. The manufacturer controls wholesale priceswrand advertising support ratesSr,r=1,2, whereas each retailer sets her retail priceprand local advertising ratear. Denote byZr(t)the cumulative sales of retailerr=1,2. Its rate of change is given byŻr(t)=αrar(t)grpr(t)1-Z1(t)-Z2(t),Zr0=Zr0∈[0,1],r=1,2wheregrpr(t)is a function describing how the retail price affects the rate of retail sales. The rate of sales of retailer r depends only on her control variables and not on price and advertising of retailers≠r. A competitive effect is captured through the cumulative sales of the other retailer. This is a simplification, but an extension to account for more competitive effects would most likely be devastating to tractability.Issues investigated are channel coordination and the role of antidiscrimination legislation, for example, a manufacturer must offer same wholesale price and support rate to all retailers. Also studied is the case (seen above) when the manufacturer sells through one retailer only while the second retailer sells a competing brand. The authors characterize equilibrium prices, advertising and support-rate strategies and compare game outcomes in different scenarios. It is shown that a co-op program benefits the manufacturer only whereas the retailers earn less profit than without the co-op program. With some exceptions, the channel as such does not benefit either.A somewhat controversial conclusion of the paper is that by letting wholesale and retail prices be decision variables, cooperative advertising is an ineffective and redundant mechanism. These results may be due to the presence of a saturation effect in the specification of the sales functions. Chutani and Sethi (2014) extend their 2012-model to cover any number of retailers. Some results for the general case of asymmetric retailers are presented and a detailed analysis of the special case of n identical retailers is given.All models in the survey are stylized representations of real world marketing channels and channel member decision making. It is in order to point the reader’s attention to some model assumptions and settings that may be critical. This is an exercise that is worthwhile doing as it can help in establishing an agenda for future research.Demand specifications: The literature has mainly focused on advertising spending by manufacturers and retailers and manufacturer support programs for local advertising. Although some papers also consider pricing (wholesale and/or retail prices), we do not have a good understanding of the interplay between co-op advertising schemes and pricing, in particular in competitive and dynamic settings. There is a need to know, for instance, under what conditions pricing decisions would render a co-op program ineffective and if a manufacturer should consider wholesale price and local advertising support as a package offered to a retailer, and not as separate decisions.A variety of demand models have been proposed for static and dynamic situations. Although these demand functions have the standard properties (decreasing in own price, increasing in competitors’ prices, concave and increasing in advertising) they are ad hoc in the sense that they are neither derived from consumer behavior nor are they based on empirical observations. Two developments seem necessary here. First, there is a need to investigate whether demand functions would be derivable from consumer utility maximization or other first principles. For example, one could start by deriving the demand functions using a Hotelling-type approach. Second, it would be useful to understand the qualitative role the demand functional form plays for equilibrium predictions: Are equilibria reasonably robust to the demand specification? For example, do we see strong effects of the choice of demand function in terms of ranking of profits and consumer surplus? In general, if results are sensitive to the choice of demand function, an ad hoc or tractability motivated choice of the demand function becomes questionable.Deterministic models: The setup of almost all models surveyed is deterministic. An assumption of no demand uncertainty is used to motivate that given consumer demand, a retailer orders from her supplier exactly what consumers will buy, and the manufacturer is supposed to produce exactly this quantity. However, there are deterministic models where inventory is carried for a variety of reasons, at manufacturer and retail levels: economics of scale, production smoothing, seasonal demand, and forward buying (i.e., retailers stockpile to take advantage of a manufacturer’s temporary reduction of the wholesale price).Introducing demand uncertainty in a static model is not likely to lead to many additional insights, as long as the cooperative advertising problem is considered in isolation, that is, independently of other issues that are regulated by contracts between manufacturers and retailers under random demand. If these contracts (e.g., on wholesale price, revenue sharing, buyback terms) are written simultaneously with the co-op advertising support contract, demand uncertainty would certainly matter. Clearly, an assumption of known demand becomes more troublesome as the planning horizon is extended, simply because it becomes increasingly unrealistic. Dynamic modeling is used when not only the final outcome matters, but also how decisions change over time. Demand uncertainty may have a significant impact on the shape of pricing and advertising policies and the design of a co-op advertising program.In operations and supply chain management there is a stream of literature that has been occupied with the design and implementation of incentives and contracts, often with a focus on how decisions may be coordinated to the benefit of the supply chain. In this literature, consumer demand typically is random and the work has been concerned with a number of contracts that are specially designed to deal with the problems arising in marketing channels facing random consumer demand. Examples are the buyback, revenue-sharing, quantity-flexibility, and sales-rebate contracts. A bit surprising, this literature has not been concerned with marketing issues, with the exception of pricing, which occasionally has been incorporated. Advertising has not been an issue. As far as co-op advertising is concerned, an interesting research agenda lies in how to combine relevant elements of the marketing and operations streams of literature in situations with demand uncertainty.We note that a stream of literature in industrial organization has been concerned with marketing channel coordination. An important, general theme is vertical control which includes vertical integration and coordination. An easily read introduction to this literature can be found in Tirole (1988).Strategic interactions: All papers reviewed adopt the Stackelberg manufacturer leadership in the co-op advertising problem.15This choice is also observed in marketing channel literature dealing with pricing issues. See Ingene and Parry (2004) for the static setting, and Jørgensen and Zaccour (2004) for the dynamic.15Few papers studied retailer leadership. Stackelberg equilibrium results typically are compared with Nash equilibrium as well as a vertically integrated channel, serving as benchmarks to assess the relative merits of a co-op advertising program. The rationale for assuming Stackelberg behavior with the manufacturer as the leader is as follows. If a manufacturer wishes, primarily through his co-op advertising support, to induce one or more retailers to behave in a certain way, then the incentive (the proposed co-op plan) must be known to them when they make their own decisions (typically consumer price and local advertising). A quite different approach is, cf. Jeuland and Shugan (1988), to assume that there is no leader. Taking this as the starting point, channel members negotiate a contract which, when implemented, will induce the firms to make decisions that are efficient, that is, they will lead to the channel-optimal outcome. Thus channel members negotiate, say, once a year, and determine the contract that will be valid for the coming year. Three questions deserve further investigation.1.Is a Stackelberg with retailer as leader consistent with the incentive interpretation and the timing of events? Put differently, is it plausible that the retailer announces her local advertising budget before knowing the support rate she can get? Lee and Staelin (1997) argue that Stackelberg retailer leadership makes no sense since the retailer can always adjust her decisions after the manufacturer has set the wholesale price.If any channel member potentially can lead the channel, is there a way to fully endogenize the choice of the leader? (A first step to resolve this problem has been made by Jørgensen, Sigué, and Zaccour (2001a). in a dynamic marketing channel which, however, does not involve cooperative advertising.)Is it realistic, especially in a dynamic game, to assume that these decisions have the same periodicity and are taken simultaneously? Karray (2013) shows that the sequence of decisions has an impact on players’ outcomes. Further investigation of the issue of periodicity/simultaneity of decisions, in static, competitive, and dynamic contexts, is a task for future research.Powerful retailers: It has often been mentioned, in academic literature as well as in business magazines, that the landscape of marketing has changed considerably during the last decade or two, due to the emergence of large and powerful retailers in the market. For measurements of marketing channel negotiation power, see El-Ansary and Stern (1972), Gaski (1984) and Brown, Johnson, and Koenig (1995). This development has had an impact on negotiations of the contractual terms of co-op advertising programs, as well as other contracts used in a marketing channel. The literature has responded to this by – without much reflection – letting the retailer be a Stackelberg leader. The above discussion of strategic interaction shows that this is not the only, and maybe not the sensible choice. Indeed, deriving the order of play in a game from the relative “size” of the players does not seem warranted.Two research areas concerning negotiation power could deserve consideration. First, to characterize equilibria of co-op advertising program games with multiple retailers having different negotiation power. Second, the growing use and importance of private labels has often been driven by large retailers but the problem has so far not attracted the attention it deserves in the co-op advertising literature. The few papers that accounted for private labels demonstrated that a private label may significantly affect the design of a co-op advertising program.Contract duration: The issue of the duration of a co-op advertising program obviously appears in dynamic models only. All surveyed models assume an infinite time horizon. Combined with an ad hoc assumption of time-independent model parameters, the modeler obtains a clear advantage when it comes to analysis. However, co-op advertising arrangements in real life marketing channels are based on contracts and it may be hard to believe that such contracts have an infinite duration. Cooperative advertising is a tactical decision problem over a finite, and supposedly rather short, planning horizon and renegotiations are expected to take place when the contract expires. Using a finite horizon often makes analysis more complicated but provides some opportunities for extensions.16For an example of a finite-horizon differential game in advertising that includes a co-op program, see Bass, Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, and Sethi (2005).16For example, one might model the co-op advertising problem as a stochastic finite-horizon dynamic game, where uncertainty (e.g., in demand) is described by an event tree.17See Haurie, Krawczyk, and Zaccour (2012, chap. 8) for a discussion of this class of games.17The terms of the co-op program are renegotiable at future, discrete instants of time.Channel structure: Co-op advertising is a contract between a manufacturer and a retailer. This suggests that the model should focus on the (vertical) interaction between the two firms but it is important to realize that this interaction normally takes place in an environment in which there are other manufacturers and other retailers as well. Relatively few papers have considered competition on either level of the marketing channel but they have showed that accounting for horizontal interactions may have a significant impact on the relevance and design of co-op advertising programs (e.g., Karray & Zaccour (2007), Chutani & Sethi (2012a), & Chutani & Sethi (2012b)). This calls for research efforts that extend existing models to include horizontal competition between manufacturers and between retailers. How will such a more complex environment affect the design of co-op advertising programs? When are they simply a prisoners’ dilemma trap for competing manufacturers? If the latter is true, how might manufacturers avoid the trap?Empirical work: Game-theoretic literature on co-op advertising has mainly been theoretical with no empirical background. This is remarkable after so many years of research on the topic. One reason of absence of empirical studies probably is a the lack of relevant data but there may be other reasons as well. What is available are some anecdotal data that has been reported and some statistical analyses of participation rates in co-op programs (e.g., Nagler (2006) and Dutta, Bergen, John, & Rao (1995)).It might be instructive to perform laboratory experiments (as in experimental economics) to gain insights into how players – ideally managers – would play co-op advertising games. In experiments one has interesting options, for example, to vary the number of manufacturers and retailers as well as the intensity of intra-brand or inter-brand competition. In dynamic settings another approach would be to estimate parameters of the model equations from empirical data sets to see how the theoretically predicted strategies correspond to actual observations of, say, participation rates and market shares. In other areas of marketing this has been done in a number of studies of national advertising expenditure strategies in manufacturer oligopolies (e.g., Coke vs. Pepsi, Anheuser-Busch vs. Miller). For a review of this literature, see Jørgensen and Zaccour (2004).Dynamic game strategies: All papers surveyed use feedback Stackelberg strategies. One reason is that these strategies are subgame perfect, that is, they provide an equilibrium in any game starting out in(t,X)where t and X are the current time and state, respectively. In contrast, open-loop Stackelberg strategies seem less useful, in the sense that the leader may have an incentive to re-optimize at some instant of time during the play of the game and hence change his decisions (support rate, national advertising). Which kind of strategies that are used if the game has no leader (i.e., a Nash game) is immaterial because in such a game there will be no support of retailer local advertising. Had the surveyed papers addressed the channel coordination problem (what they do not, cf. the next item) they could have abandoned the leadership idea and used incentive strategies. Incentive strategies are usable when firms are symmetric in the sense that there is no leader who takes the initiative to coordinate the channel. The basic idea of an incentive strategy is to let own decisions depend on the other firm’s decisions. See, e.g., Jørgensen and Zaccour (2004).The coordination problem: As we have seen, achieving coordination in co-op advertising games is an issue that has been almost completely overlooked in the research that we have surveyed. As already touched upon, coordinating a channel means that firms contract, typically on a set of payments which, if implemented, will align the objectives of all members with the objective of the channel as an entity. Channel-optimal decisions could be those that maximize the overall profit of the channel, but other objectives exist. There are different ways in which all members could be induced to select their respective channel-optimal decisions. One way of achieving this is to make sure that the set of channel-optimal decisions is in Nash equilibrium. Then no firm could profit from deviating from its part of the channel-optimal solution. Another approach is through contracts that give incentives to firms to make decisions that lead to an efficient outcome. Here, a first question to ask is if there exist coordinating contracts at all and, if yes, how these contracts designed? With a view to implementation one can ask if a contract is likely to be adopted in practice, taking into account such issues as the complexity of a contract and the associated administrative costs. A fine overview of the basic problems of coordination with contracts is provided by Cachon (2003) in a supply chain/operations framework.Managerial implications: Predictions and prescriptions based on highly stylized models have well-known shortcomings. This also applies to co-op advertising research and there is no need to repeat the reservations here. Marketing channels (supply chains) operate in the real world and wise managers should take an interest in what researchers might have to say about their businesses. It takes, however, some effort to gain the interest of managers who often complain that papers in academic journals are technical and difficult to read. We believe that for a piece of research to have practical relevance it should meet the following requirements. First, the topic and the main results of the research should be understandable and pertinent to managers. If managers do not see the problem or do not see the value of the results, it may be hard to catch their attention. Most of the papers in the survey deal with co-op arrangements that are known to managers. Second, results should be explainable (and be explained); They should appeal to the manager’s intuition and not be trivial.We end this conclusion by noting that the literature on co-op advertising (and related areas) has become quite extensive. It is still expanding, particularly during the last 10–15years. However, quite a few papers seem to make relatively minor contributions, in terms of model development and motivation and in the scope of their analysis. The problem of coordinating a channel has only been touched upon.For researchers in co-op advertising it seems worthwhile to start widening the horizon, that is, to look at other streams of literature that so far almost have been neglected. Exploiting economics and industrial organization work on vertical restraints and supply chain/operations literature on coordination under random demand could be a good starting point.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
