@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Duopolistic competition under risk aversion and uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an investment framework under uncertainty, competition, and risk aversion.The pre-emptive leader’s loss due to the follower is unaffected by risk aversion.The non-pre-emptive leader is relatively better off with greater risk aversion.Uncertainty reduces the loss of the pre-emptive leader relative to the monopolist.The non-pre-emptive leader may become worse off with greater uncertainty.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Investment analysis,Real options,Competition,Risk aversion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A monopolist typically defers entry into an industry as both price uncertainty and the level of risk aversion increase. By contrast, the presence of a rival typically hastens entry under risk neutrality. Here, we examine these two opposing effects in a duopoly setting. We demonstrate that the value of a firm and its entry decision behave differently with risk aversion and uncertainty depending on the type of competition. Interestingly, if the leader’s role is defined endogenously, then higher uncertainty makes her relatively better off, whereas with the roles exogenously defined, the impact of uncertainty is ambiguous.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the deregulation of many sectors of the economy, e.g., energy and telecommunications, investment decisions should consider not only market uncertainty but also competition. Simultaneously, more stringent environmental regulation is likely to promote investment in alternative energy technologies. For example, BrightSource Energy, a company based in California, has signed the world’s two largest deals to build new solar-power capacity and will begin constructing a series of 14 solar power plants that will collectively supply more than 2.6gigawatts (GW) of electricity (The Economist, 2009). While solar-thermal power stations have several advantages over solar-photovoltaic projects, as they are typically built on a much larger scale and historically have lower costs, thin-film solar-cell modules are rapidly falling in price and, in some situations, can generate electricity more cheaply than solar-thermal power. As a result, competition from photovoltaic systems for large-scale power generation is expected to be significant. Apart from facing competition and uncertain energy prices, firms undertaking investments in such alternative energy technologies are also likely to be more risk averse since they face technical risk that cannot be diversified. Indeed, with such projects, the underlying commodities are often not freely traded in order to allow the construction of a replicating portfolio. Consequently, the assumption of hedging via spanning assets breaks down, and risk-neutral valuation is not possible.Although canonical real options theory finds particular application in such sectors as it facilitates the analysis of capital budgeting, its treatment of such decision-making problems has mainly been in a monopoly or a perfect competition setting, while recent work considering a duopolistic setting has assumed risk neutrality. In this paper, we extend the traditional real options approach to strategic decision making under uncertainty by examining how duopolistic competition affects the entry of a risk-averse firm. We consider two identical firms that are risk averse and hold an option each to invest in a project that yields stochastic revenues. Since the two firms operate in the same industry, investment decisions of one firm impact the revenues of both firms. We analyse two settings: pre-emptive and non-pre-emptive competition. In the former, both firms have the incentive to invest in order to obtain a leader advantage, while in the latter, the role of the leader is assigned exogenously. Although in the absence of asymmetries, pre-emptive competition may be more common, nevertheless, non-pre-emptive competition may also arise in many cases, e.g., a particular technology or company may receive governmental support and, thus, has a competitive advantage over less favoured ones. Recently, both regulators and government have promoted EDF in its pursuit to build offshore wind plants over rivals even though its installed wind capacity by 2010 was only 10% of France’s overall level (Bloomberg, 2012). Thus, these two settings capture extremes in terms of government involvement in industry. For each setting, we analyse the impact of uncertainty and risk aversion on the optimal investment timing decisions of the two competing firms and examine the degree to which the presence of a competitor impacts the entry of a risk-averse firm. Hence, the contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we develop a theoretical framework for analysing investment under uncertainty and risk aversion for pre-emptive and non-pre-emptive duopolies in order to derive closed-form expressions (where possible) for the optimal investment thresholds. Second, we quantify the degree to which competition impacts the strategic investment decisions of a risk-averse firm. Finally, we provide managerial insights for investment decisions and relative firm values under each setting based on analytical and numerical results.We proceed by discussing some related work in Section 2 and formulate the problems in Section 3. In Section 4, we solve the problems and analyse the impact of uncertainty and risk aversion on the optimal investment timing decisions of the two competing firms in each setting. In Section 5, we provide numerical examples for each case in order to examine the effects of volatility and risk aversion on the optimal investment timing decisions and quantify the degree to which the entry of a risk-averse firm is affected by the presence of a rival. We also illustrate the interaction between risk aversion and uncertainty and present managerial insights to enable more informed investment decisions. Section 6 concludes by summarising the results and offering directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we develop a utility-based framework in order to examine the impact of risk aversion and uncertainty on the optimal investment timing decisions of a firm that faces competition. The analysis is motivated both by the increasing competition resulting from the deregulation of many sectors of the economy such as energy and telecommunications, as well as the fact that attitudes towards the undiversifiable risk arising from the development of new products may impact investment decisions of a firm. The combination of these two factors creates the need to incorporate risk aversion into the real options framework in order to analyse strategic aspects of decision making under uncertainty. In the context of our motivating example concerning renewable energy technologies, the nature of industry competition and the degree of risk aversion due to the presence of technical risk could shape the pathway to decarbonisation in unexpected ways.We find that, under the fear of pre-emption, higher uncertainty reduces the relative loss in the value of the leader due to competition by delaying the entry of the follower. However, in the non-pre-emptive setting, the impact of uncertainty is ambiguous and depends on the discrepancy in market share. If the discrepancy is high, then the non-pre-emptive leader’s relative loss in value increases with uncertainty since the impact of the follower’s entry is more profound and offsets the increase in the leader’s value of investment opportunity. By contrast, under low discrepancy in market share, higher uncertainty makes the non-pre-emptive leader better off as the increase in the value of investment opportunity is greater than the expected loss in value due to competition. Interestingly, the relative loss in the pre-emptive leader’s value is not affected by risk aversion, while the non-pre-emptive leader becomes better off with greater risk aversion as it delays the entry of the follower. Hence, regulators may have to think more carefully about energy policy and market design in guiding an energy transition due to the subtle effects of such salient features.This work considers the case where the two competing firms exhibit the same level of risk aversion. Consequently, a potential extension is to relax this assumption and to investigate a case with different levels of risk aversion for each firm. Directions for future research may also include the application of a different stochastic process, e.g., arithmetic Brownian motion, or the study of other aspects of the real options literature, such as the time to build or capacity sizing, under the same framework. Finally, we may allow for operational flexibility via suspension and resumption options, as this may reduce the incentive to delay investment under high risk aversion, as indicated by Chronopoulos et al. (2011).