@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joint optimization of

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a model for the joint optimization of process control and maintenance.Information from the control charts is used to facilitate maintenance decisions.Process control and maintenance procedures are inter-dependent.Potential cost savings can be obtained from joint SPC and maintenance policies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,Statistical process control,Markov processes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Statistical process control and maintenance planning have long been treated as two separate problems. The interdependence between these two activities has not been adequately addressed in the literature, despite their apparent connections. Information obtained in the course of statistical process control signals the need for possible maintenance actions, and thus, affects the preventive maintenance schedules. Preventive maintenance actions can prevent a production process from further deterioration and improve product quality in conjunction with statistical process control. This paper presents an integrated model for the joint optimization of statistical process control and preventive maintenance. The proposed model is developed for a production process that deteriorates according to a discrete-time Markov chain. It is assumed that preventive maintenance is imperfect, and both preventive and corrective maintenance are instantaneous. The formulation of the deterioration process with maintenance interventions, formulated as a Markov chain, provides a breakthrough in designing an efficient solution algorithm and obtaining analytical results. A numerical example is used to illustrate the proposed integrated statistical process control and preventive maintenance policies. Sensitivity analysis is conducted to analyze the impact of model parameters on optimal policies. Sensitivity analysis further indicates the interrelationship between statistical process control and maintenance actions. Numerical results indicate that potential cost savings can be achieved from the proposed integrated policies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Statistical process control (SPC) and maintenance planning are two major concerns in many manufacturing environments. Quality is an important business strategy in today’s competitive global market. An effective quality improvement program is critical to the success and growth of organizations. In the meantime, rapidly changing markets and the explosion of product variety have led to increased automation and the need for more complex equipment. Production equipment must be maintained in good operating conditions to meet the quality challenge. The need for effective maintenance policies and the role of the equipment condition in controlling quality and costs is more evident and important than ever (Ben-Daya, 1999; Ben-Daya and Rahim, 2000). The growing interrelationship between quality control and maintenance planning forces organizations to develop integrated management systems, which requires an increased level of coordination among management practices (Lee et al., 1999; Linderman et al., 2005).Despite the relationship between product quality and equipment maintenance, a great amount of effort has been devoted to these two issues separately. Comprehensive reviews on economic design of statistical process control models can be found in Montgomery (1980), Vance (1983) and Keats et al. (1997). The literature on the use of mathematical modeling for analyzing and optimizing scheduled maintenance plans is also extensive and has been reviewed by several authors including McCall (1965), Pierskalla and Voelker (1976), Sherif and Smith (1981), Valdez-Flores and Feldman (1989), Cho and Parlar (1991), Dekker (1996), and Wang (2002). More recent work regarding scheduled maintenance in industrial applications can be found in Kenné et al. (2007), Panagiotidou and Tagaras (2007), Alardhi and Labib (2008), Canto (2008), Samrout et al. (2009), and Moghaddam and Usher (2011). However, the integration of these two fields is yet to receive significant attention. Information obtained from statistical process control signals the need for possible maintenance actions. Similarly, maintenance actions have a direct impact on equipment condition, and thus, affect the performance of production systems. With the intervention of a preventive maintenance program, small adjustments can be made before failure occurs, which is generally more cost efficient since it increases the reliability of the system over the long term with small-scale restorations. From a systems point-of-view, the determination of statistical process control and maintenance decision parameters is suboptimal by treating maintenance and statistical process control in isolation from each other (Tagaras, 1988).Tagaras (1988) investigates statistical process control and maintenance in a joint fashion. He develops an economic model that incorporates both statistical process control and maintenance procedures and simultaneously optimizes their design parameters under a Markovian deterioration assumption. Chiu and Huang (1996) consider a preventive maintenance policy in the economic design of anX¯chart. They assume that the duration time that the process remains in control follows a general distribution with an increasing hazard rate. Cassady et al. (2000) conduct preliminary investigations on the integration of maintenance and statistical process control using a simulation–optimization approach. Their results suggest that the combined policy leads to much greater productivity. Yeung et al. (2008) extend the model in Cassady et al. (2000) and formulate a partially observable, discrete-time Markov decision process (POMDP) to obtain the near-optimal combined maintenance and SPC policy. Linderman et al. (2005) demonstrate considerable economic benefit in coordinating statistical process control and maintenance policies for a process whose failure mechanism follows a Weibull distribution. Kuo (2006) uses dynamic programming to find the optimal machine maintenance and product quality control policy for a discrete time Markovian deteriorating production machine which is either in the in-control state or the out-of-control state. More recently, Ho and Quinino (2012) propose a model that integrates statistical process control and corrective maintenance and use a geometric distribution to describe shifts from in-control to out-of-control states. Dhouib et al. (2012) utilize an integrated approach for the joint optimization of production–inventory control and preventive maintenance policy for a manufacturing cell comprising an imperfect process where the ‘in-control’ period has a general deterioration distribution.Most of the existing models make simple assumptions on deterioration of the process condition. The process is assumed to consist of two possible states: in-control state and out-of-control state. The time until the transition to an out-of-control state is usually assumed to follow an exponential distribution or a general distribution. This standard feature in statistical process control does not account for changes in the process state or the aging process of the equipment. Many production processes and commercial equipment are characterized by multiple operating states and a failure state. For example, consider the production process of forged spare parts, where forging presses are used to form specific shapes from metal sheets. A misplacement or inadequate heating of the metal may cause a slight tilt in the positioning of the hydraulic piston. In this case, the press may still be working but the output quality might be significantly lower and the probability of a piston failure due to its improper operation increases (Panagiotidou and Tagaras, 2007). There is great need of designing statistical process control for such a multi-state production process. Panagiotidou and Nenes (2009) incorporate maintenance planning into an adaptive Shewhart chart. The production process in Panagiotidou and Nenes (2009) is assumed to have two operating states and a non-operative (failure) state, and the time to quality shifts, as well as, the times-to-failures are exponential random variables. Panagiotidou and Tagaras (2010) examine the close relationship between statistical process control and preventive maintenance for a production process that is characterized by multiple distinct operational states and a failure state. The times of shift from the normal operational state to an inferior one and the times to failure are generally distributed random variables.Another factor that has been neglected in the limited literature on joint SPC and maintenance models is the effectiveness of maintenance. Due to the complexity of combined SPC and maintenance problems, most models integrating these two processes assume that maintenance is perfect and restores the system to an as-good-as-new condition. Perfect maintenance is rarely found in practical applications, if not at all. A more realistic assumption is one in which system is restored into somewhere between perfect state and as-bad-as-old, which is often referred to as imperfect maintenance (Pham and Wang, 1996). Ben-Daya (1999) and Ben-Daya and Rahim (2000) investigate the joint optimization of the maintenance level and economic design ofX¯control charts under imperfect maintenance. They assume that the reduction in age of the system is proportional to the preventive maintenance level used, and higher preventive maintenance levels lead to greater reduction in quality control costs.The goal of this paper is to consider an integrated quality control and equipment deterioration problem under more realistic assumptions and to combine preventive maintenance actions with SPC tools to address such a problem. In the proposed model, the production process has one in-control and multiple unobservable out-of-control yet operating states which result in inferior quality. The failure state is directly observable and can be detected immediately. The deterioration process is governed by a discrete-time Markov chain with known transition probabilities. There are two scenarios where preventive maintenance is performed. The first is the result of a true out-of-control signal generated from the control chart. A preventive maintenance action is also performed if there is neither a failure nor a true out-of-control signal for a pre-specified time interval. Maintenance actions here have a twofold character (Panagiotidou and Nenes, 2009). They eliminate the quality costs related to the out-of-control operation, which is a typical statistical process control objective, and at the same time improve the equipment reliability by minimizing the occurrence of failures, since a better state is less prone to fail, which is essentially a preventive maintenance action. Preventive maintenance is assumed to be imperfect, restoring the system to any non-worse state with known probabilities, whereas corrective maintenance is assumed to be perfect but at a much higher cost. The model developed in this paper captures the underlying link between statistical process control and preventive maintenance. An integrated quality control and maintenance policy is developed to minimize a total operational cost rate.This paper shares some common features with previous work cited previously, but it differs from previous approaches in many aspects. The similarities and differences from the existing models that are closer to our work are as follows: (1) The failure mechanism of the production process in our model is similar to that used in Tagaras (1988). However, Tagaras (1988) uses an adjustment-maintenance-restoration policy which uses a block maintenance policy that schedules PM periodically over a fixed time interval. We combine SPC with an age-based PM policy. Age-based maintenance usually yields a lower long-run average cost rate compared with that of block maintenance policy by reducing unnecessary maintenance cost. Our results demonstrate cost savings from the proposed joint SPC and age-based PM policy, while a pure control policy is optimal in all situations in Tagaras (1988). Also, Tagaras (1988) explicitly takes into account sampling delays and non-negligible adjustment and maintenance times, and it is assumed in this work that inspection, preventive and corrective maintenance are instantaneous and there is no sampling delay. (2) The PM is assumed to be imperfect as in some joint SPC and PM models. Ben-Daya and Rahim (2000) model the effectiveness of maintenance as a reduction in the age of the production equipment. Ho and Quinino (2012) assume that corrective maintenance returns the equipment to an “as-good-as-new” state with some probability. In this work, we define a modified method to model imperfect PM. We assume that PM restores the production equipment to any state between the current state and the “as-good-as-new” state, and that CM is perfect at more cost.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the problem description. Section 3 develops an economic model for the joint optimization ofX¯chart design and maintenance planning. Section 4 describes the solution algorithm. Section 5 provides a numerical illustration and sensitivity analysis. Finally, Section 6 contains a summary of the paper and some concluding remarks.Consider a single-machine system that operates continuously (i.e., 24hours/day, 7days/week). The production process is characterized by a single in-control state (state 0) and multiple (m) out-of-control states i, i=1,…,m, with m being the failure state. AnX¯chart is used to evaluate and control the process. The distribution of the process quality characteristic X is assumed to be a normal random variable depending on the machine state. When the process is in-control, the process mean is μ=μ0 and the process standard deviation is σ=σ0. Occurrence of assignable cause i, 1⩽i<m, constitutes a shift in the process mean but it does not affect the variance of the process, μi=μ0+δiσ, 1⩽i<m. The process mean is increasing with machine state: 0<δ1<δ2<…<δm−1. The illustration of process shifts is shown in Fig. 1. We do not impose any restriction on the functional form of the magnitude of the shift, which can be linear or exponential and is determined by the actual deterioration process.We assume that without intervention by the decision-maker, the shift of the process from the current period to the next period is governed by a time-homogeneous, discrete-time Markov chain (DTMC) with known transition probability matrix, P. This deterioration process is not outwardly visible with the exception of the failure state. Failure is directly and immediately observable. When the production system is in state i (i=0,…,m−1), the probability that it moves to any worse state j (j=1,…,m) in the next transition is pij.pij=0fori=1,…,m,j<ipijfori=0,…,m-1,j⩾i1i=m,j=mIt is assumed that∑j=1j=mpij=1. This implies that the system can only deteriorate without maintenance action. We also assume that∑j=kmpij⩽∑j=kmpi+1,j, which implies increasing failure rate (IFR) (Derman, 1970).Two maintenance actions, corrective maintenance (CM) and preventive maintenance (PM) are considered in this study. As mentioned earlier, most joint statistical process control and maintenance models consider perfect maintenance for mathematical simplicity. We make a more realistic assumption in this study. More specifically, we assume that preventive maintenance is imperfect, and the system is restored to any non-worse state with known probabilities. When the production system is in state i (i=0,…,m−1), the probability that it is restored to state j (j=1,…,m) after preventive maintenance is qij.qij=0fori=1,…,m-1,j>iqijfori=1,…,m-1,j⩽iBy makingqi0=1(i=1,…,m-1), our preventive maintenance model coincides with perfect preventive maintenance. Corrective maintenance is assumed to be much more expensive and restores the system to an “as-good-as-new” state. Both CM and PM are assumed to be instantaneous since the system is not working during these maintenance actions and system deterioration is not affected by these actions as discussed in Wu and Makis (2008). The loss of working time due to maintenance actions is accounted for in a related cost adjustment. The assumption of negligible maintenance time might also be satisfied when the time required to perform maintenance is very small relative to the time periods into which time is discretized (Yeung et al., 2008). It must also be noted that maintenance is not instantaneous and can be time consuming in nature, and maintenance time cannot be neglected in many practical situations.The statistical process control and preventive maintenance operate simultaneously as follows. A sample of size n is taken from the process every h time periods. The number of standard deviations between the center lineX¯and the control limits is given by k. Therefore, the control limits of theX¯chart are given by(1)UCL=μ0+kσ0n,(2)LCL=μ0-kσ0nFor each evaluation of the process, the sample meanX¯is computed and plotted. For mathematical simplicity and tractability, it is assumed that the entire process of analysis, measurement and plotting is instantaneous. If the sample meanX¯falls within the range (LCL, UCL), no action is taken; otherwise a signal of out-of-control is generated. The production process is then shut down for a search of assignable cause. Upon inspection, if it is a false alarm and the process is in-control, no maintenance action is performed; otherwise preventive maintenance action is initiated. The control chart can lead to both Type I errors (out-of-control signals when process is in-control) and Type II errors (no signals when process is out-of-control). Let α denote the probability of a Type I error, and let βidenote the probability of a Type II error when the machine is in state i, 0<i<m.An age-based preventive maintenance is implemented to improve the production process. If the machine operates without a failure or a true out-of-control signal since the last maintenance action for τ time units, a preventive maintenance action is performed. The preventive maintenance interval can be any length. For the purpose of easy implementation, we assume that the preventive maintenance cycle τ is a multiple of the sampling interval h (τ=λh, λ=1,2,3…). The sampling at the end of the λth sampling interval is skipped, since preventive maintenance is performed regardless.Let cF denote the fixed sampling cost, csdenote the cost of inspecting a single item, cINS denote the inspection cost, cPM denote the cost of performing PM action, and cCM denote the cost of performing CM action. Let cidenote the unit operating cost when machine is in state i, 0⩽i<m, and let cDT denote the downtime cost when the machine is in the failure state m. We assume that0<cINS<cPM<cCMc0<c1<c2<ci…<cm-1<cDT.We begin our analysis by modeling the machine deterioration process with maintenance interventions. We assume that the machine can be at any state but the failure state at the beginning of the first period. Thus, there is no breakdown in the first period. Our modified state space includes λh(m+1)−1 possible states. Each state is represented by (t,i) where t denotes period t (t⩽τ), and i represents state i, 0⩽i⩽m. At any sampling point (lh, l=1,2,…,λ−1), there are four possible scenarios as follows.a.Process is in-control and there is no false alarm from the control chart (Fig. 2).Process is in-control and there is a false alarm from the control chart at the lth sampling point (Fig. 3);Process has shifted, and there is a signal from the control chart at the lth sampling. Shift might have occurred at any period prior to the lth sampling point (Fig. 4).Process has shifted, and there is no signal from the control chart. Shift might have occurred at any period prior to the lth sampling point (Fig. 5).At any period, the system might fail and failure is self-announcing, thus, corrective maintenance is initiated, shown in Fig. 6.At the end of any non-sampling period, transitions from state i to state j are determined by the transition matrix P. The transition probabilities are different at the end of sampling periods due to the possible occurrence of the false alarm and maintenance intervention. We derive those probabilities as follows. If a false alarm occurs when the machine is in state 0, inspection is conducted and it is assumed that the false alarm can be detected by inspection accurately and inspection does not affect the transition probabilities. When no false alarm occurs, no action is taken. The probability of transitioning from an in-control state (t,0) to any state (t+1, j) is given by(3)Pr(t,0→t+1,j)=p0j,t=h,2h,…,(λ-1)h,j=0,1,…,mWe also derive transition probabilities when the machine is in any out-of-control state except the failure state m. When the process is out-of-control and a signal occurs, a maintenance action is performed. The transition probability with PM intervention is given by(4)Pr(t,j→1,j′)=qjj′(1-βj),t=h,2h,…,(λ-1)h,j=1,…,m-1,j′⩽jWhen no signal occurs at an “out-of-control” state, the transition probability from state (t,j) to state (t+1,j′) is given by(5)Pr(t,j→t+1,j′)=βjpjj′,t=h,2h,…(λ-1)h,j,1,…,m-1,j′⩾jAt the end of period τ, preventive maintenance is initiated if the production system is not in the failure state. The probability of transitioning from state (τ,j) to state (1,j′) is as follows:(6)Pr(τ,j→1,j′)=qjj′,j=1,…,m-1,j′<jFinally, when the process is in the failure state m, a corrective maintenance action is performed and the machine is restored to an “as-good-as-new” state. This probability is given by(7)Pr(t,m→1,0)=1,t=2,…,λhThe transition probabilities with SPC and maintenance intervention are summarized in Fig. 7. Thus, we have formed the transitions over the preventive maintenance interval as a DTMC.System equations formed by the transition probability matrix in Fig. 7 are used to solve the limiting probabilities of being in each state. Let π (t,j) denote the limiting probability of the machine in state j, period t. During any non-sampling period except period τ, if the machine is in-control, the cost incurred is given by(8)C(1,0)=c0During any non-sampling period except period τ, if the machine is in any out-of-control state j (0<j<m), the cost incurred is given by(9)C(t,j)=cj,t=γh+i,γ=1,…,λ-1,i=1,…,h-1,j=1,…,m-1cCM+cDT,t=γh+1,…,γh+i,γ=0,1,…,λ-1,i=1,…,h-1,j=mGiven that the machine is in state j, the cost incurs during a sampling period before period τ is(10)C(t,j)=cF+cF+ncs+αcINS+c0,t=γh,γ=1,…,λ-1,j=0ncs+(1-βj)cPM+cj,t=γh,γ=1,…,λ-1,j=1,…,m-1cCM+cDT,t=γh,γ=1,…,λ-1,j=mIn period τ when PM is scheduled, the cost is given by(11)C(τ,j)=cPM+cj,t=λh,j=0,1,…,m-1cCM+cDT,t=γh,j=mTherefore, the long-run expected cost per time period of the production process is as follows,(12)C=c0+∑γ=1λ-1∑i=1m-1∑j=0m-1cjπ(γh+i,j)+∑γ=1λ-1(cF+ncs+αcINS+c0)π(γh,0)+∑γ=1λ-1∑j=1m-1(cF+ncs+(1-βj)cPM+cj)π(γh,j)+∑j=0m-1(cPM+cj)π(τ,0)+∑t=0λh(cCM+cDT)π(t,m)The decisions on statistical process control and maintenance are made in a joint fashion. Regarding statistical process control, there are three decision variables: the sample size n, the width of the control limits denoted by k, and the sampling interval h. Regarding maintenance actions, the decision has to be made on the preventive maintenance cycle τ.The objective function is mathematically complex and closed-form analytical results are difficult to obtain. Numerical search methods are thus desirable to solve this problem. A direct search method that does not require derivatives is used to search for optimal values of the decision variables. While many search methods are available, a Fibonacci search method appears to be particularly efficient in the sense that only a small number of evaluations of the objective function are required (Chiu, 1975). An extension of a Fibonacci search to the multidimensional cases is presented in Sugie (1964). Chiu (1975) uses a two-dimensional Fibonacci search for the determination of the most economical parameters of attribute control charts. A three-dimensional Fibonacci search algorithm is developed in this paper to seek for the optimal sample interval h, the optimal maintenance interval τ and the optimal sample size n. For each combination of h, τ, and n, a golden section search identifies the optimal k. The optimization algorithm is explained below.Step 0. Select upper (U) and lower (L) bounds for h, τ, and n. U is the vector for upper bounds with elements ui, i=1, 2, 3, for h, τ, and n respectively. L is the vector for lower bounds with elements li, i=1, 2, 3, for h, τ, and n respectively. To ensure an effective search on discrete space, the length of the interval minus one must be a Fibonacci number. After determination of the indices of the Fibonacci numbers (N), the number of required function evaluations (M, M=N−1) can be determined. Since the first two Fibonacci numbers are the same, the algorithm usually starts with the second iteration. Set j1=j2=j3=2.Step 1. An h value is nominated according to Fibonacci search.Step 2. Given h, a τ value is nominated according to Fibonacci search.Step 3. Given τ, h, an n value is nominated according to Fibonacci search.Step 4. Given τ, h, n, a golden section search is performed to find optimal k.•Build transition matrix for the entire preventive maintenance interval τ, given τ, h, n, and k.Calculate limiting probabilities.Calculate objective function and compare with the previous minimum.Current values of τ, h, n, and k are stored if the current objective function value is smaller.Step 5. Is j3=m3? If no, set j3=j3+1, and go back to Step 3; Else, go to Step 6.Step 6. Is j2=m2? If no, set j2=j2+1, and go back to Step 2; Else, go to Step 7.Step 7. Is j1=m1? If no, set j1=j1+1, and go back to Step 1; Else Terminate.When h and τ get large, the number of states increases rapidly. It becomes computational burdensome to obtain limiting probabilities by solving linear equations. We approximate limiting probabilities by multiplying the transition matrix by itself until the difference of each element between the current and previous iterations is smaller than a pre-specified tolerance ε, or a maximum number of iterations K is reached.In this section, we first provide a numerical example to illustrate the proposed joint SPC and maintenance policies for a production process of which deterioration is governed by a discrete-time Markov chain. Sensitivity analysis is performed to analyze the effect of model parameters on optimal solutions.ExampleConsider a machine which deteriorates according to a discrete-time Markov chain. The machine has four possible states: in-control state 0, out-of-control states 1 and 2, and a failure state 3. The transition probabilities are given in the following matrix. Suppose cINS=50, cPM=200, cCM=2000, cs=5, cF=20, c0=0, c1=100, c2=200 and cDT=1000.The transition probability matrix (P) and maintenance effect matrix (Q) are summarized in Table 1:The optimal solution obtained by our algorithm is h*=4, λ*=14, n*=3, and k*=1.96. The optimal cost rate is C*=31.44. To be conservative, we set ε=0.001 and K=100.Sensitivity analysis is performed to observe the effect of model parameters on the optimal solutions and the interaction between SPC and maintenance. The parameters that we are interested in include transition probabilities of the production system, P; the effectiveness of preventive maintenance actions, Q; preventive maintenance costs, cPM; and the magnitude of the shifts, δ.To investigate how different transition probabilities affect joint optimal SPC and maintenance policies, three different P matrices (corresponding to low, medium and high transition probabilities from current state to worse states) are considered. Similarly, three different Q matrices which correspond to low, medium and high effectiveness of preventive maintenance are considered. Three levels of preventive maintenance cost and two levels of magnitude of shifts are used for the purposes of sensitivity analysis. All the parameters for the sensitivity analysis are summarized in Tables 2–4. In practice, preventive maintenance actions are implemented without utilizing information from statistical process control. To assess the benefits from such an integrated statistical process control and maintenance policies, the optimal cost rates of all the cases for sensitivity analysis are compared with those from an age-based preventive maintenance only policy. Results of sensitivity analysis are summarized in Tables 5–7.From Table 5, we can see that as the transition matrix P changes from low to high, sampling interval h, preventive maintenance interval τ and statistical process control coefficient k decrease, indicating more frequent sampling and preventive maintenance actions are needed as the production system deteriorates faster. The change in magnitude of shift (δ) mainly affects the value of k. As δ increases, k increases. This is logical since a larger shift in process would require a higher control limit accordingly.As shown in Table 6, the effectiveness of preventive maintenance (Q) on optimal policies is not as significant as that of transition probability matrix P. When δ is 1.5, the Q matrix mainly affects the value of k. As the effectiveness of preventive maintenance decreases, a small k which implies a tighter control limit is required. This is because more frequent sampling and preventive maintenance actions mitigate the low effectiveness of preventive maintenance actions.As can be seen in Table 7, the cost of preventive maintenance (cPM) affects both sampling interval h and preventive maintenance interval τ. As the cost of preventive maintenance is reduced, more frequent sampling and preventive maintenance actions are scheduled to ensure the proper functioning of the production system.The most important observations with regard to the results in Tables 5–7 are: (1) in every case tested, the optimal policy is the one that integrates maintenance schedules and statistical process control, and there is potential cost savings from utilizing information from statistical process control in maintenance decision-making; (2) the change in input parameters (P, Q and cPM) affects both statistical process control and maintenance policies in the majority of the cases tested, which illustrates the interdependence between statistical process control and maintenance procedures, and further justifies the desirability of considering these two processes in a joint fashion. For the parameter values used in the sensitivity analysis, the cost savings are much larger when the production process deteriorates slower (low P) than that from a faster deterioration production process; also a higher preventive maintenance cost results in more cost savings. It must be emphasized that the magnitude of cost improvements are based on a comparison between integrated statistical process control and maintenance policies and maintenance-only policies. There could be more potential savings if we were to compare such integrated policies with policies that implement SPC and preventive maintenance procedures separately.This paper presents an integrated model for the joint optimization of statistical process control (sampling intervals, sample size and control limit) and preventive maintenance. Information from quality control charts is utilized to facilitate maintenance decisions. The proposed model is developed for a process that deteriorates according to a discrete-time Markov chain. It is assumed that preventive maintenance is imperfect, meaning that preventive maintenance improves the process from its current state to any non-worse state with given probabilities. A cost model is formulated for the simultaneous optimization of statistical process control and maintenance activities with the objective of minimizing the total expected operational cost rate.A numerical example is used to illustrate the integrated statistical process control and preventive maintenance policy. Sensitivity analysis further indicates the interdependence between statistical process control and maintenance actions. For all the cases tested in this paper, potential cost savings can be achieved from the proposed integrated policies. It must be noted that the cost savings can be substantially smaller or larger when different parameters are used.The main contribution of this work lies in the development of the integration of statistical process control and maintenance activities for a general production process of which the deterioration is governed by a discrete-time Markov chain. Both statistical process control and maintenance models have been extensively studied separately. However, the interdependence between these two activities has not been adequately addressed in the literature, despite their apparent connections. Information obtained in the course of statistical process control signals the need for possible maintenance actions, and thus, affects the preventive maintenance schedules. Maintenance actions can prevent the production process from further deterioration and improve the product quality in conjunction with statistical process control. The proposed model provides an effective integration of these two processes in one model and allows for their joint optimization. Our analysis shows that there can be potential cost reduction by exploiting the relationship between the two procedures. The integrated SPC and maintenance models are often quite complex mathematically. For example, Cassady et al. (2000) use a simulation–optimization approach to determine the optimal combined policies. The formulation of the deterioration process with maintenance interventions as a Markov chain over the preventive maintenance interval (τ) in our paper provides a breakthrough in designing an efficient solution algorithm and obtaining analytical results.The present model assumes that the deterioration of production process is governed by a given discrete-time Markov chain. The investigation of similar joint models for different deterioration processes such as stochastic degradation processes (e.g., gamma process and geometric Brownian motion) is worth pursuing. The quality control chart considered in this paper is the most commonly usedX¯chart. A natural extension regarding statistical process control would be the use of more advanced statistical process control tools. Also, the present model does not consider production planning which is another major concern of any manufacturing company. The integration of production planning, statistical process control and maintenance activities is an interesting topic for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
