@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal cost sharing for capacitated facility location games

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider cost sharing in capacitated facility location games.Optimal cost sharing protocols (w.r.t. price of anarchy and price of stability) are introduced.Computational hardness and inapproximability of optimal cost shares are shown.We give a tractable protocol with performance matching the inapproximability bound.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Game theory,Complexity theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider cost sharing for a class of facility location games, where the strategy space of each player consists of the bases of a player-specific matroid defined on the set of resources. We assume that resources have nondecreasing load-dependent costs and player-specific delays. Our model includes the important special case of capacitated facility location problems, where players have to jointly pay for opened facilities. The goal is to design cost sharing protocols so as to minimize the resulting price of anarchy and price of stability. We investigate two classes of protocols: basic protocols guarantee the existence of at least one pure Nash equilibrium and separable protocols additionally require that the resulting cost shares only depend on the set of players on a resource. We find optimal basic and separable protocols that guarantee the price of stability/price of anarchy to grow logarithmically/linearly in the number of players. These results extend our previous results (cf. von Falkenhausen & Harks, 2013), where optimal basic and separable protocols were given for the case of symmetric matroid games without delays.We finally study the complexity of computing optimal cost shares. We derive several hardness results showing that optimal cost shares cannot be approximated in polynomial time within a logarithmic factor in the number of players, unlessP=NP. For a restricted class of problems that include the above hard instances, we devise an approximation algorithm matching the logarithmic bound.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Consider a setting where players jointly use resources that have load-dependent monetary costs and player-specific delays. The monetary cost of each resource must be shared by its users while the player-specific delays are unavoidable physical quantities. This setting arises in facility location models, where users share the monetary cost of opened facilities and additionally experience delays measured by the distance to the closest open facility. As players might value the delay and monetary cost differently, these delays depend on both, the player and the facility the player is assigned to. Another example appears in distributed network design, where players jointly install capacities on a subgraph satisfying user-specific connectivity requirements. Besides the monetary cost for installing enough capacity, each player experiences player-specific delays on the resources used.Given the resource cost functions, delays and user’s requirements, in an ideal world resources are allocated optimally, that is, an allocation minimizes the social costs. In distributed systems, however, players will selfishly select resources for their demands based on the cost shares they have to pay and delays they experience. While physical delays (such as switching times or travel times) are unavoidable, the ways the monetary cost of a resource is shared among its users determine the equilibrium states of the strategic game induced.In this article, we study the design of cost sharing protocols as a means to induce efficient equilibria of the strategic game played. We consider cost sharing protocols axiomatized by the following three properties:1.Budget-balance: The cost of each resource is exactly covered by the collected cost shares of the players using the resource.Stability: There is at least one pure strategy Nash equilibrium in each game induced by the cost sharing protocol.Separability: When assigning the cost shares on a given resource, the protocol has no information about the load on other resources.We call a cost sharing protocol basic if it satisfies 1–2 and separable if it satisfies 1–3. These properties have been used first by Chen, Roughgarden, and Valiant (2010) in the context of network design games. While condition 1 is straightforward, the stability condition 2 requires the existence of at least one Nash equilibrium in pure strategies (abbreviated PNE; see Osborne & Rubinstein (1994, Section 3.2) for several drawbacks of using mixed Nash equilibria instead). Condition 3 is for instance crucial for practical applications in which cost sharing protocols must be distributed because each resource has only local information about its own usage.We study the design of cost sharing protocols for games in which every player wants to use resources that together form a basis of a player-specific matroid defined on the set of resources. We demonstrate that the aforementioned class of facility location games can be represented by player-specific matroids. As we assume general nondecreasing cost functions on the resources, our model also includes the case of facility location with hard capacities. Our setting has further applications in network design games, where each player wants to allocate a spanning tree in a graph.The main objective of this paper is to design basic or separable cost sharing protocols so as to minimize the efficiency loss of the equilibria induced. We consider the price of anarchy and the price of stability as the two prevailing performance metrics used in the literature. The price of anarchy (PoA) is defined as the worst-case ratio of the cost of a Nash equilibrium over the cost of a system optimum (see Koutsoupias & Papadimitriou (1999)), while the price of stability (PoS) captures the ratio of the best possible Nash equilibrium over a system optimum (see Anshelevich et al. (2008) and Correa, Schulz, & Stier-Moses (2004)).The first main result presented in Section 3 is a characterization of Nash equilibria in games with general cost functions and strategy spaces defined by player-specific matroids, showing that only a subclass of strategy profiles (called decharged) are candidates for being a pure Nash equilibrium. This allows to give lower bounds by constructing instances where all decharged profiles are expensive. Our characterization of Nash equilibria using the notion of decharged profiles strictly generalizes a characterization introduced in our previous paper (von Falkenhausen & Harks, 2013). While in von Falkenhausen and Harks (2013) we assumed symmetric strategy spaces, i.e., the same strategies are available to each player, we allow in this work player-specific strategy spaces and, additionally, individual delay for each player and resource.As a second contribution, we give in Section 4 an algorithm that constructs decharged profiles establishing an optimal protocol with PoS matching our lower bounds. In Section 5, we further prove that this protocol is also optimal with respect to the PoA. Note that our protocol used for the positive results also fulfill the stricter separability requirement from Chen et al. (2010), i.e., when assigning the cost shares on a given facility, the protocol has no information about the load on other facilities. When the class of cost functions is restricted to be either concave or convex, we show in Section 6 a drastic improvement of the PoS and PoA. The results in comparison to those obtained in von Falkenhausen and Harks (2013) are summarized in Table 1.In Section 7, we study the computational complexity of computing optimal cost shares that minimize the cost of the best/worst induced Nash equilibrium. We prove that both problems are strongly NP-hard and there are no polynomial timeclog(n)approximations for any0<c<1, unlessP=NP. These hardness results even hold for instances with unweighted players, zero delays, singleton strategies and unit fixed costs. In light of the hardness even for this restricted class of problems, we study approximation algorithms for the case of unweighted players, zero delays and singleton strategies, still assuming general nondecreasing costs. This setting includes several interesting classes of problems such as scheduling applications, where each player is associated with a job of unit weight. The job can be processed on a job-specific set of machines, and the monetary cost on a resource (for instance energy costs as in Yao, Demers, & Shenker (1995)) is a non-decreasing function of its total load. Another application arises in capacitated facility location with delays in{0,∞}. We devise a polynomial time algorithm computing cost shares with an approximation guarantee ofHnand n for the problem of minimizing the cost of the best/worst Nash equilibrium, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We considered in this paper facility location games where facilities have nondecreasing load-dependent costs and players experience player-specific delays when connecting to an open facility. We designed several cost sharing protocols for this setting and proved that they induce the smallest possible price of anarchy and price of stability, respectively. The following problems remain open and deserve further research. We assumed that the player’s strategy space is described by the set of bases of a player-specific matroid. While matroids contain many interesting classes (such as the facility location games), other classes such as general multi-commodity networks are not covered. The problem of designing optimal cost sharing protocols for general strategy spaces still eludes us. Our results regarding the computational complexity of cost sharing protocols show that optimal cost shares cannot be approximated by logarithmic factor in the number of players. While we devised the best possible approximation algorithm for singleton strategies and delays in{0,∞}, the case of general matroids with arbitrary delays remains unresolved.