@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Patient choice analysis and demand prediction for a health care diagnostics company

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply discrete choice model to medical diagnostics location problems.We model a competitive environment with incomplete data from competitors.The choice involves which location patients choose and why.Our methodology employs “off the shelf” statistical and spreadsheet tools.Our methodology is highly portable to other service delivery systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Laboratory services,Patient choice,Demand prediction,Location,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes a case study for a medical diagnostic laboratory service provider to model the behavior of patients when choosing a patient service centre for their medical tests and to estimate future demand volume. A tool developed based on our methodology allows the management of the diagnostic services to experiment with locations and capacities for locating or relocating service centres. In addition to the focal firm, the methodology considers the impact of decisions on another service provider and hospital laboratories located in the same area. The methodology identifies the most significant service centre attractiveness factors. Our models are validated from different perspectives and show good predictive capability. This case study is used to draw a number of lessons for applying these types of models to other similar services in order to assist other applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical diagnostic laboratory services play a crucial role in the detection, diagnosis, and treatment of disease for patients. An estimated 60–70 percent of all decisions regarding a patient’s diagnosis and treatment, hospital admission, and discharge are based on laboratory test results (Mayo Clinic, 2010). The medical diagnostic laboratory service industry is a large industry. In the U.S., for example, diagnostic costs were approximately 10 percent of overall health care expenditures in the 1990s (Benge, Bodor, Younger, & Parl, 1997), and this industry recently had revenues of more than 50 billion dollars (Knowledge Source, 2010). British Columbia (BC), Canada, the location of this study, spent an estimated 457 million dollars on laboratory services in 2001–2002 (BC Ministry of Health, 2003).Medical diagnostic services are offered to both outpatients and inpatients. Inpatients do not concern us here as in countries such as the U.S. and Canada, the vast majority of inpatient tests are done by hospital laboratories. We focus on outpatients. In BC, outpatient tests are conducted by either hospital test centres or private service test centres (commonly called Patient Service Centres or PSCs), in either case funded on a per test basis through the Medical Services Plan (MSP, http://www.health.gov.bc.ca/msp/). MSP is a government administered health insurance plan, and enrolment with MSP is mandatory for all BC residents. Samples from the PSCs will typically be sent to centralized laboratories from which results are forwarded directly to physicians’ offices or clinics.With test revenues regulated, the profit of a private service provider depends on the volume of visits to its PSCs or its market share as well as on controlling costs. This brings us immediately to the core problem addressed in this paper. A private service provider in BC approached us for help in evaluating when and where to relocate a PSC, when to change the capacity of a PSC, and when to extend operating hours; all with the aim of increasing their share of volume of visits. The service provider would also like to know the impact on its PSCs when a competitor makes similar decisions. In the longer term, the service provider would like to experiment with different locations in the face of demographic trends, such as ageing and population growth.The answer to any of these questions depends on our ability to predict which PSC a patient attends, which in turn means understanding what characteristics of a PSC are instrumental to this decision. For example, does a patient simply go to the nearest from their home, or from their physician, one adjacent to public transit, to a mall or having adequate parking, near other associated diagnostic facilities or PSCs at which they have not waited too long in the past?Therefore, the primary problem posed was, “how to predict patient demand and market share for PSCs sufficiently well to enable the evaluation of many managerial choices about location, capacity, and opening hours in terms of the impact on the entire system of PSCs including those of competitors.” And to do this, we had the secondary problem, “how to predict patient choice of PSC based on characteristics of those PSCs.”In this paper, we shall describe the methodology that we employed and the results. Our key result is that the use of a probabilistic choice behavior model for patients is superior to other choice models while still keeping the methodology reasonably simple and portable. Although carried out with data pertaining to medical diagnostic facilities, we believe the method and results to be insightful for many other service sectors.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first present an overview of the relevant literature in Section 2. We then describe the background of the case study, our general methodology, and preliminary analysis in Sections 3, 4, and 5, respectively. In Section 6, we further discuss the explanatory variables included in the models, estimation, and model validation. We then provide a few key insights in Section 7 by comparing our model with three other simplified models. Section 8 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
