@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of asset specificity on maintenance financial performance: An empirical application of Transaction Cost Theory to the medical device maintenance field

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presence of in-city spare parts has a positive impact on maintenance financial performance.Online diagnostic tools had a stronger positive effect on maintenance financial performance.Hospital type influences the financial performance of the selected maintenance governance structure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,Multivariate statistics,Econometrics in health,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study uses multivariate regression analysis to examine the effects of asset specificity on the financial performance of both external and internal governance structures for medical device maintenance, and investigates how the financial performance of external governance structures differs depending on whether a hospital is private or public. The hypotheses were tested using information on 764 medical devices and 62 maintenance service providers, resulting in 1403 maintenance transactions. As such, our data sample is significantly larger than those used in previous studies in this area. The results empirically support our core theoretical argument that governance financial performance is influenced by assets specificity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical equipment maintenance increasingly demands larger sums from hospital budgets, with services that are often outsourced, while the quality of maintenance services is pivotal for overall delivery of healthcare quality to patients. While in 1996 such contracts generated revenues of US$10 billion (Blumberg, 2004), the global medical devices outsourcing market is projected to reach US$42.6 billion by the year 2015, according to the Medical Devices Outsourcing: A Global Strategic Business Report published by Global Industry Analysts, Inc (GIA), indicating that this market is still growing (GIA, 2010). Yet the anticompetitive nature of the medical device maintenance market generates extreme inefficiencies in both cost and service quality, suggesting that while the industry continues to grow, service quality is not keeping pace with rising costs and sales volumes (Smithson & Dickey, 2004:136). In the quest to overcome these obstacles, the scientific literature has identified the collaboration between the healthcare and systems engineering fields as possessing great potential, and recent interdisciplinary studies have suggested interesting solutions to healthcare efficiency problems from engineering, operational research, and business management perspectives (Boyer & Pronovost, 2010; Friedman & Mitchell, 1991; Grossmann, Goolsby, Olsen, & McGinnis, 2008; Mahara, Bretthauerb, & Salzaruloc, 2011; Richman, Udayakumar, Mitchell, & Schulman, 2008).In particular, fields such as industrial engineering, systems engineering, management and operations research, with vast experience in system design, analysis and implementation of solutions across a variety of industries have the potential to increase the effectiveness, safety, efficiency and value in a variety of healthcare scenarios and institutions (Kolker, 2011:9; Richman et al., 2008). Without the intention of listing all, management and operations research can help in a set of very common problems presented in the healthcare environment including: decision making, capacity, staffing, scheduling, and resource allocation. In order to deliver quality health services, not only is it important to guarantee qualified staff, availability of beds, etc., but also it is essential to undertake effective healthcare technology management (Lenel, Temple-Bird, Kawohl, & Kaur, 2005:3). Particularly, maintenance tasks are an essential part of technology management systems because depending on how well a piece of equipment is looked after, its expectancy life can be prolonged or cut short (i.e. the equipment is not safe anymore, and/or it costs more to repair it than to replace it). However, the variety of medical devices is huge, and the resource costs needed to maintain these devices in proper working condition are high. Thus, health care managers face an important set of questions: which modality should be used to perform the medical device maintenance tasks? In other words, do I outsource or internalize the maintenance tasks for medical devices?Despite the demonstrated applicability of interdisciplinary approaches to other healthcare systems problems, the decision-making process for medical device maintenance outsourcing appears trapped in antiquated paradigms that generate tremendous inefficiency, contributing to these growing costs. This may be especially true in developing countries, where limited funds or a lack of confidence in the skills of in-house staff lead to the outsourcing of maintenance services, under the belief that narrowing the scope of in-house tasks will lead to cost-savings and improved quality. As a result, the outsourcing of medical device maintenance activities appears to be a growing trend in the healthcare industry, as hospitals increasingly outsource maintenance services and eliminate their in-house service staff (Blumberg, 2004; Cruz, Perilla, & Pabon, 2010: 144). The problem is not exclusive to the healthcare industry – according to a survey performed by Deloitte Consulting, 44% of respondents2Respondents were senior leaders in their corporations and were significantly involved in the decision making processes of outsourcing in manufacturing, education, government, retail, medical, and finance industries.2indicated that they saw no cost savings in their outsourced activities, while only 34% of respondents were satisfied with the supplier’s service quality (Landis, Mishra, & Porrello, 2005). This problem is compounded by the fact that maintenance outsourcing studies appear contradictory and incomplete (Assaf, Hassanain, Al-Hammad, & Al Nehmi, 2011; Benaroch, Webster, & Kazaz, 2012; Berradea, Cristiano, & Scarf, 2012; Garg & Deshmukh, 2006; Miguel & Rios, 2012; Shafiee & Chukova, 2013; Simoes, Gomes, & Yasin, 2011). For example, Miguel and Rios (2012) found particular deficiencies in the few existing studies on medical device maintenance outsourcing. They identified a cluster of papers that apply mathematical models to maintenance outsourcing problems, noting that while these models were proposed for specific industries, none was applied specifically to the maintenance outsourcing of medical devices (e.g. Asgharizadeh & Murthy, 2000; Jackson & Pascual, 2008; Lisnianski, Frenkel, Khvatskin, & Ding, 2008; Lugfigheid, Jardine, & Jiang, 2007; Murthy & Asgharizadeh, 1999; Murthy & Yeung, 1996; Plambeck & Zenios, 2000; Rahman & Chattopadhyay, 2007; Tarakci, Tang, Moskowitz, & Plante, 2006a, 2006b; Tarakci, Teyarachakul, & Tang, 2009). Further, they identified weaknesses in several papers that made critical assumptions that would fail to hold in real-world applications (e.g. assuming equipment does not become more likely to breakdown as it ages). In a second cluster of papers, identified as empirical-longitudinal studies of maintenance outsourcing problems, they found only five papers related to the performance measurement of medical device maintenance outsourcing (Cruz, Aguilera-Huertas, & Días-Mora, 2010; Cruz & Denis, 2006; Cruz, Perilla et al., 2010; Miguel, Barr, & Pozo Puñales, 2007; Miguel, Denis, & Sanchez, 2002). However, these papers do not mention any discussion about the managerial implications of the findings is non-existent, making it difficult to apply results in a meaningful way in terms of the make or buy making decision paradigm. Additionally, no empirical proposal whose research was grounded in management or strategic management theory dealt in detail with the issues related to maintenance outsourcing, nor did any specifically deal with the outsourcing of medical device maintenance (Macher & Richman, 2008; Shafiee & Chukova, 2013; Shelanski & Klein, 1995).The goal of this study is to bring operational and management research principles to the problem of medical device maintenance outsourcing. More specifically, we aim to use Transaction Cost Theory (TCT) as the theoretical foundation for a model measuring the financial performance of internal and external governance structures, which may serve as an aid for hospital managers making medical device maintenance outsourcing decisions. Our goal is to provide insight into which governance structures3For example: Market (Classical Contracting), Trilateral Governance (Neoclassical Contracting), Bilateral or Unified Governance Structures. See theoretical framework section for more details.3provide hospitals with the most control over the performance of medical device maintenance under a variety of conditions, and we believe that managers of clinical/biomedical engineering departments and healthcare managers will be the first benefit from this research.Therefore, our research seeks to extend the literature on how the main variables of interest to TCT influence the financial performance of internal and external governance structures by applying TCT to an examination of outsourcing performance in the maintenance service industry for medical devices. To our knowledge, this is the first study to use a TCT framework to examine the factors that affect the financial performance of both external and internal governance structures for medical device maintenance, while measuring the impact of these variables on financial performance. We believe the novelty of our approach lies both in its theoretical contribution and its examination of previously unexplored relationships between maintenance financial performance and governance selection, while including several control variables in our model that have gone ignored in previous studies. For example, our analysis includes the level of technological complexity of medical equipment, equipment age relative to useful live (equipment obsolescence), the level of training provided to biomedical technicians, and the number of years of experience of maintenance service companies, etc. Thus, by examining new relationships impacting governance structure financial performance, while controlling for a variety of other variables, our model is a unique, integral, empirical study of maintenance financial performance.On the other hand, while most empirical papers and literature reviews support the assertion that TCT considerations are determinants of governance choice, few empirical studies have demonstrated whether governance structure impacts performance. This is because performance measurement (i.e. cost-inclusive,4Measures that encompass the costs of generating performance, including: level and growth of profit.4cost-exclusive5Measures that do not directly encompass the costs of generating performance.5measures) should compare the performance of internal versus external governance structures Geyskens, Steenkamp, and Kumar (2006), which becomes problematic since performance of the selected governance structure is observed, while the performance of those governance structures not chosen are not observed (Masten, 1993; Masten, Meehan, & Snyde, 1991). Therefore, we agree with (Geyskens et al., 2006), that “greater effort to understand the influence of governance choice on performance is needed”. While the relationship between performance and the important constructs of TCT have received increasing attention in recent years, this research seems to focus almost exclusively on financial indicators of performance, such as profit, sales growth, and firm mortality rates (Geyskens et al., 2006; Macher & Richman, 2008). We believe that part of the novelty of our approach lies in its operationalization of financial performance as maintenance service costs relative to the original cost of acquisition, a measure of service quality, as opposed to profitability. This approach allows us to measure the performance quality hazards of contract misalignment, which has especially important implications in an industry such as healthcare, where the existence of public sector hospitals makes profitability and firm mortality a less useful indicator of performance. Surprisingly, in doing so, we found that some of our results go against one of the most common assumptions in the medical device maintenance field: that externalizing maintenance services improves service quality (Blumberg, 2004: 144).This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a brief literature review, identifying the theoretical variables that affect different measures of performance (including financial) and the empirical support they have received, Section 3 presents the formulation of our hypotheses. Section 4 presents the research methods, discussing the data sample and collection methods, indicators for the dependent and independent variables, bias control strategies, and the specifications for the statistical model. Section 5 presents the results, with a discussion of the statistical data analysis. Section 6 discusses the theoretical impact and managerial implications of this study. Section 7 describes the limitations of the study and recommendations for future research in this area. We present the conclusions in Section 8.The assumption and the theoretical core argument of our research is that the performance of maintenance governance structures (e.g. outsourced, or not outsourced with different degrees of integration, hybrid or discrete forms) is influenced by the features of the medical devices under their charge (e.g. equipment type, level of obsolescence, and technological complexity), and the hospital type on which maintenance service is provided (i.e. public or private). Specifically, these factors are influenced by the capacity of the firm to deliver the service, dependent on the firḿs physical and human resources features (i.e. assets specificity). TCT aims to identify which governance structure maximizes performance (e.g. efficiency) for a given firm (Alaghehband, Rivard, Wu, & Goyyette 2011). The governance mode refers to the degree of integration a firm selects to produce goods or services, i.e. market, hybrid, or hierarchical (Williamson, 1979). According to Williamson (1979) the market structure is the lowest degree of integration, while using hierarchical structures shows the highest degree of integration; therefore, hybrid governance structures fall somewhere in between (Williamson, 1979). According to TCT the ultimate unit of analysis is the transaction, while transactions are distinguished from one another through the resources (e.g. specific investment on machinery or tooling, spare parts, etc.) and activities (e.g. searching for supplier, negotiating contracts, monitoring) that are used to carry them out, and the frequency with which they occur. According to Williamson (1979) the most important attribute of transactions is asset specificity, understood as “the degree to which the assets used to conduct an activity can be redeployed to alternative uses and by alternative users without sacrifice of productive value” (Williamson, 1996:105). As such, asset specificity is used as the main focus of our paper for analyzing the transaction costs in the medical device maintenance industry.Also, TCT posits that managers should decide on which governance choice is more appropriate to “align the transactions with governance structure in a discriminating way”. Therefore, firms must choose an appropriate degree of integration in the governance structure in order to achieve adequate performance, considering not only the different capabilities of firms to produce a good or service but also to adapt to environmental disturbances (Crook, 2005: 16). For example, TCT predicts that more integrated governance structures show higher performance with a high degree of assets specificity. According to Williamson (1979), under these circumstances, using more integrated governance structures reduces the possibility of opportunism. Instead, market or hybrid governance structures are ideal when highly specific assets are not present, because firms can redeploy assets easier and/or identify alternative suppliers without high search and switching costs, economizing on transaction costs, and thus, improve performance under these conditions.In this research we will focus on the effect of asset specificity on governance choice and firms’ performance. According to Williamson, assets specificity represents the most important transaction variable, it is defined as “the degree to which the assets used to conduct an activity can be redeployed to alternative uses and by alternative users without sacrifice of productive value,” and notes that transactions involving highly specific assets are particularly ripe for opportunistic behavior on the part of either agent or principal. For example, if the agent makes investments in non-substitutable, highly specific assets that the agent is unable to easily find elsewhere, there may be incentives for the agent to engage in opportunistic behavior, as the power dynamics of the exchange relationship have shifted in their favor. At the same time, if an agent makes highly specific asset investments to provide a good or service for which the number of alternative buyers is limited, the principal holds significant power in the exchange relationship. To encourage such investment and mitigate opportunism, appropriate governance structures must be chosen (Williamson, 1979). Since, assets specificity represents the most important transaction variable it has been the most scrutinized and empirically tested of these variables, in studies spanning several fields, including business and non-business areas (e.g. law and public policy, health economics and policy, agricultural economics policy) (Macher & Richman, 2008; Roberts and Han, 2004; (Shelanski & Klein, 1995).In an extensive review of approximately 900 articles that applied empirical tests to some aspect of TCT, Macher and Richman (2008) found significant support for the main predictions of TCT. Two main approaches to the empirical assessment of the effects of assets specificity6We will focus solely in our explanatory logic and literature review on assets specificity, as the scope of our paper is limited to this aspect of TCT.6on a firm’s activity divide the existing research: one approach has been to examine the influence of assets specificity on the governance selection, while other research has focused on the influence of assets specificity on the performance of both the organization and the governance structure chosen (Macher & Richman, 2008; Roberts and Han, 2004; Shelanski & Klein, 1995). In the first stream, specifically studying the effects of assets specificity on vertical integration, (Monteverde & Teece, 1982), along with the subsequent works done by Masten (1984), Masten, Meehan, and Snyder (1989) and provide the first evidence that asset specific investment is a critical determinant of vertical integration decisions. Furthermore, other empirical studies applied to different industries (e.g. sales, semiconductor research and development, and information technology) show that boundary choices possess distinctly different capacities to govern transactions. Regarding assets specificity, these studies have supported the idea that assets specificity has a strong, statistically significant, positive effect on internal governance structures (Anderson and Schmittlein, 1984; Anderson, 1985; Anderson & Coughlan, 1987; Lee & Lim, 2003; Leiblein & Miller, 2003; Lyons, 1995; Murray & Kotabe, 1999; Shelanski, 2004; Spiller, 1985; Ulset, 1996).While there is considerable empirical literature examining the determinants of governance selection, much less attention has been given to the effects of TCT constructs and governance choice on performance chosen (Macher & Richman, 2008; Roberts and Han, 2004; Shelanski & Klein, 1995). In one of the few examples focused on the effects of assets specificity on governance performance, Poppo and Zengert (1998) conducted a data-survey study with 152 top computer executives in the information technology industry. They found that when assets specificity increases, internal governance structures showed advantages over external governance with respect to performance, measured by customer satisfaction. Similar results have been found by Espino-Rodriguez and Padron-Robaina (2006) in the hotel. Similarly, (De Vita, Tekaya, & Wang, 2010) tested the effects of the individual dimensions of assets specificity on outsourcing performance in services-related industries7Banking and finance, hotel, information technology, and telecommunication industries.7in the United Kingdom. This study examined the specific effects of the individual dimensions of buyer and supplier asset specific investments8Authors disaggregated the assets specificity measurement into various dimensions including: human, dedicated, site, temporal, brand capital and procedural assets specificity (De Vita et al., 2010).8on performance, proxied by the overall satisfaction of relational performance with service/product quality. The results of this study indicate that asset specific investments impact satisfaction with the outsourcing relationship performance and this effect varies according to the particular assets specificity dimension examined. Also, Nickerson and Silverman (2003) and Bigelow (2008, 2006) studied the effects of misalignment on a firm’s survival time as a measure of performance, hypothesising that when misalignment increases, a firm’s survival time decreases. However, these two studies produced contradictory results, with Nickerson and Silverman (2003) finding no statistically significant relationship between misalignment and firm survival time, while Bigelow (2006) found statistical evidence for this relationship. In another study Silverman, Nickerson, and Freeman (1997) analyzed the performance of more than 42,700 large and small motor carriers in the American interstate trucking industry, proxied by the firm mortality rate. The empirical study showed that firm mortality increases when it does not adhere to operating policies consistent with transaction cost minimization principles. Moreover, (Leiblein, Reuer, & Dalsace, 2002) investigated the technological performance implications of production internalization versus outsourcing in the semiconductor manufacturing industry. They found that firms’ decisions to outsource or internalize production affect technological performance, proxied by transistor density,9Transistor density represents a universally valued success factor. Therefore, it is the fundamental driver of both cost and product performance in the industry.9consistent with TCT predictions. Another study conducted by Silverman (1999) studied the effects of a firm’s human capital, as a measure of assets specificity, on the diversification of the firm, as an indicator of performance. They found that when the tacit knowledge associated with technological resources increases, the diversification of the firm also increases.Again, we should notice that we found a small number of articles containing empirical research proposals evaluating the performance of medical device maintenance outsourcing in hospitals (Cruz, Perilla et al., 2010; Miguel et al., 2002, 2007; Cruz & Denis, 2006). Importantly, they operationalize performance in terms of service quality, in this case measured as the turnaround time for maintenance tasks. Still, they are limited in that they did not venture outside the characterization phase in the study, and in their discussion of the results there is no mention of management theory to sufficiently justify the research findings and managerial implications. Thus, it is not clear how these studies extend the literature on maintenance outsourcing (i.e. ‘make or buy’, theory of firm, etc.) in a meaningful way.We should also note that it has been difficult to empirically support the effects of assets specificity on maintenance performance in the medical device field. All that we have is a vast array of anecdotal evidence and sample cases reported in the literature about medical device maintenance outsourcing experiences (Temple-Bird, Kaur, Lenel, & Kawohl, 2005a, 2005b, 2005c). However, because there is considerable empirical evidence in other fields that demonstrates that assets specificity has effects on both governance structure selection and governance performance there is reason to suspect that assets specificity also should have effects on the maintenance performance of the governance structure in the medical devices industry as well. Thus, while we operationalize performance differently than has been done in previous empirical investigations in TCT, we believe TCT should provide a theoretical framework to support our arguments that specific spare parts and diagnostic software, as measures of assets specificity, impact the maintenance financial performance of the chosen governance structure.For the case of medical device maintenance, with performance measured as the financial performance for maintenance tasks, an indicator of service quality, we expect that an increase in assets specificity will decrease the performance of internal governance structures, relative to the financial performance of external structures.In medical device maintenance, the repair of highly complex medical devices requires specific spare parts, which are costly to acquire and store, while the devices using these specific spare parts are limited, and significant uncertainty exists as to when – or if – a given spare part will be needed. As a result, the acquisition and storage of replacement parts of complex equipment represents a significant asset investment on the part of the service provider. At the same time, equipment spare parts and maintenance materials are essential because without them medical devices cannot be maintained or repaired, even if problems are easily fixable (Paton & Nyamu, 1996; Temple-Bird et al., 2005a:107). Consequently, if spare parts are not readily available, the medical equipment cannot be adequately maintained and the frequency of breakdowns increases, provoking long periods of equipment downtime. This is particularly important in developing countries, where spare parts often must be ordered from abroad. The procurement of such spare parts from abroad is a lengthy and tedious process, because it may take a significant amount of time to obtain price quotes and ship goods (Cruz, Aguilera-Huertas et al., 2010; FAKT, 1997; Halbwachs, 2000; Halbwachs & Temple-Bird, 1991; Ministry of Health, 2003). For example, Cruz, Perilla et al. (2010) found that the response time to bring critical spare parts to the maintenance site represents 80% of the overall turnaround time in corrective maintenance tasks. Based on this reasoning, we hypothesize that:Hypothesis 1The presence of idiosyncratic spare parts in the same city where serviced equipment is located has a positive impact on the financial performance in maintenance transactions of both internal and external governance structures.The TCT states that more integrated governance structures should show performance advantages in transactions in which high degrees of specific asset investments are involved (i.e. idiosyncratic spare parts) (Williamson, 1979). Therefore, according to the TCT in the presence of transactions with highly specific asset the governance structures should be internalized (Williamson, 1979). However, while this may seem like an obvious decision with clear empirical evidence (Macher & Richman, 2008), and with clear subsequent implications for maintenance financial performance and service quality, the reality is often more complicated for the industry of medical device maintenance.On one hand, a recent trademark United States court decision about Storz v. Surgi-Tech, signaled a new paradigm in the form healthcare institutions manages and conduct the repairs of medical equipment (Gordon, 2001). This case started when the Karl Storz Company began receiving complaints from users about the quality and performance of Karl Storz’s rigid endoscopes. Since these endoscopes cost thousands of dollars, when they failed or were completed damaged, the hospitals and clinical engineering departments preferred to repair them rather than removed them from inventories. Therefore, hospitals in an effort to reduce costs they look to either the in-house service or independent maintenance organizations to perform these maintenance tasks. In doing so, by the substitution of many specific spare parts during the maintenance tasks, the repairers had created poorly rebuild versions of the original equipment (i.e. Karl Storz’s endoscopes), which affected the company reputation, when equipment become to fail unexpectedly. In other words, it was a case of the solution being worse than the problem.On the other hand, it has been reported that, the performance of corrective and/or preventive maintenance of medical devices might be lower if service providers use different or alternative corrective and/or preventive maintenance methods from those specified by the original equipment manufacturers (De Vivo, Derrico, Capussotto, & Reali, 2004). For example, using a cheaper part instead of an original equipment manufacturer part might not be cost-effective in the longer term (Deparment of health., 2006: 44). In addition to that, there is a trend of thought in the field of clinical engineering (even one could also share this thought) that as maintenance service needs more specialized spare parts, the in-house service costs rise up (i.e. lower financial performance). Logically, the service external governance maintenance structures (mainly original equipment manufacturer) have a competitive advantage over in-house modality because they have the ability to synchronize idiosyncratic spare parts purchase and locate them in a better way and also, they have better economies of scales to perform the maintenance tasks, resulting in a lower maintenance service costs (i.e. better financial performance) (Cram, 2002). Based on this reasoning, we hypothesize that:Hypothesis 1aThe presence of idiosyncratic spare parts in the same city where serviced equipment is located has a stronger positive effect on financial performance of the maintenance transactions of external governance structures than internal governance.An additional, pertinent example of highly specialized assets in the medical device maintenance field is online ancillary support service. In the second case, it is clear that there is a high demand for ancillary support services such as remote diagnostics, and online parts management among users of medical technology, particularly for high complexity equipment (Blumberg, 2004: 142). These technologies increase the performance of the service provider value chain (Dehning, Richardson, & Zmud, 2007), and create new competitive advantages for maintenance providers by anticipating equipment failures, and diagnosing failures when they occur, isolating the problem and identifying spare parts needed for the repair before a maintenance technician is even dispatched (Blumberg, 2002: 108; 2004: 471–472). This therefore decreases the downtime of out-of-service medical devices. When hospitals purchase highly complex equipment and the OEM refuses to allow other maintenance organizations access to products such as online diagnostics programs, hospitals are locked into maintenance contracts with the OEM in order to gain access to such services, driving costs above what they would be in a competitive environment. In fact, this has generated significant controversy in the field of medical device maintenance, as some scholars have noted, “in some cases, it is almost impossible to service the equipment without this software, a situation that obviously has the potential to seriously hamper in-house or third-party service” (Temple-Bird et al., 2005c: 39). Yet while it is clear that the highly specific, necessary assets of online diagnostic tools create asymmetric power relationships that influence governance selection and financial performance (Blumberg, 2004: 471), there is an absence of theoretical and empirical research describing the influence on financial performance measured as maintenance service quality. Thus, we hypothesize that:Hypothesis 2Providing online service improves financial performance of maintenance transaction for both internal and external governance structures.That online diagnostic tools improve the financial performance of any service provider should be obvious. For example, a survey conducted to over 100 maintenance service providers (i.e. externals governance structures) indicated that online diagnostic tool reduced the training time and eliminated the effort required to collect and analyze repair and maintainability data (Blumberg, 2004: 471). However, full quantifiable measurement of online diagnostic tools cost benefits has yet to be demonstrated in a broad sense. For example, just as a restriction of access to these services by the OEM creates asymmetric power relationships that allow the OEM to drive up prices, we believe these same asymmetric power relationships should generate lower efficiency pressures for OEM maintenance service providers, which should increase waiting times for servicing equipment above what they would be in a competitive environment. At the same time, when hospitals have access to online diagnostic tools, they are able to make use of their natural advantages, such as site and organizational specificity, that allow them to service equipment faster than other service providers. As a result, while online diagnostic services should have positive implications for service quality and financial performance regardless of the governance form selected, the positive influence should be stronger on hybrid governance forms that allow hospitals to lease diagnostic software, while internalizing the actual equipment maintenance tasks. Thus, we hypothesize that:Hypothesis 2aProviding online service has a stronger positive effect on the financial performance of the maintenance transactions of internal governance structures than external governance.We believe that the maintenance performance associated with governance structure selection not only depends on assets specificity, but also the type of healthcare institution in which maintenance service is provided. Ample theoretical and empirical work has been conducted in this area previously, and several scholars have dealt with the question of governance selection for medical device maintenance and other medical services by examining performance according to whether healthcare institutions are private (either for-profit or non-profit) or public, or between for-profit or non-profit private hospitals (Ashton, 1988; Balakrishnan, Eldenburg, Krishnan, & Soderstrom, 2010; Coles & Hesterly, 1998a; Coles & Hesterly, 1998b; Dranove & White, 1994; Mark, 2009; Pauly, 1987; Zinn, Mor, Intrator, Feng, & Davis, 2003). However, empirical results have been mixed and contradictory, creating an unresolved, polemic debate. A primary point of conflict in the literature arises between scholars who find that TCT has effects on the vertical integration decisions and performance of healthcare services primarily in the private sector Coles and Hesterly (1998a) and Coles and Hesterly (1998b), and others who have found that that the core constructs of TCT have effects on both private and public, and for-profit and non-profit healthcare services. For example, Ashton (1988) studied the effects of assets specificity, uncertainty and frequency of transactions on contracting costs in four types of healthcare services (e.g. acute mental health services, rest homes, primary healthcare clinics, and surgical services), finding evidence for the effects on contracting costs for both private and public healthcare facilities. Additionally, Zinn et al. (2003) found that independently operating healthcare facilities showed less propensity for the vertical integration of services than those that operated as part of a healthcare network or chain.Yet in their examination of vertical integration decisions in public and private hospitals, Coles and Hesterly (1998a, 1998b), found starkly different results. Individually testing the integration of specific medical services (e.g. Laboratory, Respiratory Therapy, Radiology, Maintenance, Housekeeping, etc.), they found that increases in the level of uncertainty in transactions lead health care institutions to integrate services at lower levels of assets specificity. However, their results were driven mainly by private hospitals, while integration decisions in public healthcare institutions were apparently uninfluenced by TCT variables. In an empirical comparison of for-profit and non-profit hospitals, Mark (2009) studied the effects of assets specificity, operationalized as the level of specialization of human skills, on governance selection decisions for information systems operations in 4608 non-profit, for-profit and catholic hospitals in the United States. Authors found a negative relationship between assets specificity and the number of functions the hospital-based health care systems outsourced. These results suggest that hospitals and healthcare systems may not be taking into account other factors, such as costs, which should be an important factor when facing outsourcing decisions. In another approach, Balakrishnan et al. (2010), found that government and non-profit hospitals are less likely than for-profit hospitals to engage in outsourcing. Finally, Wholey, Padman, Hamer, and Schwartz (2001) studied the effects of assets specify on outsourcing for development and operation activities among health care organizations, controlling for specific fixed effects such as organization type, finding that for-profit healthcare institution were more likely to outsource, while non-profit and public healthcare institutions were less likely to outsource these activities.Multiple arguments explain these contradictory results. For example, Richards (1984) has argued that public entities are less sensitive to efficiency pressures than their private sector peers because their missions are different. The main goal of public hospitals is to provide service to vulnerable populations unable to pay for those services,10For the years 1979–1982, between 11% and 12% of public hospital revenues were spent on uncompensated care; while the amount in private non-profit and for-profit private hospitals was 4% and 3%, respectively (Richards, 1984).10whereas the objective of private hospitals is to increase shareholder value, according to basic social and legal regulations driven by ethical behavior (Gray, 1986). Therefore, private hospitals are driven mainly by market forces and experience fewer constraints in the decision making processes; public hospitals may face pressure to spend all funds available to them in an effort to acquire more funding for the following fiscal year, or face special conditions as to which external providers they may contract, which can decrease their efficiency. Thus, faced with different constraints, managers of public healthcare institutions may systematically choose a certain governance structure, even if greater transaction costs are involved (Balakrishnan et al., 2010; Coles & Hesterly, 1998a).These contradictions may rise up because the idiosyncratic nature of the conditions in the healthcare industry suggests that some environmental variables usually used in analyzing other organizations are not applicable in analyzing healthcare institutions, indicating that more specific models should be tested (Goldstein, Ward, Leong, & Butler, 2002). Given the facts that first, results obtained regarding the effects of the core constructs of TCT on the healthcare institution type are still contradictory; and second, that the empirical evidence on the performance of maintenance service governance structure is scant, we believe that the maintenance performance of both external and internal governance deserves to be studied according to hospital type. This holds especially true because of the managerial implications these findings may have for future outsourcing decisions. Based on this reasoning, we hypothesize that:Hypothesis 3Irrespective of the governance structure chosen, maintenance transactions performed in private healthcare institutions will show higher financial performance than in public healthcare institutions.External governance structures will show higher financial performance in maintenance transactions for private healthcare institutions than for public healthcare institutions.For public healthcare institutions, the financial performance of maintenance transactions of internal governance structures will be higher than external governance.The relationships between independent variables and maintenance financial performance, according to service provider type are summarized in the conceptual model in Fig. 1. We tested all our hypotheses by building a multilineal regression model.We gathered primary data on maintenance transactions from hospitals under study, resulting in a total sample of 1403 observations, each representing a unique maintenance transaction. We determined this sample size was sufficient, using as parameters an effect size of 0.2 and a statistical power of 0.8 (at <0.05) (see (Portney & Watkins, 2000: 852) for more details).11We used a combination of the Portney and Watkins (2000: 852) table C.8 for the determination of lambda values (at α<0.05, with 8 predictors, i.e. k=8) for regression analysis and the formula n=λ*(1−R*R)/R*R to estimate our required sample size required. where n is the required sample size, λ is a parameter depending of residuals degree of freedom (df residual). For our case the determined value of λ is 17.4 at df residual=120, and R is the effect size. That for the case of our study design is R=0.2. Therefore according to the formula our required sample size is 69.6≈70 observations or maintenance transactions.11Due to the scarcity of previous empirical and longitudinal studies on maintenance performance, we chose a low effect size in order to be conservative. The maintenance transactions were completed by 62 external maintenance service organizations and two in-house clinical engineering departments on a total sample of 764 medical devices located in several Colombian hospitals (11 private and 11 public). By measuring the Service cost – acquisition cost ratio (COSR) for each maintenance transaction according to governance structure, we were able to measure the financial performance of internal and external governance structures (see data collection procedure and bias control section for more details).We selected the equipment in our data sample from nine pilot areas in the hospitals under study,12We got 1403 observations, each representing a unique maintenance transaction in from 72 different maintenance service providers performed in 22 hospitals.12including: Diagnostic Images, Surgical Unit, Intensive Care Unit, Neonatal Care, Emergency, Intermediate Care Unit, Immunology Laboratory, Clinical Laboratory, and Microbiology. The technical complexity, equipment types, and equipment acquisition costs involved in these areas makes them the most likely to have maintenance services contracted to an external provider. In our selection of hospitals to be included in the study, we first looked at a large sample hospitals, and narrowed down the number of potential candidates for inclusion, taking special care to select hospitals that met similar criteria: accredited by the quality assurance system of the Republic of Colombia; comparable in terms of the number of licensed beds, number and types of medical devices, number and types of medical services, and level of care; possessing in-house clinical engineering departments that perform both preventive and corrective maintenance tasks; hospitals should be selected such that 90% of the maintenance service providers contracted render services to all hospitals included in the study; and finally, the hospitals should have sufficient information systems processes to gather, monitor and process all the equipment history and the maintenance transactions in our study. We acquired this information from the Bogotá section of the Colombian Ministry of Health, which left us with only five hospital candidates that meet the conditions mentioned above.The 1403 maintenance transactions in our sample were characterized according to governance structure, the basic data of the equipment being serviced, the type of healthcare institution, and financial performance (i.e. COSR, in%/year). In doing so, we first conducted a study characterizing the hospitals’ inventories from the pilot areas mentioned above to identify the equipment features, such as obsolescence level (Obsolesc), complexity level (TComplex), the equipment acquisition cost, the acquisition date, the equipment age, and the maintenance service provider in charge of the equipment, either internal or external. Once we identified the equipment maintenance service provider and the governance structure type (GovStr), we designed a survey conducted via face-to-face interviews with maintenance service firm managers and managers of hospital clinical engineering departments. The survey recorded only the main features and services offered by both internal and external maintenance providers. Among the most important data surveyed were company name; contract service start date; contract service end date; experience and qualifications of the company’s human resources, in years and degrees obtained (TechTLevel); contract duration, in years; whether the contract is a guarantee contract; whether the contract includes replacements parts; total quantity of equipment included in the contract; number of annual visits stipulated in the contract; total number of the company’s engineers and technicians; number of engineers and technicians working on the contract; distance of the service provider from the hospital, in kilometers; experience of the company in the industry, in years (CompExp); whether online maintenance services are offered (ServLine); whether replacement stocks exist in the same locality in which maintenance service is provided (RepParCity); equipment types involved in the maintenance contract service and whether training is provided to users and operators. Finally, as mentioned above, we collected primary data on hospital equipment maintenance incidents13Information on maintenance incidents was recorded through documents called work orders, using a well-established work order standard form recommended by the Advanced Association for Medical Instrumentation (AAMI, 2002).13and the performance of maintenance service organizations (both internal and external) over a twenty-month period by means of a monitoring procedure. The monitoring procedure is presented in Fig. 2.In order to avoid bias, all users were trained at the beginning of the study, and each new user (such as a new clinician hired by the hospital during the time of data collection) was trained as part of the induction period for the job. Additionally, each maintenance service provider was monitored through a monthly phone survey in order to identify any changes in their characteristics related to the independent variables in the study. To avoid any bias related to testing, maintenance service providers knew they were participating in a study, but were unaware that it was specifically their TAT performance that was being measured. During the ten month data collection phase of the study, no maintenance service provider showed any changes in the firm characteristics related to the independent variables measured in the original service provider survey, and no device was withdrawn from the equipment inventory. Finally, the hospitals contracted no new maintenance service providers, nor did they acquire any new devices during the model building and data collection period. As a result, there was no need to deal with attrition or history bias.Table 1lists the variables, variable type (e.g. independent, dependent, or control), description, and codification. The variables in Table 1 were grouped according to the vast theoretical grounding and empirical studies that already exist on both TCT and maintenance in the medical device field (Roberts and Han, 2004; Cohen, 2010; Coles & Hesterly, 1998a, 1998b; Cruz & Denis, 2006; Cruz, Perilla et al., 2010; Dranove & White, 1994; ECRI, 1989; Ho, Xu, & Dey, 2010; Miguel et al., 2002, 2007; Shelanski & Klein, 1995). We will now proceed to explain how and why all our measures and control variables were included in our model.Maintenance performance has several dimensions (e.g. response time, service time, financial, etc., Cohen, 2010). However, for this study we used a measure of cost inclusive performance, the Service cost – acquisition cost ratio (COSR) as dependent variable. According to TCT, one of the most important determinants of governance selection is cost (Williamson, 1991). Therefore, in this paper we decided to include the maintenance service costs relative to the original cost of acquisition, in% per year, as dependent variable as a measure of financial performance associated with maintenance tasks (Cohen, 2010) (e.g. labor and specific spare parts and ancillary devices) in our evaluation of governance financial performance.Recall that assets specificity refers to the degree of investment required, or that is uniquely dedicated to support a maintenance transaction. We selected whether the maintenance service provider has replacement parts in the same location the service is offered (RepParCity), and whether online services are offered (ServLine) as independent variables. With the current debate on whether healthcare institution type affects performance and governance structure choice, the third variable we used was whether the maintenance service is provided to a private or public health care institution (HospType) (see Table 1 for more details).We included this independent variable to quantify how the availability of highly specific spare parts affects maintenance performance. If the maintenance transaction was performed by means of specialized spare parts with stocks located in the same city, it was coded as ‘1’, while transactions performed using specific spare parts from distant stocks were coded as ‘0’.As providing online service is a critical element to perform many maintenance tasks, mainly in high complexity technology (e.g. resonance magnetic imaging, or computerized tomography scanners). If the maintenance transaction was performed by means of specialized service online, we coded it as ‘1’, otherwise it was coded as ‘0’.We included hospital type to study the effects of institution type on the maintenance performance of the governance structure. In this research, HospType was considered as a dummy variable, with public hospitals coded as ‘0’, and private hospitals coded as ‘1’.In this paper we controlled for variables that were not of direct interest for testing our hypotheses, but still should have an impact on the dependent variable.Maintenance transaction tasks have been found to take more time as technological complexity of medical devices increases (Blumberg, 2004; Cheng, 2004). Thus, we expect higher COSR values for more complex equipment. Therefore, we included and controlled for equipment technological complexity in our statistical model. We used the well-accepted, established, and validated technological complexity scale proposed by (Temple-Bird et al., 2005c: 109), which has proven effective in a diverse array of countries (including underdeveloped countries). The scale classifies technology into three categories, including high, medium and low complexity (see Table 2for more details), taking into account the level of technological sophistication in terms of hardware and software design and requirements, complexity of maintenance tasks, and level of training required to operate and maintain the devices. We coded high technological complexity as “1” and low technological complexity as “0” (we did not have any medium-level complexity equipment in our data sample, (see Table 1 for more details).In this study, we used technological obsolescence14According to the logic of TCT, technological obsolescence has been used as a measure of environmental uncertainty (Coles & Hesterly, 1998a, 1998b).14as a control variable to determine whether to select either a frailty or nested case-control proportional hazards model, and as a control variable to avoid any confounding bias. One critical assumption of the proportional hazards frailty model is that covariables do not change with time. This critical assumption does not hold in the case of medical equipment, which is more likely to breakdown as it ages. Thus, COSR may be higher than normal for older equipment, erroneously identifying a maintenance service provider as having lower performance. In this study, we measured technological obsolescence using the ratio of equipment exploitation time over the useful life of the device, or ET/UL. The exploitation time, in years, was determined by subtracting the date the study began from the date on which the equipment entered the hospital inventory. The data on the useful life of the equipment was taken from the maintenance service manual provided from the original equipment manufacturer. In cases where the information was not available from the manufacturer’s manual, the data was gathered from the estimated useful life list published by (AAMI, 2002). If the ET/UL ratio is lower than one (ET/UL<1), the equipment is not obsolete, while if the ratio is greater than one (ET/UL>1) the equipment is obsolete, because it has passed what the original equipment manufacturer considers to be its useful life. We coded technological obsolescence as “0” if the value of the ET/UL ratio was lower than one, while obsolete equipment with ET/UL ratios of greater than one were coded as “1” (see Table 1 for more details). This transformation from a ratio to binary scale for this variable has proven feasible in many applications to measure the obsolescence of medical devices (Cruz & Denis, 2006; Cruz, Denis, Villar, & Gonzalez, 2002).We included the number of years of business experience of each company in our model because more experienced companies should show higher maintenance performance. These companies are better able to efficiently allocate resources, and to have local stocks of critical, highly specific spare parts. Any company with more than 10years (high experience) in the industry was coded as “1”, and companies with fewer than 10years of industry experience (low experience) we coded as “0” (see Table 1 for more details).The more complex the equipment, the more significant and important the technical skills needed to perform the maintenance tasks (Temple-Bird et al., 2005c: 175). We expect the technician training level to improve maintenance performance. Thus, we controlled for technician training involved in the maintenance transactions. We used the well-accepted, established, and validated maintenance skills scale proposed by Temple-Bird et al. (2005b: 42), which has proven effective in a diverse array of countries (including underdeveloped countries). The scale classifies the skill level needed to perform maintenance tasks as a function of technology type, the qualifications of the personnel, and the type of maintenance task to be performed in the transaction (Table 1 for more details). We coded high skill levels as “1”, and low skills levels as “0” (we did not have medium skill level technicians in our data sample).Finally, we controlled for differences in the governance structure for each maintenance transaction. We coded internal governance structures as ‘0’, and external structures as ‘1’.Once the information was completely entered into the computerized equipment management system, all service provider names were coded. The list of names and corresponding codes was stored in a sealed envelope to ensure the identity of each provider was hidden. Next, we conducted a descriptive statistical analysis for all variables. After conducting both Kolmogorov–Smirnov (0.9965, p<0.457) and Shapiro–Wilk (0.9842, p<0.561) tests for the COSR variable, data showed a normal distribution, therefore; we selected a multilinear regression as statistical model to test our hypothesis. We built our model using the method proposed by (Kleinbaum and Mitchel: 165–299; Hekman et al., 2010). We centered all variables involved in the interaction terms to minimize multicollinearity effects between the interaction terms and their individual components of our model (Aiken & West, 1991; Hekman et al., 2010). Then we performed both multicolinearity diagnostic and autocorrelations test15COSR variable measures repeated maintenance transactions amongst the service providers, therefore autocorrelation might exist.15of our data. Our data showed neither collinearity nor autocorrelation problems (see results section for more details). Next, we used a forward regression method16We used hierarchical regression models. This method starts with a model containing all main effects (i.e. individual components) and proceed sequentially add statistically significant interactions terms (Sheskin, 2007:1735).16to build our multilinear regression model. In doing so, we first entered all individual independent variables (i.e. RepParCity, ServLine, HospType) in Model I, but excluding control and interaction variables. Next, we performed the confounders assessment followed by consideration for precision17Dropping variables is precision is gained by examining confidence intervals (CIs).17by entering all the control variables without the interactions, which is presented in Model II (i.e. TComplex, Obsolec, CompExp, TechTLevel, GovStr). We assessed the confounders’ impact on the models by determining whether the estimated β coefficients meaningfully changed when selected confounders’variables were entered or deleted from the model18As a rule we used a “change-of-estimate” rule of 5% or greater to retain a confounder in the model.18. Finally, in Model III we entered all the interactions involving governance maintenance structure19We also assessed the confounding interactions by analyzing the precision gained using the confidence intervals (CIs) criteria (i.e. the lower the better, more precision).19. (i.e. (RepParCity)*(Gov Str), (ServLine)*(Gov Str), (HospType)*(Gov Str), (TComplex)*(Gov Str), (Obsolesc)*(Gov Str), (CompExp)*(Gov Str), (TechTLevel)*(Gov Str) see Tables 2 and 3for more details). As a rule for any interaction term found statistically significant, we applied a hierarchy principle identifying lower components that must remain in the final model (i.e. if certain interaction component is to be retained in the model, then all the lower-order components of that interaction are to be retained). The model of primary interest, Model III, is thus specified as follows:COSR=β1*RepParCity+β2*ServLine+β3*HospType+β4*TComplex+β5*Obsolec+β6*CompExp+β7*TechTLevel+β8*GovStr+β9*(GovStr*RepParCity)+β10*(GovStr*ServLine)+β11*(GovStr*HospType)+β12*(GovStr*TComplex)+β13*(GovStr*Obsolesc)+β14*(GovStr*CompExp)+β15*(GovStr*TechTLevel)Note 1: see Table 1 for more details (variables definition and operationalization)

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has attempted to use a TCT lens to identify the main determinants of medical device maintenance performance for both internal and external governance structures. Namely, we have quantified how assets specificity affects maintenance service provider financial performance, depending on the type of hospital. We have empirically supported our core theoretical argument that the maintenance financial performance of governance structures (e.g. internal or external) is influenced by transaction features (assets specificity), which create a scenario in which firms face a decision to accept higher transaction costs and provide quality service, or shirk these costs by providing lower quality service. The high values of the correlation and determination coefficients (i.e. R and R2), and the robustness of the β coefficients with statistically significant values (p<0.01 or p<0.05) across all models give us enough statistical evidence to assert that we achieved the aim of our research. Finally, as maintenance outsourcing is a common problem, this research has the potential to be generalized to other sectors of the economy. In particular, we believe this study might serve as a model for investigations in other areas, where using a TCT lens to calculate factors to reduced performance, operationalized as financial performance, is useful. Specifically, faced with a variety of contract options, our model may be used as a starting point for managers in a variety of industries to evaluate the risk of lower performance, which can be evaluated along with contract costs to make a decision on governance selection.