@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling repayment patterns in the collections process for unsecured consumer debt: A case study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use Markov chain models of payment patterns to estimate recovery rates.Models allow optimisation of write off policies.Models tested using large portfolio of UK retail loans during a 12 year period.Results aid the management of collections particularly the write-off decision.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in banking,Payment patterns,Collection process,Markov chain models,Survival analysis models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One approach to modelling Loss Given Default (LGD), the percentage of the defaulted amount of a loan that a lender will eventually lose is to model the collections process. This is particularly relevant for unsecured consumer loans where LGD depends both on a defaulter's ability and willingness to repay and the lender's collection strategy. When repaying such defaulted loans, defaulters tend to oscillate between repayment sequences where the borrower is repaying every period and non-repayment sequences where the borrower is not repaying in any period. This paper develops two models – one a Markov chain approach and the other a hazard rate approach to model such payment patterns of debtors. It also looks at simplifications of the models where one assumes that after a few repayment and non-repayment sequences the parameters of the model are fixed for the remaining payment and non-payment sequences. One advantage of these approaches is that they show the impact of different write-off strategies. The models are applied to a real case study and the LGD for that portfolio is calculated under different write-off strategies and compared with the actual LGD results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are two major reasons to model the collections process for the recovery of defaulted consumer debt. First the regulations, incorporated in Basel II (BCBS, 2004) and Basel III (BCBS, 2011), on the risk capital that banks must hold required banks to estimate Loss Given Default (LGD) for each segment of their loan portfolio. LGD is the percentage of the debt at default that is still not collected at the end of the collection process. Basel Accord II (BCBS, 2004) suggests three ways of modelling LGD: historical average, regression approaches and modelling the recovery process. For consumer debt, the historic average does not make much sense and the regression approaches lead to poor results with models in the literature having R-squared between 0.05 and 0.22. One reason for these poor results is the non-normal form of the LGD distributions but another significant reason is that LGD depends partially on the debtor's capacity and willingness to repay but also on the collection strategy. The models in this paper allow incorporation of the lender/collector's write-off strategy, which materially affects the resultant LGD. They also allow lenders to identify which among a set of write-off strategies will be most profitable over the whole debt portfolio. This is a second reason for modelling the collections process since lowering LGD affects who should get credit in the first place and at what price.Default is defined as borrowers being 90 days overdue or there is evidence to the lender that the borrowers will not repay. Default triggers the collections process as the lender seeks to recover the debt. Most collections processes measure their success by the Recovery Rate (RR) they achieve, where RR = 1–LGD.The recovery rate depends not only on the debtors’ capacity and willingness to repay but also on the lenders’ actions and their collection policy. Previous models have ignored the lenders’ influence in their models. One such collection action is to write off the loan and make no further attempt to collect. Writing-off is determined by the collector's expectation of future recoveries and the effort in collecting them. Such trade-offs can be used to determine whether the future expected recovery amount including recovery costs would be positive. Currently collectors make such write-off decisions subjectively and are often swayed by end of the quarter financial objectives or the pressure on the collections process. There is currently little modelling support for such actions. As well as estimating Recovery Rate (RR), the models presented here support collectors in assessing this trade-off between recoveries and the effort involved. This trade-off is influenced by the way debtors have already been repaying their debts, the cost of the collection process, and the likely duration until the debt will be repaid. The models allow collectors to have some data driven indication of which write-off policies are most profitable.Provided the debtor is contactable, collections start with an agreement for the debtor to repay a fixed amount every period or to pay off the debt in one payment. What subsequently occurs is that there is an initial sequence of periods of non-payment while the agreement is put into place, followed by a sequence of periods of payment. This may stop and then a sequence of non-payment periods occurs until repayment restarts again. This can be repeated several times throughout the collection process as some of the real data examples in Fig. 1 show. Alternatively the debt may be “cured” in that the repayments made cover the defaulted amount. In this paper we take “cured” to mean the debt is fully repaid, but a minor adjustment of the models would allow “cured” to mean a satisfactory percentage of the debt is repaid or a sufficient number of repayments has been made.This paper introduces two modelling approaches to describe these patterns of repayment and non-repayment. The first is a payment sequence approach which looks at the movements at sequence level between a sequence of payments and a sequence of non-payments. The second is a survival analysis approach, which looks at whether there is a repayment or no repayment in each time period (usually a month). It models how many payments are made in a sequence until the debtor stops paying and how many missed periods occur before they start paying again. Using the average repayment rate per sequence for the first approach and the average repayment rate per period in the second approach, one can calculate the distribution of the overall repayment rate. The models are appropriate for portfolio level decisions and overall LGD rates. To estimate LGD for an individual, one needs to extend the models so the parameters are functions of the individual debtor's characteristics.These approaches allow one to calculate the repayment rate under different write-off strategies as well as the average duration a debtor is in the collection process. This would allow the lender to decide on a suitable trade-off between the future recovery rate and the amount of future effort expended to reach that rate under the different write-off strategies. The results are relevant at the portfolio level since they involve the average recovery rate and the average extra effort involved. The models are not intended to identify the optimal write-off strategy but can be seen as a progress to optimising such decisions.The next section gives an informal description of the data from the case study on which the models will be built. This is the type of data that collectors are now recording on a regular basis. Section 3 discusses the literature on collections processes as well as the use of Markov chain models in consumer lending. Section 4 describes the sequence based Markov chain model where the debtor moves between payment and non-payment sequences. Section 5 applies this model to the case study data to estimate recovery rate, and hence LGD, under simple write-off strategies. Section 6 describes a hazard rate model of the collections process. This involves more estimation than the sequence based model but allows much more complex write-off strategies. In both cases, a full model is outlined together with simplifications of the model which require fewer parameters as they assume that after an initial period the parameters of subsequent payment (and non-payment sequences) are the same. The models in Section 6 are applied to the case study data in Section 7. Finally conclusions are drawn from the models and their results.The data we use in this case study describes the repayment history of 10,000 defaulted personal loans from a UK bank's loan book. These are loans that defaulted between 1988 and 1999 where default was defined as 90 days in arrears. The performance of the loans in the collection process was recorded from the start of 1988 until the end of 2003. The collections policy of the lender was to agree where possible with the debtor an amount that should be repaid each month until the debt was fully paid off. The data recorded whether there was a payment from the debtor in a given month and how much it was for. From that it is possible to see the history of sequences of payment and non-payment as shown in Fig. 1.Fig. 1 shows some examples of the actual payment patterns that occur in the data set we use later in the paper. The white bars are when the debtor is not repaying and the black bars are when the debtor is repaying. As can be seen from this graph, the debtors can go for long periods without paying and then start up again. In all payment patterns, the initial sequence must be of non-repayment since otherwise the debtor would not have been deemed to have defaulted. NoPayjis the jth non-payment sequence and Payjis the jth payment sequence. Some of the debtors never pay back anything after the default as for example debtor number 8. Others pay back part of their debt but are written off when they stop repaying, see for example debtor number 2. A third group pays back all of their debt – debtor number 4 for example, while others are still paying back at the end of the observation period. There are some debtors who are still repaying more than 120 months (10 years) after the default.Recall that all debtors begin in NoPay1(their first non-payment sequence) since all of the debtors in the data set have defaulted. Note that during the time of this sample the definition of default started to be tightened to 90 days overdue. There are only two ways to leave NoPay1. The debtor either has to start paying (Pay1) or gets written off (W). Once the debtor starts paying there are only two ways to leave Pay1. The debtor can either stop paying, in which case they enter NoPay2or they pay off all of their debt and are “cured” (C). In order to calculate the probability of a debtor entering Payjgiven that they are in NoPayj, we take the number of those who reached NoPayjand divide that into the numbers who then enter Payj. This gives the probability P(Payj|NoPayj). Similarly the ratio of the number who reach NoPayj+1divided by those who reached Payj, gives the conditional probability P(NoPayj+1|Payj). These values together with the number N(NoPayi) and N(Payi), which give the number of debtors in each relevant sequence, are given in Table 1. Since these are estimates of the probability of a Bernoulli random variable, the standard deviations, (N(.)P(.)(1–P(.)))0.5are also reported in Table 1.Probabilities like P(Payj+|NoPayj+) or P(NoPay(j+1)+|Payj+) correspond to the calculation where we have taken the weighted average (weighted by number of cases) of the probabilities of the relevant transition for sequence j and all higher sequences. This is equivalent to assuming that all sequences later than the jth one have the same parameters. While there are debtors in the data set that continue on this stop/start payment process up to Pay25, the proportion reaching NoPay11is less than 9%. Also, from Pay4and NoPay4onwards, the transition probabilities are getting quite close. This can be seen in Table 1 where the upper rows of the last column show the Chi-square test results to check if the proportion going from NoPayjto Payjis the same as that going from NoPay(j+1)+to Pay(j+1)+. The lower section of the last column shows the results on the same test comparing the proportion moving from Payjto NoPayj+1is the same as that going from Pay(j+1)+to NoPay(j+2)+. These results show that the parameters for moving from non-payment to payment sequences after the third payment sequence are similar. The probabilities of moving from payment to non-payment sequence are also converging if more slowly. To be conservative, in the full model we assume only that all payment and non-payment sequences after the 10th will have similar parameters to those of Pay10and NoPay10.Table 2 describes the statistics of the total recovery rate distribution for the whole portfolio of defaulted loans under the lender's collection policy over the sample period.The average recovery rate is 31.6 % corresponding to a LGD of 68.4% and the standard deviation was 29.2%. The form of the RR distribution is given by Fig. 2which has the U-shaped distribution common to almost all RR (and LGD) distributions. During the period of this sample, the collector had no fixed policy on writing off debts. Write off was done subjectively when it was felt the collections department was under pressure. It is clear from the examples in Fig. 1 that such an approach allowed repayments to stop and start many times before the debts were written off.The collections data includes loans that defaulted in the period 1988–1994 and one that defaulted in 1995–1998. The first of these was an economic downturn and the second a period of recovery. Table 2 also looks at the differences in the recovery rate statistics for loans defaulting in these two periods. It appears that it is the economic situation in the collections process more than the economic situation at default which affects the collection results. Loans which default in the economic recession pay back a little more in the subsequent recovery than those which default during good economic times. This is seen in Table 2. It may be the case that those who default during a recession are more willing to try and repay when their economic situation improves than those who default in good times.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper discusses a way of modelling Recovery Rates (RR) and hence Loss Given Default (LGD) since LGD = 1–RR for unsecured consumer loans. It models the patterns of how debtors pay back their debt after default. These models not only predict Loss Given Default but they highlight how LGD values depend on the write off policy of the collector. By allowing collectors to estimate both the extra proportion recovered and the extra effort involved if a write-off policy is relaxed, they indicate what write-off strategies are optimal.There are two related models developed in this paper. The first uses the sequences of consecutive payments or consecutive non-payments as the basic units together with the average recovery rate in each payment sequence. Markov chain ideas lead to an overall recovery rate model. The second model uses a discrete hazard rate approach to estimate the chance a defaulter is paying or not paying in a given month. Such a model gives estimates of the duration of each payment or non-payment sequence. Estimating the monthly average recovery rate allows one to estimate the total recovery rate.The first model requires less data to implement and leads to an analytic solution. However the write-off policies one can consider with it are somewhat limited. The second approach involves more parameters and has to be solved iteratively. However it can deal with more complex write-off policies. The write-off policies considered in this paper depend on the current duration of the collections process and the number of times a borrower fails to continue in a payment sequence. The model could also deal with write-off policies which depended on what percentage of the debt had been recovered, the time since the last payment, as well as combinations of these four elements.These models are essentially work in progress and indicate what is possible with this repayment pattern approach. The models operate at the portfolio level, since they deal with average recovery rates and average time in the collections process. They are useful as operations management tools for the collections process. They help the collector decide what the optimal trade-off is between recovery rate and time, effort and cost in the collections process. This leads to decisions on the staffing levels and skills needed for collections.One could extend the models to work at the individual defaulter level. The parameters would then be functions of the debtor's characteristics and the prior performance in collections. This develops the idea of a collection score suggested in Anderson (2007). The models could easily be extended to allow for discounting of the later repayments, and introducing collection costs explicitly. The models in this paper calculate the expected recovery rate and the expected collections effort and allow the lender to determine the appropriate trade-off, rather than requiring explicit collection costs. One could also introduce economic conditions by making the recovery rates and the transition probabilities be functions of economic variables. This would improve the accuracy of the models but must wait until data on collections performance against economic conditions is regularly collected. Thus though these models are some of the first to take a repayment pattern approach to LGD and RR modelling, there are clear indications of how to develop this approach. It has the advantage that it does not depend on the form of the LGD distribution, is able to deal with collector's operating decisions, such as their write-off policy, and could include economic effects. These are three of the issues that cause difficulties in LGD modelling.