@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fast simulated annealing method for batching precedence-constrained customer orders in a warehouse

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We solve the combined precedence-constrained routing and batching problem.Our method compares very well to heuristics from literature and optimal solutions.We save 5000kilometers in travel distance in our sample warehouse over a 3month period.The method is general and not constrained by the warehouse layout.A∗ is used for the routing, and simulated annealing for batching.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heuristics,Logistics,Order picking,Batching,Precedence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Batching customer orders in a warehouse can result in considerable savings in order pickers’ travel distances. Many picker-to-parts warehouses have precedence constraints in picking a customer order. In this paper a joint order-batching and picker routing method is introduced to solve this combined precedence-constrained routing and order-batching problem. It consists of two sub-algorithms: an optimal A∗-algorithm for the routing; and a simulated annealing algorithm for the batching which estimates the savings gained from batching more than two customer orders to avoid unnecessary routing. For batches of three customer orders, the introduced algorithm produces results with an error of less than 1.2% compared to the optimal solution. It also compares well to other heuristics from literature. A data set from a large Finnish order picking warehouse is rerouted and rebatched resulting in savings of over 5000kilometres or 16% in travel distance in 3months compared to the current method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Order picking is the single most important process in distribution centers. It is also the most laborious one, responsible for a substantial part of the distribution center’s total costs, with estimates as high as 55% (Drury, 1988) to 65% (Coyle, Bardi, & Langley, 1996) mentioned in the literature. Although advances in technology have made the picking process more efficient and the actual percentage of the total costs is most probably less than the figures above indicate, it is still substantial. Travel time is the largest component of the order picking time, with a contribution of up to 50% (Tompkins, White, Bozer, & Tanchoco, 2003). Much research has been devoted to methods reducing order pickers’ travel times, including modifying warehouse layout, using a different storage policy, batching orders, and routing pickers. In this paper, we focus on combined picker routing and order batching.Our study is inspired by a picker-to-parts order picking process in a large retail warehouse in Finland. In this warehouse, at most three customer orders (or orders for short) can be batched in a single pick tour, each possibly for a different customer (i.e., a store) and a different delivery location within the warehouse. Each customer order has to be picked in a fixed sequence, due to family grouping in the company’s stores. The problem of batching orders and routing pickers while respecting precedence constraints of products is common, particularly in retail organisations, but such restrictions may also play a role in other warehouses (Dekker, De Koster, Roodbergen, & Van Kalleveen, 2004; Chan & Kumar, 2008). Precedence constraints may vary in nature. They may be due to weight restrictions (heavy products at the bottom of the roll container), fragility (light at the top), shape and size (big boxes at the bottom), stackability, but also preferred unloading sequence due to family grouping on the customer’s shelves. Although order batching and picker routing have received quite some attention in the literature, the combined problem of order batching and picker routing while respecting the precedence constraints of the products (and in our problem, including potential multiple drop-off points in a route) has not received much attention.Batching orders and routing pickers while respecting precedence constraints is complex. Order batching is NP-hard for batches of size three or higher (Gademann & Van de Velde, 2005). Routing pickers while respecting precedence constraints has complexity of O(N2(P+1)N) (Psaraftis, 1980a), where N is the number of customer orders in the batch and P is the maximum number of items in an order. Finding exact solutions for large orders and large batches becomes rapidly intractable. Our reference company has 2000 orders per day and up to 50 products per order, which have to be batched in batches of three orders. As the problem has to be solved multiple times per day and because of the problem’s complexity, exact computation of the order batching is not feasible and thus a heuristic method is used.We solve the problem using a generic solution method. For the batching, we use a simulated annealing-based combinatorial search algorithm based on maximising total savings in travel distance. Batching aims to reduce total travel distance by combining multiple similar orders (which have to visit overlapping parts of the warehouse). Selecting the orders to be batched is based on comparing all pairs of orders and estimating the savings due to combining a larger number of orders. This reduces computation times substantially, while the error compared to optimal combinations is within 1.2%. The routing can be solved using an A∗-type shortest path algorithm. The method is exact and general, not constrained by the particular warehouse layout.Our contribution is a structured approach for the joint order batching and picker routing problem in warehouses with any layout or any strict sequence constraint. The method is fast, and compares well to optimal solutions and heuristics from literature. In our reference case, travel distance savings of nearly 16% could be achieved.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
