@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A heuristic solution technique to attain the minimal total cost bounds of transporting a homogeneous product with varying demands and supplies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A transportation model by varying supplies–demands is extended including inventory.Deficiency of a current method in finding upper minimal cost bound is demonstrated.A better heuristic solution technique in finding minimal cost bounds is presented.Promising performance of our technique in finding the upper bound is shown.Reasonable changes in the minimal cost bounds for inventory inclusion are revealed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heuristics,Transportation cost,Inventory cost,Total cost bound,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Transportation of a product from multi-source to multi-destination with minimal total transportation cost plays an important role in logistics and supply chain management. Researchers have given considerable attention in minimizing this cost with fixed supply and demand quantities. However, these quantities may vary within a certain range in a period due to the variation of the global economy. So, the concerned parties might be more interested in finding the lower and the upper bounds of the minimal total costs with varying supplies and demands within their respective ranges for proper decision making. This type of transportation problem has received attention of only one researcher, who formulated the problem and solved it by LINGO. We demonstrate that this method fails to obtain the correct upper bound solution always. Then we extend this model to include the inventory costs during transportation and at destinations, as they are interrelated factors. The number of choices of supplies and demands within their respective ranges increases enormously as the number of suppliers and buyers increases. In such a situation, although the lower bound solution can be obtained methodologically, determination of the upper bound solution becomes an NP hard problem. Here we carry out theoretical analyses on developing the lower and the upper bound heuristic solution techniques to the extended model. A comparative study on solutions of small size numerical problems shows promising performance of the current upper bound technique. Another comparative study on results of numerical problems demonstrates the effect of inclusion of the inventory costs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In today’s competitive business environment, integrated suppliers–buyers supply chain management is a major concern. Two of the key issues in this supply chain management are the transportation and the inventory costs. To achieve significant savings, these two issues should be integrated instead of treating them separately. The transportation problem deals with transporting a homogeneous product from multi-source to multi-destination, with the minimal total cost of transportation subject to the satisfaction of the available supply and the demand quantities. However, each of the supply and demand quantities of a product may vary within a certain range in a period due to the variation of the global economy. Following this variation, the minimal total transportation cost also varies within a certain range. So, the concerned parties might be more interested in finding the lower and the upper bounds of the minimal total costs for better decision making specifically, for proper investment and return. But the number of choices of supply and demand quantities within their respective ranges increases enormously as the number of suppliers or buyers increases. However, this type of transportation problem can be reduced to a linear programming problem following Liu (2003)’s approach, and then it can be further reduced to the minimum cost flow problem (Ahuja, Magnanti, & Orlin, 1993). Thereafter, a polynomial time algorithm can be applied to this minimum cost flow problem for finding the lower bound of the minimal total costs. Thus, in such a situation, although the lower bound of the transportation problem can be found methodologically, determination of the upper bound of the minimal total costs becomes an NP hard problem. Inventory costs during transportation and in meeting demand from destinations are essential in this system, and hence these should be considered along with the transportation cost. The format of the extended transportation model including these inventory costs is equivalent to the original one of Liu (2003) (as shown later in Section 2.4). In this situation, development of a heuristic solution method to the extended transportation model in finding the upper bound of the minimal total costs is desirable. Although a solution method to the problem without taking into account the mentioned inventories is available, here we demonstrate that this does not lead to the correct upper bound solution always. Therefore, this study mainly considers an integration of the transportation and the inventory costs in transporting a homogeneous product from multiple suppliers to multiple buyers, and development of a better heuristic solution technique to this integrated supply chain problem in finding the upper bound of the minimal total costs.Hitchcock (1941) formulated the transportation problem initially. Then Charnes and Copper (1954) developed the stepping stone method for solution of the transportation problem. Srinivasan and Thompson (1977) described two new primal basic methods – the cell and area cost operator algorithms for solving the transportation problem. Søren (1978) explained how to use the triple index and the threaded index for storing the basis-tree when applying the primal, dual or primal–dual simplex method to solve a classical transportation model. Donald and Haluk (1997) showed that general transportation algorithms automatically yield solution in integer values with integer demand and supply quantities. Sharma and Sharma (2000) proposed a new solution procedure to solve the incapacitated transportation problem. Sharma and Prasad (2003) presented a heuristic that obtained a very good initial basic feasible solution to the transportation problem in O (n3) time. Veena Adlakha and Kowalski (2009) proposed an alternative algorithm to obtain the minimal total cost solution. Saleem and Imad (2012) developed a hybrid two-stage algorithm (GA-RSM) to find the minimal total cost solution to the transportation problem. The first stage used genetic algorithm (GA) to find an improved initial basic feasible solution, and the second stage utilized this solution as a starting point in the revised simplex method (RSM) to get the minimal total cost solution to the problem. Aizemberg, Kramer, Pessoa, and Uchoa (2014) studied tactical models of scheduling the shipments of a crude oil through routes linking platforms (offshore production sites) and terminals (onshore consumer sites) with the minimum transportation cost. Vancroonenburg, Croce, Goossens, and Spieksma (2014) studied the Red–Blue Transportation Problem (Red–Blue TP), a generalization of the transportation problem where supply nodes are partitioned into two sets. Here, they provided two integer-programming formulations for Red–Blue TP and showed that one of them is strictly stronger than the other. They also presented a maximization variant of Red–Blue TP (by modifying the objective function of the Red–Blue TP to maximization) and thus provided three approximation algorithms for Max–Red–Blue TP. All of these solution procedures to the transportation problem were developed with fixed supply and demand quantities. But a little attention has also been given in developing transportation models with variable parameter values. Das, Goswami, and Alam (1999) proposed a solution for solving the multi-objective transportation problem, where the coefficients of terms in the objective functions and parameter values at the sources and the destinations were given in an interval. Safi and Razmjoo (2013) focused on the transportation problem where a fixed charge was added with the transportation cost per unit, and parameters values were given in intervals. They proposed two solution procedures to this problem. Note that both Das et al. (1999) and Safi and Razmjoo (2013) did not make any attempt to find the lower and the upper bounds of the minimal total cost following the parameter values in intervals. Liu (2003) investigated the transportation problem when the demand and supply quantities were varying within their respective ranges. Following these variations the minimal total cost were also varied within an interval. So, he constructed a pair of mathematical programs where at least one of the supply or the demand was varying, to calculate the lower and the upper bounds of the total transportation cost.A considerable amount of research dealing with the management of the integrated supplier–buyer system involving joint inventory and transportation cost has emerged in the literature. Ben-Daya and Hariga (2004), Hill (1999), Hill and Omar (2006), Hoque and Goyal (2000), Kaya, Kubalı, and Örmeci (2013), Stanisław (2003), and Zhou and Wang (2007) all have considered inventory and transportation cost in the single-vendor single-buyer integrated inventory system. Banerjee and Burton (1994), Burns, Hall, Blumenfeld, and Daganzo (1985), Chan and Kingsman (2007), Darwish and Odah (2010), Hoque (2008, 2011a, 2011b), Kang and Kim (2010), Lu (1995), Shen, Coullard, and Daskin (2003), Yang and Wee (2002), and Zavanella and Zanoni (2009) have taken into account inventory and transportation costs in the integrated single-vendor multi-buyer system. Ben-khedher and Yano (1994) studied the problem of scheduling the delivery of multiple items from a single supplier to a manufacturer. Then, they proposed a heuristic solution approach to minimize the sum of the transportation and the inventory costs. Cetinkaya and Lee (2000) presented an analytical model for coordinating the inventory and the transportation decision in a vendor-managed inventory system. Chan, Muriel, Shen, Levi, and Teo (2002) proposed a model to design simple inventory policies and transportation strategies to satisfy time-varying demands over a finite time horizon, while minimizing the system wide cost by taking advantage of quantity discounts in the transportation cost structure. Shu, Teo, and Shen (2005) studied stochastic transportation–inventory network design problem involving one supplier and multiple retailers. Berman and Wang (2006) considered the problem of selecting the appropriate distribution strategy for delivering a family of products from a set of suppliers to a set of plants so that the total transportation and inventory costs are minimized. Ertogral, Darwish, and Ben-Daya (2007) incorporated the transportation cost explicitly into a model and developed optimal solution procedures for solving the integrated model. Kutanoglu and Lohiya (2008) presented an optimization-based model to gain insights into the integrated inventory and transportation problem for a single-echelon, multi-facility service parts logistics system with time-based service level constraints. Christoph (2011) focused on a single buyer sourcing a single product from a pool of heterogeneous suppliers. The author tackled the supplier selection and lot size decision with the objective of minimizing the total system cost of inventory, transportation, setup and ordering. Janeiro, Jurado, Meca, and Mosquera (2013) proposed a new cost allocation rule for inventory transportation systems. Glock and Kim (2014) studied shipment consolidation in multiple vendors and a single buyer integrated inventory model. In developing the model, the buyer was assumed to consolidate deliveries by assigning vendors to groups to reduce transportation and handling costs.Researchers have given considerable attention to the single-supplier single-buyer, single-supplier–multi-buyer and multi-supplier–single-buyer systems involving the joint inventory and transportation cost. Although the multi-source multi-destination system has received some attention, only Liu (2003) developed a method to find both the lower and the upper bounds of the minimal total costs of transporting a homogeneous product in this system with variable supply and demand quantities. However, we demonstrate here that Liu (2003)’s method is unable to provide the exact upper minimal total cost bound solution. Therefore, we intend to develop a better heuristic solution technique to find the upper minimal total cost bound to the problem along with a heuristic solution technique to obtain the lower minimal cost bound. In developing the heuristics, we have proved theoretically that it is possible to obtain the best upper minimal total cost bound by reduction in any pair of supplier–buyer’s supply–demand quantities by the same integral amount. Analogously, in case of finding the lower minimal total cost bound, it can be proved that it is possible to obtain the best lower minimal total cost bound by increment in any pair of supplier–buyer’s supply–demand quantities by the same integral amount. Based on these notions, two heuristic based algorithms for finding the lower and the upper minimal total cost bounds are developed separately, and coded in MATLAB 7.10. Algorithm 1 in finding the upper minimal total cost bound provides better results than Liu (2003)’s approach for small-size studied numerical problems, whereas Algorithm 2 in finding the lower minimal total cost bound provides the same result as found by Liu (2003). However, Algorithm 1 does not perform well on one of the large-size studied numerical problems. Although inventory costs during transportation and at destinations seem to be an important factor in deciding the minimal total cost bounds of the problem, Liu (2003) has not taken it into account in his model. We extend his model to include these inventory costs along with the transportation cost. The solution technique to the extended model is illustrated with numerical problems. Then we use the developed heuristic techniques to find the lower and the upper minimal total cost bounds to the extended model. Benefit of this extended model is shown by reasonable changes in the minimal total cost bounds for some numerical problems, obtained following Liu’ (2003) model.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 deals with the description of Liu’s (2003) model and its extension. Deficiency of his model is demonstrated in this section. In section 3 developments of two heuristic solution approaches are proposed to find the lower and the upper minimal total cost bounds. In Section 4 the proposed heuristic technique in finding the upper minimal total cost bound is compared to Liu’s (2003) approach. Conclusion by highlighting the limitations and future research scope on the topic is drawn in Section 5.Assumptions(i)A homogeneous product is transported from multi-supplier to multi-buyer.Demand of the product is deterministic integer and variable over time.The total supply is an integer and must be greater than or equal to the total demandEach of the buyers has enough storage capacity to accommodate the required inventory.A transport vehicle is available to transport required shipment quantities.Total number of supply nodes (suppliers);Total number of demand nodes (buyers);Supply quantity (in units) from ith supplier;The demand (in units) per unit time to jth buyer;Unit transportation cost from ith supplier to jth buyer;Lower bound of supplies from the ith supplier;Upper bound of supplies from the ith supplier;Lower bound of demands of the jth buyer;Upper bound of demands of the jth buyer;Number of units transported from ith supplier to jth buyer.Liu (2003) dealt with finding respectively the lower bound,Z̲and the upper bound,Z‾of the minimal total transportation costs of transporting a homogenous product from multi-source to multi-destination with varying supplies and demands within the ranges,Si̲⩽siˆ⩽Si‾;∀i=1,2,…,mandDj̲⩽djˆ⩽Dj‾∀j=1,2,…,nas follows:(1)Z̲=Minx∑i=1m∑j=1ncijxijS.t.∑j=1nxij⩽siˆ;i=1,2,…,m∑i=1mxij=dˆj;j=1,2,…,n∑i=1msˆi⩾∑j=1ndˆjxij⩾0,∀i,j.(2)Z‾=Maxv,w-∑i=1msˆivi+∑j=1ndˆjwjS.t.-vi+wj⩽cij,i=1,2,…,m,j=1,2,…,n,∑i=1msˆi⩾∑j=1ndˆjvi⩾0,wjisunrestrictedinsign∀i,j.Then the author used LINGO solver to solve the mathematical models (1) and (2) for obtaining the lower and the upper minimal total transportation cost bounds.Here we demonstrate that the Liu’s approach does not provide the exact upper minimal total cost bound all the time. For the 2-supplier 3-buyer numerical problem, whereD̲1=45,D‾1=90;D̲2=30,D‾2=60;D̲3=60,D‾3=120;S̲1=60,S‾1=120;S̲2=75,S‾2=150;C11=15,C12=90,C13=88;C21=75,C22=80,C23=8;the upper minimal total transportation cost bound(z¯)obtained by applying Liu’s approach is 7410 and occurs at x11=90, x12=30, x13=0,x21=0, x22=30, x23=120 withs1ˆ=120,s2ˆ=150,d1ˆ=90,d2ˆ=60, andd3ˆ=120. However, for the same numerical problem but withs1ˆ=60,s2ˆ=150,d1ˆ=90,d2ˆ=60, andd3ˆ=60, LINGO solver leads to the minimal total transportation cost, 8430 along with x11=60, x12=0, x13=0 and x21=30, x22=60, x23=60. Thus, Liu’s approach misses certain supply and demand parameter values within their respective ranges for which the higher upper total transportation cost bound solution could be found. This is demonstrated by placing the results of four 2-suppliers 3-buyers numerical problems in Table 1. For these numerical problems, the lower and the upper bounds of the demands and the supply quantities are the same as given previously. The concerned values of ci,jare given in Table 1.For each of the numerical problems in Table 1, the minimal total transportation cost found with different values ofsiˆ&djˆkeeping them within their respective ranges by LINGO solver, is higher than the upper minimal total transportation cost bound obtained by Liu’s (2003) approach. These results clearly demonstrate that Liu’s approach is unable to provide the correct upper minimal total transportation cost bound.In extending Liu’s (2003) model we make an additional assumption as follows:Supplies from suppliers reach to a buyer at the same time.Additional notations:ti jTransportation time from ith supplier to jth buyerhjHolding cost for the jth buyer per unit per unit timeTotal cost=transportation cost+inventory cost during transportation+inventory cost at the buyers. Inventory cost during transportation is given by∑i=1m∑j=1nxijtijhj.Inventory of the product created at the buyer j is given by the area of the triangle in Fig. 1:Thus the inventory cost at the buyer j is12∑i=1mxijhj, and hence the total inventory cost at all buyers is given by12∑j=1n∑i=1mxijhj.So, the extended objective function becomes∑i=1m∑j=1ncijxij+12∑i=1m∑j=1nxijhj+∑i=1m∑j=1nxijtijhj=∑i=1m∑j=1n[cij+hj/2+tijhj]xij=∑i=1m∑j=1nAijxij;where,Aij=cij+hj/2+tijhj.So, our extended model is to minimize the modified objective function subject to the constraints in Liu’s model. Note that this extended model transforms to Liu’s model when ti j=0, hj=0.It has been proved in Appendix A that if the total supply of the suppliers is higher than the total demand of the buyers, then it is possible that the minimal total cost obtained by reducing both the supply and the demand of any pair of a supplier and a buyer by the same integral amount is greater than or equal to the minimal total cost obtained by reducing them by different integral amounts. Based on this notion, the heuristic solution technique (Algorithm 1) for finding the upper minimal total cost bound is described below.Algorithm 1A Heuristic to the extended model in finding the upper minimal total cost bound.Step 1:Initially, by settingsiˆ=Si‾&djˆ=Dj‾;i=1,2,…,m& j=1, 2, …, n, the minimal total cost “C00” of the extended transportation model is calculated. Then set UB(temp):=C00 and setX(temp)≔(X‾)mxnwhich is the upper bound solution associated with C00.Step 2:Set i=1 & j=1.Step 3:Set k=1.Step 4:If bothsiˆ≠Si̲&djˆ≠Dj̲, then reduce bothsiˆ&djˆby 1 and solve the resulted mathematical model and find the minimal total costCijk(say) & its corresponding solutionsXijkmxn(say); and go to step 5.Else, Ifsiˆ=Si̲&djˆ≠Dj̲orsiˆ=Si̲&djˆ=Dj̲, then go to step 10Else go to step 9.Step 5:Ifk<minSi‾-Si̲,Dj‾-Dj̲, then set k=k+1 and go to step 4Step 6:FindCij=MaxCijk:k=1,2,3,…,minSi‾-Si̲,Dj‾-Dj̲& its corresponding solutions (Xi j)m×n; and the corresponding supply and the demand parameter values as ai& bjrespectively.Step 7:IfCi j>UB(temp), then set UB(temp):=Ci j;setsiˆ=ai(<Si‾)&djˆ=bj(<Dj‾)where ai& bjare associated with Ci j; set X(temp)=(Xij)m×nwhich is the upper bound solutions associated with Ci j.Step 8:If bothsiˆ≠Si̲&djˆ≠Dj̲, then go to the next step. Else go to step 4.Step 9:Ifj<n then set j=j+1 and go to step 3.Step 10:If i<m then set i=i+1 and go to step 3.Step 11:Stop. Find the current UB(temp) as the upper minimal total cost bound, the corresponding X(temp) as its solution, and the correspondingsiˆ&djˆ;i=1,2,…,m& j=1, 2, …, n as its supply and demand quantities.Note that this algorithm becomes an algorithm to Liu’s model when tij=0, hj=0.Similarly, in finding the lower minimal total cost bound it can be proved that if the total supply of the suppliers is higher than the total demand of the buyers, then it is possible that the minimal total cost obtained by increasing both the supply and the demand of any pair of a supplier and a buyer by the same integral amount is less than or equal to the minimal total cost obtained by increasing them by different integral amounts. This can easily be proved by following the proof of theorem 1 shown in the Appendix A. Based on this notion, the heuristic solution technique (Algorithm 2) for finding the lower minimal total cost bound is described below.Algorithm 2A heuristic to the extended model in finding the lower minimal total cost bound.Step 1:Initially, by settingsiˆ=Si̲&djˆ=Dj̲;i=1,2,…,m& j=1, 2, …, n, the minimal total cost “D00” of the extended transportation model is calculated. Set LB(temp)=D00 and set X(temp):= (X)m×nwhich is the lower bound solution associated with D00.Step 2:Set i=1 & j=1.Step 3:Set k=1.Step 4:If bothsiˆ≠Si‾&djˆ≠Dj‾, then increase bothsiˆ&djˆby 1 and solve the resulted mathematical model and find the minimal total costCijk(say) & its corresponding solutionsXijkm×n(say); and go to step 5.Else, Ifsiˆ=Si‾&djˆ≠Dj‾orsiˆ=Si‾&djˆ=Dj‾then go to step 10Else go to step 9.Step 5:Ifk<minSi‾-Si̲,Dj‾-Dj̲, then set k=k+1 and go to step 4.Step 6:FindCij=MinCijk:k=1,2,3,…,minSi‾-Si̲,Dj‾-Dj̲& its corresponding solution (Xij)m×n; and the corresponding supply and demand parameter values as pi& qjrespectively.Step 7:IfCi j<LB(temp), then setLB(temp)≔Cij;siˆ=pi>Si̲&djˆ=qj>Dj̲where pi& qjare associated with Ci j; X(temp)=(Xi j)m×nwhich is the lower bound solution associated with Ci j.Step 8:If bothsiˆ≠Si‾&djˆ≠Dj‾then go to the next step. Elsego to step 4.Step 9:If j<n then set j=j+1 and go to step 3.Step 10:If i<m then set i=i+1 and go to step 3.Step 11:If the current LB(temp)≠D00 then go to step 19. Else go to the next step.Step 12:Set i=1.Step 13:Set g=1.Step 14:By keepingdjˆ=Dj̲∀jas fixed, increasesiˆ=Si̲by 1 and solve the resulted mathematical model and find the minimal total costCig(say).Step 15:Ifg<Si‾-Si̲then set g=g+1 and go to step 14.Step 16:FindCi=MinCig:g=1,2,3,…,Si‾-Si̲& its corresponding solution (Xi)m×n.Step 17:IfCi<LB(temp), then set LB(temp):=Ci;siˆ=hi>Si̲where hiis associated with Ci; X(temp)=(Xi)m×nwhich is the lower bound solution associated with Ci.Step 18:If i<m then set i=i+1 and go to step 13.Step 19:Stop. Take the current LB(temp) as the lower minimal total cost bound, the corresponding X(temp) as its solution, and the correspondingsiˆ&djˆ;i=1,2,…,m& j=1, 2, …, n as its supply and demand quantities.Note that this algorithm becomes an algorithm to Liu’s model when tij=0, hj=0.Following the Algorithm 1 developed in the previous section a MATLAB computational program for finding the upper minimal total cost bound of the Transportation Problem with varying demand and supply (TPVDS) is developed, which is given in Appendix B. Utilizing the provided MATLAB computational program in Appendix B with the repeatedly called function “Solve_LP (a,b,A,B,f,lb) ” designed as in Appendix C, we find the upper minimal total cost bound solutions by this computer program to all the problems in Tables 2 and 3.The 2-supplier 3-buyer numerical problem originally solved by Liu (2003) is again solved by following the algorithms developed in this paper. The lower and the upper bounds are found to be the same as obtained by Liu. However, we find the upper bounds of the minimal total costs with varying supply and demand quantities for additional eight 2-suppliers 3-buyers numerical problems, by applying Algorithm 1 of this paper and the Liu’s (2003) approach. For these numerical problems, the lower and the upper bounds of the demands and the supply quantities are the same as given previously in section 2.3. In all cases, our method leads to the significantly higher upper bound solutions. Comparative upper bound solutions along with the concerned values of ci,jare given in Table 2. In the table the difference between the upper bounds obtained by our method and the corresponding one by Liu (2003), is expressed as a percentage of the Liu’s one. This is shown at the right hand column of Table 2.The right hand column of Table 2 clearly demonstrates that the Algorithm 1 in this paper leads to the significant percentage increase in the upper bound of the minimal total cost in each case. However, the lower bounds of the minimal total costs for each of these eight numerical problems found by applying Algorithm 2 and the Liu’s approach are found to be the same. Comparative upper bounds of the minimal total transportation costs obtained by Algorithm 1 and Liu’s approach are depicted by bar charts in Fig. 2.The bar charts in Fig. 2 clearly show that the Algorithm 1 leads to higher upper bound of the minimal total transportation costs. Thus the Algorithm 1 performs much better than Liu’s (2003) approach in getting upper bound of the minimal total transportation costs with varying supply and demand quantities for the studied numerical problems. In addition, both the Algorithm 1 and the Liu’s approach were applied to many problem instances. In all cases, Algorithm 1 either leads to the same upper bound solution as the corresponding one obtained by Liu’s approach or better than that. But, the Algorithm 2 performs the same as Liu’s approach in all those cases.To evaluate the performance of the developed heuristics in this paper in obtaining the upper bound minimal total cost solution to large size problems, here we also carry out comparative study of our heuristic method with Liu’s one on the upper total cost bounds found for four large size numerical problems. Data for these numerical problems are given in Appendix D and the comparative results are presented in Table 3.It can easily be seen from Table 3 that the upper bound solutions to each of the problems 1–3 found by both the methods are the same, whereas the solution to problem 4 found by our method is inferior to the corresponding solution obtained by Liu’s approach. However, we have solved many large-size numerical problems by both the methods and the obtained solutions are found to be the same in all cases except problem 4 in Table 3. It should be pointed out here that the same lower bound of the minimal total costs for each of the numerical problems is found by Algorithm 2 of this paper and Liu’s approach.To show the benefit of the extended model, here we solve both the extended model and the extended model without including inventories on many numerical problems following Algorithms 1 and 2. For each of the numerical problems, the minimal total cost bounds for the extended model are found to vary from the original one up to a certain range. These variations are shown for the three numerical problems in Table 4. Data for these numerical problems are as follows:Numerical problems 1:Datafor2-suppliers 3-buyers numerical problem.ci,jand the lower and the upper bounds of the demands and the supply quantities are the same as given in the Liu’s (2003) paper.Numerical problems 2:Datafor3-supplier 4-buyer numerical problemD1̲=45,D1‾=90;D2̲=40,D2‾=80;D3̲=60,D3‾=120;D4̲=90,D4‾=160;S1̲=60,S1‾=120;S2̲=75,S2‾=150;S3̲=100,S3‾=180;C11=4,C21=6,C31=5;C12=5,C22=6,C32=6;C13=8,C23=10,C33=5;C14=8,C24=7,C34=8;Numerical problems 3:Datafor2-suppliers 3-buyers numerical problem.C11=15, C12=10, C13=20; C21=15, C22=10, C23=40; the lower and the upper bounds of the demands and the supply quantities are the same as given in the Liu’s (2003) paper.As can be seen from Table 4, the lower bound of the minimal total costs obtained for the extended model increases by 413.55, 415.87 and 224.4 respectively from the corresponding one in the extended model without including inventories. The upper bound of the minimal total costs for these example problems found following the extended model also increases by 597.4, 1007.73 and 897.4 respectively from the corresponding one in the extended model without including inventories. These increases in the lower and the upper bounds of the minimal total costs are due to the inclusion of the inventory costs during transportation and at destinations with the transportation cost in the extended model. Thus these results demonstrate that the inventory cost during transportation and at destinations plays a significant role in deciding the lower and the upper bounds of the minimal total costs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
