@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supply chain design for unlocking the value of remanufacturing under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Present an integrated model of marketing choices and supply chain design decisions.A new case on BSH closed-loop supply chain is developed, and presented in detail.“Remanufacture all” is optimal if customers highly value remanufactured products.Market size uncertainty has the most profound effect on profitability of remanufacturing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Uncertainty,Product recovery,Closed-loop supply chains,Remanufacturing,WEEE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Owing to the technological innovations and the changing consumer perceptions, remanufacturing has gained vast economic potential in the past decade. Nevertheless, major OEMs, in a variety of sectors, remain reluctant about establishing their own remanufacturing capability and use recycling as a means to satisfy the extended producer responsibility. Their main concerns seem to be the potential for the cannibalization of their primary market by remanufactured products and the uncertainty in the return stream in terms of its volume and quality. This paper aims at assisting OEMs in the development of their remanufacturing strategy, with an outlook of pursuing the opportunities presented by the inherent uncertainties. We present a two-stage stochastic closed-loop supply chain design model that incorporates the uncertainties in the market size, the return volume as well as the quality of the returns. The proposed framework also explicitly represents the difference in customer valuations of the new and the remanufactured products. The arising stochastic mixed-integer quadratic program is not amenable to solution via commercial software. Therefore, we develop a solution procedure by integrating sample average approximation with the integer L-shaped method. In order to gather solid managerial insights, we present a case study based on BSH, a leading producer of home appliances headquartered in Germany. Our analysis reveals that, while the reverse network configuration is rather robust, the extent of the firm’s involvement in remanufacturing is quite sensitive to the costs associated with each product recovery option as well as the relative valuation of the remanufactured products by the customers. In the context of the BSH case, we find that among the sources of uncertainty, the market size has the most profound effect on the overall profitability, and it is desirable to build sufficient expansion flexibility in the forward network configuration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite the increasing awareness concerning the benefits of recovering the remaining economic value in the end-of-use and end-of-life products, recycling the material content of the returns continues to be a more prevalent form of product recovery. Remanufacturing the returned products so that they perform as good as their new versions constitutes a higher form of recovery that is not used to the extent desired by the policy makers in many cases (Atasu, Van Wassenhove, & Sarvary, 2009). In Europe, for example, the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive of 2002 has been widely criticized as a “recycling law”, and consequently its recast in 2012 aims at increasing the remanufacturing levels, among other improvements.11Available at http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/weee/index_en.htm.The firm has an option of using the third-party or developing in-house capability for remanufacturing. The extent of OEMs’ voluntary involvement in remanufacturing, however, often depends on the economic benefits they expect directly (or indirectly) out of this activity (Guide, Teunter, & Wassenhove, 2003b). An important factor that clouds the OEMs’ capability to assess the potential benefits of engaging in remanufacturing is the uncertainty in the volume, quality and timing of the returns. Particularly, for the economic viability of in-house remanufacturing, which we study in this paper, the firm needs to ascertain that there would be sufficient volume of returns eligible for remanufacturing. In Section 6, we discuss one firm (BSH Bosch und Siemens Hausgeräte GmbH), which is currently investigating the possibility of developing in-house remanufacturing capability for their commercial returns. Other examples of firms that do not use third-party remanufacturing services include Caterpillar, Hewlett-Packard and Xerox.Understanding the difference in the customers’ valuation of the new and the remanufactured products is crucial for assessing the profit potential of remanufacturing. Though customers differ in how much they are willing to pay for the remanufactured goods, the initial (and often uninformed) perceptions of products containing used components are generally negative (Ferrer & Whybark, 2000).22Some exceptions are retreaded tires for commercial fleet companies and Kodak’s single-use camera (Atasu, Guide, & Wassenhove, 2010; Esenduran, Kemahlioğlu-Ziya, & Swaminathan, 2012; Souza, 2008).In addition, the OEMs constantly introduce new products in an effort to sustain/increase their market share, which pronounces the customers’ depreciation of the value of the remanufactured products. For example, the introduction of energy-efficient appliances undermines the market value of remanufactured merchandise. Thus, OEMs usually have poor knowledge of their potential secondary market demand.A firm’s product recovery strategy specifies its level of commitment to each recovery option; particularly, remanufacturing and recycling. This decision is intertwined with the configuration of the firm’s closed-loop supply chain (CLSC) under the extended producer responsibility laws. Atasu and Wassenhove (2012) point out that the e-waste network design problem is strongly restricted by environmental legislations, such as recycling technology standards and landfill bans. In this paper, we focus on return streams with both a healthy secondary market for remanufactured products and a profit potential in the recycling market. Such return streams typically include end-of-use and commercial returns. In this context, CLSC design is a complex problem that comprises determining the optimal number and location of the distribution centers (DCs) and the return centers (RCs), as well as the extent of the OEM’s involvement in remanufacturing and recycling activities.The primary objective of this paper is to develop an integrative, yet practical, decision support tool for the formation of a product recovery strategy under the variety of uncertainties faced by the OEM’s top management. We utilize a profit-maximization framework so as to incentivize the OEM’s voluntary engagement in remanufacturing under uncertainty. This requires the estimation of the potential revenues from the primary and secondary markets as well as the costs of the development and operation of the firm’s CLSC. Traditionally, the marketing aspects mentioned above have been studied through stylized models, whereas the network design problems have been represented by mathematical programming formulations. In this paper, we integrate these two modeling approaches by incorporating a stylized representation of the firm’s primary and secondary markets in the mathematical programming formulation developed for CLSC design under uncertainty. Without this integration one would fail to consider the potential profitability of remanufacturing in making the strategic product recovery and CLSC design decisions.We seek answers to the following primary research questions: How do uncertainties influence the profitability of closed-loop supply chains? and How does variable cost structure as well as consumer valuation of remanufactured products influence the product recovery strategy in uncertain business environments? In addition, we explore the robustness of the CLSC configuration under uncertainties. We propose an integrated stochastic CLSC design model (IS-CLSC) that explicitly considers different sources of uncertainty as well as the difference in customer valuation of new and remanufactured products. The proposed model enables us to optimize the extent of an OEM’s involvement in each product recovery option and to determine the most appropriate facility network configuration for supporting this strategy.One of the main contributions of our work is the incorporation of both primary and secondary markets as well as the product recovery choices in a detailed network design model under uncertainty. As we summarize in the next section, to the best of our knowledge all the prevailing work on CLSC design under uncertainty focuses on cost minimization, and hence ignores the impact of the product markets. The literature that explicitly represents the market segments for the new and remanufactured products and the recovery options, however, mostly comprises stylized models based on broad assumptions and lacking a detailed representation of the dynamics of the network design decisions. The arising stochastic mixed integer quadratic formulation is not amenable to solution by commercial software. As a methodological contribution, we propose an integration of the integer L-shaped decomposition with sample average approximation that enables us to use a large number of scenarios in our analyses.We also developed a new case based on BSH Bosch und Siemens Hausgeräte GmbH’s operation in Germany so as to illustrate the proposed methodology and develop managerial insights. BSH is currently the largest manufacturer of home appliances in Europe and one of the leading companies in the sector worldwide. The case study is inspired by a real-life problem encountered by BSH concerning the decision whether or not to offer remanufactured products within Germany’s unique WEEE take-back scheme. The results provide a solid understanding of the impact of different sources of uncertainty on the CLSC configuration. Also, we shed light on the conditions under which BSH needs to develop in-house remanufacturing capabilities in response to the trend of tightening environmental regulations.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we position our research in the context of the relevant literature. In Section 3 the IS-CLSC model is presented. We describe the proposed solution method in Section 4 and report on its performance in Section 5. In Section 6, we present the BSH case study in order to highlight the features of the proposed model and show the impact of uncertainties on the performance of a real supply chain. Unlike a significant majority of the earlier papers, this new case study is presented at a level of detail that would enable the readers to re-construct the problem instances. In Section 7, we analyze the impact of uncertainties on network structure, overall profitability and recovery strategy. The computation experiments reported in this section enable us to provide substantial answers to the research questions stated above. The paper ends with managerial insights and our concluding remarks in Section 8.Our research draws on two separate streams of literature: remanufacturing and CLSC network design. In this section, we provide a review of the prominent research in each stream and position our research at the point of their intersection. We begin with an overview of the relevant remanufacturing literature.Remanufacturing has received attention in the academic literature for more than a decade. The existing literature has addressed a variety of problems spanning from strategic to tactical level issues. In order to satisfy the immediate need for firms, the operational aspects of remanufacturing such as inventory control (Ahiska & King, 2010; DeCroix & Zipkin, 2005; Toktay, Wein, & Zenios, 2000), production planning (Ferguson, Guide, Koca, & Souza, 2009; Guide, Jayaraman, & Linton, 2003a) and logistic network design (Fleischmann, Beullens, Bloemhof-Ruwaard, & Wassenhove, 2001; Salema, Barbosapovoa, & Novais, 2007) have received the most attention. Other research efforts have considered remanufacturing from a more strategic perspective. Significant portion of these papers adapted a game-theoretic approach. For instance, Majumder and Groenevelt (2001) model the competition between an OEM and a local remanufacturer in a two-period game setting. Ferrer and Swaminathan (2006) expand the above model and characterize the optimal strategies in monopoly and duopoly environments for two-period, multi-period and infinite-period settings. They prove the existence of a remanufacturing threshold policy in the second period based on remanufacturing cost saving. Ferrer and Swaminathan (2010) further expand the monopoly model by relaxing the perfect substitution assumption of new and remanufactured products. For the two-period case, a two-level remanufacturing threshold policy in the second period based on remanufacturing cost saving is identified.Remanufactured products are offered as an alternative to the new products with lower price. Therefore, they may cannibalize the sales of new products but also may be able to extend the customer base of the firm attracting price-conscious customers, who previously did not consider purchasing a product of that brand (Thiel, 1994). A few recent papers consider the distinguished nature of remanufactured products. Debo, Toktay, and Wassenhove (2005) investigate joint pricing and production technology selection decisions faced by an OEM that considers introducing a remanufacturable product in a market, which consists of heterogeneous consumers. Ferguson and Toktay (2006) explore the strategic role of OEM remanufacturing as an entry deterrent to local remanufacturing, but with concerns that the remanufactured product will cannibalize sales of the higher-margin new product. Atasu, Sarvary, and Wassenhove (2008) investigate the profitability of remanufacturing system in the presence of environmentally conscious demands, peer competition and product life-cycle effects. Örsdemir, Kemahlıoğlu-Ziya, and Parlaktürk (2014) extend Ferguson and Toktay (2006) by capturing the endogenous quality decision of the OEM. Galbreth, Boyacı, and Verter (2013) study the required technology innovation affects reuse decisions. To this end, these recent papers allow the price of new and remanufactured products to be endogenously determined via a market-clearing mechanism. In particular, the price-demand functions for new and remanufactured products are interdependent and derived based on utility theory; and therefore the potential cannibalization effect is captured. In the same vein, motivated by the lack of information for academics studying such problems, Guide and Li (2010) provide the first attempt to empirically examine the cannibalization of new product sales by remanufactured goods. To this end, the authors use Internet auctions to investigate consumer valuation differences for new and remanufactured products.Most of these studies mentioned about are characterized by a relatively compartmentalized approach, putting a strong emphasis on one of the different parts of the system such as production planning, inventory control, logistic network, distribution channel design, product acquisition or market segmentation(Geyer, Wassenhove, & Atasu, 2007). By decoupling these strongly dependent issues, these studies have two major shortcomings: (i) they fail to consider the integrated nature of remanufacturing systems and (ii) they are incapable of answering the fundamental question of whether offering a remanufactured product is profitable, because they presuppose that the profitability of remanufacturing is obvious (Guide et al., 2003b). We contribute to this emerging stream of literature by investigating the profitability of remanufacturing through integration of market segmentation and closed-loop network design in the presence of uncertainty.A number of researchers address problems with respect to CLSC network design. Despite the significance of uncertainty in CLSCs, it has not been adequately analyzed in the past, possibly because of the difficulty in handling a lot of interdependent involved factors simultaneously. To the best of our knowledge, Salema et al., 2007 is the first paper that studied a general CLSC network design model taking uncertainty into account. Assuming that customer’s demand and return are scenario-dependent, a stochastic programming-based MILP is proposed. Listes (2007), Lee, Dong, and Bian (2010), Pishvaee, Jolai, and Razmi (2009) and Zeballos, Gomes, Barbosa-Povoa, and Novais (2012) also presented two-stage stochastic programs to explicitly include uncertainty. Though sources of uncertainty vary, the principle of the stochastic models is the same. The primary objective of these models is to manage the CLSC to meet customer demands as cost effectively as possible. With this intent, all the prevailing work on CLSC design under uncertainty focuses on cost minimization, and hence ignores the impact of the product markets. This is presumably because e-waste has been traditionally viewed by the industry as a waste rather than a resource. As remanufacturing shows a vast economic potential in today’s business, however, it becomes necessary for us to view CLSCs from a value-creation perspective. Only then can the hidden value be released from the system. Although it is out of the scope of this paper we would like to point out that robust optimization is the other main approach of dealing with optimization under uncertainty. For such an approach the reader can refer to Realff, Ammons, and Newton (2004).In our analysis, we assume that new and remanufactured products are imperfect substitutes. We further assume that the associated prices of them are endogenously determined via a market clearing mechanism. Our findings differ from (or complement) the two streams of literature on remanufacturing in a CLSC network design setting. To this end, we investigate the profitability of remanufacturing as one of the product recovery strategies, and under what conditions it is preferable. From a modeling perspective, the incorporation of a stylized representation of the primary and secondary markets links our CLSC network design model under uncertainty with the market segmentation models such as Ferguson and Toktay (2006), Atasu et al. (2008), Galbreth et al. (2013) and Örsdemir et al. (2014).In this section, we formulate a generic model for a single product category by considering a monopolist who makes both new and remanufactured products, which are clearly differentiable to customers, and sells them via different retailing channels under price discrimination. We focus on the market, where consumers are interested in a specific product but are still deciding whether to buy a new or remanufactured product. Such an internal and imperfect competition between new and remanufactured products is also considered by Vorasayan and Ryan (2006).In terms of the design of the network, we consider a CLSC network that is capable of dealing with product returns via several recovery options: remanufacturing/reuse, recycling and proper disposal. New and remanufactured products are produced in plants with separate manufacturing and remanufacturing capacities, and then shipped to markets through distribution centers in order to satisfy the different demand segments. To comply with e-waste laws, all the returns have to be collected from collection centers located in each market point and sent to return centers for sorting and inspection purposes. After the testing performed in the return centers, the OEM identifies the returns that are profitable to remanufacture and ships them to one of the plants. The remaining returns are either shipped to recycling facilities or properly disposed.We model this environment by describing a monopolistic OEM that is responsible for the design and operation of its CLSC under uncertainties in (i) market size; (ii) return quantity and (iii) return quality. In general, durable goods are categorized by their long useful life. For such products, the total return volume during a year is not necessarily determined or constrained by the sales from the previous year. For instance, economic incentives through product acquisition campaigns might substantially influence the consumers’ decisions concerning the timing of returns. We observed this phenomenon in the BSH case, with regards to the sales and return volumes of refrigerators and washing machines from 2005 to 2011. In some particular years, the return volume is even higher than the sales volume from the previous year. Thus, we opted to represent the key problem dynamics in a single-period setting.We aim to determine the best way for the OEM to be involved in product recovery by optimizing (i) the number and location of DCs and RCs (i) the manufacturing and remanufacturing quantities and (iii) the flow of products through the CLSC. The OEM gains revenues from primary and secondary markets, and occasionally from recycling when the recycled raw material prices are higher than the recycling costs. We do not explicitly differentiate between recycling and disposal in the model because usually both are cost factors. Under this circumstance, the OEM will certainly choose the cheaper way between recycling and proper disposal to the extent permitted by law. In the event that there is potential revenue from selling recycled materials, this is represented by a negative recycling/disposal cost. Such a representation is also used by Alumur, Nickel, da Gama, and Verter (2012).SetsI={1,…,i}set of plantsset of potential DCs as well as potential RCsset of customer zonesset of products, where n represents new product and r represents remanufactured productset of all possible scenarios of the uncertain parametersUncertain parametersM(s) = total market size of the company under scenario sr(s) = total volume of returns under scenario sα(s) = recovery rate under scenario sGeneral parametersβk= fraction of the total population living in customer zone ksil= capacity of producing type l product at plant i, forl=n,rMarketing-related parametersφ = customer’s reservation pricea = lower limit of reservation priceb = upper limit of reservation priceδ = customers’ relative willingness-to-pay for remanufactured productCostscl= unit production cost of product type l forl=n,rch= unit handling cost in DCscs= unit sorting cost in RCscd= unit recycling/disposal cost (cd< 0 indicates recycling revenue)fj= (annualized) fixed cost of opening a DC at site jgj= (annualized) fixed cost of opening a RC at site jcij= cost of shipping one unit of product from plant i to DC jejk= cost of shipping one unit of product from DC j to customer zone kcji′= cost of shipping one unit of return from RC j to plant iekj′= cost of shipping one unit of return from customer zone k to RC jDecision variablesqil= quantity of type l product produced in plant i, forl=n,rYj={1ifaDCislocatedatsitej;0otherwiseTj={1ifaRCislocatedatsitej;0otherwiseUijl= quantity of type l product shipped from plant i to DC j ∀i, j, lXjkl= quantity of type l product shipped from DC j to customer zone k ∀j, k, lWkj= quantity of return shipped from customer zone k to RC j ∀j, kVji= quantity of return shipped from RC j to plant i ∀i, jFollowing the market segmentation literature, we assume that customer’s willingness-to-pay is heterogeneous and represented by his/her reservation price for a product. To this end, a parameter that is uniformly distributed within [0,1] is commonly used to represent the customers’ heterogeneity in the market. It is also common to normalize the market size to 1. These assumptions, of course, offer analytical simplicity without affecting the nature of the analysis and results. Normalization, however, is not desirable in our work because one of our goals is to provide a solid understanding of the influence of the different sources of uncertainty. Thus, we work with the actual market size and use uniformly distributed reservation prices between a and b (a < b) to represent the customer’s willingness-to-pay. In most cases, the customers distinguish the remanufactured products from the new products, and thus the firm chooses differentiated prices to serve the market. Each consumer’s evaluation for a remanufactured product is a fraction δ (0 < δ < 1) of their evaluation for the new product. Therefore, a consumer who has a reservation price of φ for a new product is willing to pay δφ for the remanufactured product. We derive the inverse demand functions from consumers’ utility functions (See Appendix A for all proofs), which leads to the following proposition:Proposition 1Let qn and qr denote the production quantity for new and remanufactured products, respectively. The inverse demand functions of the new and remanufactured products are linear, and(1)pn=b−b−aMqn−δb−aMqr(2)pr=δ(b−b−aMqn−b−aMqr).Although the market area comprises a number of customer zones, we assume that the firm will charge the same price across the market. The inverse demand functions (1) and (2) map the quantities of output demanded to the market prices for the output. Here, we implicitly assume that the market clearing mechanism is applied. That is, at the market clearing prices of the new and remanufactured products (pnand pr), the quantities produced (qnand qr, respectively) will be equal to the quantities demanded for the new and remanufactured products, respectively. As a result, the market clearing pricespoptnandpoptrare functions of decision variables qnand qrand thus will be optimized from the IS-CLSC model proposed in next section. Note that a number of authors, including Ferguson and Toktay (2006), Atasu et al. (2008) and Galbreth et al. (2013) have used demand functions of similar forms. The difference in Proposition 1 is that we incorporate the actual market size and use reservation prices rather than resorting to normalization as described above. The fact that we do not normalize the parameters in (1) and (2) enables us to incorporate the inverse demand function in an applied setting.The IS-CLSC model can be formulated as follows. Note that network configuration is decided under uncertainty and cannot be changed after the realization of the uncertain parameters concerning the market size, return volume and recovery rate.(3)maxE[Qs(Y,T)]−(∑jfjYj+∑jgjTj)s.t.(4)Yj,Tj∈{0,1}∀jwhere the profit function Q(Y, T) for scenario s is defined as(5)Qs(Y,T)=max(pn−cn)qn+(pr−cr)qr−(∑i∑j∑lcijUijl+∑j∑k∑lejkXjkl+∑k∑jekj′Wkj+∑j∑icji′Vji)−ch(qn+qr)−csr(s)−cd(r(s)−qr)s.t.(6)qil≤sil∀i,l(7)ql=∑iqil∀l(8)qr≤α(s)r(s)(9)qn+qr≤M(s)(10)qil=∑jUijl∀i,l(11)∑iUijl=∑kXjkl∀j,l(12)∑jXjkl=qlβk∀l,k(13)∑jWkj=r(s)βk∀k(14)α(s)∑kWkj≥∑iVji∀j(15)qir=∑jVij∀i(16)Xjkl≤(∑isil)Yj∀j,k,l(17)Wkj≤r(s)βkTj∀j,k(18)qil,Uijl,Xjkl,Wkj,Vji≥0∀i,j,k,l.The first-stage problem is modeled by (3)–(4), while the second-stage problem is defined by (5)–(18). The first stage corresponds to the investments that must be made for establishing facilities namely, DCs and RCs prior to the actual realization of the random parameters; whereas, the second stage involves the allocation of product flows through the established network and the decisions pertaining the quantity of the new and remanufactured products to be produced, based on the realized uncertain scenario. The location variables are assigned as the first-stage decision variables and the allocation variables and production quantities are assigned as the second-stage decision variables. Note that the optimal value of the second stage problemQs*(Y,T)is a function of the first-stage decision variables.The first-stage objective function (3) maximizes the expected net profit, which is given by the difference of expected sales profit and the fixed costs of establishing facilities. The second-stage objective function (5) maximizes the operating profit for any realized uncertain scenario s. The first two terms represent the sales revenues of the new and remanufactured products, respectively. The four terms in the second row denote the transportation costs from plants to DCs, from DCs to customer zones, from customer zones to RCs and from RCs to plants, respectively. The last three terms relate to the handling cost in DCs, the sorting cost in RCs and the disposal cost, respectively.Constraints (6) are capacity constraints with respect to manufacturing and remanufacturing. Constraints (7) calculate total production quantity of the new and remanufactured products, respectively. Constraint (8) ensures that the amount of remanufactured products produced does not exceed the total amount of remanufacturable returns. By Constraint (9) the total production quantity of the two products does not exceed the number of potential buyers in the market since we assume that each customer will purchase at most one unit. Constraints (10)–(12) are flow balance constraints for plants, DCs and the entire market, respectively. Constraints (13) ensure that all returns must be collected in every customer zone. Constraints (14) are the maximum throughput constraints guaranteeing that the total outflow from RCs cannot exceed the inbound return handling. Constraints (15) ensure that all the returns sent to remanufacturing plants will be remanufactured. Constraints (16) and (17) guarantee that flows can only be assigned to open DCs and RCs. Finally, Constraint (4) and (18) are domain constraints.Plugging the price functions (1) and (2) into (5), we can get the profit function for any possible scenario s as follows:(19)Qs(Y,T)=max−b−aM(s)(qn)2−2δb−aM(s)qnqr−δb−aM(s)(qr)2+(b−cn−ch)qn+(δb−cr−ch+cd)qr−(∑i∑j∑lcijUijl+∑j∑k∑lejkXjkl+∑j∑icji′Vji+∑k∑jekj′Wkj)−(cs+cd)r(s).Thus, we have a quadratic objective function.Proposition 2The objective function in(19)is concave in the profit function Qs(Y, T) for any given s is concave in (qn, qr) throughout δ ∈ (0, 1).Proposition 2 ensures the existence of an optimal solution, which serves as a starting point of the development of our solution method in next section.The proposed IS-CLSC model is integrated in the sense that it incorporates the major product recovery options i.e., remanufacturing, recycling and proper disposal, for OEMs to fulfill their environmental responsibilities. Thus, the model is applicable for various industries. In Section 6, we present an application of the model on a case study focusing on refrigerators (that are in the large household and refrigeration appliances category of WEEE) with the purpose of illustrating the implications of these options in a realistic setting.In this section, we propose a solution method that integrates the integer L-shaped method and the sample average approximation (SAA) technique for solving the stochastic mixed-integer quadratic program presented in Section 3. The motivation for developing such an algorithm is two-fold: First, our IS-CLSC model contains a quadratic resource function and there is no existing commercial software that can be used for solving stochastic quadratic programs directly. Second, we prefer to use SAA so that we can avoid using a limited number of scenarios to represent the real life setting. In order to focus on the decomposition itself and organize ideas in a transparent manner, we restrict our discussion to a single plant.For the purpose of illustration, the resource function Qs(Y, T) can be written concisely asminx12x′Hx+g′xs.t.A1x≥b1−Dy:z1A2x=b2:z2x≥0:πwhere y represents the first-stage decision variable vector and x represents the second-stage decision variable vector. By definingL(Y,T)=E[Qs(Y,T)],the first-stage problem is equivalent to the following reformulation in which a new variable θ is introduced:(20)max−θ−(∑jfjYj+∑jgjTj)s.t.(21)θ≥−L(Y,T)(22)Yj,Tj∈{0,1}∀j.As illustrated by Listes (2007), IS-CLSC has two potential sources of difficulty. First, constraint (21) cannot be used computationally as a constraint sinceL(Y,T)is not available in a closed analytical form and is only implicitly defined. The L-shaped decomposition method provides the means to create an outer-approximation of it by using a series of tangent hyperplanes (Kulkarni & Shanbhag, 2012), also called optimality cuts (Birge & Louveaux, 1997). This method is applicable to problems with continuous variables. Consequently, the second issue is the integrality of the first-stage variables. Combining the L-shaped method for quadratic programs (see Appendix B for the detailed derivation) with the well-known branch-and-bound method for mixed integer programs results in the integer L-shaped method. We start by brief descriptions of the integer L-shaped method for stochastic MIQPs (SMIQPs) and the SAA technique; and in Section 4.3 we present the solution method we used to solve the IS-CLSC model by integrating the SAA scheme with the integer L-shaped algorithm.First, we ignore the integrality constraints (22) and allow the first-stage variables to be continuous in the interval [0,1]. Let it be the initial feasible set, and denoted byF0={(Y,T,θ)|θ∈ℜ,Yj,Tj∈[0,1]∀j}.Letf=(f1,f2,…,fj)andg=(g1,g2,…,gj). Such L-shaped method proceeds iteratively by solving the first-stage problem with a series of additional constraints i.e., optimality cuts, which can define a monotonically decreasing feasible setF1such that the problem(23)max{−θ−fY−gT|(Y,T,θ)∈F0∩F1}eventually yields a solution that satisfies constraint (21). With a concave second-stage problem, the optimality cuts can be efficiently constructed from the corresponding optimal dual solutions. For any particularF1during the iterative process, problem (23) is called the current problem (Listes, 2007).As already mentioned, the integer L-shaped method combines the branch-and-bound scheme for the first-stage problem with the iterative cutting planes procedure of the L-shaped method. Thus, we operate with a list of active nodes, each of which corresponding to a form of the current problem. The procedure consists of the following main steps.Integer L-shaped method for SMIQPsStep 1.0:Set ν ≔ 0, ω ≔ 0,L¯:=0. The list consists of one node corresponding to the initial current problem.Choose a node from the list. If the list is empty,vm=L¯,m:=m+1,and return to Step 1.0.Letν:=ν+1. Solve the current problem and denote an optimal solution by (Yν, Tν, θν).If−θν−(fY+gT)<L¯,fathom the current node and return to Step 1.1.If there are unsatisfied integrality constraints, pick a variable with fractional value and create two new nodes corresponding to setting its value at 0 or 1. Replace the current node by the two new nodes in the list and return to Step 1.1.L-shaped SQP Algorithm (Kulkarni & Shanbhag, 2012).Ifθν≥−L(Yν,Tν),fathom the current node and return to Step 1.1. Otherwise, impose the optimality cutE1ω+1m+E2ω+1m+θ≥zω+1m,setω:=ω+1and return to Step 1.2.The basic idea of SAA is that a random sample is generated and the expected value function is approximated by the corresponding sample average function. The obtained SAA problem is solved and the procedure is repeated until a stopping criterion is satisfied. In the SAA scheme, a random sample of N realizations of the random vectorξ=(M,r,α)is generated, and the expected future profit is then approximated by the sample average function:(24)E[Q(Y,T,ξ)]=1N∑s=1NQ(Y,T,ξs˜).Z independent sample sets of random parameters each size N are generated in Step 1 to select potential optimal solutions of the first-stage problem. The true objective function value is estimated in Step 2 with much bigger sample size N′. For more details of SAA the reader can refer to Kleywegt, Shapiro, and Homem-de Mello (2002).In this subsection, the integer L-shaped method for SMIQP and the SAA scheme are integrated to develop the solution algorithm for the IS-CLSC model. The overall procedure is as follows:Step 0:Generate Z independent sample sets of random parameters each of size N, i.e., (ξ1,z, … , ξN,z) forz=1,…,Zands=1,…,N.Forz=1:Z,obtain the location, production and flow decision by the Integer L-shaped method for SMIQPs. Let vzand (Y, T)z, be the corresponding objective value and the location solution for a given sample z, respectively.Calculatev¯Z,N=1Z∑z=1Zvz. It provides a upper statistical bound for v*.For each feasible solution (Y, T)zof the first-stage problem in Step 1, generate a sample(ξ1,…,ξN′)of size N′ independently of the samples used to obtain the feasible solution. Typically, N′ is set to be much bigger than the sample size N used in Step 1. Using the dual formulation of the second-stage problem to determine Q(Yz, Tz, s) for every s. Estimate the true objective function value F(Yz, Tz, qn, qr, U, X, W, V) as follows:(25)F(Yz,Tz,qn,qr,U,X,W,V)=1N′∑s=1N′Q(Yz,Tz,ξs˜)−(fYz+gTz).Choose the feasible solution(Y¯,T¯)with the biggest estimated objective valueF¯N′(Y¯,T¯)is an unbiased estimator ofF(Y¯,T¯). Since(Y¯,T¯)is a feasible solution of the true problem,F(Y¯,T¯)≤v*. Therefore,F¯N′(Y¯,T¯)is an estimate of an lower bound on v*.Calculate an estimate of the optimality gap of the solution(Y¯,T¯)using the lower bound estimate and the objective function value estimate as follows:(26)ϵZ,N,N′(Y¯,T¯)=v¯Z,N−F¯N′(Y¯,T¯).In this section, our goal is to show that our solution method can solve the model to optimality in reasonable time. We illustrate the computational performance of the proposed methodology in a smaller-scale numerical setting generated from the real case presented in the next session. The specific setting we use is as follows. We consider problem instances withJ=5,10and 15 candidates of facilities (i.e., DC/RCs) where K is fixed at 15 customer zones. The 15 most populated cities in Germany are identified as the customer zones. To generate the problem instances, the alternative facility locations are randomly chosen among the 15 customer zones with equal probability. We generate 3 problem instances for each problem size. For each problem instance, we produce 3 independent sample sets of uncertain parameters each of sample size 9. In all problem instances we consider one fixed plant (that is a randomly chosen location). The remaining parameters, such as demand, return and cost structure, are fixed as outlined in Section 6.We take the runs on a server with 2.80 gigahertz Intel Xeon processor and 4 gigabyte of RAM and we used the optimization software CPLEX version 12.4. All the runs are solved to optimality. Pilot tests show that the CPU time of solving the optimal location from step one of the algorithm predominate over the CPU time of estimating the optimal total profit from step two. An increased number of potential facilities will further increase this predominant effect. Given that the basic procedures of our solution method are facility-based, the number of potential facilities has stronger effect on solution time. Table 1presents computational results with varying number of potential facilities givenZ=1,N=9andN′=0in order to focus on performance of the integer L-shaped algorithm. The table reports the CPU running time (in seconds) as well as the number of nodes and optimality cuts generated during the solution process. The CPU times include both the branch-and-cut part of the procedure and the building of the problem objects for the current problem and for the dual second-stage problem in step one. The figures reported in Table 1 are the overall averages for each problem instance.ForJ=15,the model contains 30 binary first-stage variables and 722 continuous second-stage variables for each scenario (resulting in a total of 6498 continuous variables for all scenarios). Although a relatively large number of nodes are investigated and a significant number of optimality cuts are generated, the computational time is less than 35 minutes. The results show that the number of optimality cuts has a stronger effect on solution time. It is also worthy to mention that the significant monetary magnitude difference between production related parameters (qn, qr, pn, pr) and logistics related parameters induces numerical difficulties during computation. Through further analysis, we observe that the CPU time of solving large-scale problems (e.g. 40 × 40) can reduce from hours to seconds when the values of these parameters are closer an order of magnitude. This demonstrates the efficiency of our solution method itself.We apply the IS-CLSC model on a new case based on BSH’s operations in Germany, focusing on the remanufacturing of refrigerators under EPR. The case study is inspired by the need for BSH to decide whether to offer remanufactured products under Germany’s unique WEEE take-back scheme. Our goal is to highlight the features of the proposed model and also to show the impact of uncertainties on the performance of real supply chains. The information in this case study is developed through telephone interviews and follow-up email exchanges with a number of managers in BSH Germany and BSH Spain. In addition, we interviewed two of the main reverse logistics partners of BSH in Germany. Secondary data was collected from BSH concerning sales and recycled volume of refrigerators in 2011 as well as the associated recycler matrix. We also benefited from the market research reports concerning the household appliances in Germany.The CLSC network structure in this case study represents BSH’s existing supply chain. We assume that refrigerators are sold and collected from 40 retailer points located in the 40 most populated German cities (i.e., customer zones). The locations of the cities on the map of Germany are depicted in Fig. 1. To obtain a list of facility candidates, we start with the capital city of each federal state in Germany (16 in total). Potsdam, Schwerin and Saarbrücken are excluded from this list since they are scarcely populated. Furthermore, Berlin, Hamburg and Munich are also excluded due to the high real estate cost concerns as well as the environmental and safety concerns associated with the hazardous materials contained in the refrigerators. Consequently, we have 10 alternative facility sites which are (1) Stuttgart, (2) Düsseldorf, (3) Bremen, (4) Dresden, (5) Hanover, (6) Wiesbaden, (7) Kiel, (8) Magdeburg, (9) Erfurt and (10) Mainz.BSH has a single plant of producing refrigerators in Germany. Since it is used to supply the whole Western Europe, we assumed that all demands from the German market will be satisfied. The returns in this case are referred to those commercial returns and end-of-use returns collected in major retailer points, which account for about 10 percent of the total returns for BSH. The quality of these returned products are much better than those collected from municipality collection points in general and therefore it might be profitable for BSH to consider remanufacturing instead of recycling. We take 10 percent of the total return to estimate the average amount of returns in tons generated in retailer points. In order to convert weight to the total number of returned refrigerators, the average weight per refrigerator is estimated by 50 kilogram.33We divide the total amount of demand in tons from BSH data, by the sales in units given by Anonymous (2012) to estimate the average weight of a refrigerator.We assume that each returned refrigerator contains only one core. It is verified by BSH that demands for new and remanufactured products and return at each customer zone are allocated proportionally according to population density.We estimate market price of the new product by dividing BSH’s total monetary sales by the associated total sales volume (Anonymous, 2012). The manufacturing cost is estimated by 25 percent of its profit margin i.e., 80 percent of the market price of the new product. The relative willingness-to-pay for BSH remanufactured refrigerators is estimated by customer’s relative willingness-to-pay for LG remanufactured refrigerators from eBay (www.ebay.com), which is 62 percent on average. Taking into account the larger market share and higher reputation in the German market, we use 70 percent as the relative willingness-to-pay for BSH. Then we estimate the remanufacturing cost by 70 percent of its corresponding market price.Refrigerators are appliances that contain refrigerants and therefore special certification requirements are needed for their reverse logistics. Alumur et al. (2012) provide estimates for the costs incurred at RCs for washing machines. We extrapolate the sorting cost in RCs as well as recycling/disposal cost for the refrigerators from this reference.The basis of annualized fixed costs of opening a DC is estimated by the rental of the only warehouse, which is located in Nauren. This property is not owned by BSH. The company informed us that Nauren arguably has the lowest fixed cost comparing to the other cities in Germany. Since land prices are higher in the populated cities, a parameter γ is generated in order to reflect the differences on fixed costs depending on the land prices at the candidate locations. As used in Alumur et al. (2012), for each candidate location, this parameter is equal to the ratio of the population of the city to the total population of these 40 cities multiplied by 100. We adapted the base of annualized fixed cost of opening a RC used in Alumur et al. (2012) and adjusted this number by land price parameter to get the fixed cost for each potential RC.A distance matrix is generated between the 40 cities by using the shortest suggested route on the road network from maps.google.com. Diesel consumption of Volvo heavy duty 2010 model truck is used to estimate the net transportation cost. We multiply this number by 1.25 to estimate the unit transportation cost per truck per kilometer. In order to convert transportation cost per truck to transportation cost per refrigerator, we assume 80 units of refrigerators per truck to estimate the truck load. These give us the unit transportation cost between potential plants and DCs. Next, we apply the same scale among different unit transportation costs used in the copier remanufacturing case study by Fleischmann et al. (2001) to estimate the unit transportation cost between DCs and customer zones. We assume that the unit transportation costs on the reverse network are 2.5 times more expensive than their counterparts on the forward network due to the hazardous materials content of the returned refrigerators, their transportation is regulated and hence more expensive. Due to the regulatory difference, BSH also uses separate trucks for backhauling the returned refrigerators.Finally, the lower limit and upper limit of the reservation price are taken as 370 and 600 euros. And the customer’s relative willingness-to-pay for remanufactured goods is estimated as 0.7. The cost parameters used in the case study are summarized in Table 2.As indicated in Section 3, the market size, total return volume and recovery rate are uncertain, each assumed to be independent and identically distributed. In the context of this case, we further assume that they follow triangular distributions with modes taken from BSH’s business, and both lower and upper limits as percentage of the associated mode. In particular, the actual total return volume of BSH is taken as mode of r. Since BSH has not yet included remanufacturing in their business i.e.,qr=0in Eq. (1), M can be expressed as a function of pnand qn:(27)M=qn1−pnb−awhere qnis taken from the real sales data.In this section, we investigate the impact of the uncertainties in market size M, return quantity r and return quality α on the performance of the BSH supply chain, where a full range of product recovery options are available. We also explore the characteristics of cost structures and customer perceptions that would encourage (or discourage) remanufacturing under uncertainty in Section 7.2. We introduce effective recovery rate, as a measure to facilitate the comparison of different recovery strategies. In Section 7.3, we investigate the impact of the uncertainties associated with disposal/recycling cost. In the last subsection, we study the benefit of the integrated network design approach compared to the sequential approach under the market, return and recovery rate uncertainties.In this subsection, we seek answers to the following questions: How robust is the network configuration under uncertainty? How do uncertainties influence the profitability of CLSC systems?We start with the formal definition of the term, uncertainty level, used in this paper. The uncertainty level of a stochastic parameter represents the half-width of its range as percentage of the mode of this parameter. Table 3provides a summary of the uncertain parameters used in the base-case, where all parameters are (symmetric) triangular distributed.We generate 40 scenarios based on random realizations of the uncertain parameters M, r and α. The stochastic solution and the optimal solutions for each of the 40 scenarios, each solved as a deterministic problem, are depicted in Table 4, which also shows the number of times each network configuration constitutes the optimal solution for one of the scenarios. Although there are six alternative network structures, each being optimal to at least one of the 40 scenarios; two network structures are optimal 75 percent of the scenarios. Interestingly, the optimal stochastic network configuration is the same as the optimal deterministic solution that is repeated most often i.e., DCs at Stuttgart, Wiesbaden and Magdeburg and RCs at Magdeburg and Mainz. This stochastic solution is shown in Fig. 1.In general, forward supply chains tend to be spatially decentralized compared with their reverse logistics counterparts. This is presumably due to the smaller volume of commodities that flow through the reverse network. In the case of refrigerators, however, this disparity is much smaller mainly because of the high transport costs associated with returned refrigerators that include hazardous materials. It is evident from Table 2 that shipping returns to RCs is 2.5 times more expensive than shipping products from DCs to the customers, due to the safety guidelines across the reverse network for this product category.Another interesting observation from Table 4 pertains to the sets of optimal DCs under different realizations of the uncertain parameters. Note that the set of optimal DCs with three facilities (i.e., {1, 6, 8}) remains in the solution when it becomes necessary for BSH to open four DCs (i.e., {1, 6, 8, 9}). Although theoretically this is not true in general, it is certainly helpful in practice to know that BSH has a viable strategy option to start with DCs at sites 1, 6, and 8, and open an additional DC at site 9 if it becomes optimal depending on the scenario they end up facing. It is worthwhile to note that the same property does not hold for the reverse network. That is, BSH cannot start with a single RC at site 9 and expect that the set of RCs can be simply expanded and will remain optimal as the scenario in effect is revealed.We now turn to investigating the sensitivity of the solution to the changes in the distribution of each uncertain parameter. To this end, we keep the base-case settings (see Table 3) for two of the parameters (e.g., r and α) while we alter the distribution of the third parameter (M for this example). In ascertaining the overall impact of each uncertain parameter, we study the effect of varying (i) the uncertainty level, (ii) the mode of the distribution, and (iii) the upper limit of the triangular distribution. For each parameter, such effects are studied via Test 1, Test 2 and Test 3, respectively. In Tables 5–7, the lower limit, mode and upper limit of the triangular distribution used in each test are represented as a percent deviation from the base-case mode of the associated parameter. For example, the distribution of M in the fifth row of Table 5 is[0,+10percent,+20percent]indicating that the market size is triangular distributed with [2, 648, 785,  2, 913, 664,  3, 178, 542] for this test. The profit growth column in Tables 5–7 provides a comparison with the base case. For each problem instance, we also report the mean and standard deviation of total profit as well as the stochastic solution.Table 5 reports on the experiments with varying the distribution of market size M, while r and α were kept at their base case distributions. In Test 1, we increased the uncertainty level of M without altering the mode of the distribution. Interestingly, the profit and the network configuration seems to be rather robust to changes in the uncertainty level of up to 30 percent. In Test 2, we keep the uncertainty level at 10 percent and study the impact of varying the average market size. The problem instances with 5 percent and 10 percent increase in the average M, requires that a new DC is open at Erfurt (site 9) to address the anticipated market growth. More importantly, these two instances show that the expected percent increase in profit is larger than the percent increase in the average market size. Test 3 in Table 5 depicts that increasing the upside uncertainty level – while the downside uncertainty level remains the same – is likely to lead to notable growth in profits.Tables 6 and 7 show that total profit is quite robust with respect to changes in the distribution of return quantity r and return rate α, respectively. For example, in Tables 6, when we increase the upper bound of r by roughly 30 percent, total profit increases less than only 1 percent (see Test 3). This robustness can be due to two reasons: First, the return volumes are rather small, since only 10 percent of BSH’s total returns are collected through the retail stores. Second, the case study is confined to the activities of BSH within Germany, where the transportation distances are relatively short, and hence the logistics costs are dominated by the production costs; weakening the impact of r and α.It might seem counter-intuitive that in Table 6, the total profit decreases while the mode of r increases (see Test 2). In general, higher return volumes result in larger amounts of unrecoverable returns that have to be either disposed off or recycled. In Germany, however, disposal is discouraged due to the high priority of environmental protection. For instance, even the disposal costs of shredder residue surpassed 180 €  a ton in 2001 (Lambert & Stoop, 2001). Consequently, the end-of-life treatment costs can adapt to 50 €  per refrigerator in Germany. Although, there is a profit growth from remanufacturing under increased r, this seems to be offset by the high costs of the mandated environmentally-friendly end-of-life treatment.In closing this subsection, we remark that the primary observations reported above validate the proposed model in light of a realistic case. Perhaps more importantly, some of our less intuitive findings – in the context of BSH – dispel the “one-size-fits-all” type approaches to the design of CLSCs under uncertainty.In this subsection, we explore the impact of key parameters that could encourage (or discourage) remanufacturing under uncertainty. In particular, we focus on the following three parameters:•cd: the disposal/recycling cost;cr: the remanufacturing cost;δ: customer’s valuation of the remanufactured product.Evidently, the impact of cdand crdepends on the magnitude of these costs relative to the cost of manufacturing a new product, cn. Also it is important that these three parameters are not directly and fully controlled by the OEM. We ask the following questions: What is the impact of the variable cost structure on the extent of the OEM’s involvement in remanufacturing? How does consumer’s relative valuation of remanufactured products influence the preferred product recovery alternative?In order to facilitate the comparison of the firm’s involvement in remanufacturing under different scenarios, we define the effective recovery rate for each scenario (αeff*(s)). Let qr*(s) denote the optimal remanufacturing quantity under scenario s. Omitting the scenario index for ease of exposition, the effective recovery rate is:(28)αeff*=qr*αr.We makethe following observation by analyzing the sensitivity of the effective recovery rate to the change of cdin a deterministic setting.Observation 1Given a realization of the uncertain parameters, there exists a two-level threshold policy for the dominant recovery alternative that varies with the recycling/disposal cost and the customer’s valuation of the remanufactured product.That is, there exists a lower-threshold value for cd, below which the OEM should not engage in remanufacturing and have all the returns recycled or properly disposed. There is also a higher-threshold and if cdis above this level the firm should remanufacture all the returns. In the event that the recycling/disposal cost is between these two thresholds then remanufacturing a certain portion of the returns is the best option for the OEM. Naturally, the values of these thresholds also depend on the values of the other problem parameters, particularly cnand cr.Table 8 presents the results for BSH when the uncertain parameters are at the mode of their distributions (see Table 3),cn=370€,cr=225€ and δ takes the values 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9 (i.e., in increasing order of customer valuation for remanufactured products). Forδ=0.5,for example, BSH should remanufacture all the returns if cd≥ 57€ and do not remanufacture at all when cd≤ 52€. Interestingly, the two thresholds are within 5€ of each other in all quadrants of the table. This suggests that the preferred recovery option is very sensitive to the recycling/disposal cost for BSH. Here, we remind the reader that negative values of cdrepresent revenue from recycling. Evidently, even for higher values of δ, the firm could still have the incentive to recycle all the returns (i.e.αeff*=0) if recycling is profitable enough. Table 8 also depicts that the customers’ valuation of remanufactured products, δ, has a profound effect on the threshold levels. As long as the clients are willing to pay somewhat more than half of the price of a new refrigerator to purchase a remanufactured one, it seems that BSH should consider recycling as an option only when it generates revenues. That is, in a deterministic setting, when δ ≥ 0.7 BSH should remanufacture all the returns as long as cd≥ 0.Expanding the sensitivity analysis above, Fig. 2a depicts the two thresholds for the entire range of (cd, δ) values. In Fig. 2, region III represents the parameter range where BSH should remanufacture all the returns and region I represents the range where all returns should be recycled or properly disposed. Region II in the figure corresponds to the partial remanufacturing option. Indeed, we made a similar observation through a sensitivity analysis on the remanufacturing cost crthat is depicted in Fig. 2b.Observation 2Given a realization of the uncertain parameters, there exists a two-level threshold policy for the dominant recovery alternative that varies with the remanufacturing cost and the customer’s valuation of the remanufactured product.The above observationsunder a deterministic setting i.e., for a given realization of (M, r, α), provide the basis for studying the recovery options in the presence of uncertainty. To this end, we perform a Monte Carlo simulation by generating 100 realizations of (M, r, α), using their base-case triangular distributions (see Table 3). This enables us to estimateα¯eff*as an average of theαeff*values calculated for each of the 100 realizations. Figs. 2a and b show that not only the two-level threshold policy generalizes to the problem under uncertainty, but also both the threshold levels are quite robust to uncertainty for the Germany business of BSH (i.e., the three regions almost overlap). We also drew Fig. 2a forcr=€175 and €370 as well as Fig. 2b forcd=0and €−50, and found similar results. More importantly, we make the following observation based on the fact that region II is quite narrow in Figs. 2a and b.Observation 3Under the uncertain parameters (M, r, α), the extent of the firm’s involvement in remanufacturing is sensitive to changes in disposal/recycling cost cd, remanufacturing cost crand customer’s valuation on remanufactured products δ.Here, we remark that the above observations are valid for BSH’s Germany business, where transportation distances are not too long. We carried out similar commutations with quadrupling the transportation costs to develop a rough understanding of whether our results hold true for larger markets, such as the entire Europe. Our findings are depicted in Figs. 2c and d.Observation 4Under the uncertain parameters (M, r, α), as the market territory is expanded, remanufacturing only a portion of the returns is more likely to be the preferred recovery option.To conclude, we remark here that it is quite important for the managers to accurately estimate the costs associated with product recovery options under uncertainty. We also find that under highly uncertain environments, the managers are less likely to have the easier options of “recycle all the returns” or “remanufacture all the returns” as the most appropriate strategy. For the BSH case, we excluded a number of cost items such as utilities, indirect labor, etc., and focused on real estate costs, primarily due to the unavailability of data. Presumably, including these costs would not alter the main insights, but may results in few sites being opened.As noted in Observation 3, the net cost (or profit) of recycling is highly dependent on the market prices of recycled material, which are subject to frequent frustrations. Therefore, it will also be of interest to a firm to consider not only the value of the disposal/recycling cost cdbut also the uncertainty associated with it. Mean reverting process is widely used in finance to model commodity prices stochastically and commodity prices are commonly assumed to be lognormally distributed, as the commodity price should be retained as positive (Chan, Karolyi, Longstaff, & Sanders, 1992; Schwartz & Smith, 2000; Uhlenbeck & Ornstein, 1930). In our case, however, the normal distribution assumption enables us to capture the possibility of disposal/recycling being a cost (cd> 0) and that being a revenue (cd< 0). Steel, copper and aluminum are the three major materials recovered from used refrigerators. Based on the bill of materials (BOM) of a A++ Siemens refrigerator, which is very popular in Germany (Chen, Kucukyazici, & Sàenz, 2014), we use the weighted average of the variances of the prices of steel, copper and aluminum in the secondary material markets so as to estimate the overall variance of cd.We perform a Monte Carlo simulation by generating 100 realizations of cd, using the normal distribution with mean € 50 per refrigerator and variance 35. Meanwhile, we keep the base-case setting for three uncertain parameters. When we consider the current returns collected from retail stores (i.e., 10 percent of BSH’s total return), we find that the impact of uncertainty in cdis negligible. It is important to note that Observation 3 still holds and the value of cdis still significant. Further computation experiments reveal that the uncertainty plays an increasingly important role as the proportion of commercial returns increases. Table 9 summarizes the results of the scenario where BSH is able to collect 75 percent of its total returns from retail stores.When cd> €15 per unit i.e., remanufacturing is quite profitable given a high disposal/recycling cost, reverse network tends to be closer to Giengen, where the production facility is located. When €−13 < cd≤ €15 i.e., there is no huge difference in terms of profitability between remanufacturing and recycling, reverse network tends to be more evenly spread. When cd≤ €−13 i.e., recycling is more profitable, forward network shrinks as less DC capacity is needed to handle remanufactured products. Assuming that BSH will implement most common supply chain configuration associated with the 100 scenarios tested, the regret of opening DC at {1, 6, 8, 9} and RC at {1, 6, 8} is negligible except for the case where recycling is considerably profitable (i.e., cd≤ €−13).Given the established forward network, a company may realize the economic value associated with remanufacturing or may be forced to deal with product returns after the enforcement of the take-back legislation. In this subsection, we study the benefit of the integrated network design approach compared to the sequential approach under the market, return and recovery rate uncertainties. To this end, two variations of the sequential approach were considered, the main difference being the pricing strategy concerning the new product: In strategy 1, the price of the new product is determined based on the forward network and cannot be changed afterward; while in strategy 2, the price of the new product can be altered when the reverse network is launched. Table 10 summarizes the results of the case where we assume 75 percent of BSH’s returns are collected in retail stores. Sequential decision making (with either strategy) results in a reduction in the number of DCs i.e., the DC in Erfurt (i.e., site 9) is closed. This is because the sequential decision making does not take into account of the increase of flow volume due to the existence of remanufactured products that will also be redistributed through the DCs. Moreover, in the integrated design as well as the sequential Strategy 2, where pnand prare determined simultaneously, a new RC is open in Mainz (i.e., site 10). Such market prices maximally absorb the demands for the remanufactured products and therefore opening RCs closer to remanufacturing facility in Giengen can effectively reduce the increasing outbound transportation costs of RCs. Perhaps more interestingly, the sequential strategy 1 achieves an expected profit of only 66 percent of the integrated solution; while that of Strategy 2 is 98 percent. The intuition is the following: With a higher pnin Strategy 2, the firm obtains more profit from the primary market demand and reduces the potential cannibalization effect from the sales of remanufactured products. On the other hand, the fixed pnin Strategy 1 sets an “anchor” for the price of the remanufactured product via the inverse demand functions. Such a suboptimal (pn, pr) pair fails to extend the firm’s customer base furthest nor to contain the cannibalization effect to the least extent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Managers are increasingly finding it necessary to ponder the extent of their company’s involvement in remanufacturing. This often involves deliberations concerning the establishment of in-house remanufacturing capability. Considering the uncertainties they face pertaining to the market size, return volume and recovery rate, we study the profitability of the firm’s product recovery options as well as the associated network configuration. An overwhelming majority of the prevailing network design literature aims at minimizing the total cost of establishing and operating the CLSC, which amounts to viewing uncertainty as a nuisance. In contrast, we perceive the uncertainties mentioned above as an opportunity and present an integrated network design model to assist the firm in unlocking this potential. Hence, the proposed model incorporates a market clearing mechanism and aims at maximizing the firm’s profit.Inspired by a real-life problem pertaining to refrigerator remanufacturing, we study the choice between remanufacturing and recycling (or proper disposal) in highly uncertain settings. Our model captures the market characteristics and the overall cost structure as the two key factors driving the choice of recovery strategy. Motivated by practice, we focus on return streams with both a healthy secondary market for remanufactured products and a profit potential in recycling market for the OEM. This enables us to represent the benefits (or costs) of remanufacturing relative to those of recycling that have not been explicitly explored in previous research.The proposed IS-CSLSC model and the solution method that integrates the SAA and integer L-shaped decomposition techniques are generic. The managerial insights developed in Section 7, however, are specific to the BSH case. Nevertheless, it is important to note that there are a large number of OEMs that operate in the WEEE domain, whose only source of remanufacturable returns is retail stores. For such firms, the return streams through the municipal collection centers are often directed to recycling; a process that the firm usually perceives as a cost factor and delegates to a take-back scheme. It is safe to argue that our findings can be generalized to firms in this category. Our key results are summarized below.First of all, integrating uncertainty and differences in customer valuation in the same model enables us to identify market size uncertainty as a primary lever for overall profitability and supply chain design. This is a rather unique finding: On the one hand, the closed-loop supply chain design models under uncertainty (e.g., Lee et al., 2010; Listes, 2007; Salema et al., 2007) focus on cost minimization, and hence do not incorporate market clearance for the new and the remanufactured products. On the other hand, the models that do incorporate market clearance (e.g., Ferguson and Toktay, 2006 and Galbreth et al., 2013) do not focus on supply chain design, and hence report no findings concerning its impact in this domain.We find that the configuration of the CLSC is rather robust to uncertainties. We also find that the integrated network design approach performs better than the sequential approach under the market, return and recovery rate uncertainties. This has been also observed by Lee et al. (2010). In our work, however, this is due to a better pricing strategy, rather than the cost sharing by utilizing hybrid facilities as in Lee et al. (2010). Investment on network infrastructure is a medium-to-long-term decision. For those firms that add reverse logistics initiatives onto their existing forward network, an almost-optimal profit can be achieved by coordinating the prices of new and remanufactured products during the development of their reverse network. Thus, flexible pricing can be an effective way for them to react to the uncertain business environment. In addition, due to the regulatory difference, the trucks used for return shipments are different than those used for delivering the new and remanufactured refrigerators, which weakens the tendency of co-locating DCs and RCs.We observe the existence of cost thresholds that make remanufacturing a profitable alternative, which is consistent with Ferguson and Toktay (2006) and Atasu et al. (2008). We find that the consumers’ valuation of remanufactured products increases the economic viability of remanufacturing, which is also consistent with the above two papers. Perhaps more importantly, we also find that the extent of the firm’s involvement in remanufacturing is very sensitive to the relative values of the remanufacturing and recycling costs as well as the customers’ willingness-to-pay for remanufactured products. The likelihood for remanufacturing a certain portion of the returns to be the most appropriate choice for the firm increases under uncertainty. The prevailing studies on closed-loop supply chain design under uncertainty mostly focus on model and solution methodology development and offer limited managerial insights. Therefore, our findings concerning the sensitivity associated with the variable cost structure and the customer valuation of remanufactured products are unique.Our work also reveals the significance of secondary markets for an OEM in the context of product recovery. To the extent that the firm can influence the customers’ perception and valuation of remanufacturing products, it will be able to position itself in a situation where simply remanufacturing all viable returns is the best option. Considering that remanufacturing only a portion of the returns is more likely the best option for larger market regions, we view the efforts of an OEM to improve the marketing of its remanufactured products as an important lever under highly uncertain environments.An important extension of the setting considered in this paper is the inclusion of a regulator’s perspective in the analytical framework. This could lead to some results that are helpful to policy makers. Nevertheless, this extension is far from straightforward and hence out of the scope of this paper – since it requires a multi-stage decision making formulation of the dynamics of the interaction between the regulator and the OEM.