@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Can long-run dynamic optimal strategies outperform fixed-mix portfolios? Evidence from multiple data sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analyze performance of optimal portfolios under predictability for HARA investors.The portfolio problem solved using dynamic programming and Monte Carlo methods.Benchmarks are fixed-mix strategies: equal-weight and a myopic Markowitz strategy.There are strong differences between mean–variance and optimal dynamic weights.No out-of-sample evidence that dynamic strategies outperform naive portfolios.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finance,Investment analysis,Portfolio choice,Predictability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Using five alternative data sets and a range of specifications concerning the underlying linear predictability models, we study whether long-run dynamic optimizing portfolio strategies may actually outperform simpler benchmarks in out-of-sample tests. The dynamic portfolio problems are solved using a combination of dynamic programming and Monte Carlo methods. The benchmarks are represented by two typical fixed mix strategies: the celebrated equally-weighted portfolio and a myopic, Markowitz-style strategy that fails to account for any predictability in asset returns. Within a framework in which the investor maximizes expected HARA (constant relative risk aversion) utility in a frictionless market, our key finding is that there are enormous difference in optimal long-horizon (in-sample) weights between the mean–variance benchmark and the optimal dynamic weights. In out-of-sample comparisons, there is however no clear-cut, systematic, evidence that long-horizon dynamic strategies outperform naively diversified portfolios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the most important problems faced by investors involves the allocation of wealth among risky assets. The task of determining optimal portfolios is a complex problem that depends on the objective of the investor, her horizon, any constraints, as well as the dynamic properties (forecasts) of the set of investment opportunities. In this setting, the objective of the investor has typically (but not exclusively, see e.g., Liu, 1999) been the maximization of the expected value of a utility function depending on either terminal wealth or, more realistically, on the flow of consumption that a portfolio may finance over time.A rich literature straddling the empirical finance and operations research fields (see Section 2) has investigated applications of stochastic programming approaches to dynamic portfolio problems. Such methods become of particular interest when asset returns are predictable, i.e., when the investment opportunity set is time-varying, as in Barberis (2000) or Campbell, Chan, and Viceira (2003). Using a number of recursive, out-of-sample (OOS) experiments applied to five different data sets, in our paper we document whether, how, and when long-term strategies based on dynamic optimal portfolios (DOPs) that exploit predictability may outperform simple—one may argue, naive—fixed mix strategies in which an investor may either ignore predictability, holding constant weights over her investment horizon, or even disregard the properties of asset returns altogether and assign equal weights (EW) to each of the assets in a menu. In our paper we capture a wide range of linear predictability patterns from past asset returns and a set of predictors that the finance literature has shown to forecast economic conditions (such as the dividend yield, the riskless term spread, and the default spread between Baa- and Aaa-rated bonds, see Fama & French, 1989).In the empirical finance literature, it is has been long known that portfolios selected according to the mean–variance (MV) criterion are unlikely to perform as well as equally weighted portfolios in OOS tests (see e.g., DeMiguel, Garlappi, & Uppal, 2009; Duchin & Levy, 2009). In this paper, we recast the key question in this literature—i.e., “If we have at least some information on the expected returns, riskiness, and diversification properties of the assets, limited though it may be, why should we not expect optimization to improve on a naively diversified portfolio?” (see Kritzman, Page, & Turkington, 2010, p. 31)—with reference not to simple MV strategies, but to stochastic programming approaches to long-horizon DOPs that exploit predictability. Notice that from an ex-ante perspective, the odds that the answer to this question may be positive are not easily guessed. On the one hand, full DOPs are based on large-scale econometric models that are exposed to both the risks of model misspecification and to the problems caused by estimation uncertainty concerning a large number of parameters. This would make one think that DOPs may not stand a chance to out-perform the naive fixed mix EW strategy. On the other hand, if investment opportunities are truly time-varying and statistically predictable, then the entire literature that has claimed the failure of optimizing models over EW may simply derive from the fact that important features of the actual set of investment opportunities have been ignored, so that the Markowitz-style MV strategies would be biased for the true but unknown portfolio weights. Our paper sheds light on these important issues.As in Moreno and Olmeda (2007), we follow a quite simple but extremely computationally intensive approach: we build a variety of linear models estimated using several alternative information sets and use them to obtain forecasts of a significant number of return series, along an extensive time span. Subsequently we employ test procedures to detect any differences among models, information sets as well as specifications. Within a framework in which the investor maximizes expected HARA (constant relative risk aversion) utility in a frictionless market, our key finding is that there are enormous differences in optimal long-horizon (in-sample) weights between the Markowitz MV benchmark and DOPs. While all fixed mix strategies imply zero hedging demands by construction, in the case of long-run DOPs, the dividend yield causes rather large hedging demands to be optimal in most applications. In OOS comparisons, there is however no clear-cut, systematic (i.e., common to all the data sets investigated) evidence that long-horizon (60-month) dynamic strategies that take linear predictability into consideration may outperform—according to a simple Sharpe ratio metric—naive strategies such as a myopic MV and EW portfolios.However, Sharpe ratios are, by construction, suitable risk-adjusted measures only for mean–variance investors and/or in the presence of normally distributed returns. Therefore the Certainty Equivalent Return (CER) represents, a more reliable OOS metric to rank competing strategies. Using a CER metric, we obtain a slightly more negative view of the actual chances of dynamic strategies that exploit linear predictability to outperform the benchmarks. Only in one of our five applications, there was evidence of DOP that exploit predictability within VAR frameworks producing useful portfolio signals, in terms of realized utilities. In three other applications it was instead the fixed mix strategy that outperformed all other models. However, only for one data set, the DOPs were systematically ranked below all benchmarks.The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we review the literature, also to emphasize our contributions. In Section 3 we describe our research design and the structure of the statistical models that capture predictability, the dynamic portfolio problem, the solution methods, and the criteria used to test whether DOPs outperform the benchmarks. Section 4 describes the asset allocation strategies, with special emphasis on the conditions under which DOPs simplify to myopic, Markowitz-style ones. Section 5 describes our data sets. Section 6 compares ex-ante, recursive in-sample portfolio weights and hedging demands. Section 7 is the core of the paper as it documents realized OOS performances. Section 8 discusses our key results, a few additional robustness tests, and concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Should long-run investors flock to implement DOP methods that take into full account any statistical evidence of predictable returns in the available data? As far as the widely used and investigated linear predictability models—of the vector autoregressive type and under standard choices of predictors—are concerned, our paper has provided a moderately negative answer: especially when criteria that take directly into account the realized utility of investors (such as CER) are used to rank the portfolio strategies, our evidence from five alternative data sets and a rather comprehensive range of 1,077 alternative optimizing strategies is that only occasionally the best performing (as opposed to average, randomly chosen dynamic strategy) VAR-based portfolios have systematically outperformed the simple benchmarks entertained in this paper. This result does not depend from the assumed coefficient of risk aversion of the investor. Even though the evidence is slightly more favorable to dynamic optimizing strategies under a simpler Sharpe ratio criterion and it was observed that hardly ever both benchmark fixed mix strategies (MV and EW) outperformed the best VAR-based portfolios, the finding casts doubts on how useful and economically valuable simple off-the-shelf optimizing methods may actually be.In unreported robustness checks (see Appendix C), we find that these empirical results are remarkably resilient to several alternative experiments. For instance, we have divided our overall back-testing sample in four sub-samples containing each approximately five years of monthly data, (i.e., 1985:01–1990:06, 1990:07–1995:12, 1996:01–2001:06, 2001:07–2006:12). The OOS performances measured in terms of both SRs and CERs are then re-computed across the different sub-samples. In overall terms, even though some instability has been occasionally observed, the results in Section 7 hold in each of the sub-samples. Given that the presence of regimes in financial data has been widely documented, we have also computed realized OOS performances comparing periods of bear and bull markets, as classified by standard multivariate Markov switching models. Also in this case, there is some evidence that only the best VAR-based portfolio strategies may compete with simple benchmarks in all regimes. We have also performed calculations subject to short sale constraints,wi,t∈[0,1]for the SAA data set. We find that imposing constraints improves the comparative—relative to the EW strategy and the classical MV strategy—performance of DOPs. As one would expect, the constraints considerably reduce the realized OOS Sharpe ratios and, although to a lesser extent, also realized OOS CERs. However imposing short-sale constraints does not radically alter our conclusion that outperforming fixed-mix strategies in recursive OOS experiments using DOP strategies is difficult. We have shrunk the amount of estimation error affecting our OOS performance measures by performing afresh calculations for the MKT/SMB/HML data set, when the exercise is initialized to an in-sample estimation period 1975:01–1994:12 to include from the very start 240 observations per series. This set up implies around 23 data points per parameter or parameter at each point in time. Increasing the amount of information fed into DOP asset allocation strategies does not seem to produce statistically different performances across models and relative to either fixed-mix or MV-type strategies. Finally, we have also entertained expanding the set of predictors employed in our OOS tests.27The benefit of including additional predictors is investigated by considering, in addition to DY, TS, and DS: (1) the rate of growth in the M2 monetary aggregate; (2) the CPI inflation rate; (3) the change in the unemployment rate; (4) the rate of growth in industrial production; (5) the personal consumption expenditure growth rate; (6) the 30-year mortgage rate; (7) the rate of growth in housing starts.27We conclude that adding or changing predictors, even though this often slightly improves the OOS performances of the different strategies considered, does not generate a sensible effect on the qualitative nature of the results.However, it must be observed that the problem may lie as much with dynamic optimizing portfolios as with our specific implementation of these methods in this paper. Even though the spirit of our research design has consisted in adopting the most popular choices that have appeared in the finance literature, a number of details of the research design might be subject to deeper scrutiny so that it cannot be ruled out that our empirical findings may consequently be affected. For instance, in this paper we have only entertained the case in which asset returns are linearly predictable using simple vector autoregressions. However, the applied statistics literature contains massive evidence that asset returns contain nonlinear, regime switching patterns that may describe the predictability in financial returns as well as or better than vector autoregressions do (see e.g., Guidolin & Hyde, 2012). In practice, our finding that dynamic optimizing strategies fail to generate adequate economic value may be the result of a difference between the information that affects our in-sample VAR estimates and the data generating process from which the realized asset returns are subsequently drawn (see Fleten et al., 2002). It is possible that DOPs may exploit in-sample information in the data sets better than the fixed mix portfolios do, and yet implementing such strategies in practice may prove misleading to the point of destroying portfolio value (in risk-adjusted terms) because of the presence of parameter uncertainty and misspecification. It would be interesting to investigate whether the empirical results in our paper as to the problems that VARs encounter in out-performing fixed mix strategies extend to the case of, for instance, asset returns governed by modulating Markov chains that represents the economic and political factors that affect markets (see e.g., Çanakoğlu & Özekici, 2010; Moreno & Olmeda, 2007). If these more complex predictability models were better specified and/or less subject to the effects of estimation uncertainty, then they may lead to better OOS performance.Additionally, we have evaluated competing portfolio strategies on the basis of their realized, back-tested CER as well as of their realized Sharpe ratio. While the former measure was selected because entirely consistent with the way dynamic portfolio problems have been formulated and appears to be an increasingly dominant criterion in financial economics (see Gollier, 2004, and references therein), the Sharpe ratio has been reported only because it tends to populate the practitioners’ literature. It would be therefore interesting to supplement CERs and SRs as tools to rank strategies. For instance, Farinelli and Tibiletti (2008) have emphasized the explicit importance of skewness with respect to a benchmark. Joro and Na (2006) have argued in favor of a new paradigm in portfolio performance measurement which is based on mean–variance-skewness framework.Finally, our dynamic optimizing strategies have not taken transaction costs into account. Yet, especially in the presence of multivariate linear predictability, such costs are likely to be very important and to possibly further worsen the relative performance of long-run optimizing vs. benchmark strategies. Because both the empirical finance (see e.g., Guidolin & Hyde, 2012) and the operations research literatures (see e.g., Barro & Canestrelli, 2005) have paid attention to transaction costs in dynamic optimization, it would be important to extend our research design to this important case. We leave this and related extensions to future research.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.01.030.Supplementary material