@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
When should service firms provide free experience service?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study a priority queueing system with free experience service.We derive the expected waiting time of the informed customers.We obtain an optimal strategy for the service firm.We found some managerial insights for the service firm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Queueing,Revenue management,OR in service industries,Experience service,Delay-sensitive,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
By providing a free experience service, a service firm can attract more uninformed customers. However, it could reversely effect the delay-sensitive, informed customers’ decision. In this paper, we study a priority queueing system with free experience services. We study the customer behavior in equilibrium after we derive the expected customer waiting time. We then construct the service firm’s revenue function and obtain an optimal strategy for the service firm. Our results suggest that when the market size of informed customers is relatively small, the firm should consider providing free experience services for uninformed customers. Conversely, if the demand rate of potential informed customers is quite high, the firm should ignore uninformed customers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is widely acknowledged that customer experience service is the sum of all experiences a customer receives from a supplier of services or products, over the duration of their relationship with the supplier. Customer experience has an important impact on many customer behaviors such as: discovery, attraction, awareness, joining, balking, interaction, purchase, use, cultivation and advocacy. Furthermore, it can also be considered an individual experience over one transaction. The customer experience service is a journey to make customers, according to their standards, happy, satisfied, justified, respected, served and cared for, from the minute they start a relationship with the supplier. The customer experience has emerged as the most important aspect in achieving success for companies across almost all industries, especially the service industry (Peppers & Rogers, 2005). For example, Starbucks spent less than $10M on advertising from 1987 to 1998 yet added over 2000 new stores to accommodate growing sales (Gilland & Warsing, 2009). In addition, providing free experience service may also increase the revenue of the firm by attracting uninformed customers to purchase service, especially when there is a scarcity in informed customers. For example, video game sellers can grant consumers limited access to their products prior to its launch and enable consumers to gain partial experience (Chu & Zhang, 2011). However, it is also possible that the experience service increases the informed customers’ waiting time, and may result in non-purchase.In this paper, we consider a service firm which simultaneously provides service for informed customers and provides free experience service for uninformed customers. The informed customers are fully informed about the service and delay sensitive. We assume that the service firm is a monopoly in the sense that it provides exclusive service to a designated region, or there is little competition for the service provided. The customers in the waiting room queue up in order to receive the regular service as soon as it is unoccupied. Being uninformed about the formal service, all arriving uninformed customers will attempt to receive experience service. After the experience service, some of them depart, but the rest continue with the regular service. To simplify the model, we assume that there is only one server in the system. That is, this is anM/M/1priority queueing model with informed customers and uninformed customers. The informed customers have higher priority, but cannot interrupt the uninformed customers who are receiving service (see Fig. 1). Our objective is to help the service firm figure out an optimal service strategy to maximize the expected revenue.Our paper is related to several research streams, including: experience service and pricing with delay sensitive customers. We now briefly review each of the research streams below. When there are uninformed customers in the market, one approach that has been widely utilized in the operations literature is to provide experience service or goods for the uninformed customers. Experience service has been extensively studied from one of two viewpoints: customer learning and free riding. Ackerberg (2003), Crawford and Shum (2005), and Osborne (2005) model a customer learning process by using information transfer, in which, experience service is adopted to control the customers’ valuation. The other common phenomenon related to experience service is free riding defined as a customer’s behavior in which he/she experiences service in one place while purchasing service in another place. For example, a customer takes experience service from the bricks-and-mortar retailer while buys the product from an online retailer. Most works claim that free riding would hurt the profit of the firm providing free experience service when there is price competition, as in Antia, Bergen, and Dutta (2004) and Carlton (2001). Shin (2007) shows that free riding can be considered as a necessary mechanism that prevents an aggressive response from another firm and reduces the intensity of price competition. As shown in all the works on service experience, providing experience service for the uninformed customers will increasing revenue of either the service provider or the free rider. On the other hand, providing experience service for the uninformed customers increases the service load, which would affect informed customers’ purchasing decisions, especial when the informed customers are sensitive to the delay.When facing delay-sensitive customers, not only the price but also the delay of the service system affect customers’ purchase decision. In this case, the service firm should carefully post price and control service load. Naor (1969) was first to study the interaction between the price and queueing effect. In the precursory work, Naor studied an observableM/M/1queueing system with a single class of customers and assumed that the customers have a constant perceived value for the service and a constant unit delay cost. Furthermore, the author showed that the social optimality, the individual optimality of the customers, and the revenue-maximizing strategy of the firm do not align with each other, and the monopolistic firm would set a higher price than the one under social optimality. Knudsen (1972) generalized Naor’s result to multi-servers queue with a nonlinear waiting cost function. Edelson and Hildebrand (1975) investigated Naor’s model with an unobservable queue, i.e., customers cannot observe the current state of the queue and make their purchasing decision based on their expected waiting time. Other extensions of Naor’s model include De Vany (1976), Lippman and Stidham (1977), and Hassin (1986). For a comprehensive review on pricing with queueing effect, the reader may refer to Hassin and Haviv (2002) and Stidham (1992). Chen and Frank (2004) gave an optimal pricing strategy for the monopoly service firm by assuming that there are only informed customers in the market. Afèche and Mendelson (2004) investigated a uniform price and priority auction with continuum classes of informed customers that have different service values and delay costs. Gilland and Warsing (2009) studied two priority queues with continuum classes of informed customers and no balking, and presented the optimal priority decision under the assumptions of self-interest customers and coordinated customers. Guo, Sun, and Wang (2011) gave the equilibrium joining behavior of the customer in a queueing system, when the customers have partial information on service times distribution such as moments and the range. Economou and Kanta (2011) and Wang and Zhang (2013) studied the customer equilibrium and socially optimal balking behavior for unobservable and observable single-server retrial queues. Boudali and Economou (2012) investigated the balking strategies of the customer in a Markovian queue with catastrophes. In their work, the customers not only care about the waiting time in the system, but also concern the unreliable server.In this paper, we assume that there are both informed and uninformed customers in the system, and the informed customers are sensitive to the delay. As a result, there is an interaction between the informed customers and the uninformed customers. That is, the purchase decision of an informed customer will be affected by the uninformed customers who cause the additional delay of the former. We first develop a priority queueing model to get the expected waiting time of informed customer, and then construct a game model to analyze the equilibrium customer behaviors. Based on this, we study the optimal strategy for the firm. In contrast to the previous literature on the interaction with price and congestion, we focus on the interaction between informed and uninformed customers. Our work can be considered as an extension of Chen and Frank (2004) and Gilland and Warsing (2009). Similar to their works, we also consider a pricing problem of a monopoly firm. Additionally, we study the firm’s optimal decision on providing experience service. To our best knowledge, our paper is probably the first one addressing the issue involving both service pricing and experience service with sensitive customers. The main contribution of this paper is that we have answered the following questions: In what case should a service firm provide the uninformed customers with free experience service? If the firm is not supposed to provide free experience service, should the firm provide regular service to all potential informed customers or only part of them, and what is the optimal service rate and what is the optimal service price? The main results are given in Theorem 2.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the system as a mathematical model. In Section 3, we analyze the priority queueing system and derive the expected waiting time of the informed customers. In Section 4, we present the results on the optimal strategy of the firm, which are presented for the two cases separately. Numerical examples are given in Section 5 and we conclude the paper in Section 6. All the proofs of the lemmas, theorems and propositions are in Appendix A.In practice, it is more common to model the system as a queueing network service system with multiple servers (for example, Gong, Lai, & Wang, 2008). To simplify the model, we follow the assumption of many other references, for example, Chen and Frank (2004), Gilland and Warsing (2009), and Economou and Kanta (2011), etc. We consider a capacity-constrained service firm in the market, which can be modeled as an unobservableM/M/1queueing system with service rateμn. The firm posts a uniform price p for the customers who require service. There are two classes of customers: informed and uninformed customers. Similar to Chen and Frank (2004), we assume that the informed customers have sufficient knowledge about the service and have the same perceived value on the service, say, R. Furthermore, the informed customers are sensitive to delays and the delay cost is in proportion to the waiting time in the system. Denote by d the delay cost per unit of time for an informed customer. The potential informed customers arrive according to a Poisson process with rateΛ.In contrast, uninformed customers do not know about the service and need experience service to find out whether the service is suitable. The firm provides free experience service to uninformed customers. The experience service times are also subjected to independently identical exponential distributed with rateμf. It is reasonable to assume thatμf>μn. Uninformed customers are not delay sensitive and arrive according to a Poisson process with rateλU, which depends on the effort of dissemination. Following a non-preemptive policy and First Come First Service (FCFS) discipline, we further assume that a regular service has a higher priority than an experience service. After an experience service, proportionαof the uninformed customers will continue to receive a regular service by paying p dollars, while(1-α)of them will depart without continuing the regular service.The informed customers make decisions on whether to purchase the regular service based on their expected utility, which is a function of perceived value of the service, the posted price, and the expected waiting time in the queue. LetW(λI,λU)be the expected waiting time in the system of a random informed customer, given that the firm provides experience service and the demand rate of informed and uninformed customers areλIandλUrespectively. Define u as the expected utility of an informed customer, thenu=R-dW(λI,λU)-p,when the firm provides free experience service,R-dμn-λI-p,when the firm does not provide free experience service.We assume that all informed customers are rational so that they join the regular service only if the expected utility value is nonnegative. We further assume that the customers will not renege from the queue once they join the queue.Remark 1In some cases, informed customers will be very loyal to the firm, that is, the value of the reward R is much greater than the total cost, or the unit waiting cost d is so small that the informed customers can be very patient on the waiting line. In general, the behavior of the informed customers are affected by the utility.We describe the firm’s policy as following: The firm first decides whether it should provide experience service for uninformed customers. If the answer is no, the firm decides the demand rateλIof informed customers who are served, and the price is determined accordingly by(1)p=R-dμn-λI.Conversely, if the firm decides to provide free experience service for the uninformed customers, the firm needs to control the uninformed customer demand rateλUin order to guarantee that all the informed customers have priority in receiving service over uninformed customers. The posted price p is adjusted accordingly by(2)p=R-dW(Λ,λU).In this section, we assume that the firm makes decision to provide experience service for the uninformed customers and the demand rate of uninformed customers isλU. We further assume that all the informed customers follow common strategy: join the service system with probabilityλIΛ, that is, the demand rate of the informed customers isλI. In what following, we deriveW(λI,λU)by using method of probability generating function. To this end, we construct a continuous-time Markov chain{N1(t),N2(t),K(t),t⩾0}, whereN1(t)represents the number of informed customers in the queue (excluding the customer receiving service),N2(t)represents the number of uninformed customers in the queue (excluding the customer receiving service), andK(t)represents the status of the server and is defined as:K(t)=0,the server is empty,1,the server is providing regular service,2,the server is providing experience service.It is easy to see that the state space of the Markov chain is{0,1,2,…}×{0,1,2,…}×{0,1,2}. For the sake of convenience, we defineπi,j,k(i,j=0,1,…,k=0,1,2) as the steady-state distribution of the Markov chain andρas the utilization rate of the system. The following Lemma gives the ergodic condition of the Markov chain.Lemma 1The Markov chain{N1(t),N2(t),K(t),t⩾0}is ergodic if and only if(3)ρ=λIμn+λUμf+αλUμn<1.As we well know, if the Markov chain is ergodic, then the corresponding queueing system is stable. In other words, Lemma 1 provides the stability condition of the queueing system. Although the proof of Lemma 1 is little bit complicated, the result is quite intuitive: the first term represents that the server provides regular service for the informed customers, the second term represents that the server provides experience service for the uninformed customers, and the last term represents that the server provides regular service for the uninformed customers who decide to purchase the service after getting experience service. By using the approach of probability generating function, we can give the specific form of the expected waiting time of an arbitrary joining informed customer, which is characterized in Theorem 1.Theorem 1Assume that the firm decides to provide experience service for the uninformed customer. If the service system is stable, i.e.,ρ<1, then the expected waiting time of an arbitrary joining informed customer can given by(4)W(λI,λU)=(μn+αλU)μf2+λUμn2+αλU(μn+μf)(μn-λI)μnμf2.According to Theorem 1, we have the following proposition.Proposition 1∂W(λI,λU)∂λI>0,∂W(λI,λU)∂λU>0,∂W(λI,λU)∂μn<0,∂W(λI,λU)∂μf<0.As we mention in the introduction, Proposition 1 reports that if the firm provides the experience service for uninformed customers, arrivals of the uninformed customers will affect the waiting time of the informed customers. Specially, the expected waiting time of the informed customers is increasing with respect to not only their own demand rateλI, but also the uninformed customer demand rateλU. Conversely, the expected waiting time of the informed customers is decreasing with respect to both the regular service rateμnand the experience service rateμf.Having analyzed the expected waiting time of an arbitrary joining informed customer when the firm is providing free experience service, we then study the firm’s optimal strategy problem. The service firm makes a decision on whether providing a free experience service, and sets the uniform price for the service to maximize its expected revenue. For the sake of convenience, we defineπNP(λI)as the expected revenue of the firm when not providing free experience service, given that the demand rate of informed customers isλI;πP(Λ,λU)as the expected revenue of the firm when providing free experience, given that the market size of informed customers isΛand the demand rate of uninformed customers isλU. According to (1), (2) and (4), it follows that(5)πNP(λI)=R-dμn-λIλI=RλI-dλIμn-λI;(6)πP(Λ,λU)=(R-dW(Λ,λU))(Λ+αλU)=αR-αdμnμf2+dΛ(αμf2+μn2+αμn+αμf)μnμf2(μn-Λ)λU-αdαμf2+μn2+αμn+αμfμnμf2(μn-Λ)λU2+RΛ-dΛμn-Λ.Remark 2Formula (5) indicates that when the service firm decides not to provide free experience service, only part of (or all) informed customers (λIin Eq. (5)) purchase regular service. Formula (6) indicates that when the firm decides to provide free experience service, there are actually two groups of customers will purchase the regular service: the first group are all the informed customers (Λin Eq. (6)), another group are those uninformed customers who decide to purchase the regular service after taking free experience service (αλUin Eq. (6)).1.πNP(λ)is strictly concave with respect toλin[0,μn), and the optimal demand rate lies in(0,μn)and is given by(7)λNP∗=μn-dμnR.Correspondingly, the optimal price is given by(8)pI=R-dRμn.πP(Λ,λU)is strictly concave with respect toλUin0,μnμf-μfΛμn+αμfand the optimal demand rate is(9)λU∗=max0,αμnμf2(Rμn-RΛ-d)2αd(αμf2+μn2+αμn+αμf)-Λ2α.When the firm does not provide experience service, our result (the first part of Lemma 2) is consistent with Proposition 2.3 in Chen and Frank (2004).Given that the market size of informed customers isΛ, denote byπNP∗the maximum value of the expected revenue of the firm when it does not provide free experience service, and denote byπP∗(Λ)the maximum value of the expected revenue of the firm when it does provide free experience service. That is,πP∗(Λ)=πPΛ,λU∗(Λ).The following reference demand rate will be useful in characterizing the optimal strategy of the firm:(10)λˆ=αμnμf2(Rμn-d)αRμnμf2+dαμf2+μn2+αμn+αμf.Therefore, the main result of the paper is given in the following theorem, which presents the optimal strategy of the firm in two exclusive cases of the system parameters according to the values ofλˆandλNP∗.Theorem 2Case 1:λˆ⩽λNP∗. In this case, the optimal strategy of the firm is given according to the following subcases:(i-1)IfΛ<λˆ, the optimal strategy of the firm is to provide free experience service for the uninformed customers with rateλU∗, whereλU∗is given by Eq.(9). Accordingly, the posted price isp∗=R-dWΛ,λU∗.Ifλˆ⩽Λ⩽λNP∗, the optimal strategy of the firm is not to provide free experience service but to serve all the potential informed customers. Accordingly, the posted price isp∗=R-dμn-Λ.IfΛ>λNP∗, the optimal strategy of the firm is not to provide free experience service and only serve informed customers with rateλNP∗. Accordingly, the posted price isp∗=pI.IfΛ⩽λ¯, the optimal strategy of the firm is to provide free experience service for the uninformed customers with rateλU∗, whereλU∗is given by Eq.(9). Accordingly, the posted price(12)p∗=R-dWΛ,λU∗IfΛ>λ¯, the optimal strategy of the firm is not to provide free experience service and only serve informed customers with rateλNP∗. Accordingly, the posted price isp∗=pI.In the case ofλˆ>λNP∗, whenΛ=λ¯, there exist two different optimal prices:R-dW(λ¯,λU∗(λ¯))andR-dRμn. This is because the optimal price is not unique on the boundary points. Both solutions result in the same maximum revenue for the firm.Theorem 2 provides us very important and interesting implications. Let us take Case 1 as an example. In this case, the service firm should make different decisions based on different types of markets. (a) A scarce demand market. Assume that the potential market size of informed customers is smaller thanλˆ. It is worth providing free experience service to attract the uninformed customers. Meanwhile, the firm should control the demand rate of the uninformed customers so as not to scare the informed customers away, i.e.,λU⩽λU∗. (b) A moderate demand market. Assume that the potential demand rate of informed customers is larger thanλˆbut less thanλNP∗. Uninformed customers are not profitable to the firm. At the same time, the potential demand rate of informed customers is not high enough. Therefore, the firm should not attract uninformed customers by providing free experience service, but set the price to beR-dμn-Λin order to serve all potential informed customers. (c) An ample demand market. Assume that the potential market size of informed customers is larger thanλNP∗. There is an over abundance of informed customers such that the firm cannot handle all them. Therefore, the firm should completely ignore uninformed customers and set a higher price ofpIpI>R-dμn-Λ. In this case, there is only a portion,λNP∗Λ, of the informed customers purchase the regular service.In this section, we present two numerical examples to illustrate the results of the previous section.Example 1An informed customer’s perceived value on the regular service is $2.00. An informed customer’s delay cost is $0.10 per minute. The expected regular service time is 1min and the expected experience service time is 2/3min. The probability that an uninformed customer purchases the regular service after taking experience service is 0.05.It is easy to compute thatλˆ=0.6130andλNP∗=0.7764. That is,λˆ<λNP∗, which means that Example 1 belongs to Case 1 in Theorem 2.According to Theorem 2, the optimal strategy structure of Example 1 can be shown in Fig. 2. When the potential market size of the informed customers is less than 0.613 per minute, i.e.,Λ<0.613, it is worth providing free experience service for uninformed customers. The optimal demand rate of uninformed customers isλU∗=190-310Λ11persons/min.Correspondingly, the optimal price isp∗(Λ)=0.45+12-2Λ.When0.613⩽Λ⩽0.7764, the firm benefits by not providing uninformed customers with free experience service and instead only serves all informed customers. The optimal price isp∗(Λ)=1.9-2Λ1-Λ.WhenΛ>0.7764, the firm should not provide free experience service for uninformed customers and only serve 0.7764 informed customers per minute in equilibrium. Correspondingly, the optimal price isp∗=$1.5528.Example 2An informed customer’s perceived value on the regular service is $2.00. An informed customer’s delay cost is $0.10 per minute. The expected regular service time is 1min and the expected experience service time is 0.25min. The probability that the uninformed customer purchases regular service after taking experience service is 0.5.It is easily verified thatλˆ=0.886>0.7764=λNP∗. That is, Example 2 belongs to Case 2 in Theorem 2. Using bisection search, we can find thatλ¯=0.8171person/min. The optimal strategy structure for Example 2 is given in Fig. 3. WhenΛ<0.8171, the optimal strategy of the firm is to provide free experience service for uninformed customers, and to offer304-343Λ23uninformed customers free experience service per minute in equilibrium. Correspondingly, the optimal price isp∗(Λ)=2-386.4-394.45Λ368-368Λ.WhenΛ>0.8171, the firm benefits by not providing free experience service and instead only serves 0.7764 informed customers per minute in equilibrium. Accordingly, the optimal price isp∗=$1.5528.The service firm can win over some of the uninformed customers by providing free experience service, but that may lead to informed customers experiencing a longer waiting time. When informed customers are delay sensitive, we should use this promotion strategy carefully. In this paper, a priority queueing system is developed to model a monopoly service firm providing free experience service for uninformed customers. By means of a probability generating function, we derive the expected waiting time of a random informed customer, which helps us analyze the informed customers’ behavior. Based on this, we address the following three questions: Should the service firm provide uninformed customers with free experience service? Which classes of customers should be given service (regular or experienced)? What is the optimal price posted by the served firm?Our results suggest that when the market size of informed customers is very small (scarce demand market), the service firm can increase revenue by providing uninformed customers with free experience service, in the condition that all the informed customers are guaranteed to receive service. However, when the potential market size of informed customers is large enough (is larger thanλˆin Case 1 and is larger thanλ¯in Case 2), it is not a good strategy to provide free experience service. In this case, the firm should focus on the informed customers and ignore the uninformed customers.The limitation of this paper is that we only study a simpleM/M/1model in order to obtain and deeply analyze the theoretical results. As an extension of this paper, we can consider a multi-server system with heterogenous informed customers who have different perceived values and different delay costs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
