@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of ambulance relocations on the performance of ambulance service providers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the effect of the number of relocations on the response-time performance.The performance is measured by a general penalty function.We validate the effectiveness of relocations for a wide variety of realistic scenarios.Results show that already a small number of relocations lead to good performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Multiple criteria analysis,Dynamic smbulance management,Dynamic relocation,Response times,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dynamic Ambulance Management (DAM) is generally believed to provide means to enhance the response-time performance of emergency medical service providers. The implementation of DAM algorithms leads to additional movements of ambulance vehicles compared to the reactive paradigm, where ambulances depart from the base station when an incident is reported. In practice, proactive relocations are only acceptable when the number of additional movements is limited. Motivated by this trade-off, we study the effect of the number of relocations on the response-time performance. We formulate the relocations from one configuration to a target configuration by the Linear Bottleneck Assignment Problem, so as to provide the quickest way to transition to the target configuration. Moreover, the performance is measured by a general penalty function, assigning to each possible response time a certain penalty. We extensively validate the effectiveness of relocations for a wide variety of realistic scenarios, including a day and night scenario in a critically and realistically loaded system. The results consistently show that already a small number of relocations lead to near-optimal performance, which is important for the implementation of DAM algorithms in practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In emergency situations, the location of ambulances has a huge impact on the response time to an incident, i.e., the total time between an incoming emergency call and the moment that an ambulance arrives at the emergency scene. The evaluation of ambulance services providers, judged by the authorities, heavily relies on their performance regarding these response times. For instance, in The Netherlands, the response time of an ambulance may not exceed 15 minutes in 95 percent of the highest priority emergency cases. To realize short response times, it is crucial to plan ambulance services well. This encompasses a variety of planning problems at the strategic, tactical, and operational level. At the strategic level, the locations of the ambulance base stations are determined. Then, at the tactical level, the number of ambulances and thus crews per base station is specified. At the operational level, real-time dispatching of ambulances to incidents and real-time relocation of ambulances is considered.In this paper, we focus on the last part of the operational level: the relocation of ambulances. Ambulance vehicles are relocated in real-time, using dynamic and proactive relocation strategies, in order to achieve shorter response times to incidents. These relocation decisions are typically made when an event happens, e.g., when an ambulance is dispatched or when an ambulance is newly free after the service of a patient. However, whether relocations are allowed, and if so, to which locations, depend on regulatory rules. For instance, in Vienna, Austria, moving around ambulances unoccupied by a patient is not allowed, cf. Schmid (2012) as opposed to Edmonton, Canada, cf. Alanis, Ingolfsson, and Kolfal (2013). Moreover, the number of locations at which an ambulance is allowed to park up differs per country. This number can exceed the number of ambulances, as in Montreal, Canada, cf. Gendreau, Laporte, and Semet (2006). Many of these waiting sites are just street corners or different hot spots. In contrast, in The Netherlands, ambulances always must return to a base station, cf. Jagtenberg, Bhulai, and van der Mei (2015). This is a building with several facilities where the ambulance crew can spend its shift when idle. Another difference between countries is the average hospital transfer time. In North America this time can be very large, cf. Carter et al. (2015), as opposed to The Netherlands where the transfer time is usually short.We consider the Dutch setting in this paper: short transfer times and the dispatcher is allowed to relocate ambulances unoccupied from base station to another one, but the number of locations on which an ambulance can idle, i.e., base stations, is rather small.Ambulance relocations are not popular among ambulance crews, especially when the crew is idle at a base station and it is relocated to a different one. Instead, they prefer to spend their shift at a base station and not on the road. To keep the personnel motivated, the number of relocations they have to perform is not allowed to increase excessively. If the ambulance crews spend too much time on the road, the ambulance service provider probably will be condemned by an Occupational Safety and Health organization. Furthermore, costs for the ambulance service provider are associated with each relocation. Some ambulance service providers namely have the policy, especially at night, that the salary of the ambulance crew partly depends on their busy time in which their relocation time is included. Therefore, decision makers must make a consideration between the number of ambulance relocations and the effect of these relocations on the performance of the ambulance service provider.As an alternative, one could also consider the relocation times. Especially if the above-mentioned payment structure is used, it can be cheaper to minimize these relocation times. However, in this paper, we treat the crew’s perspective as our major critical success factor, instead of the financial aspect related to relocations. The number of relocations is a good measure for the crew’s perspective, since crews in general prefer to perform one long relocation rather than several short ones. Of course, there is also a trade-off between number of relocations and relocation times. We will pay attention to this trade-off as well.The relationship between performance and the number of ambulance relocations is complex. The consequences of moving an ambulance to a different base station are not known a priori, due to uncertainty that plays an important role in the process. It is usually not the case that ‘more’ is ‘better’, i.e., the more relocations are made, the better the performance of the ambulance service provider. But even if this was the case, there is still a trade-off: would one carry out extra ambulance relocations for only a small gain in performance? Opinions of different ambulance providers differ on this question and it is hard to set a standard concerning the execution of relocations. Therefore, useful insights about the relationship between performance and the number of ambulance relocations are desirable.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
