@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficiency assessment of primary care providers: A conditional nonparametric approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We estimate efficiency measures for a set of primary care units.We consider both (continuous and discrete) exogenous variables.We also deal with the presence of undesirable outputs in data.The characteristics of the population have a significant effect on results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Efficiency,Data envelopment analysis,Environmental factors,Nonparametric analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper uses a fully nonparametric approach to estimate efficiency measures for primary care units incorporating the effect of (exogenous) environmental factors. This methodology allows us to account for different types of variables (continuous and discrete) describing the main characteristics of patients served by those providers. In addition, we use an extension of this nonparametric approach to deal with the presence of undesirable outputs in data, represented by the rates of hospitalization for ambulatory care sensitive condition (ACSC). The empirical results show that all the exogenous variables considered have a significant and negative effect on efficiency estimates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The combination of growing care demands from an ageing population and the existing difficulties associated with budget restrictions has placed the objective of improving the effectiveness and efficiency of health systems at the center of the debate on the future of health care in Europe (European Commission, 2010). In this context, there has been a growing interest in measuring efficiency in the health sector. Although most of the empirical work has been focused on hospitals (Steinmann, Dittrich, Karmann, & Zweifel, 2004), primary care provision is receiving progressively more attention (Amado & Dyson, 2008). In fact, primary and community-based care is called on to play a pivotal role in the search for an overall more efficient organization of healthcare (Ham, 2010).Modeling the production technology of primary care providers is a difficult task. The final output, which should capture the impact of the services on current and future health status of patients, cannot be directly measured or clearly identified. On the one hand, patients’ health status depends on many other factors, besides activities by primary care providers, and on the other hand, there may be a delay before particular primary care services are seen to have an effect on health. Hence, intermediate products related with final outputs are normally used as proxies. This strategy is not straightforward either, however, as primary care providers deliver multiple services, whose impact on health improvement is difficult to disentangle and/or may even be questionable in some cases.In this context, the use of a nonparametric approach, and particularly data envelopment analysis (DEA), has become very popular in empirical studies, since it can easily handle multiple dimensions of performance and is less vulnerable to the misspecification problems that can affect econometric models.1See Hollingsworth (2003, 2008) or Worthington (2004) for an overview of studies on the measurement of efficiency in the health sector.1Furthermore, multiple extensions of this technique have been developed in the literature to facilitate its adaptation to different frameworks (Emrouznejad, Parker, & Tavares, 2008).This paper contributes to the existing literature in the field by applying several extensions of the nonparametric approach to assess the performance of a set of primary care units (hereafter PCUs) in a Spanish region. First, we use a transformation approach in the traditional DEA model to incorporate undesirable outputs. Second, we adopt the robust order-m approach (Cazals, Florens, & Simar, 2002) to avoid potential problems due to the presence of atypical observations or noise in the data. Finally, we use a conditional approach to include the effect of both continuous and discrete environmental variables.The potential existence of undesirable (bad) outputs in a production process was already mentioned in the seminal work by Koopmans (1951). These undesirable outputs are prominent in the energy and environmental context in the form of pollution emissions or waste in resources, but they can also appear in health care services (e.g., adverse effects of drugs). In such cases, the aim of units should be to minimize these outputs rather than maximize them. However, in the standard DEA model, decreases in outputs are not allowed2In theory, the outputs can be decreased, but with a positive cost.2(only inputs being allowed to decrease); thus, it would be necessary to transform the original data or change the production technology in order to take into account the presence of these factors. In the current study, the undesirable factors will be represented by the hospitalization rates for ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSCs). In order to include them in a DEA model we use the extension developed by Seiford and Zhu (2002), since this is the method that fits better with the assumed production technology. This model has been used previously in the health (Hu, Qi, & Yang, 2012) as well as in the environmental sector (Hua, Bian, & Liang, 2007; Lu & Lo, 2007).In addition to the problem of dealing with undesirable outputs in data, we need to bear in mind that the performance of primary care providers can also be affected by exogenous or environmental variables, which in the context of our study are represented mainly by the characteristics of the patients served by each unit (Iezzoni, 1997). As these variables, unlike the inputs and the outputs, are not under the control of the decision making units (in our case, the PCUs), we need to include them in our efficiency analysis in a different way. For that purpose, many different approaches can be used (see Cordero, Pedraja, and Salinas (2008) for an overview); however, the validity of these traditional models is limited, because they need to assume the separability condition between the input–output space and the space of external factors environmental variables. This is not realistic for the health sector, where the characteristics of the population are clearly related to the volume of outputs and even of some inputs. Therefore, in this paper we use the so-called conditional nonparametric approach (Cazals et al., 2002; Daraio & Simar, 2005, 2007a), which avoids the restrictive separability assumption required by traditional approaches in order to provide meaningful results. This method was designed for continuous variables only, but we are interested in considering also discrete variables (in particular, a measure of deprivation), so we apply an extension of this methodology developed by De Witte and Kortelainen (2013) to include both types of exogenous variables.The conditional approach has become very popular in the recent literature on efficiency measurement. Hence, it is possible to find studies using this approach to measure the efficiency of units operating in a wide range of settings including the education sector (Bonaccorsi, Daraio, & Simar, 2006; Cherchye, De Witte, Ooghe, & Nicaise, 2010; De Witte & Kortelainen, 2013; De Witte & Rogge, 2011; De Witte, Rogge, Cherchye, & van Puyenbroeck, 2013; Haelermans & De Witte, 2012), banks and mutual funds (Badin, Daraio, & Simar, 2010; Blass, Da Silva, & Miranda, 2008; Daouia & Simar, 2007; Daraio & Simar, 2005, 2006), post offices (Cazals, Dudley, Florens, Patel, & Rodriguez, 2008), public libraries (De Witte & Geys, 2011, 2013), regional welfare and environment (Halkos & Tzeremes, 2011a, 2013), local services (Rogge & De Jaeger, 2012; Verschelde & Rogge, 2012) and the water sector (Carvalho & Marques, 2011; De Witte & Marques, 2010a, 2010b; Vidoli, 2011). However, to the best of our knowledge, this methodology has only been applied previously in the health sector to measure the efficiency of Greek health administrative districts (Halkos & Tzeremes, 2011b) and Portuguese hospitals (Ferreira & Marques, 2014), considering only continuous exogenous variables. Therefore, we believe that this is the first attempt using this approach to estimate efficiency measures of primary care organizations and considering both continuous and discrete environmental variables.In the literature, there are few previous studies where the presence of both undesirable outputs and exogenous factors are considered simultaneously in a DEA framework. Hua et al. (2007) developed a non-radial output-oriented DEA considering both types of variables in a model to estimate the ecological efficiency of paper mills in China. Yang and Pollitt (2009) assess the performance of Chinese coal-fired power plants combining four different traditional models to incorporate uncontrollable variables into DEA with one approach to deal with undesirable factors. More recently, Halkos and Tzeremes (2013) use a conditional directional distance function approach for measuring regional environmental efficiency, although they opt for transforming the technology of production to adapt it to the presence of undesirable outputs.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a brief literature review about previous studies attempting to measure efficiency of primary care providers. Section 3 presents the methodology employed in our study with a detailed explanation of the approaches we use to incorporate both undesirable outputs and environmental variables into the estimation of efficiency measures of PCU performance. Section 4 describes the dataset and the variables used in our analysis and Section 5 summarizes the main results. Finally, conclusions are set out in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper uses a recently developed conditional nonparametric approach to estimate efficiency measures for a set of Spanish primary care units incorporating the effect of different types of environmental factors (continuous and discrete) representing the characteristics of the population served by these providers. This method allows us to avoid the restrictive separability assumption between the input–output space and the space of external factors environmental variables required by traditional approaches and thereby provide meaningful results. In addition, this methodology makes it possible to determine the statistical significance and the direction of the effect of the exogenous variables. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first empirical study using this method to measure efficiency in primary health care.Further, the variables selected to represent the outcome of the evaluated units can be interpreted as undesirable variables according to the structure of the production process. For this, we have needed to use an extension of the traditional nonparametric models to transform the original values of those variables and estimate valid measures of performance for the evaluated units.Other strengths of the study are that it includes all the primary care organizations of the public Basque Health Service. Moreover, instead of only considering activity-related indicators, it uses a more solid performance indicator represented by hospitalization rates for ACSCs. In addition, the study population is adjusted for health status through a morbidity index (based on ACGs), which is a sophisticated measure validated in our context (Orueta, Urraca, Berraondo, Darpon, & Aurrekoetxea, 2006). The population is also adjusted for age and for the socio-economic level of the area of residence.The empirical results show that all the environmental variables considered have a significant and negative effect on the performance of primary health care providers, which is in line with the results obtained in the scarce previous literature using traditional semi-parametric approaches (Cordero et al., 2014). Among the limitations of this study, it should be noted that the output measures used might not only depend on performance by PCUs, but could also be influenced by other factors. For example, hospitalization rates for ACSCs might also depend on differences in quality of outpatient specialist care and admission policies between hospitals (Muecke, 2010). Finally, it has to be considered that the deprivation index is not assessed at the individual level so it could also represent an ecological fallacy.