@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Delivery pattern and transportation planning in grocery retailing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An MIP model is developed defining repetitive store delivery patterns.The model considers warehouse operations, transportation and instore logistics.The heuristic solution method developed reflects practical requirements and sizes.A numerical study shows that operational costs can be significantly reduced.Significant cost savings were achieved for an European grocery retailer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Retailing,Distribution,Instore logistics,Discrete optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper develops a planning concept for defining repetitive delivery patterns according to which stores of a grocery retailer are supplied from a distribution center. Applying repetitive delivery patterns offers major advantages when scheduling the workforce for shelf replenishment, defining cyclic transportation routes and managing warehouse capacities. In doing so, all logistics subsystems of a retail chain, i.e., warehousing, transportation and instore logistics, are jointly scheduled. We propose a novel model to minimize total costs in all associated subsystems of a retail distribution chain. A solution approach is developed for clustering stores and selecting delivery patterns that reflects practical requirements. A broad numerical analysis demonstrates cost savings of 2.5 percent on average compared to a state-of-the-art approach (see Sternbeck & Kuhn, 2014). This considerable cost reduction potential is confirmed by applying the suggested approach to a real case of a major European grocery retailer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Limited trade margins are forcing retailers to constantly strive for excellence in logistics. Improving the efficiency of the delivery of products from the distribution center (DC) to stores is therefore an ongoing effort in retailing. Retailers need to determine optimal delivery policies and optimize the vehicle routes for replenishing store inventory from the warehouses (Agrawal & Smith, 2009). Grocery retail stores mostly follow repetitive weekly demand patterns. Consequently, grocers respond to customer and store demand by supplying their stores cyclically with store-specific delivery patterns. A delivery pattern is a certain combination of weekdays on which a delivery from the DC arrives at a particular store on a repetitive basis for all standard weeks, i.e., weeks without public holidays, in a planning horizon. Empirical studies prove that the majority of grocery companies apply such delivery patterns, which are usually designed according to the volume of sales and store sizes (Kuhn & Sternbeck, 2013).Applying repetitive and store-specific delivery patterns offers several benefits. (1) Scheduling the workforce for the shelf replenishment process is much easier since the order replenishments arrive at a store on identical weekdays each week (Gaur & Fisher, 2004). (2) Likewise, in terms of transportation, delivery patterns offer the opportunity to design basic cyclic routes in each corresponding planning period. (3) At the DC, staff deployment and shift planning can be adjusted with regard to expected aggregate picking volumes that are dependent on the delivery patterns selected across all stores. And (4) retailers usually apply periodic inventory review policies (Cachon, 2001; van Donselaar, Gaur, van Woensel, Broekmeulen, & Fransoo, 2010). Whenever shelf inventory falls to or below a reorder level, a replenishment order is issued. Applying a cyclic ordering and delivery policy allows reorder levels to be adapted on a regular basis, which decreases overhead steering and eases logistics planning in subsequent planning modules (Schöneberg, Koberstein, & Suhl, 2010; Hübner, Kuhn, & Sternbeck, 2013). As a result, the delivery patterns selected greatly influence efficiency within the operational subsystems of an internal retail supply chain, i.e., DC, transportation and instore logistics. As order intervals are a result of the delivery pattern applied, volume effects along the supply chain occur that strongly influence logistics costs (Cachon, 1999). Retail practice thus considers the selection of delivery patterns as an important lever to balance DC, transportation and instore requirements, although the majority of retailers do not yet apply integrative approaches across all subsystems at all when assigning delivery patterns to stores because of the complexity of setting up appropriate models and tools. Proper decision support is needed for retail companies to achieve “optimal” or at least “near optimal” decisions.The current literature, however, lacks an adequate integrated approach for selecting delivery patterns while explicitly considering bundling effects in transportation across stores. In this research we therefore develop a comprehensive planning concept with an innovative model and a solution approach for selecting delivery patterns according to which the stores of a grocery retailer should be supplied from a DC. The model considers end-to-end logistics costs that are impacted by the pattern decision and considers bundling effects across stores. The solution approach is especially designed for solving practical relevant problem sizes. This, as well as the cost savings potential of the new approach, is demonstrated using a case study of a major European retailer. Additional numerical studies show that the cost savings are generalizable, and the discussion of the results generates valuable insights for retail practice. The model and solution approach developed therefore supports grocery retailers striving for effective and efficient distribution plans and closes an open gap in literature.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we detail the retail network considered, formulate the decision problem at hand, and develop the associated cost model. Section 3 presents an overview of related literature. The real decision problem is complex, so we transfer the real practical problem to a tractable formal problem formulating a mathematical optimization model in Section 4. We then present an efficient solution approach that considers practical needs with regard to the solution quality required, relevant problem sizes, and spendable computation times (see Section 5). Section 6 first analyzes the solution approach using a broad spectrum of simulated data, and secondly demonstrates the applicability of the suggested approach using a case study of a major European grocery retailer. Finally, Section 7 concludes the study and gives an outlook on opportunities for future research.Grocery retailers channel the overwhelming majority of product volumes to their stores via DCs. While around 70–90 percent of the product volumes are distributed via DCs, cross-docking deliveries play a minor role. Direct-to-store delivery is an alternative concept of grocery distribution, especially for large full-line formats. However, deliveries via DCs are also most important for this type of retailer (Fernie, Sparks, & McKinnon, 2010; Kuhn & Sternbeck, 2013). We therefore limit our analysis to the major delivery mode via DCs. European discounters and to some extent full-line supermarkets operate their own distribution networks that consist of several regional DCs from which stores are supplied with their complete assortment. Fresh food and highly perishable products, for example, require high-frequency or even daily deliveries to the stores. Thus, the delivery frequencies for those product categories are generally predefined by the specific product requirements. We, however, focus on storable assortments that can potentially be delivered at differing frequencies. In addition, by far the largest delivery volumes from DCs to stores come mostly from the ambient segment (Kuhn & Sternbeck, 2013). Consequently the scope of our analysis is the distribution network structure of the storable assortment or at least ambient segment where all products are delivered to the stores from one identical DC. Fig. 1 illustrates the relevant subsystems and defines the functional scope of our research.An unlimited number of different delivery patterns (r ∈ R) can be defined from a theoretical point of view. The majority of retailers, however, limit the delivery patterns applied to a certain degree for practical reasons, i.e., they use weekly delivery cycles. Only very few retailers make use of a cycle of two or even three weeks in the event of ultra-slow-moving items. Normally, retailers assign delivery patterns on a tactical level for a rolling planning horizon of three to six months to ensure planning stability (Gaur & Fisher, 2004; Hübner et al., 2013). Assuming that the delivery cycle comprises |T| days and a maximum of one delivery per day, parameter gr, t∈ {0, 1} indicates whether a delivery takes places on day t, t ∈ T, of the delivery cycle, applying delivery pattern r. A delivery pattern r can then formally be defined as a unique combination of values of gr, tfor all t ∈ T. A store has to be supplied at least once per delivery cycle. For example, assuming a delivery cycle of one week with six delivery days, the frequency of deliveries can range between once and six times per cycle. The delivery pattern for one cycle will then be repeated in each following cycle until the end of the planning horizon. Fig. 2shows an example of a set of delivery patterns,R={1,2,…,r,…,|R|},assuming a cycle length of one week. For a delivery cycle of one week, at maximum one delivery per day, and at least one delivery per cycle, there exist|R|=26−1=63potential delivery patterns in all for each store. Assume a DC supplies a setF={1,2,…,f,…,|F|}of stores, this produces a total of 63|F| combinations. This demonstrates the combinatorial challenge of the decision problem considered. Each possible combination has different capacity requirements at the DC, and varying transportation needs. As a result, it is not possible to determine the delivery pattern of the stores independently.The store delivery process can be characterized as follows. The products in a store order are picked onto load carriers such as pallets or roll cages in the DC. Next, the goods are shipped to the outlets. At the outlets the load carriers have to be taken over by store employees and brought to the sales room where initial shelf filling takes place. Products that do not fit onto the shelf due to limited shelf capacity have to be carried to the backroom and refilled later when shelf space becomes available due to consumer purchases (Reiner, Teller, & Kotzab, 2012; Eroglu, Williams, & Waller, 2013). Backroom storage and restocking activities from the backroom particularly need to be considered since these processes are very time-consuming and constitute one of the main drivers of instore logistics costs (van Zelst, van Donselaar, van Woensel, Broekmeulen, & Fransoo, 2009; Kuhn & Sternbeck, 2013). In addition, extensive backroom inventory frequently causes the phenomenon of “phantom products,” i.e., products that are available in the store but not on the shelf and hence are not visible for customers (DeHoratius & Raman, 2008; Ton & Raman, 2010). Since these backroom processes highly depend on the volume shipped per delivery and therefore on the number of shipments, they have to be reflected when selecting store delivery patterns.Various operational costs are impacted by the selection of delivery patterns. Sternbeck and Kuhn (2014) identify these decision-relevant costs per period, which can be divided into (A) costs that rise when delivery frequency a increases,C+(a),and (B) costs that decrease with more frequent deliveries,C−(a).(A)Costs that are directly related to an order rise when delivery frequency increases. Such costs include store ordering and store receiving costs. Due to the shipments of smaller batches and the larger number of orders per period, the overall costs increase for these cost types. In addition, fewer economies of scale can be achieved with smaller store order volumes, especially during the picking process at the DC, the transportation process from the DC to the stores, and the initial shelf-filling process at the stores. Thus, assuming a constant sales volume per period, the average volume per order decreases and therefore the costs for picking and packaging, transportation and initial shelf-filling per period rise when the delivery frequency increases.Contrary to (A), some processes and expenditure benefit from smaller order sizes, i.e. inventory holding at the store and instore handling when refilling shelves from the backroom storage of a store. Consequently, the costs for these operations per period decrease with an increasing number of deliveries. Especially when quantities delivered exceed the free shelf space capacity available, the remaining products have to be stored in the backroom storage, which causes additional shelf-refilling activities later on. These activities are generally very time-consuming and involve considerable additional labor costs (Eroglu et al., 2013; Sternbeck & Kuhn, 2014).The cost drivers considered display a highly dynamic structure due to the weekly seasonality of store sales. Thus, the resulting costs not only depend on the delivery frequencies, but also on the specific delivery days. This is especially relevant for instore operation costs, because, e.g., the effort of refilling shelves from the backroom depends on the product volume delivered, which in turn varies according to the particular pattern of delivery days and the corresponding pattern of review periods.Each store would be able to realize its individual optimal delivery pattern independently of all other stores if capacity limits in all processes and bundling effects in the transportation system were neglected. Especially in the case of tactical planning it is appropriate to include capacity restrictions to set the framework for subordinate planning tasks and make it easier to generate feasible short-term plans. Moreover, retailers try to balance the workload at the DC to be able to use allocable capacity efficiently (Cachon, 1999; Gaur & Fisher, 2004). That is why minimum and maximum picking capacity as well as transportation capacity has to be considered when deciding on efficient delivery modes in grocery networks. Furthermore, limited space in the store’s backroom and in the receiving area can affect the product volume that can be delivered to the store in one delivery tour. This limits the number of practicable delivery patterns for one store (Agrawal & Smith, 2009).An integrative modeling and solution approach is therefore required that takes into account all relevant costs and capacity limitations when determining store-specific delivery patterns for a grocery network. In the following section we will investigate to what extent grocery store delivery solutions suggested by literature reflect these requirements.In the literature the delivery planning problem of a retail chain is often viewed as an inventory routing problem (IRP), considering a distribution structure with several stores that are replenished from a DC. The IRP generally deals with the coordination of outgoing deliveries from a DC to geographically dispersed multiple locations. The overall costs consisting of transportation costs for the deliveries and inventory costs arising from storing the items at the outlets have to be minimized. This implies that routes along the stores and optimal order quantities have to be determined within the IRP. IRPs have been widely studied in different contexts. Various surveys classify the problem (e.g., Andersson, Hoff, Christiansen, Hasle, & Løkketangen, 2010; Bertazzi, Savelsbergh, & Speranza, 2008; Coelho, Cordeau, & Laporte, 2014).Because IRPs consider the tradeoff between more frequent deliveries (causing higher transportation costs) and less frequent deliveries (causing higher inventory costs), there is a certain familiarity with our problem described in the previous section.Thus in the following we describe IRPs in a broader sense within this literature review and classify the literature according to Gaur and Fisher (2004). They differentiate IRPs into (i) strategic, (ii) tactical or finite horizon and (iii) infinite horizon.The strategic IRP determines the minimum number of vehicles in a fleet required to supply inventory to a set of stores. It determines the minimum fleet size before the start of the actual deliveries, but also makes it necessary to anticipate tactical routing (Webb & Larson, 1995). Also Raa and Aghezzaf (2009) and Raa (2015) discuss the fleet design problem.The tactical IRP considers a network with one supplier serving a set of stores over a finite time horizon with a given fleet size. The following approaches need mentioning with regard to our work: Viswanathan and Mathur (1997) determine multi-product joint replenishment policies to specify delivery quantities and vehicle routes. Gaur and Fisher (2004) provide an approach for determining a weekly delivery schedule for a retailer. The core of their approach is a periodic inventory routing problem (PIRP) that is part of a three-stage decomposition. Delivery times per store and corresponding vehicle routes are determined with help of the PIRP. A subsequent truck assignment module and workload balancing module ensure that fleet size aspects and time regulations are considered as well as capacity utilization profiles. Cardós and García-Sabater (2006) design a decision support system to determine delivery schemes for stores focusing on inventory and transportation costs. The authors preselect feasible deliveries in a first step. Then, in a second step, they evaluate minimal cost paths for each delivery frequency for each store and afterwards solve a periodic VRP (PVRP) for each delivery frequency combination using a neighborhood search.Additionally, we need to note that the PVRP is closely related to the IRP, where customers are visited multiple times in a finite time horizon. The PVRP is a variation of the classic VRP in which delivery routes and sequences are constructed for a period of time (e.g., a week). We refer to the review papers that summarize settings and solution methods for this problem (e.g., Campbell & Wilson, 2014; Francis, Smilowitz, & Tzur, 2008; Schmid, Doerner, & Laporte, 2013).The infinite time horizon and operational IRP deals with deliveries from a DC to customers in order to minimize transportation, ordering and inventory holding costs (e.g., Anily & Federgruen, 1990; Kleywegt, Nori, & Savelsbergh, 2002).A common limitation shared by the IRP papers listed above is their focus on transportation and inventory costs, while neglecting the effects on DC operations and instore operation costs. Furthermore, most applications of IRPs are in the context of vendor-managed inventory, where the transportation network is not owned by the retailer (Gaur & Fisher, 2004).Besides the IRP literature, Ronen and Goodhart (2008) propose a hierarchical approach to solve the delivery planning problem on a tactical level. First, the authors cluster stores with similar characteristics and preselect patterns. They then assign patterns to stores using an MIP. Thirdly, they build transportation routes applying a PVRP. Feedback loops are not integrated, which causes the problem that once patterns are assigned to the stores they cannot be changed any more although the routing step may reveal that adapting the delivery patterns could capture additional savings. In addition the model of Ronen and Goodhart (2008) neglects instore operation costs. Instore logistics, however, constitute the main cost block of operational logistics costs according to several studies (Kuhn & Sternbeck, 2013; van Zelst et al., 2009) and account for approximately 50 percent of total logistics costs.Sternbeck and Kuhn (2014) therefore propose an MIP that selects delivery patterns for stores on the basis of a set of preselected reasonable patterns, jointly taking into account DC, transportation and store operations. This model, however, assumes that logistics service providers fulfill all store deliveries. Thus, transportation costs only depend on the distance between the DC and the store and the associated shipping volume. Bundling effects across stores as a result of joint tours are not considered, although these can change the solution significantly, which is illustrated in Fig. 3 where stores A and B are assumed to be located close to each other.Example I of Fig. 3 shows two possible delivery patterns for stores A and B; store A receives deliveries on days 1 and 4, and store B on day 2 only. This could be the minimum cost solution if transportation costs are considered to be volume- and distance-dependent only. However, store A and B could be supplied on the same tour, which may have a beneficial effect on total costs if store B also receives its deliveries on day 1 and possibly on day 4 too (see Example II of Fig. 3). In this case, a higher delivery frequency for store B (i.e., store B receives an additional delivery on day 4) results in transportation cost savings and reduced instore handling, which compensates for additional efforts in the DC.Given the setting and cost structure in the DC, transportation and store, the decision problem needs expanding so that it takes into account all relevant cost effects faced by a retailer that orchestrates the entire fulfillment process. We contribute to the existing literature of store delivery planning by designing and solving a comprehensive planning approach to determine store delivery patterns that incorporates transportation issues across stores as well as costs and capacity in each operational subsystem without preselecting patterns in advance. In the following section we develop a more exact decision support model for retailers to select optimal delivery patterns for their stores.This section formulates a decision support model for selecting store-specific delivery patterns and transportation tour clusters to minimize the total costs of the entire retail distribution chain. The real decision problem is thereby transferred to a tractable formal representation relying on certain modeling techniques and preprocessing efforts that are further elaborated within the following sections. The model is based on the underlying network structure and defined cost functions discussed above with a retailer who operates a significant set of company-owned stores, F. The applied notation is listed in Table 1.Each of the retailer’s stores f, f ∈ F, is supplied from a DC according to a distinctive delivery pattern r, r ∈ R, which defines the delivery days in a certain repetitive delivery period, e.g., one week. The assignment of delivery pattern r to store f is reflected by the binary decision variable xf, r∈ {0, 1}, while the associated logistics costs in the DC and in the store are quantified byc^f,r. Parameter gr, thas the value of 1 if a delivery on day t, t ∈ T, takes place applying pattern r. It is assumed that the delivery pattern of a store is repeated in all following periods, e.g., weeks, until delivery patterns are updated because of major changes in demand, network, delivery or cost structures.On each day of a store’s delivery it is assumed that the store receives products that fulfill the required demand for all articles until the next delivery day. The product volume delivered to store f on day t is quantified by parameter pallf, r, tand is therefore dependent on the assigned delivery pattern r. The quantity is measured by the number of receiving pallets of goods. However, the maximum capacity each store can receive,capfrec,has to be considered. In addition, on each day of the defined delivery cycle the maximum available and the minimum required daily picking capacity at the DC,maxcaptpickandmincaptpick,have to be taken into account. The picking volume for store f on day t is denoted by pickf, r, tand depends on the assigned delivery pattern r.Furthermore, it is assumed that the retailer operates its dedicated transportation fleet comprising |K| equally sized trucks, each with the capacity captrans. Bundling effects in the transportation system can be realized if nearby stores receive deliveries on the same day. The available number of trucks, |K|, has to be considered when specifying the delivery patterns of the stores. It is assumed that each truck can only serve a certain set of stores on day t. These stores are combined into delivery cluster k, k ∈ K. The set of stores clustered into set k on a specific day t is defined by the binary decision variable xf, k, r, t∈ {0, 1}. Binary variable yk, t∈ {0, 1} defines whether a cluster k is supplied on day t. The exhaustive and disjunctive clustering of all stores served in one tour and only one cluster k on each day t of the delivery cycle leads to a multi-period assignment problem with the help of which the transportation costs are approximated (see Fisher & Jaikumar, 1981; Holzapfel, Sternbeck, & Hübner, 2016).We distinguish between transportation costs associated with serving a seed point of cluster k,cktranstour,and the additional costs occurring when a truck assigned to delivery tour k adds store f to its tour, i.e.,cf,ktransstop. On each day on which stores of cluster k receive deliveries, a truck has to drive from the DC into the region, i.e., to a seed point, of cluster k. This involves basic transportation costs,cktranstour. Any point in the delivery area can serve as a seed point. Together the cost termscktranstourandcf,ktransstopserve as an approximation for the underlying VRP. This is equivalent to the logic suggested by Fisher and Jaikumar (1981) for solving the capacitated VRP (CVRP). Fisher and Jaikumar (1981) construct clusters that define so-called base tours, for which the exact sequence of store deliveries is not known, but the resulting vehicle routing costs can be approximated via the marginal cost increase when store f is assigned to cluster k.Applying the logic of Fisher/Jaikumar, real tour costs are approximated on a tactical level. This approximation considers the effects of bundling nearby stores into the same tour when selecting store-specific delivery pattern.Fig. 4explains the determination of the two transportation cost parameters for a certain assignment on the basis of distance-dependent transportation costs. For example, there are two possibilities for supplying store 4 from the DC, i.e.,f=0: either on a tour based on the cluster with the seed point A or on a cluster with the seed point B (A, B ∈ K). The calculation example shows that assigning store 4 to cluster A results in lower costs than assigning it to cluster B. Supplying store 4 as part of the tour of cluster B, however, can be advantageous, if for example stores 1, 2 and 3 are not supplied on certain days, but stores 5 and 6 are. Then it is favorable to include store 4 on a tour with seed point B and not to start a new tour with seed point A on this day. The underlying assumptions are summarized as follows:•Stores receive deliveries a maximum of once per day.Each store gets supplied by a store-specific weekly delivery pattern.The weekly delivery pattern repeats all weeks of the entire planning horizon.Store delivery lead times are deterministic and predetermined.The product range is homogeneous in the sense of products that can be packaged together on a common pallet or roll cage.The transportation fleet is homogeneous and limited.Each truck can carry out a maximum of one delivery tour per day.The capacity for receiving goods at a store is limited and implies limited storage space in the backroom.The workload at the DC is restricted between a minimum and maximum level.Note that each set of stores grouped into one cluster k receives deliveries in the course of a maximum of one single tour on a certain day t. Thus, on each day t a maximum of |K| tours are generated. Accordingly, a maximum of |K| trucks are utilized each day. We therefore denote an identical symbol k for trucks, tours, and clusters. The following mathematical model can then be formulated, which is denoted by Delivery Pattern Planning with Transportation Bundling across stores (DPPTB).(1)MinTC=∑f∈F∑r∈Rc^f,r·xf,r+∑k∈K∑t∈Tcktranstour·yk,t+∑f∈F∑k∈K∑r∈R∑t∈Tcf,ktransstop·xf,k,r,ts.t.(2)∑r∈Rxf,r=1∀f∈F(3)∑k∈Kxf,k,r,t=gr,t·xf,r∀f∈F,r∈R,t∈T(4)mincaptpick≤∑f∈F∑r∈Rpickf,r,t·xf,r≤maxcaptpick∀t∈T(5)∑r∈Rpallf,r,t·xf,r≤capfrec∀f∈F,t∈T(6)∑f∈F∑r∈Rpallf,r,t·xf,k,r,t≤captrans·yk,t∀k∈K,t∈T(7)xf,r∈{0,1}∀f∈F,r∈R(8)xf,k,r,t∈{0,1}∀f∈F,k∈K,r∈R,t∈T(9)yk,t∈{0,1}∀k∈K,t∈TThe objective function (1) minimizes the sum of total operational and logistics costs (TC). The first term of the objective function represents DC and store operations costs. All relevant cost drivers except transportation are reflected in the cost parameterc^f,r. This includes instore handling, instore inventory holding, as well as picking and packaging activities at the DC. The resulting costs depend on the assignment of a delivery pattern r to store f. The binary variable xf, ris set to 1 if pattern r is assigned to store f, otherwise it is 0.Transportation costs are quantified by the second and third term of the objective function (1). The second term of Eq. (1) quantifies transportation costs associated with the round trips from the DC to the central points (seed points) of all clusters K on all possible delivery days T. If at least one store is assigned to cluster k and receives a delivery on day t, the binary variable yk, tis set to 1. In that case at least one round trip from the DC to the seed point of cluster k takes place, producing the associated basic transportation costscktranstour.The third term of Eq. (1) quantifies the additional transportation costs incurred when supplying stores assigned to the clusters K. Assume a truck is already available in cluster k. This means that delivering goods to store f results in additional transportation costs ofcf,ktransstopcurrency units. These tour-specific costs depend on the assignment of a store f to a delivery cluster k on day t, using the chosen delivery pattern r. This multi-dimensional binary decision variable is reflected by xf, k, r, t∈ {0, 1}.Besides the objective function, the model consists of several constraints, i.e., (2)–(9). Constraint (2) ensures that each store f receives its deliveries according to exactly one delivery pattern r. When the delivery pattern r of a store is selected then the associated delivery days gr, tare known. Consequently, for each of those delivery days, it has to be decided on which tour (=cluster) k the deliveries should be fulfilled. Constraint (3) ensures that each store f is assigned to exactly one cluster k on each day the store is served. Constraint (4) ensures that the picking effort at the DC is within the range[mincaptpick;maxcaptpick]on each day t. Constraint (5) considers the receiving capacity of each store f on each delivery day t. Constraint (6) ensures that the truck capacity for each tour k is respected. Transportation capacity is only available for a certain cluster (=tour) k on day t if at least one store is assigned to this cluster and served on day t. The decision variables are defined as binary in constraints (7)–(9).In conclusion the model reflects the relevant cost components as well as the restricting capacities and models two decisions:(a)Selection of delivery patterns: Which stores are supplied on each day?Construction of tour clusters: Which stores build a delivery cluster on each day?In this section we develop the solution approach for solving the model DPPTB. First we describe precalculations of parameters required for the model before detailing a sequential solution approach.Solving model DPPTB requires precalculations of the following parameter sets.Model DPPTB requires the number of possible clusters |K| as input data. The number of clusters equals the number of available trucks and thus the maximum number of feasible delivery tours per day. We approximate this number by dividing the maximum total daily sales volume of all stores by the carrying capacity of one truck. Rounding up this quantity to the next integer value results in the number of trucks that are necessary to ensure that all stores can receive their required products on all days of the delivery cycle. This approximation generates a reasonable number of trucks and reasonable delivery cluster sizes. In the unlikely case that the number of trucks approximated does not lead to a feasible solution, the number is increased by one until a feasible solution can be generated.The underlying VRP of model DPPTB is approximated via a multi-period assignment problem where we distinguish between transportation costs associated with serving a seed point of cluster k,cktranstour,and the additional costs incurred when a truck assigned to delivery tour k adds store f to its tour, i.e.,cf,ktransstop. Given the seed points, the cost parameterscktranstourandcf,ktransstopcan be calculated for all possible combinations in advance according to the procedure of Fisher/Jaikumar described in Section 4. The selection of seed points is discussed within the following section.The computational complexity of solving model DPPTB requires an approximate solution procedure. We propose a sequential heuristic procedure (DPPTBSeq) that follows a “cluster first (Step 1), assign delivery patterns second (Step 2)” concept. Following this approach, the assignment of stores to clusters is assumed to be identical for all days of the delivery cycle.Despite the complexity involved, practical requirements also favor a fixed clustering structure since this is in line with the needs of truck drivers and tour operators. They prefer stable and regular basetours as they need to be familiar with the characteristics of the tours and the unloading areas. Stable clusters and tours may therefore reduce short-term operational complexity and increase service quality.The heuristic solution approach DPPTBSeqis described in the following using additional symbols defined in Table 2.Step 1 assigns stores to clusters. This is done with the help of the following store clustering algorithm which is based on a K-Means logic (see Fig. 5):(1.1)Substep 1.1 defines initial locations for the seed points for all clusters k. One possibility for this is to distribute the seed points equally over the delivery area, which guarantees that starting seeds are not concentrated in a certain subarea of the delivery area. On the basis of the position of the seed points, represented bycrdSPkx(l)andcrdSPky(l),and the store coordinates, given bycrdStfxandcrdStfy,the distancescf,kdist(l)between seed points and the stores are calculated using an Euclidean metric. The iteration index is denoted by l.Substep 1.2 entails assigning clusters (1.2.1) and determining the location of seed points (1.2.2).An MIP minimizes the travel distances (TD) between the seed points and their associated stores by assigning store f to cluster k, expressed by zf, k∈ {0, 1} (see (10)). Each store is assigned to exactly one cluster (see (11)). Constraint (12) ensures that the volume to be delivered to all stores assigned to a specific cluster – assuming daily deliveries – must be equal or less than the truck capacity, captrans, on each day of the delivery cycle. This ensures that all stores within a certain cluster can potentially be supplied on one single tour on each day.(10)MinTD(l)=∑f∈F∑k∈Kcf,kdist(l)·zf,ks.t.(11)∑k∈Kzf,k=1∀f∈F(12)∑f∈Fvolf,t·zf,k≤captrans∀k∈K,t∈T(13)zf,k∈{0,1}∀f∈F,k∈KIf TD(l) is not equal to the previous iteration TD(l−1)or at least the difference between TD(l) and TD(l−1)is greater than a small number ϵ, an update of the seed points for iterationl=l+1follows. The x-coordinatecrdSPkx(l+1)of the seed point of cluster k is set to the mean of the x-coordinates of the stores assigned within the previous iteration withcrdSPkx(l+1)=∑f∈FcrdStfx·zf,k(l)/∑f∈Fzf,k(l). The y-coordinatecrdSPky(l+1)is calculated accordingly. After that, the distancescf,kdist(l+1)are updated. Then the procedure continues with step (1.2.1). The iteration stops when no further improvements are possible.The procedure results in the location of the seed points for each cluster k, as well as an exhaustive and disjunctive assignment of all stores f to one and only one cluster k. The calculation of the transportation cost parameterscktranstourandcf,ktransstopbases on this assignment (see Section 5.1).The applied store clustering procedure presented above is only one of several possible clustering procedures. As seed points are known to have a certain impact on the solution quality (van Breedam, 2002), we tested different approaches before selecting the approach mentioned above, i.e., “Distance approach.” Three basic approaches may be applicable when determining seed points. The first one is the cone covering approach proposed by Fisher and Jaikumar (1981) using the bisectrix of cones of the delivery area locating seed points. This approach is applied by several authors (e.g., Nygard, Greenberg, Bollkan, & Swenson, 1988, van Breedam, 2002 and Baker & Sheasby, 1999). A common drawback of the procedure that is mentioned, however, is that the seed point locations depend on the location of the depot, and therefore the quality of the seed points is viewed rather critically (van Breedam, 2002). The second main seed point generation method is the circle covering procedure suggested by Savelsbergh (1990). This procedure selects stores as seed points according to the extent of the distance of each store to the other stores that fit in one truck load. With this method, however, additional seed points could be generated that may exceed the number of trucks available. Thus, this approach is unsuitable in our setting. The third approach, which is based on a K-Means logic and described above, reflects the idea of distance clusters as the circle covering approach but guarantees a fixed number of seed points, equivalent to the predefined number of trucks |K|. The evaluation function of the K-Means approach, however, can be formulated in different ways, i.e., the sum of travel distances or sum of store-demand weighted travel distances. In addition, the seed points of a given cluster could be chosen differentially, i.e., center related to travel distances (Distance), center related to demand-weighted travel distances (Weighted), location of the store with the highest demand volume (Volume), and location of the store with the shortest distance to the DC (DC-Distance). Each of these seed point selection procedures can be combined with one of the evaluation functions described above. As criteria we assume the sum of travel distances in all cases except for the “Weighted case,” and compare all variants of the approach and the “Cone approach” with the approach described above, i.e., the “Distance approach.” For evaluation purposes we use the identical scenarios (240 test instances), as described in Section 6.2. The resulting total cost differences for each of the instances are illustrated by box plots shown in Fig. 6.Although there seem to be only small cost differences between all of the approaches on average, we find statistical evidence that the results of the approach selected (Distance) differ significantly from those named Cone, Volume and DC-Distance by providing two-sided t-tests with a confidence level of 99 percent. There is evidence for the claim that the approach selected performs better on average than Cone, Volume and DC-Distance. Additionally, the approach selected is found to be the best in one third of all cases. No significant average difference is found between the approach selected and Weighted (tested with a two-sided t-test with a confidence level of 90 percent), so we selected the “Distance approach” in our case. The box plots in Fig. 6, however, show that the seed point generation approaches analyzed achieve quite different results in the individual instances.Another issue is the selection of initial seed points in the store clustering approach. As stated above, the selection procedure implemented ensures that initial seeds are distributed all over the delivery area. Nevertheless, our tests showed that other initial seed points, e.g., randomly generated initial seeds, can lead to an improvement in solution quality (see Section 6.2.6).Step 2 assigns delivery patterns to stores using a model equivalent to the original DPPTB model (see Section 4). However, the model here assumes that the store cluster assignment is predetermined. This assignment is represented by parameter set zf, k∈ {0, 1} and determined in Step 1.In the following section we analyze the applicability of the decision support model and the suggested solution approach for selecting delivery patterns.The analysis consists of three parts. First (see Section 6.1), we specify appropriate solution approaches to solve model DPPTB and align these approaches so that it is possible to compare the results achieved. Second (see Section 6.2), we conduct a numerical analysis of these approaches using simulated data. The main objective of this investigation is to benchmark the approaches selected, and in particular to evaluate the sequential solution approach developed in Section 5. Finally (see Section 6.3), we apply the preferred solution approach to a real life case example of a major European grocery retailer to show its practical applicability and the cost savings achievable.The numerical analysis compares three different approaches for solving the optimization problem defined:(I)Solving the original model DPPTB with the help of a standard solver, i.e., CPLEX v12.5. This approach is denoted as DPPTBMIP; in this case the seed point generation thereby follows the same logic as within the sequential heuristic procedure.Applying the sequential heuristic procedure DPPTBSeq developed in Section 5.2.Applying the approach suggested by Sternbeck and Kuhn (2014), which is the most comprehensive approach presented in literature so far and the approach used by the retailer of the case study. This approach is denoted as DPPTCM.Sternbeck and Kuhn (2014) determine delivery patterns using a similar formulation as in the model DPPTB, but neglecting transportation bundling effects across stores. They approximate transportation costs with the parametercf,rtransrepresenting a volume- and distance-dependent and digressive transportation cost matrix when applying pattern r for store f. We denote this model Delivery Pattern Planning with a volume- and distance-dependent Transportation Cost Matrix (DPPTCM). In so doing, the total cost of applying a specific pattern r for store f can be represented bycf,r=c^f,r+cf,rtrans. The objective function of model DPPTCM is modified accordingly.Store-delivery assignment constraints, capacity constraints for the DC and the stores, as well as binary variable requirements are analogous to model DPPTB (see (2), (4), (5) and (7) in Section 4). Model DPPTCM is then solved with the help of a standard solver, i.e., CPLEX v12.5.All of the approaches mentioned above only approximate the resulting transportation costs. We therefore need a procedure that schedules the trucks on each day of the delivery cycle so that realizable and comparable transportation costs can be calculated for each of those approaches. The resulting costs will be denoted effective transportation costs, ETC.To determine ETC, independent CVRPs are solved for each day t of the delivery cycle by applying the Fisher and Jaikumar (1981) approach. A Traveling Salesmen Problem (TSP) is solved for each of the clusters k generated on each day t of the delivery cycle to specify the effective sequence in which the stores combined into one tour receive their deliveries. The TSPs are solved using an exact algorithm for all instances.While approach DPPTBMIP generates dynamic clusters, DPPTBSeq only generates static clusters. Static clusters are justified by practical reasons (see Section 5.2). However, for reasons of “fairness” in respect of the evaluation criterion ETC when comparing the results of DPPTBMIP with DPPTBSeq we reschedule the delivery tours on each day for all stores assuming the given delivery patterns received from approach DPPTBSeq.Calculating the effective transportation costs (ETC) becomes a little more complex for the approach suggested by Sternbeck and Kuhn (2014), i.e., DPPTCM. A solution to model DPPTCM creates neither clusters nor tours. To be able to compare it with the solution approaches DPPTBMIP and DPPTBSeq we need to align the resulting solutions of model DPPTCM by applying the store clustering algorithm (Step 1 of approach DPPTBSeq, see Section 5.2) independently for each day t of the delivery cycle. This generates day-specific clusters and their respective seed points. However, assuming an equivalent number of trucks |K| as specified in model DPPTB, a solution to model DPPTCM does not ensure feasible solutions for the store clustering algorithm. On some days of the delivery cycle the entire carrying load may be larger than the total capacity of all |K| trucks or it may not be possible to split it into |K| truckloads at maximum. In these cases, the number of trucks |K| is increased by one until a feasible store cluster assignment is found. Afterwards a TSP is solved for each of the clusters k generated on each day t of the delivery cycle.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
