@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On deciding how to decide: Designing participatory budget processes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a methodology to design a participatory budget processes.This methodology is based on a multicriteria decision making model.We have identified alternatives, constraints, criteria and a value function model.We illustrate the use of the methodology with an example.With this approach we hope to facilitate the design of participatory budget processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Group decision support,Public budgeting,Participatory budgeting,Participation,Multicriteria decision making,Multiattribute value function,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Participatory budgets are becoming increasingly popular in many municipalities all around the world. The underlying idea is to allow citizens to participate in the allocation of a municipal budget. Many advantages have been suggested for such experiences, including legitimization and more informed and transparent decisions. There are many conceivable variants of such processes. However, in most cases both its design and implementation are carried out in an informal way. In this paper we propose a methodology to design a participatory budget process based on a multicriteria decision making model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the 1960s, an increasing apathy and feeling of alienation among citizens has led to the so-called democratic deficit (Sttefek et al., 2008), which has entailed a growing interest in promoting participatory processes. These allow citizens to take part in public policy decision making. Among such processes, participatory budgets (PBs) are emerging as a paradigm for participation, especially at a local level, see Alfaro et al. (2010a). They constitute an attempt to allow citizens to have a word on the decision of how a public budget is spent, mainly in municipalities. It is a budget allocation approach based on dialogue and citizen participation, which diverges from the predominant representative model. In a sense, PBs are transforming the idea of a representative democracy, in which the citizen’s input is considered just at the moment of elections, to move closer to a participatory democracy, based on direct participation of citizens.Early experiences with PBs took place in several Brazilian cities such as Lajes, Boa Esperança, Diadema and Vila Velha. However, the most well known and longest lasting PB experience comes from Porto Alegre, initiated in 1989 and consolidated in 1992, acclaimed for both the efficient and democratic management of urban resources it has enabled. PBs are becoming increasingly popular in many other places. Recent reports indicate that PB processes have spread to more than one thousand municipalities in Europe (Sintomer et al., 2008; Herzberg, 2011).There are many variants of PBs (Alfaro et al., 2010a). In some cases, they consist only of an informative event, so that citizens do not actually participate directly in decision making. In other cases, PBs entail an intensive participation procedure, using, for instance, voting or negotiation sessions. Generally speaking, they may be seen as a sequence of decision making tasks which are scheduled in various ways leading to different PB processes (Alfaro et al., 2010b). However, there is very little guidance on how to design such processes, which are usually adopted in an ad hoc manner. As described in Bayley and French (2007) and French and Ríos Insua (2010), designing participatory processes remains as a key methodological issue in this area.In this paper, we present a PB process design methodology based on a multicriteria decision making model. With it we aim at facilitating an organization wishing to implement a PB process to choose the most appropriate approach, taking into account various constraints and their organizational objectives in relation with participation. First, we shall briefly present a PB as a group resource allocation problem in which citizens try to agree on a budget in view of multiple criteria, possibly subject to constraints in addition to that of a maximum budget limit. Then, we define the set of alternatives that characterize various PB processes as sequences of decision making tasks. There are some limitations when combining such tasks which we describe through logical and logistic constraints that, from our point of view, should satisfy any PB process. Then, we propose a list of objectives to be achieved in a PB process and the attributes that allow us to evaluate them. Furthermore, we construct a value function to evaluate every feasible PB scheme and obtain the optimal one. We illustrate our approach with an example. We end up with some discussion.Suppose that a group of n persons has to decide how to spend a budget b. There is a set of q projects, X={a1,…,aq}. Project aihas an estimated cost ci, and is evaluated by the jth individual with respect to m criteria, with valuesxikj,k=1,…,m. For simplicity, we assume that we have a sufficiently precise estimate of the cost and features of various projects. We represent this information in Table 1, in which each position associated with a pair composed by project aiand the jth participant has a score vectorxi1j,…,ximj, for all i=1,…,q and j=1,…,n.Assume that the total cost of the projects is greater than b. Otherwise, there would be no discussion as we could implement all projects. In addition to the budget constraint, there may exist other constraints that restrict the feasible budgets. For example, there could be several projects concerning a new hospital, of which more than one may not be necessary in the final budget. Moreover, there could also be logical constraints, like when there is a project that requires another one to be in the final budget.A feasible budget for the PB problem is a subset of projects, defined by the corresponding subset of indices F⊆I={1,2,…,q}, which satisfies the budget constraint,∑i∈Fci⩽b,and other possible constraints. The aim of a PB process is to find a feasible budget which, somehow, maximizes group satisfaction.There are many variants of PB processes (Alfaro et al., 2010a) all based on a sequence of common tasks differentiated by how they are combined and scheduled (Lavin and Rios Insua, 2010). These tasks are:1.Participant sampling. In many processes, participation of all citizens is impossible for logistic or physical reasons. Thus, a sample of citizens is chosen to represent the whole population. This sample could be purposive, random …, depending on the proposed issue or problem.Election of representatives. For the same reasons, the participants might alternatively elect representatives to take part in the PB process.Use of questionnaires. They aid in focusing on the main issues of interest, revealing what is of most interest to citizens.Preparation of documents. There are two types of documents: preliminary, which contain information about the problem, and final, which contain the results from the process. The documents are usually proposed by representatives and/or experts.Distribution of information. A key element in decision-making is providing the best possible information to participants. Similarly, participants should be able to share the information they might be able to gather.Problem structuring. A problem might not be clearly formulated and participants would spend time structuring it, dividing it into parts so as to better apprehend it. In PB processes, these include determining criteria for choosing between proposals and elaborating an initial list of alternatives, together with their associated costs, technical features and constraints.Preference modeling. Participants are sometimes required to express their preferences, usually through pairwise comparisons, goal setting or value functions. These preferences aid participants in finding their most preferred alternative and support them in negotiation.Debate. Whether regulated or spontaneous, the exchange of ideas is vital for citizen participation. Participants can express and discuss their opinions.Negotiation. When individuals disagree on their preferred alternative, they may try to deal with the conflict through negotiations, in which participants exchange offers, ideas and arguments so as to try to reach a consensus. Several negotiation methods could be used, such as POSTING or the Balanced Increment Solution, see Ríos and Ríos Insua (2008, 2010) or Benyoucef et al. (2008) for further information.Arbitration. Through debate and negotiation, we may find that the parties involved cannot be satisfied and refuse to budge from their positions. To avoid this, some mechanisms include the figure of an arbitrator who makes the final decision, once the opinions and reasoning of the different parties have been presented, see e.g. Raiffa et al. (2002).Voting. Many times, it is used as a last resort, particularly if achieving consensus is not possible. Voting can be done with different rules, such as simple majority, approval voting, and Borda count. See Nurmi (2010) or Brams and Fishburn (2002), among others, for information on voting rules.As an illustration, we shall sketch some instances of PB processes that have been carried out in some municipalities around the world as well as a general scheme that could support any PB process (Alfaro et al., 2010b). For each of them, we provide the corresponding schedule of tasks:–Madrid (Spain): Problem structuring, use of questionnaires (in parallel with debate), problem structuring, negotiation and distribution of information.Chicago (USA): Debate, election of representatives, debate and voting.Medellin (Colombia): Distribution of information, election of representatives, preference modeling and negotiation.Emsdetten (Germany): Participant sampling, debate, arbitration and preparation of documents.Morsang-Sur-Orge (France): Debate, preference modeling and arbitration.Scheme in Alfaro et al. (2010b): Problem structuring (to elaborate an initial list of projects and determine criteria for choosing between them); debate (in which the participants can express their opinions and discuss the list of projects and propose new projects or criteria to consolidate the final list of proposals); problem structuring (to elaborate the final list of proposals based on the previous debate); preference modeling (where citizens asses their preferences); negotiation (where the participants exchange offers, ideas and arguments to try to reach a consensus); voting (if there is no agreement after negotiation, the participants search for the final decision through voting).An organization willing to undertake a PB process may feel overwhelmed by the many potential variants available. Thus, it seems interesting to devise a procedure to support the choice of the most appropriate PB process for such organization, given its objectives and constraints. We provide a decision analytic approach to such problem, see Clemen and Reilly (2001). We first define the set of feasible alternatives. Then, we propose a multiattribute value function model for the PB process design. Finally, we optimize the value function to find out the most appropriate PB process.We start by structuring the participatory budget design problem, defining the initial alternatives, the constraints and the feasible set.We shall consider that a PB process may be described as a finite sequence of tasks of the type we introduced in Section 2. We shall represent them through a single character as follows: participant sampling (M), election of representatives (R), use of questionnaires (Q), preparation of documents (D), distribution of information (I), problem structuring (E), preference modeling (P), debate (F), negotiation (N), arbitration (A) and voting (V). Furthermore, we have identified a couple of cases in which two tasks can be carried out in parallel:•Debate and Use of questionnaires (L). Both tasks can be used to express the participants’ opinions about an initial list of proposals.Use of questionnaires and Preference modeling (O). Both tasks can be undertaken in parallel to obtain information about the participants’ preferences.Each sequence of tasks will represent an alternative in the PB process design problem, i.e.S=(task1,task2,…,taskn),where n is the number of tasks included in the corresponding PB process S and taskiis the task carried out at the ith stage, which will belong to the set {M,R,Q,D,I,E,P,F,N,A,V,L,O}. As an example, the PB process in Chicago may be represented through the sequenceS=(F,R,F,V).Different schedules of tasks lead to different PB processes. However, there are some logistic and logic constraints that should be satisfied by such task sequences. For instance, some tasks cannot begin a process; some tasks cannot precede others, and so on. We provide here a list of the constraints that we shall consider.A PB process is a finite sequence of participatory tasks. We should define the minimum and maximum number of tasks that a PB process could contain.•Maximum number of tasks. A large number of tasks could lead to fatigue and confusion among the citizens participating in the process and, consequently, participation could decrease. We shall consider that nine tasks is a sufficiently high number within a PB process.Minimum number of tasks. We consider that a PB process must include, at least, two participatory tasks. In addition, one of them should be voting, negotiation, or arbitration, as these are the actual decision making tasks.Issues concerning process duration are considered below.Clearly, some tasks should not begin the process such as arbitration, as it is a dispute resolution mechanism involving a third actor, the arbitrator, who makes the final decision, once the opinions and reasoning of different participants have been presented. Thus, arbitration may not appear as the first task of a process. For similar reasons, preference modeling, negotiation and voting tasks should not begin the PB process.Certain tasks cannot be preceded by others because their outcomes must feed the first ones. The acceptable precedences we shall consider are included in Table 2, where an X in cell (i,j) means that the task in row i may precede the task in column j. For example, the first row of the table means that the task Participant sampling may precede all tasks (except itself).A relevant example refers to the negotiation task. In some cases, before starting the negotiation, participants must have communicated their preferences. The inverse sequence is not possible: once a negotiation stage has been carried out, preference modeling will be typically irrelevant.For various reasons, such as lack of time or efficiency, some tasks should appear only once in the process. Other tasks could be repeated at most once. Table 3indicates the maximum number of occurrences of each task within a PB process.We consider that at the last stages of the process should appear at least one of the tasks leading to a decision (arbitration, negotiation or voting), probably followed by the tasks of debate or/and preparation of documents.Two tasks can be used to obtain information about citizen preferences: Preference modeling and Use of questionnaires. We consider that citizens must elicit their preferences at most once so that the inclusion of one of them implies the exclusion of the other task, except if both tasks are carried out in parallel.Note that there may exist other constraints that restrict the feasible schemes taking into account cost, time, or other resource availability considerations. For example, if a maximum time T is available to undertake the PB process, we would add a constraint d(S)⩽T, where d(S) is the duration of the process S. If there is a maximum budget B to implement the PB process, it should be c(S)⩽B, where c(S) is the cost of S, and so on. In what follows, we shall not include this last type of constraints.Before we generate the PB schemes that satisfy the above constraints, we must choose how to represent them. We define a PB scheme as a character sequence where each character belongs to the set {M,R,D,I,E,Q,F,P,V,N,A,L,O}.The constraints may be represented through regular expressions, see Friedl (2006) for details. Therefore, a feasible scheme will be a sequence of characters matching all these regular expressions. In Table 4, we present the regular expressions that represent some of our constraints.For example, constraint C1 indicates that a sequence is valid if its length is between two and nine and the characters included belong to the set {M,R,Q,F,I,E,P,D,N,V,A,L,O}. C2 means that the sequence may be started only by a character not in {P,N,A,V,L,O}, possibly followed by a sequence of characters included in the set {M,R,Q,F,I,E,P,D,N,A,V,L,O}, and so on.The next step consists of obtaining the feasible PB schemes. If m denotes the number of tasks of a scheme and n is the number of possible tasks, nmrepresents all schemes composed of m tasks, without considering the constraints. The number Smof feasible schemes of length m will beSm=nm-card(Cm),where Cmis the set of schemes of length m that do not satisfy the constraints we have described above. Finally, the set of feasible schemes will be∑m=29[nm-card(Cm)].Table 5provides the number of feasible schemes, obtained with a JAVA program which we have implemented. The generation of these feasible schemes takes less than 2days. Most of this time was spent producing schemes composed of eight and nine tasks since the generation of the other ones takes about 20minutes. The schemes were generated with a laptop with a Dual-Core processor of 2.0gigahertz and 2gigabyte of memory RAM. A best processor could be used reducing significantly the generation time.To conclude this section, we present some of the PB processes generated:•S2={FN,FA,FV,MN,MV,RN,RV,DN,DV,IN,IV,EN,EV,QN,QV,QA} are the feasible PB schemes with two tasks.S3′={FPA,MFN,MND,DNI,DOA,IQN,EVN}is a subset of feasible PB schemes with three tasks, which include the scheme of Morsang-Sur-Orge (FPA).S4′={FRFV,FOFV,MFAD,DFAD,DMPA,IRPN,IMVN}are some of the feasible PB schemes with four tasks, which include the schemes of Chicago (FRFV), Medellin (IRPN) and Emsdetten (MFAD).S5′={FPFVD,MFNQA,MFOAD,ELENI,IEQRN}is a sample of feasible PB schemes with five tasks, which include the scheme of Madrid (ELENI).S6′={FPNVIV,MEFOAI,DQEVFN,EDNQFV}is a subset of feasible PB schemes with six tasks.S7′={FPINVIV,MIPNVFV,IMOFVIV,RFONVIV}represents four feasible PB schemes with seven tasks.S8′={DMEFOIAD,EDPVINID,QDIMVFVD,FQFNVRND}is a subset of feasible PB schemes with eight tasks.S9′={RIPINVFVN,IEDVFQIVD,IDEQVFVND,MEPINVFND}is a sample of feasible PB schemes with nine tasks.We describe now the preference model adopted in our PB process design methodology.An important issue when designing a PB experience is to identify the objectives describing why are we conducting the process and what we hope to achieve. However, as argued in Bayley and French (2007), there has been relatively little discussion of the objectives that could be addressed in designing a participatory process, see Rowe and Frewer (2004, 2005), or Keeney (1992), for general issues on value focused thinking. Rowe and Frewer (2000, 2005), Macintosh and Whyte (2008), Aichholzer et al. (2008), Aichholzer and Westholm (2009) have proposed several attributes to assess the effectiveness of a participatory process, once it has been undertaken. Based on them, we suggest the following objectives as a reference for PB process design, illustrated in Fig. 1, although the process designer could define alternative ones.1.Maximize the relevant information. A key element of participatory processes is to make available the best information possible. For this, it is necessary to involve citizens, technicians and authorities, to identify complete and relevant information from them. We thus distinguish the following sub-objectives:(a)Maximize the relevant information from participants. An effective process requires the elicitation of all relevant information from active citizens. Rowe and Frewer (2005) identify two structural aspects of engagement mechanisms that will surely affect the likelihood of maximizing such relevant information: the presence or absence of a facilitator and the response mode available, in particular, whether it is “open” or “closed”.Maximize the information from technicians and authorities. Both authorities and technicians, responsible for initiating participation processes, should ensure that any information provided by them is relevant, comprehensive and appropriate for citizen understanding.Maximize information exchange. Through information exchange, stakeholders involved in the PB process can share their opinions and knowledge.Maximize the number of participants. Involving a diverse group of participants in decision making processes may encourage a greater number of opinions and, possibly, more creative ideas.Maximize democratic ideals. There is a range of democratic issues that need to be considered when a participatory process is designed. We shall consider the following sub-objectives:(a)Maximize transparency. A key issue is building trust in the authorities conducting the PB process and in the PB process itself.Maximize representativeness. Sometimes it is impossible to involve all citizens in a PB process. In this case, we must ensure that all relevant viewpoints are represented in the process.Maximize fairness in the distribution of public resources. Public resources must be distributed equitably and fairly, without discriminating against minority groups.Minimize the process duration. A key issue in any process that requires citizen involvement is its duration. It is clear that a process demanding excessive effort by citizens will lead to fatigue and, consequently, a low participation rate.For three of these objectives, we may identify the following ‘natural’ scales:•Maximize the information from participants. According to the response mode available to the tasks, we consider the following possibilities: “None”, “Closed” and “Open”, which we identify with the values 0, 1 and 2, respectively.Maximize information exchange. We consider that the level of citizen engagement (Rowe and Frewer, 2005) affects the information provided by participants, technicians and authorities. Possible values could be: “None”,“Communication”, “Consult” and “Participation”, corresponding to 0, 1, 2 and 3, respectively.Minimize the process duration, which will be the sum of the durations of the tasks within the PB process. We can measure it in days. Finding consensual durations of the tasks is not easy and may depend on cultural and logistic aspects. We propose as typical durations the values in Table 6obtained from a literature review (Alberich, 2004; Brown, 2006; Coglianese, 1997; Iglesias et al., 2004). However, other values could be considered, as pertinent in the incumbent case.For the rest of objectives, we have used a qualitative ordinal scale with five levels: Very Low, Low, Fair, High and Very High, which has been transformed into a numerical 1–5 scale, 1 to Very Low, 5 to Very High. Table 7summarizes the measurement scales of all the objectives except that related with the duration of the process.Table 8proposes a possible evaluation of each of the tasks in terms of their success against the first seven objectives. Note that there are many potential evaluations: ours is one of many. However, this might be used as a starting point to mitigate the PB process owner fatigue.We define now a value function to assess the feasible schemes and obtain the most preferred PB process. We shall assume an additive value function, see Von Winterfeldt and Edwards (1986) or Clemen and Reilly (2001), which penalizes the number of repetitions of the same task. Specifically, a PB process S=(t1,t2,…,tn) will be evaluated throughv(S)=∑i=1nρi∑j=17wjvj(ti)+w8v8(d(S)),where•ρi=ρk−1, if this is the kth occurrence of task tiin the process, where ρ∈[0,1]. In such a way we penalize the repetition of tasks within a PB process, as we expect that repeated tasks will not reveal themselves as useful as the first time they are implemented.wjis the weight of the jth objective, where wj⩾0 and∑i=18wj=1vj(ti)=vj′(ti)-min(vj′)max(vj′)-min(vj′), wherevj′(ti)is the effectiveness of task tiwith respect to the jth objective.d(S) is the process duration.v8(d(S)) is the evaluation of the duration of the process, where v8(d(S))∈[0,1], with 1 for the shortest process and 0 for the longest one. Note that this value is calculated for all schemes, independently of their number of tasks.Once we have constructed v, we have to solve the problem(1)maxv(S)s.t.S∈Rwhere R is the set of feasible PB processes.We illustrate the methodology, with an example in which we only consider the achievement of six of the goals with the following weights, emphasizing the need to speed up the execution of the PB process:–0.02 to maximize information exchange.0.05 to maximize the number of participants.0.10 to maximize transparency.0.03 to maximize representativeness.0.15 to maximize fairness in the distribution of public resources.0.65 to minimize the process duration.The other weights would be 0. We assume that ρ=0.8. We present the results based on the number of tasks:•Schemes with two tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.662 with the scheme RV (election of representatives and voting), which lasts 2days.Schemes with three tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.673 for the scheme RPV (election of representatives, preference modeling and voting), which lasts 3days. Another PB scheme with three tasks is carried out in Morsang-Sur-Orge (debate, preference modeling and arbitration) with a value of 0.586.Schemes with four tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.665 for the scheme RPNV (election of representatives, preference modeling, negotiation and voting), which lasts 5days. Other PB schemes with four tasks are carried out in Chicago (debate, election of representatives, debate and voting) with a value of 0.554, Emsdetten (participant sampling, debate, arbitration and elaboration of documents) with a value of 0.516 and Medellin (distribution of information, election of representatives, preference modeling and negotiation) with a value of 0.566.Schemes with five tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.651 for the scheme MPRNV (participant sampling, preference modeling, election of representatives, negotiation and voting) and its feasible permutations, which last 6days. Another PB scheme with five tasks is carried out in Madrid (problem structuring, use of questionnaires in parallel with debate, problem structuring, negotiation and distribution of information) with a value of 0.322.Schemes with six tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.641 for the scheme MPRNVN (participant sampling, preference modeling, election of representatives, negotiation, voting and negotiation) and its feasible permutations. These schemes last 8days.Schemes with seven tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.605 for the scheme MPRNVFV (participant sampling, preference modeling, election of representatives, negotiation, voting, debate and voting) and its feasible permutations. These schemes last 11days. Another scheme with seven tasks is our scheme proposed in Alfaro et al. (2010b): EFEPNVN (problem structuring, debate, problem structuring, preference modeling, negotiation, voting and negotiation) with a value of 0.415.Schemes with eight tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.578 for the scheme MPRNVIVN (participant sampling, preference modeling, election of representatives, negotiation, voting, distribution of information, voting and negotiation) and its feasible permutations. These schemes last 14days.Schemes with nine tasks: The maximum value obtained is 0.497 for the scheme MPFRNVFVN (participant sampling, preference modeling, debate, election of representatives, negotiation, voting, debate, voting and negotiation) and its feasible permutations. These schemes last 16days.As we can see, the optimal value tends to decrease as the duration gets longer, given the importance (0.65) we have assigned to the duration related objective. Furthermore, the above schemes tend to result by combining tasks with shorter durations, to wit, arbitration, voting, participant sampling and preference modeling. Globally, the best scheme would be RPV, which would proceed by:1.Election of representatives. Citizens elect representatives to participate in the PB process.Preference modeling. The participants must provide their preferences. (If all participants prefer the same optimal budget, the process concludes).Voting. The participants make the decision through voting (assisted by their preference model).Note that, as we have mentioned, these results arise from the importance given to the duration objective. In addition, we have observed that if we assign a small weight to this objective, the function value tends to increase when the schemes are composed of a greater number of tasks. On the other hand, if we would like to increase the number of participants and emphasize the objectives related with democratic ideals, the obtained results would be significantly different. Thus, for example, if we assume ρ=0.8 and the following weights:–0.05 to maximize the relevant information from participants.0.05 to maximize the relevant information from technicians and authorities.0.05 to maximize information exchange.0.20 to maximize the number of participants.0.20 to maximize transparency.0.30 to maximize representativeness.0.10 to maximize fairness in the distribution of public resources.0.05 to minimize the process duration,the optimal scheme would be FPINVFVNI which contains tasks like voting, debate, distribution of information, negotiation or preference modeling which provide best values for these three objectives (maximize number of participants, transparency and representativeness). This scheme would proceed by:1.Debate, in which participants can express their opinions and suggestions in order to elaborate an initial list of proposals.Preference modeling, through which participants asses their preferences. (If all participants prefer the same optimal budget, the PB process ends).Distribution of information, in which authorities and technicians explain to citizens all the proposals and its technical features and constraints among them.Negotiation, where participants exchange offers, ideas and arguments to try to reach a consensus. (If negotiation is successful, the PB process ends.)Voting, if there is no agreement after negotiation a voting session takes place in which the participants eliminate the less preferred proposals.Debate, where participants may explain their preferred alternatives to the other participants in order to facilitate achieving consensus at the next stage.Voting, if there is no agreement in previous phases, the participants make the final decision through voting.Negotiation, if the decision made by voting is dominated then there is a negotiation to find a best solution.Distribution of information, where authorities and technicians explain to citizens the final budget.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
