@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Achieving customer satisfaction through product–service systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an approach for achieving customer satisfaction in manufacturing firms.The key criteria can be identified through an integrated BSC and MCDM approach.A questionnaire survey was conducted in 24 manufacturing firms from 3 countries.The results show that various customer perspectives need to be further improved.We provide a procedure for identifying key criteria and their interrelationships.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Product–service system,Customer satisfaction,Balanced scorecard,DEMATEL,ANP,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this research is to help manufacturing companies identify the key performance evaluation criteria for achieving customer satisfaction through Balanced Scorecard (BSC) and Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) approaches. To explore the causal relationships among the four dimensions of business performance in Balanced Scorecard as well as their key performance criteria, a MCDM approach combining DEMATEL and ANP techniques is adopted. Subsequently, the MCDM framework is tested using Delphi method and a questionnaire survey is conducted in 24 manufacturing firms from Taiwan, Vietnam and Thailand.The research findings indicate that manufacturing companies should focus more on improving customer perspectives such as customer satisfaction and customer loyalty by integrating products and services innovation and providing diversified value-added product–service offerings as well as developing close long-term partnership with customers. In addition, the classification of importance and improvability into four strategic planning zones provide practicing managers with a decision making tool for prioritizing continuous improvement projects and effectively allocating their resources to those key criteria identified in the strategic map for business performance improvement.By identifying critical criteria and their interrelationships, our research results can help manufacturing companies enhance their business performance in both financial and non-financial perspectives. They can also serve as valuable guidelines and references for manufacturing companies to achieve better customer satisfaction through sustainable product–service system practices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the discussions on the topic of “transition to service” by manufacturing companies have been growing rapidly, not only in academia, but in business practices as well. This is a result of dramatic changes in customer expectations, the destruction of product margin, together with pressures from intense competition and environmental movement that have driven many manufacturing companies to shift their business focus from a traditional pure product orientation approach to an integrated product–service system in order to secure their profits and actively manage their sustainability (Ahamed, Inohara, & Kamoshida, 2013).The concept of product–service system (PSS) can be referred to as a solution to integrate services with products through alternative product-uses and adding more value to customers. Its ultimate objective is to improve a company's profitability and competitiveness, as well as to satisfy customers’ needs while minimizing environmental impact (Manzini & Vezzoli, 2003). Basically, there are three main categories of PSS – Product-oriented, Use-oriented and Result-oriented as suggested by Tukker (2004). Firstly, Product-Oriented Services refer to mainly a supply of products sold with extra added services which are necessary during the products’ usage period, and involves two sub-categories: (1) product-related services like insurance or maintenance contracts, and (2) advice or consultancy. This is very common in business-to-business markets where providers offer extra services like maintenance and repair terms to customers in supporting their sales functions. The second type is Use-Oriented Services which mainly focus on selling the use or availability of products together with value-added services as a package while the asset ownership remains with the providing companies. Examples of this include product leasing, sharing, and product pooling such as car sharing or rental services. Furthermore, Result-Oriented Services focus on the result or competency consented by both the service provider and customer without a pre-determined product involvement; product ownership also remains with the company. These services comprise of activity management or outsourcing (cleaning service), pay-per-service unit (e.g., photocopy service, self-service clothes washing), or functional result.According to Baines et al. (2007), PSS not only causes minimum negative environmental impact but also further reaches sustainability by maximizing social well-being and optimizing economic added value. Furthermore, pursuing servitization or product–service system strategies may also lead to significant transformation in firms’ organizational structures, business capabilities improvements and relationships with customers as well as suppliers (Neu & Brown, 2008). Therefore, these would require manufacturers to take proactive action in improving the business's learning capability, enhancing internal processes and efficiently managing customer relationships in order to maximize service output and achieve customer satisfaction. Recently, Vasantha, Roy, Lelah, and Brissaud (2012) presented a good literature review of product–service systems’ design methodologies. Their review showed that the field of PSS design is still at an initial stage of development and substantial research is required to develop an efficient PSS design methodology. Li, Huang, Cheng, Zheng, and Ping (2014) considered a product–service supplier chain that comprises of a manufacturer and a retailer. They treated PSS as a market proposition that extends the traditional functionality of a product by incorporating additional services. Zhang, Han, Liu, Liu, and Leng (2015) examined the pricing of product and value-added services and their study show that a manufacturer choosing a pricing strategy should consider consumers’ initial expectations regarding the value-added service quality. Ding, Pingyu, and Zheng (2015) discussed an environmental and economic sustainability-aware resource service scheduling problem during the product–service delivery phase of industrial PSS.Although there is a high demand for deeper insight into the business benefits of sustainable PSS from a quantitative point-of-view, most of the literature found on this topic only emphasize on case studies, reviews, or qualitative assessments, while comprehensive quantitative research methods like statistical analysis on survey data are still lacking. The goal of our paper is to fill this research gap. Balanced Scorecard, which is widely used as a helpful performance indicator, was suggested as a good evaluation tool for the PSS approach (Jiang, Luh, & Kung, 2010). However, when assessing the effectiveness of a sustainable product–service system in manufacturing firms, besides considering factors and sub-factors affecting performance, the degree of influence of these factors are also in need of investigation.Hence, this paper aims to adopt the Balanced Scorecard model which integrates the four perspectives of business performance (financial, customer, internal process, and learning and growth) with support of the Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) approach combining DEMATEL and ANP techniques to provide a better analysis of the key criteria in measuring business performance with real applications in manufacturing firms in three countries – Taiwan, Vietnam and Thailand. The objectives are to identify the performance evaluation criteria for manufacturing companies to pursue higher customer satisfaction through product–service system (PSS) practices. Moreover, it is necessary to determine the relative weights of the criteria as well as the degree and direction of influence among the perspectives of the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) and their corresponding criteria through a MCDM approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
