@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integration of RFID and business analytics for trade show exhibitors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An RFID-enabled traceability framework is proposed to improve information visibility at the exhibition.RFID allows exhibitors to track attendees’ movements and activities for their entire exhibition visit.This study outlines how to utilize RFID data for analytics processes.The results show that the exhibitor can use RFID to gather visitor intelligence.The key findings provide feedback to business analysts to promote follow-up marketing strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RFID,Analytics,Trade show,Exhibition,Traceability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Drastic changes in consumer markets over the last decades have increased the pressure and challenges for the trade exhibition industry. Exhibiting organizations demand higher levels of justification for involvement and expect returns on trade show investments. This study proposes an RFID-enabled track and traceability framework to improve information visibility at the trade site. The identification information can potentially create detailed, accurate, and complete visibility of attendees’ movements and purchasing behaviors and consequently lead to considerable analytical benefits. Leveraging the wealth of information made available by RFID is challenging; thus, the objective of this study is to outline how to incorporate RFID data into existing enterprise data to deliver analytical solutions to the trade show and exhibition industry. The results show that the exhibitor can use RFID to gather visitor intelligence and the key findings of this study provide valuable feedback to business analysts to promote follow-up marketing strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Participation in trade shows, also known as trade fairs and trade exhibitions, has been an instrumental marketing strategy not only to promote sales of a variety of products and services, but also to share updated information and knowledge, to establish relationships, and to negotiate contracts and deals (Rogers, 2008). Trade shows and exhibitions are regarded as effective and efficient marketing venues for enhancing communications and face-to-face interactions with both current and potential customers. Thus, many industries treat trade show and exhibition participation as a potential element in creating a competitive edge by bringing customers closer to their businesses in a short period of time (Blythe, 2002; Bonoma, 1983).Drastic changes in consumer markets over the last decades have increased the pressures and challenges for the trade exhibition industry. According to the Attendee Acquisition Challenges & Practice Survey in 2013, event organizers at exhibitions have experienced decreased attendance even though the number of exhibiting companies has remained consistent. The physical size of the exhibition or booth space in net square feet has declined as well (Jenner & Kent, 2013). Many exhibitors at the trade site strive very hard to attract and retain attendees by investing heavily in their marketing and promotion strategies for the exhibitions. Mobile applications and social media (Facebook and Twitter), for instance, are utilized as attendance acquisition and retention tactics. In addition to booth space costs, marketing budgets are allocated to direct mail, email, social media marketing, etc., at an estimated average cost of $27–$140 per attendee and $56–$200 per new attendee (Jenner & Kent, 2013). Because of the high levels of investment for participating in trade shows, exhibiting organizations demand higher levels of justification for their involvement and expect significant returns on their trade show investment. Thus, the challenge is not only for trade shows to yield positive results but also for management to truly recognize the value of participating in trade shows and exhibitions.Information technology (IT) plays a vital role in all kinds of businesses, especially in facilitating routine business tasks at trade shows and exhibitions. The old-fashioned ways of either manually updating attendee data into a system or accessing information though printed reports is costly, incomplete, prone to error, and eventually, fading away. Many automatic identification technologies (AITs) have been developed to automate such traditional processes. Radio frequency identification (RFID) technology is one way to automatically capture such data. It is built around the idea that information can be gathered quickly and easily by just putting radio transceiver tags on physical objects and then using the tags to know where those objects are (Brazeal, 2009). Literally, RFID is an information and sensor technology that collects data though reader devices and tags that are attached to or embedded inside objects such as a documents, persons, animals, or containers. It basically uses radio waves to transfer data from an RFID tag to a reader (Brown, 2007).Barcodes, RFID, and sensor networks have been developed and implemented to better manage trade show participation at the exhibiting site. The idea of adding RFID tags to conference and exhibition badges is not new. For instance, a real-time mobile tagging system has been introduced that connects buyers and sellers at fashion trade shows. The attendees can use their mobile phone to capture trade information such as brands, tagged locations on a map of the conference center, or events scheduled at the trade site through two-dimensional barcodes in the QR code format. Additionally, attendees can save notes or record voice notes along with the brand and business information on their mobile phones so that such information can be retrieved throughout the trade visits (Bisker, Ouilhet, Pomeroy, Chang, & Casalegno, 2008). Bravo, Hervás, Sánchez, Chavira, and Nava (2006) describe a context-aware, visualization-based service and applications using RFID technology at a conference site. The main purpose is to anticipate the attendees’ needs during the conference based on their location, schedule, and time in the reception area, the common area, and the session rooms (Bravo et al., 2006).The majority of the literature on RFID implications in the trade exhibition context is location oriented, focusing on either tracking attendee visits to desired exhibitor booths or enhancing the visitor experience. Relatively few studies outline how to utilize the enormous data generated from RFID technologies to help exhibitors understand attendees’ interests and purchasing behaviors. In fact, many business or marketing analysts do not fully understand how real-time updated data from RFID can also be a valuable component of business analytics processes related to trade exhibitions. Thus, in exploring the potential of RFID in the trade show business, the following research question arises: “How can integration of business analytics and RFID improve exhibitors’ understanding of customers’ purchasing behavior in the trade show business?” To answer this research question, this study proposes an RFID-enabled track and traceability framework that improves information visibility by tracking and recording attendees’ movements and activities while they are visiting the exhibition. Leveraging the wealth of information made available by RFID is challenging; thus, the objective of this study is to outline how to incorporate RFID data into existing enterprise data to deliver analytical solutions to trade show and exhibition industry participants.The rest of this study is organized as follows. After a brief literature review in Section 2, Section 3 presents the traceability-based analytical model that utilizes improved information visibility from RFID technology. The trade show and exhibition environment, along with the current analytical process from an exhibiting company in Thailand, is described in Section 4. The RFID-enabled track and traceability framework that is applicable in the context of trade shows and exhibitions is also outlined. After results and discussion on combining business analytics with RFID data in Section 5, Section 6 contains the conclusions and directions for future research.Although this study originated within the context of a specific exhibitor at a trade show, the situation depicted at the site is quite typical of what is observed in most trade show and exhibition environments. The case presented in this study can provide fruitful avenues for exploring how RFID can be integrated into business analytics processes, contributing to both knowledge and practice.RFID has received considerable attention for decades, as it offers tantalizing benefits for improving business performance in supply chain management, inventory control, warehouse distribution, manufacturing, retail management, and healthcare (Gunther, Kletti, & Kubach, 2008; Hunt, 2007; Jones, 2008). Even though RFID has been around for a while, it has only recently been brought to the attention of the trade show and exhibition communities. Bellotti, Berta, De Gloria, and Margarone (2006) have developed location-aware multimedia guides based on handheld devices with RFID tags to help blind visitors in exhibitions. The purpose of the device is to provide general information about the exhibition and the services and to describe selected interest points associated with the RFID tag when the visitors enter specific areas (Bellotti et al., 2006). Many studies report the implementation of real-time location systems to enhance visitors’ experiences at museums, conferences, and exhibition sites. RFID is integrated with existing handheld devices such as cell phones or PDAs, not only to improve the communication and interaction between visitors and exhibitors, but also to capture information about exhibits recently visited for further product and service inquiries. The results indicate that the number of visitors and the profits increase and the costs of operations are reduced (Hsi & Fait, 2005; Huang, Wang, & Sandnes, 2011; Lin, Chiu, Feng, & Lin, 2007; Mody, Akram, Rony, Aman, & Kamoua, 2009).The main purpose of this study is to utilize RFID data to improve analytical processes at the trade exhibition so that marketing analysts can not only detect and predict any changes in attendees’ purchasing behavior, but also react to what they actually need with a high quality of products and services. In fact, advanced analytics through data mining approaches have been applied to identify customer behavior patterns in retail, direct marketing, and customer relationship management for decades (Davenport, 2006; Gopal, Marsden, & Vanthienen, 2011; Harding, Kusiak, & Shahbaz, 2006). The key concept of data mining is to incorporate both statistical and analytical techniques to effectively and efficiently identify intrinsic patterns from large amount of data and interpret them into useful information within a particular context (Jackson, 2002; Turban, Sharda, & Delen, 2011). Bose and Chen (2009) provide an intensive review of machine learning techniques, such as logistic regression, decision trees, neural networks, and genetic algorithms, commonly used for selection of targets for direct marketing. They also provide a summary of data used in direct marketing models, from demographic, lifestyle, socio-graphic data to transaction records, feedback, and customer preferences (Bose & Chen, 2009). Particularly in retail marketing, data mining is used significantly to understand the customer segments based on the records of shopping transactions through the use of credit cards and point-of-sale systems. Retailers can utilize data mining techniques to predict which products customers tend to purchase together, forecast the likelihood customers will purchase products in the store, develop profiles of customers who purchase particular items, examine patterns in stores, or determine the ideal layout for a specific store (Rygielski, Wang, & Yen, 2002). Cluster analysis is also applied to aid in classifying customers into sub-groups that share similar characteristics or interests at different periods of time. RFM (recency–frequency–monetary value), k-means clustering, and Self Organizing Maps (SOMs) are among the popular techniques used for customer clustering and pattern recognition (Bose & Chen, 2009; Collica, 2011). In addition to developing long-term relationships with customers, another important aspect of dynamic retail marketing is to understand changes in customer behavior so that effective promotion campaigns can be established. RFM, association rule mining, and cluster analysis can be used to analyze the patterns of customer behavior based on customer profile and purchased products (Chen, Chiu, & Chang, 2005). Liao, Chu, and Hsiao (2012) summarize research in other advanced data mining techniques and applications in the areas of knowledge-based systems published from 2000 to 2011, which can be applied to this business context (Delen, 2010; Delen, Oztekin, & Kong, 2010; Delen, Walker, & Kadam, 2005; Jackson, 2002; Liao et al., 2012; Turban et al., 2011).On the other hand, few studies have addressed the integration of RFID data with other data sources in the business and operations to produce analytic value. Al-Kassab, Thiesse, and Buckel (2013) present a case report on RFID-enabled business process intelligence in retail stores. The study outlines the procedure for handling massive RFID data sets and explores the opportunities for generating business value from store management to customer behavior on the sales floor. In the fitting room area, the collected RFID data is used to analyze not only the number of try-ons in fitting rooms based on cluster level or according to the time of day, but also the correlations of try-ons based on color, size, or price of the items (Al-Kassab et al., 2013). Tamura, Inaba, Nakamura, Kokuryo, and Murai (2010) propose data analytics methods using RFID-enabled customer purchasing behavior data and sales data for a cosmetics store. They first focus on inferences from compared items when customers try many items but finally purchase only a few. Then, consumer purchasing behavior data captured by an RFID system is analyzed with sales data extracted from the point-of-sale (POS) system. The results indicate the practical use of the proposed framework (Tamura et al., 2010). Several studies address the value of RFID in retail and fashion industries and illustrate the use of RFID data with POS and marketing data on consumer perceptions and purchasing history (Loebbecke & Palmer, 2006; Resatsch, Sandner, Leimeister, & Krcmar, 2008).These studies are examples of efforts to realize the benefits of RFID implementation at exhibition sites. Although several studies present the RFID system as a way to enhance the experience of consumers and some of them propose data analytics methods, this study is different from the others by providing guidelines for how improving the visibility of information about attendees’ movements and activities during their visits can help exhibiting companies conduct better analytics to improve their understanding of attendees’ purchasing behavior. The RFID-based traceability framework and the trade show and exhibition environment are explained in the next section.Identification of factors influencing the purchasing decision is always critical for the trade exhibition industry. Many marketing analysts seek to identify what factors actually drive demand, especially for those who attend trade exhibitions, and how these factors vary across different products. Although a variety of data mining techniques is available in predictive analytics to answer those business questions, this study offers another alternative to complement the traditional analytics approach. Fig. 1presents the traceability-based analytical model that utilizes the improved information visibility from RFID to understand attendees’ behavior from the time they enter the exhibition area until they leave the site.Traditionally, after defining the appropriate business goal and objectives of the analysis in the domain of exhibition operations, the first task in the analytical process is to collect the relevant data, called the input variables, related to customer profiles, sales and revenue, and even inventory data for all products at the trade site. The next step is to look for preliminary insights into the data, understand the data sources, and assess the quality of the data from its initial raw state to the final dataset that is ready for model development. Before the analysis, the data are cleaned, transformed, organized, and formatted. Usually, the data are partitioned into two datasets, one for training and one for validation. The training dataset is used for preliminary model fitting and the validation dataset is used for model assessment. Several popular predictive models such as stepwise regression, a decision tree, and an artificial neural network (ANN) can be applied to predict the target variables. In this case, the target variable, called the dependent variable, can be either (1) the decision to purchase a product, where “1” = purchase and “0” = none or (2) the total amount ($) spent at the trade site. Cluster analysis can also be used to segment attendees into sub-groups that share similar characteristics. Predictive models are then applied to each cluster. The key business questions remain: “What factors influence the purchasing decisions for those who attend the trade exhibition, what factors drive demand, and how do these factors vary across different products?”RFID offers a unique opportunity to help marketing analysts make better strategic decisions in approaching existing and potential customers when they visit the trade site. With RFID, marketing analysts can make some sense of when attendees enter or leave specific booths or locations and can determine the exact amount of time they actually stay at each booth (see Step 1 in Fig. 1). This information from RFID, which is usually hidden in the exhibition environment, is very useful for the analytical process. In Step 2, the analysts can then gain insight into customer behavior through exploring the data, for example discovering the pattern or route each attendee takes in visiting the booths in the exhibition or the attendee's interest in a particular booth. The next task, Step 3, is to integrate RFID data with the existing attendee database. This process usually takes time, but important information gained from RFID (time, location, path or route) is used as input parameters for developing predictive models or creating a data analysis scenario, Step 4. For instance, in addition to the traditional predictive modeling (Alternative 1) or cluster analysis (Alternative 2), marketing analysts can first segment attendees into sub-groups based on the traceability data from RFID (Alternative 3) before building the predictive models to explain attendees’ purchasing behavior. For Step 5, the key findings from data analysis either from the data exploration in Step 2 or from the predictive models in Step 4 are used not only to provide feedback to the marketing analysts but also to develop actionable plans to maximize the value of the exhibition investment, such as follow-up offers to the attendees after the event, changes in the layout design to emphasize the booths that attendees visit the most, or promotions during the event for those products attendees are most interested in. A detailed explanation of RFID's applicability at trade exhibitions and the valuable input for data analysis provided by the tracking and traceability information from RFID is presented in the next section.An in-depth study of an RFID deployment assessment from an exhibiting company in Thailand has been conducted to explore the benefits of an RFID-based traceability system. The company specializes in the fashion business and participates in the International Fashion Fair at Impact Arena—Muang Thong Thani, Bangkok, Thailand every year. This year, the marketing budget remains about the same as last year, even though the number of visitors is expected to decline about 20 percent. In addition to the costs of exhibit space and booth design, money is budgeted for direct mail, email marketing, and social media campaigns on Facebook and Twitter to market the event. The main goal of participation is to get the most out of this investment, including (1) establishing relationships with both current and potential customers, (2) selling the overstock inventory from last year, and (3) launching new products and designs.Currently, marketing analysts employ descriptive statistics and several data mining techniques to better understand the factors and patterns of customers’ purchasing behavior. Fig. 2presents an example of the profiles of customers recently attending the trade show and exhibition. Decision trees and stepwise regression models are used to predict target variables: whether the visitors purchase at least one item at the trade site or place advance orders (Binary Target Variable: 1 = Purchase and 0 = none) and how much they spend (Interval Target Variable: $). Once the marketing analysts understand the key factors associated with the decision to purchase products, follow-up marketing strategies such as target marketing or customized promotions are employed accordingly.The current data mining project focuses only on the final outcome of the decision to purchase products. The following questions are of interest to the exhibiting company:-Which exhibitions or booths are attendees most interested in or which are most visited?How much time do attendees spend at each booth?How many times do attendees visit the booth before deciding to purchase the products?Are attendees interested in the new product designs or do they visit the trade shows just for the sale items?How do attendees explore the exhibition before making a decision to purchase the products?With existing trade exhibition operations, this information remains invisible, and current trade performance measurements—from the financial aspect, survey questionnaires, or focus-group interviews—might not clearly answer these questions.In this study, RFID is proposed to help marketing analysts understand attendees’ behavior during their visits. Fig. 3presents the layout of the exhibition area with a total of 12 booths equipped with an RFID system. The layout is set so that attendees’ visit the new product development section (B4 and B5) after registering at the main entrance. Other booths include women's fashions (B1–B3), men's fashions (B6 and B7), sales (B8), men's and women's accessories (B9 and B10), and boy's and girl's fashions (B11 and B12). The infrastructure comprises RFID passive tags attached to the name badges of each participating attendee and two antennas mounted on the curtain of each booth to detect the RFID tags. Alien® ALR-9800 RFID readers are used during the pilot experiment. The reader is designed to read and program all global EPC Gen 1 and 2 tags. The Electronic Product Code (EPC), developed by EPCglobal IncTM, is a unique number designed to be stored on an RFID tag. EPC tags—Generation 1or Gen 1, used in this study, are RFID tags that can be written once and read many times (WORM); meanwhile, EPC Generation 2 or Gen 2 tags offer significant performance enhancements over the EPC Gen 1 Tags. The Gen 2 Tags can be written many times and read many times (WMRM) or, basically, fully rewriteable. Additionally, the Gen 2 tags can be read up to 10 times faster than the Gen 1 tags with improved accuracy allowing extremely high read rates on the RFID tags.The middleware used to evaluate the technical feasibility of the RFID installation is TagCentric software, developed at the University of Arkansas. TagCentric is open source, Java-based software that allows users to develop other source codes for advanced use. The software also has the capability of integrating different RFID readers with RFID tag printers and a MySQL database. Dynamic host configuration protocols (DHCP) or IP addresses on the RFID readers are then updated accordingly. When an attendee with an RFID tag coded “3008 32B2 DDD9 0140 3505 0000,” for instance, visits Booth 1, the RFID reader at Booth 1 sends a signal to notify the system. Multiple reads from an RFID reader can be expected. While the attendee is still visiting Booth 1, the tag is read 7388 times, with an average of 96 reads per second. The middleware allows users to enter ad-hoc SQL queries with different functions, such as the number of runs or distinct test reads. When query commands are submitted, the software will send the DBQuery message to the designated database and display the results of the query appropriately.Adapted from the RFID-enabled track and traceability framework in the job-shop scheduling environment (Chongwatpol & Sharda, 2013), Fig. 4 presents an example of the walking flow of visitors in the trade exhibition. Let us assume a total of 12 Booths (B1–B12) with a rest area (B13); Pijkrepresents the path of a visitor walking from one booth to another.Let i = the current location or booth an attendee is visitingj = the destination an attendee is heading tok = the number of times an attendee follows path Pij during the entire visitFor instance, PB1, B2, 1 represents the path when an attendee walks from Booth 1 to Booth 2 for the first time, and PB2, B4, 1 represents the path when an attendee skips Booth 3 and walks directly from Booth 2 to Booth 4. When an attendee follows the same path twice between Booth 8 and Booth 12, for example, the RFID reader at B12 reads the tag and the system notes it as PB12, B8, 2.Fig. 5presents the data flow when a customer with Customer_ID 100201 visits the exhibition and is given an RFID tag coded ABC0001. RFID readers installed at each booth detect the RFID tag and send information (Reader ID, RFID code, and Time stamps) to the RFID database when a customer walks from one location to another. All of a customer's paths and the total time (TB1–TB13) a customer spends at each booth are calculated and updated into the path database. Thus, an overview of a customer's activities during the exhibition visit is now visible.Fig. 6presents an example of the full path of a customer (ID 100201, Female, 25 years, from the North region, College) during her exhibition visit. By employing the RFID-based traceability system, the movement, also called walking pattern or walking behavior, of a customer is tracked and captured. The complete path is presented as follows:Path Database: RFID CODE #ABC 0001 - PB1,B2,1, PB2,B3,1, PB3,B4,1, PB4,B5,1, PB5,B2,1, PB2,B4,1, PB4,B6,1, PB6,B2,1, PB2,B3,1, PB3,B8,1, PB8,B2,1, PB2,B11,1, PB11,B12,1This customer visits Booth 2, which is in the women's fashion section, 4 times for a total of 95 minutes. Interestingly, she visits Booth 5 (the new product development section) for less than 5 minutes, indicating that she might not be interested in any new products advertised at Booth 5. She visits Booth 6, which is in the men's fashions section, once but for less than 5 minutes as well.With the RFID-based track and traceability system, data on the attendee's current movements throughout the exhibition and the total time spent at each booth are captured. During the 3-day pilot experiment, 140 attendees agreed to carry a badge with RFID tags and received a 20 percent-off coupon for their participation. Of these attendees, 60 percent visited the exhibition the previous year and have been loyal customers for over a year. Of the loyal customers, approximately 23 percent of attendees have not purchased any company's products for over a year and a half. Another 10 percent of all attendees state that they purchased products at least once in the past and visited the exhibition the previous year; however, the company has no records of them in the existing house files. Another 5 percent of the attendees are loyal customers but have never visited an exhibition. The other 25 percent of attendees are new customers, of which approximately 10 percent visited the exhibition the previous year. The following 5 steps outline how to utilize RFID data for analytics processes, based on the pilot experiment.Step 1: Making senses of attendees’ movementsStudying the data can provide some sense of attendees’ movements throughout the exhibition. Customers have different expectations, interests, and preferences. Visiting all the exhibition booths systematically, from Booth 1 to Booth 12, is unlikely. Some customers prefer only sale products, while some only attend the exhibition to look at new collections. Female attendees tend to spend more time in each booth and visit more booths than male attendees. Some customers spend quite some time in each booth talking to staff before moving to another booth, while some quietly browse through the products offered in every booth before making a purchasing decision. Some customers visit a particular booth multiple times before purchasing the products, and some visit a booth once and purchase the products right away.Step 2: Gaining insights into customer behavior through data explorationAfter we get a sense of attendee data, the next step is to calculate frequency distributions and descriptive statistics and to perform cross-tab analyses. Fig. 7presents examples of the total time spent at each booth. The first attendee (ID 100251), who visited the exhibition last year, seems to be interested in women's fashions (B1), new products and designs (B5), the sales section (B8), and women's accessories (B9), spending about 20–25 minutes at each booth. The second attendee (ID 110135), who is visiting the exhibition for the first time, spends about 25 minutes in the new product section but mostly visits the sales section. Overall, prospective customers spend approximately one and a half hours, on average, for their entire visit. Current customers, on the other hand, seem to be a little more interested in the products and designs, spending approximately two hours in the exhibition. Interestingly, customers, who have been with the company for over 3 years spend less than one and a half hours in the exhibition. Approximately 40 percent of the attendees visit every booth, while about 90 percent of attendees visit the sale items in B8. The average time attendees stay in B8 is 27 minutes, which is almost twice that of attendees who visit B11, boy/girl fashions.Step 3: Integrating RFID data with the customer profiles.The next step is to integrate RFID data with the current customer profile, which includes previous purchases, demographics, and credit history, for further analysis. This data preprocessing step takes about 80 percent of the project time. It involves understanding the data from the RFID readers, cleaning the RFID data, and formatting and integrating the relevant RFID data with the existing customer database. Fig. 8 presents examples of the full paths of three customers with the records of whether they actually purchase at least one item during the exhibition. One customer (ID 100256) visits every booth in the exhibition in less than an hour but does not purchase any items (Purchase = 0). Another customer (ID 100257) first visits B8 (Sales) for about 45 minutes, later visits Booths 7 and 4, and in the end purchases at least one item (Purchase = 1). A third customer (ID 100258) is only interested in the new collection, spending approximately 1.5 hours in Booths 4 and 5, and in the end purchases at least one item (Purchase = 1).Step 4: Creating a data analysis frameworkAs presented in Section 3, a variety of data mining techniques are currently employed at the exhibiting sites, and the value of applying analytics has been convincingly recognized. However, focusing only on the final decision to purchase (Binary Target Variable: 1 = Purchase and 0 = none) means that marketing analysts are assuming a homogeneous group of attendees with similar purchasing characteristics. This assumption is arguable since customers attend the trade site for different reasons. One may just want to explore the trade site without intending to purchase the products. Another may just want reassurance about recently purchased products to ensure the right decision has been made. Others may be willing to spend time at the trade sites to purchase products they actually want. Thus, the key advantage of utilizing RFID data is in classifying samples into various subgroups before building the models to explain and predict customers’ purchasing behaviors. Consider the following two scenarios as the justification for improving analytics through RFID:Scenario 1: For each booth, marketing analysts divide attendees into two groups. The first group is attendees visiting the trade site for less than an hour; the second group is those visiting the site for more than an hour. The “one hour” cut-off point is the average time attendees with RFID tags spent during their visits; thus our initial assumption is that attendees spending more time at the exhibiting sites are more interested in the products and designs and are considered prospective customers who may intend to purchase products. This assumption is applied to both first-time visitors and loyal customers of the exhibiting company. Fig. 9 presents data integration for customers visiting B8. Customer attributes include both demographic data and purchasing history, while RFID attributes include both the total time spent at B8 and at the exhibition site as well as the number of visits to B8. A similar process is expected for other booths. Each cluster is analyzed separately. Marketing analysts can also classify the data sample into more than two groups if the dataset has enough observations to perform predictive analysis.Scenario 2: Customer data can be classified into four groups in a quadrant diagram based on the average time spent at the exhibition site and the number of units sold. As presented in Fig. 10, the predefined cut-off points (60 minutes and 10 units sold) in each quadrant of the diagram are set. Group 1 is customers who spend greater than 60 minutes exploring the exhibition site but, in the end, purchase fewer than 10 units. Group 4 is the opposite, those who purchase at least 10 units but spend less than 60 minutes visiting the exhibition site. The customer with ID 100273, for example, is considered a member of the first group. Alternatively, instead of the number of units sold, total sales can be used as a criterion for classifying customer data into subgroups. The customer with ID 100273 is now categorized in Group 1, in which customers spent more than $150 purchasing the products and over an hour visiting the booths.Scenario 3: This scenario considers the number of times attendees revisit a particular booth as part of the classification process. As presented in Fig. 11, attendees are segmented into four groups in a quadrant diagram based on the purchase expenditure and frequency of revisits. According to the tracking and traceability data from RFID, attendees visit Booth 8 more than once (an average of 1.5 times) with an average spending of approximately $70 per attendee. Groups 1 and 3 in Fig. 11 represent the most valuable customers, spending an average of more than $70. Groups 2 and 4 represent marginal customers with lower monetary expenditure. Attendees in Groups 3 and 4 visit the booth more than once. Marketing analysts can first pay more attention to those loyal customers who regularly make purchases and are in Groups 1 and 3 in order to discover patterns and changes in the behavior of attendees. The first-time customers who are the big spenders in Groups 1 and 3 are also a top priority since they may be the most valuable for the business in the future. Additionally, the first time customers in Group 4 are also worth studying. They seem to be interested in the collection and design as they come back to the booth several times. The key findings may come from comparing the key factors influencing loyal and first-time customers’ decisions to purchase the products.Cluster analysis may also be applied in the traditional data mining process; however, in this study, the main focus is on utilizing the knowledge from the RFID system as another means to improve analytical processes. Another important task is to examine the quality of the data to figure out whether the data are complete or contain missing values, errors, and outliers. Frequency distribution and descriptive statistics are used to handle such inconsistencies and to determine what variables to be included in the model. In this analysis, the model excludes variables with over 50 percent information missing or over 50 percent missing values. Additionally, any extreme values, greater than three standard deviations, are considered outliers and discarded from the analysis. In each scenario, traditional data mining techniques such decision tree, stepwise regression, or neural network models are applied to predict and explain factors associated with the decision to purchase the products at the trade show and exhibition.Step 5: Turning knowledge into actionable plansThe last step is to turn the knowledge from the analytics process into actionable plans. Marketing analysts can start from the data exploration in Step 2 to gain some insights about attendees. For instance, the average time customers spend visiting the new products and design show case in the woman's fashion products section (B5) is less than the time they spend in other woman's fashions (B1). This finding provides valuable feedback to the marketing analysts: the new designs for this season may not be of interest to either potential or existing customers. The team needs to research the current trends and redesign the products to reflect customer demands.Another example is that the time when attendees visit the booths varies greatly during the day. For instance, male attendees visit the men's fashion section (B6 and B7) mostly in the early afternoon, from 12.30 to 02.30 PM; female attendees, on the other hand, tend to visit the women's fashion section (B1–B3) in the late afternoon, from 2.00 to 4.00 PM. With these findings, marketing analysts propose two follow-up strategies: (1) to more efficiently reallocate staff between men's and women's fashion sections and (2) to offer special “Deal of the day” promotions in different periods, such as at 1.00 PM for men's fashions and at 3.00 PM for women's fashions.The following example illustrates rule-based predictions from the decision tree model for attendees visiting the exhibition site for more than an hour.“IF number of visits is greater than 1 AND Annual Income is greater than $10,000 AND Gender is Female AND Time_at_Booth is greater than 30 minutes THEN the probability of purchasing at least one item at Booth #8 = 72.1%”“IF number of visits is greater than 1 AND Time_Since_LastPurchase is less than 3 months AND Time_at_Booth is greater than 30 minutes AND Time_as_Loyalty is greater than 28 months AND Region is center THEN the probability of purchasing at least one item at Booth #8 = 65.83%”Marketing analysts are now able to focus on female customers who visit the exhibition more than once and earn over $10,000 annually as a new target-market group, or those who have been with the company for a long time, have recently purchased products, and have previously visited the exhibition.For attendees spending less than an hour visiting the exhibition site, the results of stepwise logistic regression (Fig. 12) indicate that Time_as_Loyalty, Last_Year_Visit, Age, and Loyalty_Status are the most important factors influencing the decision to purchase products (Y = 1) where Time_as_Loyalty and Last_Year_Visit have the highest odds ratio estimates of 1.221 and 1.192, respectively. The odds ratio estimates indicate how a unit change in the independent variables impact the change in purchasing odds. They provide an excellent way for marketing analysts to set the importance of factors with the highest odds. For instance, the longer the time attendees have been loyal to the company, the higher the propensity of those customers to buy at least one item during the exhibition visit. Marketing analysts can use this finding as a way to measure the behavior and level of loyalty of customers who are likely to continue purchasing products.Further investigation of RFID data shows that attendees who visited the exhibition the previous year and have been with the company for over 5 years spend less time, on average, than those with the company for between 3 and 5 years. Thus, follow-up offers may be sent directly to those loyal customers after the exhibition. On the other hand, customers attending the trade site and spending more than the average time at the booth but leaving empty-handed (Y = 0) are worth analyzing. They are definitely prospective customers and marketing analysts should approach them with different promotions or strategies to boost sales. Changing the layout of the exhibition is also possible. Currently, the exhibiting company allocates two slots each for both the accessory (B9 and B10) and boy/girl fashion (B11 and B12) sections. Based on the results of descriptive and predictive statistics, more effort should be aimed at male and female fashions. Adding another slot for adult fashions and reducing accessories and teenage fashions by one slot may maximize the overall revenues generated at the site. Alternatively, both the men's and women's accessory sections should be right next to the registration areas to expose them to more attention from attendees.The lessons from carrying out this study are elaborated as follows. First, because of the capabilities of the RFID equipment and the limited number of RFID readers in each booth, several technical problems were encountered: (1) redundancy at the reader level—multiple readers simultaneously sending the signal to an RFID tag, (2) redundancy at the data level—multiple readings per second when RFID tags were in the proximity of the readers, (3) missed and unreliable readings, and (4) inaccurate timestamps—RFID middleware failing to respond to event changes. These problems cause significant challenges during the data preparation processes. Since attendees pass the RFID readers’ antennas at different speeds and from different directions, the RFID tag might not be able to send back signals to the antennas constantly and the readers might not correctly read the tags. Thus, on the last day of the experiment, we had to simulate and measure the speed of attendees, tune the antennas’ direction, relocate the antennas, and add more antennas in some booths to optimally cover the signal. For a future experiment, we believe the RFID system currently developed and introduced in the market will overcome those technical issues and can guarantee that a tag is read accurately even when multiple tags are read simultaneously. Secondly, RFID data are currently not automatically integrated with the existing enterprise database. Traditionally, excel-based statistical analysis and data preparation are still in use to classify the sample data into subgroups before applying data mining techniques in SAS® Enterprise Miner™.Additionally, privacy concerns remain an important issue. During the exhibition, the first day of the experiment was not successful: only two attendees agreed to participate, even though the staff was trained to educate attendees regarding their privacy. On the next day of the experiment, the RFID privacy policy indicating how RFID tags are used, their effect on attendees, and how information is used and shared was clearly in place. The emphasis was that only the ID on the RFID tag and the time were being traced and tracked and that the information in the tag did not contain any personally identifiable data. Specifically, the information contained in the tags would mean nothing to others and the integration of such information with the existing enterprise system is processed in the backend. Providing more education, along with the discounted coupons as an incentive, overcame some of the privacy concern. However, many attendees still did not participate in the pilot experiment. They did not actually understand how an RFID system operates but were afraid that their identity and personal information were being traced for illegitimate acts. Thus, more education about RFID and perceptions of the privacy risks are necessary to help attendees understand when, how, and with whom their private information is shared.In conclusion, much progress in the use of RFID in trade shows and exhibitions has been made, as the RFID technology allows exhibitors to identify and track attendees’ movements and activities for their entire exhibition visit. The identification information from RFID can potentially create detailed, accurate, and complete visibility of attendees’ behavior and consequently lead to considerable analytical benefits. Based on the RFID data, marketing analysts can start from understanding when attendees enter and leave specific booths in the exhibition and determining the time attendees actually stay at each booth. The analysts then utilize the RFID-enabled track and traceability framework proposed in this study to gain insight into attendee behavior to discover not only the route each attendee takes in visiting the booths but the attendee's interest in a specific booth as well. The total visibility of attendees from the RFID data can be integrated with the existing enterprise database for further analytical processes. Cluster analysis can then be used to segment attendees into sub-groups based on the traceability data and the predictive models are developed to explain attendee's purchasing behavior at the exhibition. The marketing analysts can consequently use the key finding from the analytics process to shape up their marketing strategies, for instance, follow-ups offers to the attendees after the events or promotions during the event for booths attendees frequently visit or particular products attendees are most interested in.However, the findings reported in this study are still limited and may not be generalizable due to the small samples in the experiment. Additionally, the results of this study are only a snapshot of customer behavior during the exhibition. Other factors such as seasonality, the influence of advertising on customer behavior, and industry trends may alter the way customers make decisions to purchase products and the way they visit the exhibition. Thus, future work will focus not only on an experiment with a larger sample size, but also on the real-time integration of both RFID and attendee data to offer more tailored or time-based promotions at the trade exhibition site. A second experiment with a similar setup and group of attendees should be conducted to strengthen the research finding of this study. Lastly, technical difficulties and privacy issues may limit the adoption of RFID technology in trade shows and exhibitions. Thus, the most challenging step is to ensure that the top management realizes the financial and operational improvements and continues to provide support and awareness of the value of integrating RFID to support data analytics.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
