@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Two-worker blocking congestion model with walk speed m in a no-passing circular passage system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Construct a blocking model traveling with walk speed m in a circular-aisle warehouse.Derive a closed-form expression of two-worker blocking congestion.Estimate the blocking congestion in a practical walk speed system.Demonstrate the applicability to a bucket-brigade order picking situation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Facilities planning and design,No-passing passage system,Blocking congestion,Bucket brigade order picking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a blocking model and closed-form expression of two workers traveling with walk speed m (m=integer) in a no-passing circular-passage system of n stations and assuming n=m+2, 2m+2,…. We develop a Discrete-Timed Markov Chain (DTMC) model to capture the workers’ changes of walk, pick, and blocked states, and quantify the throughput loss from blocking congestion by deriving a steady state probability in a closed-form expression. We validate the model with a simulation study. Additional simulation comparisons show that the proposed throughput model gives a good approximation of a general-sized system of n stations (i.e., n>2), a practical walk speed system of real number m (i.e., m⩾1), and a bucket brigade order picking application.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A no-passing circular passage system characterizes three common material handling and traffic flow situations: (1) a warehouse with a narrow-aisle system to improve storage utilization (Gue, Meller, & Skufca, 2006; Hong, Johnson, & Peters, 2012; Hong, Johnson, & Peters, 2013a; Parikh & Meller, 2010); (2) a no-passing bucket brigade order picking to obtain high operational performance and high space utilization (Bartholdi & Eisenstein, 1996; Hong, Johnson, & Peters, 2013b); and (3) a cellular automata model to capture the characteristics of traffic flow (Skufca, 2005). This no-passing passage represents a one-way transit situation with a traffic rule that forbids a worker or vehicle to pass over another worker or vehicle due to physical and logical restrictions. Fundamentally, workers move forward (i.e., one-way) and stop at a service station when a service is requested; any difference in the amount of service requested causes blocking congestion.Generally speaking, a simple transit protocol, such as a no-passing or one-way passage, reduces or eliminates workers’ directional confusion (Bartholdi & Eisenstein, 1996; Hong et al., 2013b) and enables managers to develop a high-resolution operational algorithm (Hong et al., 2012, 2013b). Unlike a two-way traffic system, a no-passing protocol obtains a larger service area by yielding traffic space for a service. For example, material handling often favors a passage system built on a narrow-aisle because the narrow-aisle automatically creates more storage space (Gue et al., 2006). However, the no-passing protocol’s inevitable blocking congestion will offset most operational advantages.The literature has studied the significance of blocking congestion from the passing restriction in narrow-aisle picking systems (Gue et al., 2006) and bucket brigade order picking systems (Bartholdi & Eisenstein, 1996). The significance of congestion in circular warehouses is addressed by a k-worker congestion model of infinite walk speed (Skufca, 2005). Gue et al. (2006) recognize that a practical congestion, such as a narrow-aisle picking system, is very sensitive to walk speed. The authors develop analytical models of both infinite and unit walk speeds and assess the impacts on congestion blocking between two extreme walk speeds. Pick patterns also impact blocking congestion. Parikh and Meller (2010) and Hong et al. (2013a) extend into cases of a stochastic pattern of picks. Based on our review of the literature, we assert that a comprehensive understanding of the impacts of walk speed over blocking congestion will derive from simulation and practical experiences rather than limited analytical models. Thus, we propose a DTMC model to coordinate two workers’ travels, service operations, and blocked delays, and find a closed-form expression of blocking throughput in a function of walk speed m, pick density p, and number of service stations n.This paper contributes to the literature on congestion by providing a DTMC model when two workers travel a circular passage system with stochastic service time and walk speed m and by deriving a closed-form expression of the blocking throughput model. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 clarifies the problem and reviews the related studies. Section 3 introduces the DTMC model and its closed-form expression for the m=2 case and extends the model for m>2 cases. Section 4 discusses the analytical model’s chief characteristics. Section 5 summarizes the comparison results for a general-sized model and a bucket brigade order picking. Section 6 mentions future research.In this paper a system is a circular-aisle warehouse, a service station is a pick column, a service is a pick, and workers provide a picking service. Fig. 1shows a circular-aisle warehouse with linked n pick columns (n>2) and workers circulating in a clockwise direction. A stochastic model determines the number of picks at a pick column. Workers continue picks with probability p. They spend unit time to conduct one pick. When no pick is chosen (1−p), they move to the next service station with speed m, i.e., the walk time between two pick columns is 1/m. After a pick, each worker repeats the same choice independently of the previous action. At a pick column, workers retrieve items from both sides. The number of picks at a pick column is determined by a series of successes. The retrieval time is one unit time regardless of the sides and shelving height. Blocking occurs under a no-passing restriction, e.g., when two workers are in neighboring pick columns, if the downstream worker is picking, the upstream worker cannot pass and thus remains idle because there is no available pick. When the blocking worker completes pick(s) and a blocking situation is released, each worker moves to his/her next pick column simultaneously.The ratio of the number of pick columns n to the walk speed m influences the modeling step. Our modeling assumes that (n−2) % m=0, where % is the notation for the modulation operator, but shows the applicability to the general configurations of any positive n>2 and real number m⩾1. As a performance measure, we obtain the percentage of time blocked (=the time blocked of a worker/the worker’s total time in the system), and denote it as b(p,m,n).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
