@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computing economies of vertical integration, economies of scope and economies of scale using partial frontier nonparametric methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method based on partial frontiers is proposed to look for scope economies.This method allows assessing the robustness of these economies.The influence of the imposition of convexity on the production set was analysed.Economies of vertical integration were identified in the water sector in Portugal.The existence of some smaller utilities reduces the minimum optimal scale.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
(D) Data envelopment analysis,Economies of scope,Economies of scale,Economies of vertical integration,Partial frontier nonparametric methods,Efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
So far, in the nonparametric literature only full frontier nonparametric methods have been applied to search for economies of scope and scale, particularly the data envelopment analysis method (DEA). However, these methods present some drawbacks that might lead to biased results. This paper proposes a methodology based on more robust partial frontier nonparametric methods to look for scope and scale economies. Through this methodology it is possible to assess the robustness of these economies, and in particular to assess the influence that extreme data or outliers might have on them. The influence of the imposition of convexity on the production set of firms was also investigated. This methodology was applied to the water utilities that operated in Portugal between 2002 and 2008. There is evidence of economies of vertical integration and economies of scale in drinking water supply utilities and in water and wastewater utilities operating mainly in the retail segment. Economies of scale were found in water and wastewater utilities operating exclusively in the wholesale, and in some of these utilities diseconomies of scope were also found. The proposed methodology also allowed us to conclude that the existence of some smaller utilities makes the minimum optimal scales go down.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Scale economies refer to the relationship between outputs and inputs, measuring the way the outputs produced change with an increase in inputs. Scale economies exist when an expansion in an output can be achieved with less than a proportionate increase in all inputs, whereas scope economies are related to savings originating from the joint production of different goods or services (Panzar & Willig, 1981). The concept of natural monopoly is associated with the latter kind of economies. In the simple case of single-output production, there is a natural monopoly when a single firm can produce a good or service at a lower cost than several firms that produce the same good or service separately, or when the cost function is subadditive, in other words, whenC(Y)<∑i=1kC(yi), where∑i=1kyi=Yand k is the number of producers (Baumol, Panzar, & Willig, 1988). However, when the production involves more than one type of output, economies of scope may be observed. For economies of scope to occur the cost function has to be subadditive, but it is also necessary that orthogonality between the output vectors of the different (specialised) firms exists, that is, yi⋅yj=0,i≠j. This means that there are scope economies when the costs of production of two or more goods produced together by the same firm are lower than the costs of producing them separately by several different specialised firms (Baumol et al., 1988).Scope economies may be derived, for example, from the sharing of resources (especially important in the network industries where usually there are high short-run fixed costs) or negotiation power. However, these benefits may not be sufficient, and therefore it might be more advantageous to separate production (specialisation). In these cases there are diseconomies of scope. Usually this happens with large institutions, where the provision of services is already too complex (for example, due to the network complexity (Abbott & Cohen, 2009)) and where bureaucracy might be relevant.Generally scope economies refer to savings originating from the joint production of different kinds of services (for example, water supply and wastewater services). However, when economies of scope originate from joining various production stages in the production of a single good or service in an industry characterised by several successive production stages they are called economies of vertical integration. For example, in the drinking water service industry, if a single vertically integrated utility (in charge of activities from bulk water production to water distribution) is able to provide water at a lower cost than several vertically disintegrated firms, there are economies of vertical integration. Economies of this type may occur if there are strong technological interdependencies between production and distribution stages and if there are considerable needs for coordination and adaptation across stages, as in the case of network industries (e.g., water, electricity and gas industries) (Garcia, Moreaux, & Reynaud, 2007). In these cases, vertical integration avoids duplication of fixed costs and enables better coordination across stages, bringing benefits for customers, either within the final product quality or the price level. However, vertical integration may also lead to negative situations. For example, utilities may take monopoly positions in the region where they operate because they have no direct competitors or no incentives to improve. In such situations, vertical disintegration may be beneficial because it may promote competition between upstream and downstream stages.For the purpose of this research we investigated the economies of scope and scale in the Portuguese water sector, which presents a very enriched sample with audited data by a regulator. In addition, in Portugal there has been a divergent scenario with respect to the vertical integration of water utilities. In 1993 the water sector was reformed and the guidelines were in the direction of unbundling, meaning that production should be separated from distribution in drinking water activity and collection from treatment in wastewater activity. Some years later, in 2001 the sector was reformed again but the orientations then were towards the merger of utilities, spending millions of Euros for such a purpose. Recently, the government has announced the reform of the water sector market structure, aiming at its optimisation (see Marques (2010) for a detailed analysis of the Portuguese water sector). Therefore, searching for economies of scope and economies of scale in the water sector in Portugal is not only necessary but also urgent if the aim is to move towards an optimal market structure rather than facing advances and retreats.In the water sector literature there is no consensus regarding the optimal scale for water utilities or in relation to the existence of economies of scope in the joint provision of different kinds of services or across stages (vertical economies). So, while some studies found economies of scale in the provision of water services (e.g., Nauges & Berg, 2008), economies of scope between water supply and wastewater services (e.g., Fraquelli & Moiso, 2005), or between other activities in multi-utilities (such as electricity, urban waste or gas services: e.g., Piacenza & Vanonni, 2004) or even economies of vertical integration (e.g. Torres & Morrison Paul, 2006), other studies concluded the opposite (diseconomies of scope: e.g., Correia and Marques (2010) and diseconomies of scale: e.g., Baranzini and Faust (2009)) (see further on, for example, Abbott and Cohen (2009) and Carvalho, Marques, and Berg (2012)). Although these findings are not surprising since the researches are related to different countries or regions with different operating conditions (different topographical, hydrological and geographical circumstances, or legal frameworks, among other aspects), it can be concluded that generally small water utilities providing only one service or that are not vertically integrated have significant scale and scope economies and that large or vertically integrated utilities have scale and scope diseconomies (Carvalho et al., 2012).In the literature, two main approaches have been followed in the study of economies of scope and economies of scale: the parametric and nonparametric approaches (e.g., Sahoo & Tone, 2012). The parametric approaches (e.g., stochastic frontier analysis – SFA) estimate cost or production functions based on the econometric theory while the nonparametric ones, like Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978), use linear programming to estimate the deterministic production (or cost) frontier (see, for example, Fried, Lovell, and Schmidt (2008) for an overview of parametric and nonparametric approaches). Even though the parametric methodologies have been more often applied in the literature, they have faced some controversial issues, such as choosing a functional form to represent the cost or production functions, which may lead to biased results and severe policy implications when such a form is not appropriate (Giannakas, Tran, & Tzouvelekas, 2003). Nonparametric methodologies do not suffer from this problem and present advantages such as not requiring so many assumptions and being easy to compute. Nevertheless, the nonparametric methodologies applied so far in the literature to search for scale and scope economies have basically been the full frontier methodologies (DEA and the non-convex free disposal hull – FDH (Deprins, Simar, & Tulkens, 1984)), which also have some limitations. They are particularly sensitive to extreme data and outliers and suffer from the problem of the “curse of dimensionality”. Several recent studies have used bootstrapping methods to mitigate some of these drawbacks, but a few problems remain.For this reason, in the current study we propose the use of new nonparametric methodologies (partial frontier nonparametric methodologies) to assess scope and scale economies. These partial frontier methodologies use only part of the sample to estimate the production frontier, therefore they are less sensitive to extreme data and outliers and do not suffer from the problem of the “curse of dimensionality”. In addition, they allow for evaluating scope and scale economies for various partial frontiers, enabling us to understand how these economies behave as we approach the full frontiers and to evaluate their consistency as they will incorporate possible outliers in the sample. Therefore, they are far more robust than full frontier methodologies.After an overview of the nonparametric methodologies and their application in the literature, Section 2 describes the proposed methodology. Section 3 presents the case study and the model adopted and Sections 4 and 5 display and discuss the results obtained. Finally, Section 6 draws the main conclusions.Economies of scope have been examined through nonparametric methodologies, primarily through DEA. Most studies in the literature are based on the idea of Färe (1986) and Färe, Grosskopf, and Lovell (1994), which consists of computing scope economies by estimating the frontier of multiproduct firms and the frontier of firms constructed from the sum of specialised firms and by evaluating which of these frontiers is the most efficient. There are several examples of studies in the literature that have applied the full frontier nonparametric methodologies, as is the case, for example, of Grosskopf and Yaisawarng (1990) in the provision of municipal public services; Ferrier, Grosskopf, Hayes, and Yaisawarng (1993) in the banking sector; Fried, Schmidt, and Yaisawarng (1998) and Lee, Chun, and Lee (2008) in hospitals; Cummins, Weiss, and Zi (2003) and Berger, Cummins, Weiss, and Zi (2000) in the insurance; Growitsch and Wetzel (2007) in the railways; Arocena (2008) in the electricity; Cherchye, De Rock, and Vermeulen (2008) in universities and De Witte and Marques (2010) in the water sector.The DEA is a full frontier nonparametric method (Charnes et al., 1978) which allows estimating the production (or cost) frontier and evaluating the technical efficiency for each observation (or decision making units – DMU). In an input orientation context, DEA estimates the frontier from observations which use a minimum of inputs to produce a given level of outputs. The frontier and technical efficiencies are estimated from the following linear programming problem (when a variable returns to scale (VRS) technology is assumed) (Fried et al., 2008):(1)minθ,λθiVRSs.t.:yi⩽YλθiVRSxi⩾XλI′λ=1λ⩾0whereθiVRSis the technical efficiency of the DMU i assuming a VRS technology, xiand yiare the vectores of p inputs and q outputs of DMU i, X and Y are the matrices of inputs and outputs of all n DMU in the sample (of dimensions p×n and q×n),λa vector of unknown variables (with dimension n×1) and I a unit vector (with dimension n×1).The DEA frontier is defined by DMU with efficiency θ=1 (efficient DMU). All the remaining DMU (with efficiency θ<1) lie below the frontier and are considered inefficient. The efficiency value represents the distance that the DMU is from the frontier and indicates how much the input should be reduced proportionally (keeping constant their production level of outputs) so that the DMU i can reach the frontier and become technically efficient. The DEA assumes the properties of free disposability of inputs and outputs and the convexity of the production set. The DEA also allows the assumption of a constant returns to scale (CRS) technology, where it is assumed that all DMU operate at an optimum level. The CRS DEA efficiencies scores (θiCRS) are computed from the previous linear program (1) but ignoring the constraintI′λ=1. From VRS and CRS efficiencies scale efficiency (SE) can be estimated as follows: SE=θCRS/θVRS. When an observation presents a scale efficiency equal to unity, it means that the observation operates in CRS, otherwise it is necessary to solve an additional DEA problem with non-increasing returns to scale (NIRS) imposed (imposingI′λ⩽1instead ofI′λ=1in the formulation (1)) (Färe & Grosskopf, 1994) to assess whether the observation is operating under increasing returns to scale (IRS) or decreasing returns to scale (DRS). If the obtained efficiency θNIRS=θVRSit means the observation operates under DRS, otherwise the observation would be operating under IRS. Recent developments in the literature show that economies of scale can also be estimated via DEA using other approaches (Zelenyuk, 2013).Another full frontier nonparametric method also found in the literature is the FDH (Deprins et al., 1984). The difference between the DEA and FDH is that the latter does not allow the convexity of the technology. The FDH efficiency scores are also estimated by solving the linear programming problem (1) but imposing the values zero and one for the vector of unknown variables:λi∈{0,1},i=1,…,n.These full frontier nonparametric methods are particularly sensitive to extreme data and outliers and suffer from the problem of the “curse of dimensionality” which requires a large number of observations and a small quantity of inputs and outputs to avoid getting inaccurate results (Daraio & Simar, 2007). Also the full frontier methodologies are deterministic methods with a non-statistic nature and so all the deviations from the efficient frontier are considered as inefficiency. Although recent studies employ bootstrapping methods (Simar & Wilson, 1998) to mitigate some of these drawbacks (e.g., Growitsch & Wetzel, 2007), they tend to remain.As an attempt to avoid these drawbacks of the full frontier nonparametric methods, we propose the use of recent and more robust partial frontier nonparametric methodologies to search for scope and scale economies. These methodologies, which are part of the order-α and order-m methods, do not envelop all the observed data of the sample to estimate the production frontier, becoming, for this reason, less sensitive to extreme data and outliers and more robust than the traditional full frontier nonparametric methods. For example, when assessing the efficiency of a DMU that uses x inputs to produce y outputs using the order-m method, a partial frontier benchmark represents the expected minimal input among m other firms randomly drawn from the population of firms producing more than y of outputs. As a consequence of their statistical properties, these robust measures of efficiency do not suffer from the “curse of dimensionality” (Daraio & Simar, 2007). In addition, the robust partial frontier nonparametric methods have important statistical features and an interesting econometric interpretation, and also allow for the easy inclusion of exogenous variables in efficiency computation (Bădin, Daraio & Simar, 2012) (see e.g., Carvalho & Marques, 2011a). Fig. 1shows an example of a partial frontier (order-α) and of full frontiers.The partial frontier nonparametric methods derive from the idea of defining the production process by a probabilistic formulation proposed by Cazals, Florens, and Simar (2002). According to these authors, the production process can be defined through a joint distribution function of inputs (X) and outputs (Y) and the efficiencies can be obtained from the decomposition of this probability function. In a context of input orientation this joint distribution function can be decomposed into a conditional distribution function of X, FX|Y(x|y), and into a survivor function of Y, SY(y) (Daraio & Simar, 2005):(2)HXY(x,y)=Prob(X⩽x,Y⩾y)=Prob(X⩽x|Y⩾y)Prob(Y⩾y)=FX|Y(x|y)SY(y)For example, the order-α efficiency score (Aragon, Daouia, and Thomas-Agnan (2005) and Daouia and Simar (2007)) (in the case of input orientation) for an observation operating at the level (x,y) can be defined as (Daraio & Simar, 2007):(3)θα(x,y)=inf{θ|F^X|Y(θx|y)>1-α}whereF^X|Y,n(θx|y)=∑i=1nI(Xi⩽θx,Yi⩾y)/∑i=1nI(Yi⩾y)and where I(k) is the indicator function that takes the value of I(k)=1 if k is true or I(k)=0, if otherwise (see Daraio and Simar (2007) for further details of the algorithm for the estimation of efficiency).The order-α efficiencies are estimated by ex ante fixing the quantity (probability) 1−α of observations that are above the frontier. Thus, an observation that uses a level of inputs x0 to produce y0 and presents an order-α input efficiency score θα=1 is efficient at the level α×100%, being dominated by the observations producing more outputs than y0 with a probability 1−α. If an observation presents an order-α input efficiency score θα<1 (θα>1), it has to reduce (or can increase) its inputs to the level θαx0 to reach the input efficient frontier of level α×100%. Note also that partial frontiers converge to the FDH frontier when α→1 (in the case of order-α) and when m→∞ (in case of order-m) (Daraio & Simar, 2007).Due to the benefits of these partial frontier methodologies, we propose their use to search for scope and scale economies. Following the ideas of Färe (1986), we suggest to assess scope economies by estimating and comparing the order-α frontiers of multiproduct firms with the order-α frontiers of specialised firms. This approach proves extremely useful especially to assess the consistency of scope economies, for example, when we move towards the FDH full frontier or, in other words, when possible outliers or extreme observations are incorporated in frontier estimation. However, since these partial frontiers (like those of FDH) are irregular (Fig. 1), we suggest the use of linearized order-α frontiers (henceforth LOαF) (Carvalho & Marques, 2011b) to facilitate the assessment of the dominance of a frontier over the other, especially when situations like the one in Fig. 2occur, where it is difficult to distinguish which one dominates. These linearized order-α frontiers correspond simply to the FDH linearized frontiers (linearly interpolated FDH, henceforth LFDH) (Jeong & Simar, 2006) estimated from the observations that are below the corresponding order-α frontier.The partial frontier chosen to our methodology was the order-α because it is more appealing and it is more intuitive with respect to the amount of observations that are above the frontier, and also because it is less sensitive to extreme data compared with the order-m (Daouia & Simar, 2007).To estimate the order-α frontiers of the specialised firms in the proposed methodology, fictitious multiproduct firms (in the same way as in Morita (2003)) were created combining the real specialised firms (all possible combinations) through the sum of their corresponding inputs and outputs. For example, assuming that there are nAspecialised firms that produce products A and nBspecialised firms that produce product B, we have created nA×nBfictitious multiproduct firms A+B from these specialised firms.Thus, the methodology proposed in this paper to assess scope economies consists in the estimation, for each linearized order-α frontier (LOαF), of the efficiencies of multiproduct firms in relation to their own frontier (θAB) and of the super-efficiencies of multiproduct firms relative to the frontier of the firms constructed from the sum of specialised firms (fictitious multiproduct firms A+B) (θA+B) and relate them through the following ratio:(4)η=θA+B/θABThe super-efficiency of an observation is estimated by not including the observation under evaluation in the reference set (see Zhu (1996) and Charnes, Haag, Jaska, and Semple (1992), for the case of super-efficiencies in DEA).This ratio (η) assesses which of the two frontiers dominate over the other, determining which one is more efficient, allowing us to conclude about the existence of economies or diseconomies of scope. To clarify this, consider, for example, the multiproduct firms MPand MQin Fig. 3, the corresponding frontier of the multiproduct firms (FAB) and the frontier of the sum of specialised firms (FA+B). For the multiproduct firm MP, the ratio is:(5)ηˆMP=θˆA+B/θˆAB=(0D′/0P′)/(0C′/0P′)=0D′/0C′Since 0D′>0C′, the multiproduct firm MPwill have a ratioηˆMP>1, which means that for that level of output, its own frontier (FAB) is located above the frontier of the sum of specialised firms (FA+B) and, therefore, dominates it, meaning that this firm displays economies of scope.In contrast, the multiproduct firm MQhas a ratio:(6)ηˆMQ=θˆA+B/θˆAB=(0F′/0Q′)/(0E′/0Q′)=0F′/0E′And as 0F′<0E′, the ratio to the multiproduct firm MQisηˆMQ<1, which means that its own frontier (FAB) is dominated by the frontier of the sum of specialised firms (FA+B), such that the multiproduct firm MQpresents diseconomies of scope. Thus, when the multiproduct firms have a ratioηˆ>1, they exhibit economies of scope but diseconomies of scope when the ratio isηˆ<1.According to the literature, the imposition of convexity on the production set (the set of feasible combinations of input and output vectors) or its disregard may interfere with the conclusions about the existence of scope economies. For example, Chavas and Kim (2007) demonstrated that the economies of scope (S) can be decomposed into four parts: one measuring complementarity among outputs (SC), one reflecting economies of scale (SR), one reflecting convexity of the technology (SV) and another one reflecting the role of catalytic outputs (SL). As stated by Chavas and Kim (2007) there are economies of scope if and only if:(7)S≡SC+SR+SV+SL>0According to the authors a convex technology implies SV⩾0 contributing to the existence of economies of scope. Thus, to test such interference, we studied several different situations, some imposing convexity through the application of DEA and others disregarding the hypothesis of convexity, applying the LOαF. The imposition of convexity was performed by DEA, excluding the observations above the corresponding order-α frontier. Fig. 4presents the possible configurations of the multiproduct firm frontiers and frontiers of specialised firms. Note that the cases represented here are only illustrative. In real situations the two frontiers may have opposite positions.Also in line with the literature, the assumption of different returns to scale influences the final results with regard to economies of scope. For example, according to Chavas and Kim (2007) under the increasing returns to scale (IRS) the portion that captures the scale effects (SR) tends to take positive values contributing positively to economies of scope, noting the opposite under decreasing returns to scale (DRS). On the other hand, under CRS SRvanishes, therefore the effects of scale do not contribute to economies of scope. For this reason, we assume CRS in the application of DEA in order to mitigate the influence of scale effects in the search for economies of scope. In Fig. 4, the straight lines refer to the DEA frontier when it assumes CRS.As already mentioned, the methodology proposed here reveals itself to be extremely beneficial and useful, especially to assess the consistency of scope economies. This can be done by estimating scope economies (ratiosηˆ) for various LOαF partial frontiers and then determining how they behave between these frontiers, for example, towards the full frontier (LFDH or DEA).Similarly, as we did for the economies of scope, we also propose looking for economies of scale for each partial frontier LOαF of multiproduct firms. This procedure consists in evaluating economies of scale through DEA but considering only the observations below their order-α frontiers. Thus, it is also possible to evaluate the consistency of economies of scale by estimating the scale efficiencies for each partial frontier LOαF.To illustrate the practical usefulness of the methodology proposed in this paper, we applied it to the water sector in Portugal. The methodology intends to determine whether or not there are economies of vertical integration (between the “retail” and “wholesale” segments) in the drinking water supply (D) and wastewater collection and treatment (W), scope economies between drinking water supply and wastewater treatment activities in the “wholesale” segment and also scale economies in the vertically integrated utilities and in the multiproduct utilities in the “wholesale” segment.The water services in Portugal, contrary to what happens in many other countries in Europe, are not vertically integrated, since the “wholesale” and the “retail” segments are provided by different entities. In the drinking water supply sector, “wholesale” corresponds to the activities from intake to reservoir storage, including transportation and treatment of drinking water, while the “retail” includes the activities of storage and distribution to final consumers. In the wastewater sector, “wholesale” corresponds to transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater in the environment after treatment, while the “retail” includes wastewater collection. Currently, in the “wholesale” segment there are 21 water utilities. Most of them are public concessionaires (a partnership between a state owned company and municipalities) that operate exclusively in the wholesale segment. The majority of these water utilities provide both water and wastewater services, and there is a great number of them that provide only water or only wastewater services, and a small number that also provide other services in addition to water supply and wastewater collection, such as solid waste. In the retail segment, there are 279 retail companies and the majority are municipal services. However, some of these water utilities are also responsible, totally or partially, for the wholesale segment. Although in the water sector in Portugal there are two distinct markets (wholesale and retail), in water supply and wastewater services (and therefore, most utilities are vertically disintegrated), there are also utilities that are vertically integrated. We assumed that the water utilities with their own bulk water production of more than 50% of the total water introduced into the network (in the activity of water supply) (most of these water utilities produces more than 80% of water introduced into the network) or with wastewater treatment plants (in the wastewater treatment activity) operate in wholesale segment. In the retail segment the vast majority of water utilities provide both water and wastewater services. However, there are also utilities that provide only water and others that provide water, wastewater and other services, like solid waste collection, transportation, street cleaning or gardening.The sample analysed is composed, on the whole, of 74 different water utilities (438 observations) that operated in the period between 2002 and 2008 in Portugal. Throughout the period studied new utilities entered in the sector, others gathered and others altered their scope regarding to the number and type of water services provided. In the sample there are 46 utilities that operated in 2002 and 47 utilities that operated in 2008 in the retail segment (Fig. 5: top left-hand side) and there are 14 utilities that operated in 2002 and 19 utilities that operated in 2008 in the wholesale (Fig. 5: below left-hand side). The water utilities in the sample served about 5million people in the retail segment (almost 50% of the Portuguese population) and about 9.8million people in the wholesale segment (about 97% of the Portuguese population). Fig. 5 shows the observations according to the types of services provided during the period studied in the retail (upper graphs) and in the wholesale (lower graphs) segments. The capital letters D and W refer to the drinking water supply and wastewater collection and treatment, correspondingly, and the lowercase letters r and w designate the retail and the wholesale segments, respectively. Thus, for example, the Drw–Wr utilities provide both water and wastewater services. In the retail segment they provide water and wastewater services and in the wholesale segment they provide only drinking water supply.The observations use labour costs, capital costs and other operational costs (in thousands of Euros) as inputs to distribute volume of delivered water and volume of treated and collected wastewater in the retail and wholesale segments (in thousands of meter3) as outputs. Table A.1 in the Appendix describes some statistics of these input and output variables for the various types of utilities. All the data were obtained from the annual account reports published by the water utilities and from the annual reports of the Portuguese regulator. Also, all monetary data have been updated to the year 2008 taking into account the Consumer Price Index observed in Portugal over the period studied. An input orientation was adopted, since the aim of these utilities is to reduce the inputs consumed for a given level of outputs delivered. Table 1lists the models considered for each analysis as well as the number of observations of multiproduct or vertically integrated utilities and specialised utilities.Scale economies were also evaluated for the various partial frontiers LOαF of multiproduct and vertically integrated utilities (Dwr, Dwr–Wwr and Dw–Ww) considering the same models as in the research of economies of scope (Table 1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
To date, the studies of the literature that apply nonparametric methods to assess economies of scope and scale have resorted exclusively to full frontier nonparametric methods (particularly DEA). However, these methods have some drawbacks. In order to assess scope and scale economies without incurring the problems of full nonparametric methods, the current paper proposes a methodology based on the latest and most robust partial frontier nonparametric methods.The proposed technique enables the evaluation of the robustness of scope and scale economies, through the knowledge of these economies for several partial linearized order-α frontiers. Through the proposed methodology we can also evaluate the influence of possible extreme observations or outliers on the scope and scale economies. The proposed methodology is thus an extremely useful method in most real situations, where the samples are contaminated by extreme observations and outliers.In this paper we found that the imposition of convexity on a production set of multiproduct firms pushed the results towards the existence of economies of scope/vertical integration, as supported by the literature. We also found that the most appropriate setting to search for economies of scope/vertical integration is not to impose convexity on the production sets.By applying the proposed methodology to the Portuguese water sector, it was found that there are economies of vertical integration and economies of scale in utilities specialising in water supply and in water and wastewater utilities in the retail segment and that there are economies of scale for water and wastewater utilities operating exclusively in the wholesale segment. Nevertheless, diseconomies of scope were also found in some of these utilities. The proposed methodology allowed us also to detect that, in our case study, some extreme small size utilities bring down the optimal scales.See Tables A.1–A.4.