@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Incentives to improve the service level in a random yield supply chain: The role of bonus contracts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To address how to improve the service level in a two-level decentralized supply chain with random yield and uncertain demand.The high service-level requirement without any bonus incentives only benefits the downstream retailer.The service-level based bonus contract can achieve the two firms’ Pareto-improving for service level and profits.The two common bonus contracts, i.e., unit bonus and flat bonus, have different incentive roles.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Random yield,Demand uncertainty,Bonus contract,Service-level requirement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a decentralized supply chain comprised of one manufacturer and one retailer where the manufacturer has random yield, and the retailer faces uncertain demand. To guarantee product availability, the retailer requires a service level of the product supply from the manufacturer. However, we determine that the high service level indeed benefits the retailer whereas causes the manufacturer’s profit loss. Therefore, to promote the high-service-level cooperation, the retailer has to provide incentives for the manufacturer, such as bonuses. We consider two common bonus contracts: unit bonus and flat (or lump-sum) bonus. The primary question we address is whether the service-level based bonus contracts can achieve the two firms’ Pareto-improving for both service level and profits, which is a prerequisite for the retailer to carry out them with the manufacturer. The results show that both bonus contracts can achieve Pareto-improving. While it is simpler for the retailer to carry out the unit bonus contract, the retailer can achieve a higher service level and higher profits under the flat bonus contract.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Given the increasingly intense global market competition, improving service level has become one of the “top two goals” for supply chain management (Chen and Shen, 2012; Gyorey, Jochim, and Norton, 2010). High customer service level plays an important role in enhancing competitiveness and continuous development for the entire supply chain. Fortunately, firms gradually identify this key point. According to the description of KPMG (2010), in the food, drink, and consumer goods (FDCG) industry, retailers often enter into a service-level agreement with their FDCG manufacturers. Additionally, in the automotive industry, many original equipment manufacturers cooperate with their first-tier suppliers under service-level contracts (Stratmann, 2006).However, high degree supply chain risk, including supply and demand uncertainty, hinders the achievement of a high service level. A survey by McKinsey finds that 82 percent of the respondents in developed Asian countries claim that the supply chain risk will continue to increase in the next five years (Gyorey et al., 2010). Therefore, product availability, which is critical in keeping customers satisfied in the uncertain operations environment, is emphasized in service-level based contracts between supply chain parties. Based on these contracts, the upstream suppliers must achieve an ample supply with a certain probability (Chen and Shen, 2012; KPMG, 2010; Stratmann, 2006).Although the high service level benefits the entire supply chain with respect to customer satisfaction, it may cause ineffective operations for the upstream parties. This problem is highly serious when the product has a short life cycle and random yield. Therefore, the service-level contracts between the supply chain parties should emphasize not only achieving a high service level but also providing the incentives (such as bonuses) for the contractors to improve performances (Tarakci, Tang, Moskowitz, and Plante, 2006). This observation stems from the business practice of the leisure food chain store companies in China, such as LPPZ Foods. LPPZ Foods is an emerging and rapidly developing chain store company that purchases products from a large number of food manufacturers, including some seasonal perishable products with short life cycles such as green bean cake, zongzi, and mooncake. To guarantee product availability, LPPZ Foods measures the service level of the manufacturers and provides bonuses for the manufacturers with relatively high service levels.11We observe this phenomenon through the field survey and interview in a cooperation project with LPPZ Foods. Visit the website to learn more about LPPZ: http://www.517lppz.com/.However, the lack of quantitative decision analysis hinders retailers such as LPPZ Foods from taking full advantage of service-level based bonus contracts to improve the performance of the entire supply chain.The above discussion gives rise to three new quantitative research questions. Specifically, we elaborate them as follows. First, facing the supply and demand uncertainty, how does the retailer use the two common bonus regimes (i.e., unit bonus and flat or lump-sum bonus) to motivate the manufacturer to improve the service level? Second, can service-level based bonus contracts achieve the two parties’ Pareto-improving? Third, what are the differences between the flat bonus contract and the unit bonus contract?To address the above issues, we construct a decentralized supply chain that consists of a manufacturer and a retailer. The retailer faces a single-period uncertain demand for a short life-cycle product and places an order with the manufacturer. The manufacturer is responsible for the production of the product, wherein the production process contains the random yield problem. To guarantee product availability, the retailer cooperates with the manufacturer under a service-level based bonus contract. The retailer requires the manufacturer’s product supply to reach a service level, defined as the probability of meeting the order quantity. Once the order is met, the manufacturer can receive a bonus payment from the retailer. There exist two bonus contracts for the retailer to use: a unit bonus contract and a flat bonus contract. A unit bonus contract means the manufacturer receives a unit bonus for every leftover product exceeding the retailer’s order quantity, whereas with a flat bonus contract, the manufacturer acquires a fixed bonus when the order quantity is met.22In the random yield supply chain, the definition of the unit bonus contract between the manufacturer and the retailer is similar to the over-production risk sharing contract, which is investigated by Inderfurth Clemens (2014) and He Zhang (2008). It is also similar to the additional marginal payment, which is considered by Sohoni, Chopra, Mohan, and Sendil (2011).By analyzing the equilibrium strategies of the two parties, we find some interesting results that contribute to the extant literature in the following ways. First, our model involves both the supply and demand uncertainties, which are major issues of concern in recent literature. However, our investigation is from a new perspective that highlights the impacts of service level on the two firms’ performances. It is useful for the entire supply chain to maintain a high competitive advantage under these two common risks. Second, we analyze the influence of a bonus on the two firms’ cooperation with a service-level requirement. The results show that the bonus plays the role of an incentive for the random yield manufacturer to improve the level of service. More importantly, under certain business conditions, bonus contracts can help the two firms achieve Pareto-improving for service level and profits. Third, our paper compares two potential bonus contracts, the unit bonus contract and the flat bonus contract, thus providing managerial insights for the retailer to choose an appropriate contract under different operation situations.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews relevant literature. In Section 3, we describe the problem’s formulation and notations. The basic model without a bonus is analyzed in Section 4. Section 5 and Section 6 discuss the unit bonus contract and flat bonus contract with a service-level requirement, respectively. Section 7 illustrates comparisons between the unit bonus contract and the flat bonus contract. We present this paper’s conclusions in Section 8. All mathematical proofs are provided in the online Appendix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We consider a decentralized supply chain that consists of a manufacturer and a retailer. The manufacturer is responsible for the production of a short life-cycle product, whereas there exists a random yield in the production process. The retailer faces an uncertain demand for the product and places a procurement order with the manufacturer. To improve the service level of the product supply, the retailer cooperates with the manufacturer under a service-level based bonus contract. This means that the retailer requires the manufacturer’s supply to reach a service level, and the manufacturer can receive a bonus payment when the product supply meets the retailer’s order quantity. We compare the incentive role of two common bonus contracts: unit bonus and flat bonus. The results show that both bonus contracts can achieve the Pareto-improving on the two firms’ service level and profits. However, there are differences in the computational complexity and the ability in mitigating the adverse influence caused by the changing business conditions, e.g., wholesale price, supply risk and demand uncertainty. The unit bonus contract is implemented more simply. However, the flat bonus contract can help the retailer achieve higher service level and higher profit, and the advantage of the flat bonus contract is more significant when the wholesale price is large, the yield is more stable, or the market demand is more variable.There are three directions of extensions that can be studied based on our research. First, we only consider the bonus incentives to improve the service level. Other ways, however, can also be explored, such as penalty (Liang Atkins, 2013; Sieke et al., 2012) and supplier diversification (Hu, Gurnani, Wang, 2013). It would be interesting to compare the role of these different incentive measures. Furthermore, we assume that the random yield manufacturer’s supply information (e.g., production cost and yield distribution) is common knowledge to the retailer. A possible extension could be conducted regarding the case of private information for the manufacturer, such as the asymmetric cost information research by Dong et al. (2012). In this case, the retailer could offer a menu of incentive contracts for the manufacturer. Finally, the random yield in our paper is defined as stochastically proportional to the manufacturer’s initial production quantity. However, there are several other types of yield variability, such as all-or-nothing, guaranteed-minimum-yield, binomial and additive form, etc. (Inderfurth and Vogelgesang, 2013; Li et al., 2013; Tang, Gurnani, and Gupta, 2014) . Therefore, it is interesting to study whether our main results still hold under different ways of modeling yield variability.