@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact analysis of maritime cabotage legislations on liner hub-and-spoke shipping network design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Consider maritime cabotage constraints and transit time constraints.Ship route design as a vehicle routing problem with pickup and delivery.Present a Lagrangian relaxation based solution method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Combinatorial optimization,Liner shipping,Hub-and-spoke,Maritime cabotage legislations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Maritime cabotage is a legislation published by a particular coastal country, which is used to conduct the cargo transportation between its two domestic ports. This paper proposes a two-phase mathematical programming model to formulate the liner hub-and-spoke shipping network design problem subject to the maritime cabotage legislations, i.e., the hub location and feeder allocation problem for phase I and the ship route design with ship fleet deployment problem for phase II. The problem in phase I is formulated as a mixed-integer linear programming model. By developing a hub port expanding technique, the problem in phase II is formulated as a vehicle routing problem with pickup and delivery. A Lagrangian relaxation based solution method is proposed to solve it. Numerical implementations based on the Asia–Europe–Oceania shipping services are carried out to account for the impact analysis of the maritime cabotage legislations on liner hub-and-spoke shipping network design problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In International Law, “Cabotage” is identified with coasting – trade so that is means navigating and traveling along the coast between the ports thereof (Igbokwe, 2001). Cabotage has however come to be known as “coastal trade” or “coasting trade” or “coastwise shipping”, meaning carriage of goods and persons by ships between ports on or along the same coast or between ports within the same country and the exclusive rights of a country to operate sea traffic within its coasts, or to operate air traffic, road traffic or rail traffic within its territory (Igbokwe, 2001). In this regard, there is cabotage in different modes of transportation. This paper is concerned with the maritime cabotage.A maritime cabotage law is a legislation published by a particular coastal country, to exclusively conduct its domestic shipping operations. The strict and relaxed maritime cabotage legislations (Igbokwe, 2001) have been used by different coastal countries in order to favor the national interests and to control local coastal trades. In the former legislation of a coastal country, the domestic shipping is strictly restricted to those ships built, owned and operated by citizens of this country. The latter one relaxed one or some of the above three restrictions. One example for the strict maritime cabotage legislation is known as “the Jones Act” (Whitehurst, 1985) implemented in the United States (US). The relaxed maritime cabotage legislations are applied in coastal countries, such as India, Philippines, Australia, and Malaysia.In order to benefit from the economies of scale in ship size, large ships are deployed by liner shipping companies to serve the major or hub ports and small ships are used to consolidate cargoes (e.g., containers) from some feeder ports, leading to a hub-and-spoke (H& S) shipping manner. For example, Maersk line, which is the world’s largest liner shipping company, ordered 10 mega ships with the capacity of 18,000 twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) each in 2011 and these mega ships will be deployed on the Asia–Europe trade lane. Furthermore, the liner shipping company provides the maximal transit time between a pair of ports on the website as an important factor to evaluate the level of service, called the transit time constraints. The purpose of this study is to quantify the impact of the strict maritime cabotage legislation on a liner shipping company in designing its H& S shipping network subject to the transit time constraints by developing a proper mathematical model and a solution method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has investigated the impact of maritime cabotage legislations on liner H& S shipping network design problem. It proposes a two-phase mathematical programming model to formulate the problem. In phase I, the hub location and feeder allocation subject to the maritime cabotage legislations is formulated as a mixed-integer linear programming problem. It can be efficiently solved by CPLEX when introducing the candidate hub ports. By developing a hub port expanding technique, the ship route design with ship fleet deployment subject to the transit time constraints in phase II is formulated as a vehicle routing problem with pickup and delivery. A Lagrangian relaxation based solution method is proposed to solve it.Clearly, the maritime cabotage legislation of a particular coastal country has a direct impact on the allocation for its local feeder ports. In addition, the obtained results also show that the practical butterfly shipping service routes are proper to benefit from the economies of scale, reduce the number of ships to maintain a weekly service frequency, and improve the ship utilization.