@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective particle swarm optimization for mechanical harvester route planning of sugarcane field operations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This is the first report of the sugarcane harvester path planning involving field accessibility and split harvesting constraints.Multi-objective particle swarm optimization was applied.A new particle encoding with four decoding schemes were constructed to solve the problem.The seven movement strategies for Multi-objective particle swarm optimization were applied.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sugarcane,Harvester planning,Particle swarm optimization,Multi-objective,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the important aspects to increasing sugarcane mechanical harvesting efficiency is the path planning of the harvester, involving direction and field accessibility constraints. Moreover, in real-life applications, the two objective functions pertaining to minimization of harvested distance and maximization of sugarcane yield are conflicting and must be considered simultaneously. This paper presents a multi-objective with the variant of the particle swarm optimization combined gbest, lbest and nbest social structures (MO-GLNPSO), to solve sugarcane mechanical harvester route planning (MHRP). A new particle encoding/decoding scheme has been devised for combining the path planning with the accessibility and split harvesting constraints. Numerical computation results on several networks with sugarcane field topologies illustrate the efficiency of the proposed MO-GLNPSO method for computation of MHRP, which is compared with other methods such as the traditional particle swarm optimization (PSO) and Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm-II (NSGAII) by the values ofC˜metric indicator. The solutions found in this work can offer a decision maker a choice of trade-off solutions, providing sufficient options to give planners the power to make an informed choice that balances the important objectives.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sugarcane, which is one of the world's largest crops (FAO, 2012), has therefore increased infield machinery use, particularly in harvesting operations, because labor wages have risen greatly and less labor is available for manual infield work. In many parts of the world where sugarcane production is steadily increasing, the harvesting mode has switched from manual harvesting to mechanical harvesting (Salassi & Champagne, 1998). Mechanical harvesting of sugarcane is performed by cutting the sugarcane at the base of the stalk, stripping the leaves, chopping the sugarcane into short sticks (billets) and depositing it into a transporter following alongside. It is likely to be the most important factor in reducing future sugarcane production costs (Ahmed & Alam-Eldin, 2014), since it can complete the harvest faster with more sugarcane harvested per unit of time than manual cutting and loading. However, mechanical harvesting is quite capital and machine intensive. The fuel prices have over the past many years risen significantly faster than the growth in the sugarcane price paid to growers for delivered sugarcane. Moreover, particular movement of a harvester between different directions of sugarcane planting groves will be too time-consuming and cause cane damage. The harvester turning to another direction should be performed at the termination of the plantation boundary. For a directed graph, the definition of path requires that consecutive vertices (fields) be connected by an appropriate directed edge. Mechanical harvesting has less flexibility to access between fields. Field preparation becomes stricter, as mechanical harvesters require the same direction of sugarcane planting groves to plan the movement properly (see Fig. 1:the mechanical harvester can move between Field 1 and Field 2, due to their planting groves being in the same direction but cannot move between Field 1 and Field 3 since it results in sugarcane damage). It can therefore be useful to identify suitable path routing in field operations and the field accessibility will make realistic implementation achievable. Furthermore, sugarcane is continuously sourced in diverse quantities and qualities from hundreds of geographically dispersed haciendas. The harvesting of sugarcane at a proper time, i.e. peak maturity, is necessary to realize increased average commercial cane sugar (CCS) yields. The yield values were different in accordance with the harvesting in each field, depending on many factors such as sugarcane variety, crop class, and climatic conditions, therefore, the field accessibility constraint can be the main obstacle to harvesting a field that is at its maturation peak. This is the contribution of split harvesting, that a harvester can partially harvest some field to access the inside fields that have higher cane yield. The optimal MHRP of sugarcane field operations which considers both traveling distance and sugarcane quantity is the most efficient.This study has first proposed a multi-objective particle swarm optimization with multiple social structures, called MO-GLNPSO to identify an appropriate route for mechanical harvester path planning. To enhance diversity of particles for exploring in the global and local search space, modifying the particle position representation can be obviously improved by a heuristic-based method. This encoding/decoding exploits the sub-optimality feature of the path planning. Moreover, one reason for the success of MO-GLNPSO is the movement behavior, which allows the swarm to effectively explore the search space. Seven movement strategies are discussed for MO-GLNPSO. The next section provides a review of the relevant literature. The overview of the model is described in Section 3 and the methodology is presented in Section 4. Section 5 outlines simulation results. Finally, a summary is given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study presents an application of the MO-GLNPSO algorithm for solving MHRP of sugarcane field operations with accessibility constraints, with the objective to simultaneously minimize distance and maximize total sugarcane yield. The MO-GLNPSO framework uses an elite group to store solutions and utilizes those solutions as the guidance for particle movement. A single swarm with a mixture of four groups of particles with different movement strategies is adopted to search for a PF. MO-GLNPSO with the new encoding/decoding scheme, called GLNPSO_SP, was proposed to find a solution to the model, which offer a decision maker a choice of trade-off solutions, providing sufficient options to give planners the power to make an informed choice that balances the important objectives In order to evaluate the capability of the algorithms (proposed GLNPSO, PSO and GA) in achieving optimal or near optimal value, the sugarcane MHRP model will be validated by comparing the optimal solution obtained in each individual objective function. It is observed that proposed GLNPSO outperforms other algorithm. Moreover, the result indicates that the proposed GLNPSO yielded better solutions than the current practice. The solutions found in this work leading to potential cost savings versus schedules produced manually by the mill officer. A measure based on the set coverage concepts as theC˜metric indicator was also applied to illustrate the quality of the non-dominated solution sets obtained by (1) comparing in the different decoding methods (2) comparing in the different movement strategies, and (3) comparing in the different methods (proposed GLNPSO_SP, GLNPSO_Giant and NSGA-II. The results show that the proposed GLNPSO_SP outperforms other algorithm, in the terms of values of theC˜metric indicators. Finally, we propose some suggestions that were not considered in this paper but can be regarded in future research. For example, the dynamic graph approach by automatically updating an existing structure after some modifications (after harvested in each period) were not taken into account in this problem, in order to obtain the global path planning entire the sugarcane harvesting season.