@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cooperative game analysis of retail space-exchange problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate a new space-exchange strategy from the perspective of retailers’ incentives.We apply the cooperative game theory to the space-exchange problems.We derive the conditions under which retailers can benefit from exchanging their excess space.We compute a weighted Shapley value that is in the core.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Retail space-exchange,Bargaining power,Generalized Nash bargaining scheme,Weighted Shapley value,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We analyze retail space-exchange problems where two or more retailers exchange their excess retail spaces to improve the utilization of their space resource. We first investigate the two-retailer space exchange problem. In order to entice both retailers with different bargaining powers to exchange their spaces, we use the generalized Nash bargaining scheme to allocate the total profit surplus between the two retailers. Next, we consider the space-exchange problem involving three or more retailers, and construct a cooperative game in characteristic function form. We show that the game is essential and superadditive, and also prove that the core is non-empty. Moreover, in order to find a unique allocation scheme that ensures the stability of the grand coalition, we propose a new approach to compute a weighted Shapley value that satisfies the core conditions and also reflects retailers’ bargaining powers. Our analysis indicates that the space exchange by more retailers can result in a higher system-wide profit surplus and thus a higher allocation to each retailer under a fair scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A recent innovation in retailing is the establishment of partnerships by exchanging excess retail space between two (or more) retailers which sell different products. An example of this retail space-exchange strategy is the successful partnership between the British retailers Waitrose (selling food products) and Boots (selling healthcare products). These retailers have established strategic partnership to stock ‘selective product ranges’ in each others’ stores in order to utilize their spaces and increase accessibility to consumers; see Stych (2009). Under this space-exchange strategy, Waitrose can sell its food products in Boots’s stores while Waitrose sells Boots’s healthcare products in its stores. Encouraged with the success of their space-exchange strategy with Boots, Waitrose has also built a partnership with Welcome Break, which is a British motorway service station operator, opening shops in some stores of the latter. As another successful example of such a space-exchange strategy, in February 2009 Tim Hortons (a favorite doughnut store in Canada) cooperated with Cold Stone Creamery (an U.S.-based chain stores of ice cream) to operate their “co-branded” stores; refer to Draper (2009). In July 2009, Bloomberg BusinessWeek (2009) released the news that the two firms had successfully co-branded nearly 50 restaurant locations in the U.S. and Canada within five months, and would continue to greatly expand the partnership. The report in Bloomberg BusinessWeek (2009) shows the success of the space exchange between Tim Hortons and Cold Stone Creamery.The success of the space-exchange strategy as implemented by the partnerships formed by Waitrose and Boots, and Tim Hortons and Cold Stone Creamery naturally depends on, (i) whether or not the system-wide profit can be improved, and (ii) whether or not each retailer benefits from this strategy. More specifically, if the two retailers cannot achieve more profit jointly, then this strategy would fail because one or both retailers may be unwilling to cooperate. However, even if the total profit of both retailers increases, then one retailer may still be worse off and thus lose the incentive to cooperate with the other retailer. For this scenario, the retailer who is better off may have to make a transfer payment to compensate for the other retailer’s loss. To examine this issue, it is important to consider the fair allocation of the system-wide profit surplus generated by the space exchange. We use the generalized Nash bargaining scheme to analyze the problem.Since more than two retailers can also cooperate to exchange excess retail spaces, (e.g., Waitrose, Boots and Welcome Break), one should investigate the space exchange problem with three or more retailers. For this problem, it is also important to examine whether or not the system-wide profit can be increased, and thus it is necessary to consider the problem of fair allocation among three or more retailers. For this multiple-retailer problem, we use the weighted Shapley value to determine the fair allocation. We develop a new approach to compute the weighted Shapley value that must be in the core and thus assure the stability of the grand coalition.The space-exchange strategy results in indirect sales known as the “cross-category effect” for both retailers which should be taken into account when analyzing the retail space-related problems described above. In one of the earliest works to investigate the cross-category effect, Corstjens and Doyle (1981) use a space-dependent demand function which can be used to estimate the demand for each retailer. When cross-category effect is not considered, a simpler type of direct sales demand function is obtained. We present a generalized demand model which includes the Corstjens and Doyle’s model and the direct sales model as special cases. Our more general model is used to estimate each retailer’s sales at his own space and sales at other retailers’ spaces.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we review representative relevant publications, and summarize our paper’s major contributions to the literature. In Sections 3 and 4 we investigate the space-exchange problem with two retailers, and that with three or more retailers, respectively. In Section 5 we conclude with a summary of major managerial insights that we draw from our analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
