@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A surcharge pricing scheme for supply chain coordination under JIT environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Buyer offers a price increase to the supplier asking him to reduce the batch sizes.Surcharge pricing as a mechanism for supply chain coordination is introduced.Equivalence of surcharge pricing with Joint Economic Lot Sizing and quantity discount has been established.Analysis also covers the case of information asymmetry.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Just-in-time,Supply chain coordination,Surcharge pricing,Information asymmetry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Just-In-Time (JIT) system involves frequent shipments of smaller batch sizes from the supplier to the buyer. For the buyer, it results in the reduction of the inventory holding cost. However, it is often accompanied by an increase in the set up cost for the supplier. Thus, the supplier may be reluctant to switch to the JIT mode unless he is assured of some form of compensation. In this paper, we introduce a pricing scheme where the buyer offers the supplier an increase in the wholesale price, to encourage the supplier to switch to the JIT mode. Such a pricing scheme may be termed as a surcharge. We develop the economics of surcharge pricing as a supply chain coordinating mechanism under JIT environment. We also establish the equivalence of surcharge pricing with other common coordination mechanisms like Quantity Discount (QD) and Joint Economic Lot Sizing (JELS) model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Just-in-time (JIT) system is marked by frequent shipments from the supplier to the buyer in small batch sizes (Dong, Carter, & Dresner, 2001). The success of JIT in manufacturing firms like Toyota and Honda has resulted in many firms trying to move towards JIT. While it leads to lower inventories at the buyer's premises, implying lower inventory carrying costs and higher profitability for the buyer (Brox & Fader, 2002), it often increases the supplier's set up costs and the cost of transportation (Fazel, 1997). Due to this increase in cost to implement JIT, a supplier may be reluctant to participate unless he is guaranteed some form of compensation. Sometimes these increased costs are transferred to the buyer by changing the wholesale price (Fazel, 1997). According to Newman (1993) suppliers in Japan charge their JIT customers a premium of 5 percent in the wholesale price to switch to JIT mode. In practice, such compensations are decided in an ad hoc fashion and currently there is no systematic procedure to determine the same. We define such compensations as surcharge pricing. In this paper, we develop the economics behind this surcharge and establish how it can be used as a supply chain coordination mechanism in the JIT scenario. We also examine the equivalence of surcharge and other coordination mechanisms such as quantity discount and Joint Economic Lot Size Models (JELS) from a purely system-wide cost perspective.Paying surcharge is a part of our everyday life. However, as buyers and suppliers we may not consciously acknowledge the process. For example, as consumers, we often pay a surcharge over the originally quoted wholesale price, while purchasing items in smaller quantities. This situation could arise because of budget and space constraints, and high holding costs. Similar situations arise in organizations as well, where buyers may be ready to pay a surcharge to offset the high set up costs of the supplier (Fazel, 1997; Voigt & Inderfurth, 2011). Suppliers prefer to operate at higher batch sizes because of high cost of set up (Esmaeili, Aryanezhad, & Zeephongsekul, 2009), or high transportation cost (Kelle, Al-khateeb, & Miller, 2003). Compensation from the buyer, in such cases, is supposed to offset the high set up or transportation cost incurred by the supplier if the supplier has to deliver more frequently. In real life, such compensation arises not only in the context of changing the batch sizes but also for other issues like bringing down the lead-time. In this paper, we are proposing this compensation as a surcharge on the wholesale price, rather than an ad hoc amount that is typically negotiated in practice.While a lot of work has been done in the area of quantity discount (see Banerjee, 1986a; Monahan, 1984), literature has been relatively silent on surcharge pricing. The papers that employ the concept of surcharge pricing include Banerjee (1986b), Miller and Kelle, (1998), Lau, Lau, and Wang (2007) and Chakraborty and Chatterjee (2012). The objective of this paper is to establish surcharge pricing as a coordination mechanism and then to show its equivalence with other coordination models. We examine the feasibility of coordination that will maximize the buyer's resulting economic gains without altering the costs of the supplier. The model has also been extended to incorporate the case of information asymmetry.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: A brief review of relevant literature is presented in the next section. Problem statement is presented in Section 3, followed by Model development of the problem in Section 4. Section 5 extends the current model by relaxing the lot-for-lot and infinite production rate assumptions. Section 6 shows the equivalence of surcharge pricing with other coordination models like JELS and quantity discount. Section 7 presents the information asymmetry case for supplier's set up cost. Sensitivity Analysis results are covered in Section 8 and the concluding remarks are presented in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
