@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Nonparametric quantile frontier estimation under shape restriction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a nonparametric quantile regression for τ-frontier estimation.This estimation can be obtained by solving two linear programs.Experimental results verify its superiority over the linear estimator.We suggest how to avoid crossing between multiple estimated τ-frontiers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Productivity and competitiveness,Production frontier,Quantile regression,Shape restriction,Concavity,Non-crossing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a shape-restricted nonparametric quantile regression to estimate the τ-frontier, which acts as a benchmark for whether a decision making unit achieves top τ efficiency. This method adopts a two-step strategy: first, identifying fitted values that minimize an asymmetric absolute loss under the nondecreasing and concave shape restriction; second, constructing a nondecreasing and concave estimator that links these fitted values. This method makes no assumption on the error distribution and the functional form. Experimental results on some artificial data sets clearly demonstrate its superiority over the classical linear quantile regression. We also discuss how to enforce constraints to avoid quantile crossings between multiple estimated frontiers with different values of τ. Finally this paper shows that this method can be applied to estimate the production function when one has some prior knowledge about the error term.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Quantile frontier with τ×100% acts as a benchmark for whether a decision making unit (DMU) achieves top τ efficiency. In statistics, this τ-frontier is merely the τ-quantile of random output conditional on various input levels. If one DMU produces output not less than the τ-frontier at its input level, the DMU is regarded as τ-efficient; otherwise, τ-inefficient. In contrast with the full frontier that envelopes the production possibility set, the τ-frontier partitions the production possibility set into two portions: upper τ-efficient and lower τ-inefficient.Linear quantile regression (LQR: Koenker & Bassett JR, 1978) has been applied to τ-frontier estimation by Behr (2010) and Bernini, Freo, and Gardini (2004). The first paper studied the productivity of German savings, cooperative and commercial banks, and the second paper analyzed the efficiency of the Italian hotel industry. In both papers, τ-frontier is assumed to be linear with the input (or log-input). But this linear functional form may fail to describe complex dependence relationships between conditional quantiles and input levels. Real applications call for flexible nonparametric methods, instead of LQR that is characterized primarily by technical convenience.This paper provides a concave nonparametric quantile regression (CNQR) for τ-frontier estimation. Similar to previously proposed nonparametric extensions in frontier analysis, e.g. convex nonparametric least squares (CNLS: Kuosmanen, 2008), corrected concave nonparametric least squares (C2NLS: Kuosmanen & Johnson, 2010) and stochastic non-smooth envelopment of data (StoNED: Kuosmanen & Kortelainen, 2012), this estimator has a piecewise linear form and satisfies monotonicity and concavity. The main characteristics of CNQR are described as follows. First, it is robust to functional misspecification that could undermine conventional parametric regression methods. Second, with the CNLS formulation (14a–d) developed by Kuosmanen (2008), it adheres to the regularity conditions (monotonicity and concavity) implied by microeconomic theory. Third, it enables the transformation of continuously constrained shape-restricted quantile regression into a tractable linear program.A nonparametric quantile regression model for τ-frontier estimation is proposed in Wang and Wang (2013), which applies shape-restricted support vector regression with pinball loss. Although this estimator is smooth, it may fail to be globally nondecreasing and concave, because it only imposes the first and second-order derivative constraints on the sample points, as that in Wang and Ni (2012). However, the CNQR estimator in this paper is globally nondecreasing and concave, which is a decided advantage over Wang and Wang (2013).Quantile frontier in this paper differs significantly from partial frontier in Aragon, Daouia, and Thomas-Agnan (2005), Daouia and Simar (2007) and Martins-Filho and Yao (2008), which is also based on conditional quantiles of random output. In these papers, the α-partial frontier at a given input level x is the α-quantile of random output conditional on input level not larger than x, whereas in this paper the τ-quantile frontier at x is the τ-quantile conditional on input level right equal to x. The α-partial frontier in the aforementioned studies is to evaluate whether one specified DMU achieves the largest α output among companies with inputs less than or equal to its input. Because comparing a DMU’s output to that of other DMUs with substantially less input is a meaningless endeavor, we do not test their models in the experiments.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the shape-restricted nonparametric quantile regression for τ-frontier estimation. Section 3 investigates the performance of CNQR through Monte Carlo simulations. Section 4 discusses how to enforce non-crossing constraints in estimating multiple frontiers with different values of τ. Section 5 introduces how to estimate the production function with CNQR by adjusting τ when the modeller has some prior knowledge about the error distribution. Section 6 concludes the paper.In this paper,R+dis the nonnegative orthant ofRd. All vectors are column vectors written in boldface, whereas their elements are written in plain letters. For example,βiis a vector and ziis the ith element of vector z. Vectors 0 and 1 are the vectors of appropriate dimensions with all their components equal to 0 and 1, respectively. ∀i=1,…, n and ∀j=1,…, n are abbreviated as ∀i and ∀j, respectively. ∀h denotes ∀h=1,…, H.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
