@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal delivery strategies considering carbon emissions, time-dependent demands and demand–supply interactions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Delivery schedule with carbon emissions and demand–supply interactions is explored.We use mathematical programming methods to determine the optimal decisions.Emissions cost has little effect on decisions providing the carbon taxes are small.Price discount is not work for compensating infrequent delivery under inelastic demand.Model with demand–supply interactions has larger profit than that without interaction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Carbon tax,Time-dependent demand,Supply–demand interaction,Delivery strategy,Green logistics transport,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The study addresses a distributor's delivery strategy problem with consideration of carbon emissions, retailers’ time-dependent demands and demand–supply interactions. A mathematical programming model is formulated for solving optimal number and time-window of service cycles. A case study is presented. The results show that the distributor would adopt a frequent delivery strategy if carbon taxes are insufficiently high. Providing the retailers with price discounts does not work out since retailers would value the delays in receiving their ordered products more than the compensations of less frequent delivery given by the distributor in response to carbon taxes. Models with demand–supply interactions can result in larger profit and market share than those without demand–supply interactions. This study sheds new light to the distributors, the retailers, and the regulators in greening the logistics transport.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When dealing with the global warming issues, almost all researchers in different fields agree that we need to take actions to effectively curb the carbon emissions. In logistics, transportation is the largest source of CO2 emissions, of which road freight shipments have contributed emissions quite a lot (Piecyk &#38; McKinnon, 2010). Consolidation of shipments with full truck loads (FTL) has proven to be the most cost-effective due to transportation economies (Caputo, Fratocchi, &#38; Pelagagge, 2005; Chopra &#38; Meindl, 2007). It can significantly cut the delivery frequency, thereby reducing both transportation costs and CO2 emissions (Ülkü, 2012). However, this strategy requires longer delivery cycles, thus causing increased delays in receiving the products ordered. Increased delays usually discourage the retailers and result in less demand. The distributor thus yields less revenue and provides fewer delivery frequencies, which in turn, cause even greater delays. As such, a vicious circle forms. It is therefore important to explore the issues on a distributor's delivery strategies that can meet retailers’ needs while maintaining the distributor's profit and sustainability and meanwhile also mitigating carbon emissions.Center to the issues of conventional physical distribution problems is the delivery frequency of vehicles (Daganzo &#38; Newell, 1986). However, the conventional logistics problems are addressed by assuming inelastic retailers’ demands with a distributor pursuing minimized cost. Hsu and Li (2006) relaxed the inelastic demand assumption and showed the importance of demand–supply interactions when determining delivery frequencies for Internet shopping. However, their study did not consider product characteristics, distance traveled in serving customers or vehicle composition in distributor's fleet. The above items have major influences on the distributor's delivery costs, and thus delivery strategies.In logistics, many researchers have paid attention to environmental issues and emissions (e.g., Bae, Sarkis, &#38; Yoo, 2011; Lin &#38; Ng, 2012; Paksoy, Bektas, &#38; Özceylan, 2011). For example, Yang, Yang, and Wijngaard (2005) and Mallidis, Dekker, and Vlachos (2012) focused on mitigating the impacts of pollution and emissions from transportation. Nieuwenhuis, Beresford, and Choi (2012) investigated the trade-off between shipping from domestic plants and investing in a transplant facility, and compared the emissions for different transport options. Liao, Tseng, and Lu (2009) showed that replacing long-haul truck transport with intermodal transport can significantly reduce carbon emissions. Ülkü (2012) proposed a shipment consolidation policy to decrease CO2 emissions, in which customer demand is considered under a time-constrained delivery system. Lovrić, Li, and Vervest (2013) used such economic indexes as cost, revenue or profitability to represent the sustainability factors. Kim and Wee (2014) compared CO2 emissions from the intermodal freight and road-based systems. The results show that though intermodal systems emit less CO2, there exists more CO2 in the system under certain extreme conditions of electricity production, vessel size and detour factors. Demir, Bektaş, and Laporte (2014a, 2014b) investigated a bi-objective vehicle routing problem in which one objective is relating to fuel consumption and the other objective is relating to delivery time. Brandenburg, Govindan, Sarkis, and Seuring (2014) evaluated development and directions of sustainable supply chain management. Demir, Bektaş, and Laporte (2014a, 2014b) also reviewed recent research on green road freight transportation and found that very few studies have been carried out within the perspective of fuel consumption and emissions when dealing with fleet size problems.Hua, Cheng, and Wang (2011) employed the classic economic order quantity (EOQ) model to examine impacts of carbon cap and carbon price on order size and carbon emissions. Choi (2013) and Theiβen and Spinler (2014) explored supplier selection and partnership problems in the presence of CO2 reduction management. Choi (2013) further investigated the impacts of different formats of taxes on supplier selection. Benjaafar, Li, and Daskin (2013) presented a battery of models to illustrate how the carbon footprint and emissions can be incorporated into the operational decisions. The above issues can be classified as the operational level. Lee (2011) employed a case study approach to enhance understandings of the carbon footprint and emissions within the contexts of automobile supply chain management. Other relevant studies focused on methods for measuring energy and carbon emissions (e.g., Cholette &#38; Venkat, 2009; Sundarakani, de Souza, Goh, Wagner, &#38; Manikandan, 2010). In sum, when emissions are to be factored into the decision modeling, either the emissions limiting or the emissions pricing has been used—the former refers to imposing an upper bound on the carbon emissions (e.g., Absi, Dauzére-Pérès, Kedad-Sidhoum, Penz, &#38; Rapine, 2013; Hua et al. 2011; Ülkü, 2012), while the latter refers to a carbon tax (e.g., Choi, 2013). Hoen, Tan, Fransoo, and Houtum (2014) compared the impacts of emissions cost and emissions constraints on the transport-mode selection. The study concluded that a carbon tax could make the marketplace accountable for the external costs of carbon emissions, thereby promoting a reduction in emissions. What seems to be lacking so far, however, is incorporating the carbon emissions and demand–supply interactions into models for solving the delivery decision-making problems.With the advent of cutting-edge information and communication technologies (ICTs) in logistics today, it has become more dynamic than ever for the retailers to place orders of various products; consequently, the distributors are faced with more time-dependent demands and more complex demand–supply interactions than before. Serving retailers with constant and uniform delivery cycles may no longer be acceptable or efficient because it can result in increased transportation costs and carbon emissions, especially when total demand is low. Moreover, such a delivery strategy cannot meet any urgent requests. In fact, the cost of shipment, including fuel consumption of vehicles and distances and time traveled, is greatly affected by the retailers’ demands. A large-sized vehicle can deliver large amount of product in one service cycle, which reduces both transportation cost and carbon emissions. If carbon taxes are imposed by the regulators, a profit-maximizing distributor must trade off transportation cost and carbon emissions cost against the revenues generated when determining a delivery strategy. In light of this, the present study attempts to explore the relationship between retailers’ demands, which are time dependent, and a distributor's delivery cost, which comprises transportation cost and carbon emissions pricing. Special emphasis is given on carbon taxes, demand–supply interactions, and their influences on the optimal delivery strategies.The designed delivery problem is described as follows. Consider a number of retailers’ orders with mixed products over the course of a time horizon. The distributor needs to process these orders and choose a favorable delivery schedule to ship all of the products ordered. Upon completing a service cycle, the products ordered during that cycle are delivered to the retailers. In short, the delivery scheduling problem is equivalent to determining delivery frequency and time-window of service cycles during the study period. Dissimilar to the traditional and typical uniform service strategy, the delivery strategy herein follows Hsu and Li (2006) in which the distributor spaces service cycles according to retailers’ time-dependent demands. Furthermore, this study focuses on carbon emissions and demand–supply interactions by investigating the extent to which carbon taxes would affect the optimal delivery frequency. The remainders are organized as follows. Section 2 formulates the distributor's delivery cost, the retailers’ choice for distributors, and the mathematical programming models. Section 3 presents a case study. Section 4 discusses the results and implications, followed by the conclusions with directions for future studies.The study aims to determine optimal delivery strategies for a distributor who receives orders from many retailers in a market area and who is also responsible for the delivery. Mathematical programming models are formulated in ways that the relationship between retailers’ demands and distributor's supply is interacted. On the demand side, the retailers minimize the generalized costs to choose the distributors. The retailer's generalized cost consists of monetary and non-monetary costs of products ordered. The monetary costs refer to costs of goods purchased and are the results of distributor's unit selling price and product quantities. The non-monetary costs reflect the delays in receiving products ordered, which indicate the postponements in the renewal of retailers’ order. An increased delay implies that a higher backorder and inventory holding costs the retailers must bear. The delays are converted to monetary values, which vary across retailers depending on their values of time and product values. On the supply side, the distributor maximizes the profit—the sum of gross margin of all products minus total delivery cost—to determine the number and time-window of service cycles during the study period. The gross margin of a product is the selling price less the acquisition cost, whereas the total delivery cost consists of transportation cost and carbon emissions pricing, i.e., carbon taxes. Additionally, a distributor may offer price discount to the retailers to compensate for the delays in receiving the products ordered. Relationships between price discount and delivery frequencies are also discussed underlying different values of carbon taxes.Let s and i respectively denote the total number of delivery service cycles and a specific delivery service cycle during a study period T. Let Tirepresent the time-window of service cycle i,Ti=(ti0,tim), i = 1, 2,…, S, whereti0andtimrepresent the start- and end-time of service cycle i; S denotes the last delivery cycle. At eachtim, i = 1, 2,…, S, the distributor begins to deliver the accumulated products ordered by the retailers during service cycle i. Moreover, let p denote a specific product. The delivery cost function is formulated by an analytical approach, in which the total cost function composites transportation cost and carbon emissions cost. The transportation cost function further involves fixed and variable transportation costs—the former reflects the cost of dispatching a vehicle and the latter expresses the cost of fuel consumption—both costs depend on the vehicle type. The fixed transportation cost mainly comes from labor cost and/or vehicle depreciation, which is regarded irrelevant to journeys of vehicles. However, the variable transportation cost mainly comes from fuel consumption, which is closely related to journeys of vehicles, i.e. distance traveled, vehicle speed and roadway traffic conditions. Therefore, the journeys of vehicles are measured in distance traveled as a simplification of the study. Carbon emissions cost is modeled in the same way as the variable transportation cost. Carbon emissions cost is dependent on carbon emissions, which are based on the weight of the load, the vehicle, the type of fuel used, and the distance elapsed to carry that load (Ülkü, 2012). In this study, the carbon emissions are calculated based on distance traveled and total weight of the load associated with products carried by the vehicle.Let k denote a specific vehicle type. Then, the transportation cost using vehicle type k of service cycle i, Ci, k, can be formulated as:(1)Ci,k=fk+vk·Diwhere fkand vkrepresent the fixed and variable transportation costs of vehicle k, respectively; Diis the total distance traveled. Let r denote the carbon emissions cost per gram of CO2 emitted. The carbon emissions cost using vehicle type k of service cycle i, Ei, k, can then be formulated as follows:(2)Ei,k=r·(ak·Di·Wi)where akdenotes the carbon emissions per weight-distance of vehicle type k measured in grams per metric ton-kilometer; Diis the total distance traveled; Wiis the total weight of the load carried in service cycle i. The total distance traveled can be estimated by approximate analytical models, commonly found in the logistics literature (Hsu &#38; Tsai, 1999). Consequently, the total delivery cost using vehicle type k of service cycle i, Li, k, can be expressed as:(3)Li,k=Ci,k+Ei,k=fk+Di(vk+r·ak·Wi)Note that the total delivery cost is directly related to the vehicle type k, distance traveled and total weight of load carried of service cycle i.Letw¯krepresent the volumetric weight capacity of vehicle type k. To serve retailers during the service cycle, a vehicle is feasible only if its volumetric weight capacity is equal to or larger than the total volumetric weight of load carrying. The total volumetric weight of load can be estimated by the delivered amount of mixed products accumulated during the service cycle and unit product volumetric weight. Let δi, kbe a binary indicator. If vehicle type k is assigned to service cycle i, then δi, k= 1; otherwise, δi, k= 0. The constraint can be expressed as follows.(4)(δi,kw¯k−∑t=ti0tim∑∀pQtp·w¯p)≥0wherew¯pis the volumetric weight of a unit of product p;Qtprepresents the time-dependent retailer's demands for product p from the distributor at time t. Let ϕ be the vehicle utilization rate, a proportion of the total volumetric weight carried to the vehicular capacity and 0 < ϕ < 1. ϕ can be expressed as:(5)ϕ=∑t=ti0tim∑∀pQtp·w¯pw¯kA probability model is designed for a retailer to choose between the existing distributor and other potential distributors. To capture the dynamic and time-sensitive demands, the issues such as retailer's perceptions of any delay in receiving the products ordered, temporal variations in ordering time, and product characteristics are considered. The decision rule applied to the optimal distributor choice assumes a rational decision maker who minimizes the generalized cost. In the study, the retailer's demand is derived from the generalized cost which is the sum of monetary and non-monetary costs of placing an order of products. Other things being equal, a relationship exists among delays in receiving products ordered, retailer's ordering time, and distributor's lead time. If a retailer's order is placed between the periods of lead time, the ordered products will not be shipped until the end of next service cycle. That is, retailer's generalized cost is a lead-time dependent variable. Letb¯pand τhbe the distributor's selling price of a unit of product p and the value of time for a specific retailer h, respectively. Let zprepresent a weight factor for the retailer's value of time toward product p, zp≥ 1. Then, retailer's value of time toward product p is (zp· τh). Assume that the retailer is well informed about the services provided by different distributors, then the generalized cost function of a retailer who places an order of product p at time t,Gtp, can be formulated as follows:(6)Gtp=(b¯p+TtD·zp·τh)·qtpwhereTtDandqtprepresent the delay in receiving the ordered products and the demand quantity of product p ordered by time t, respectively.The present study considers the impact of lead time on the delay in receiving the ordered products. The lead time is defined as the total time used by the distributor for preparing the order for delivery, i.e., handling and processing time. Thus, the delay in receiving the ordered products by a retailer, when the order is placed at time t, can be expressed as follows:(7)TtD={(tim+12(TiR+ni·u))−t,t∈(ti0,(tim−∂))(ti+1m+12(Ti+1R+ni+1·u))−t,t∈((tim−∂),tim)whereTiRand u denote the average transportation time from the distributor to the retailers during service cycle i, and the product handling and unloading time at the retailer, respectively, with ∂ being the lead time for the distributor. Recall that niis the total number of retailer stops in service cycle i. Ignoring the detailed vehicle routing issues of goods delivery, this study simplifies the problem by averaging the sum of transportation and product handling and unloading times to represent goods delivery time to the retailer. Because of the time required for handling and processing, if an order is placed between((tim−∂),tim), the ordered products will not be shipped until the end of the next service cycle (i + 1). Moreover, lead time for the distributor also implies that the distributor may not have orders available and therefore has to order from a supplier.Different values of time may exist across different retailers, even within the same industry; thus, the value of time for a retailer is regarded as a random variable. Let τ and f(τ) represent the value of time for a retailer and the probability distribution function, respectively. The probability of value of time for retailer h is given by Pr{τ = τh} = ω(h). Furthermore, assuming many distributors are available to the retailers in the market, in which the product price and delivery schedule are diverse. Let y and x be the object distributor and other distributors, x ≠ y. The probability of a retailer choosing the object distributor y can be expressed as:(8)βtp=Pr{Gtp,y≤Gtp,x,∀x≠y}=∑hPr{Gtp,y≤minGtp,x}·ω(h)From Eqs. (6) and (7), the choice in Eq. (8) is endogenous and depends on the delay in receiving the ordered products which is the result of delivery frequencies and length of service cycles. Assume that the total retailer's demand for product p at time t is exogenous and is denoted asqtp, then the time-dependent demand for product p of the distributor at time t can be expressed asQtp=qtp·βtp. Thus, the total demand for product p,Qip, and all products from the distributor during service cycle i, Qi, can be restated as:(9a)Qip=∑t=ti0timQtp=∑t=ti0timqtp·βtp(9b)Qi=∑t=ti0tim∑∀pQtp=∑t=ti0tim∑∀pqtp·βtpwhereβtprepresents the probability of a retailer’ choice of the distributor for product p at time t. Then, the total weight of load transported in service cycle i can be expressed as:(10)Wi=∑∀pQip·wpwhere wprepresents the weight of a unit of product p. The total demands expressed in Eqs. (9a) and (9b) are relevant to the decision variablestimandti0in two ways. First, the start and end times of a service cycle are influential factors of delay in receiving ordered products and further the probability of a retailer's choosing for an object distributor. Second, total demands toward the distributor in a service cycle are estimated by aggregating the time-dependent demands toward the distributor from the start to end times of the service cycle. Finally, the market share is defined as the percentage of the product demand that is attributable to the distributor. Let M be the market share of the distributor, which can be estimated as:(11)M=∑i=1SQi∑∀t∑∀pqtpThe profit function for a distributor is the sum of gross margin of all products minus total delivery cost, which is irrelevant to product p. In this study the distributor may offer price discounts to the retailer as a compensation for the increased delays in receiving the products ordered. Thus, two scenarios are considered: without and with a price discount. It should be mentioned that the competition equilibrium between distributors is ignored.Without a price discount, the total profit of the distributor during the entire study period, π, can be formulated as:(12)π=∑i=1S(∑∀p(b¯p−bp)·Qip)−∑i=1SLi,kwhere bpis the distributor's acquisition cost of a unit of product p; Li, kis the total delivery cost using vehicle type k of service cycle i. Thus, the programming problem for maximizing the distributor's profit during the study period, without a price discount, is as follows.(13a)Maxπ=∑i=1S(∑∀p(b¯p−bp)·Qip)−∑i=1SLi,ks.t.(13b)(δi,kw¯k−∑t=ti0tim∑∀pQtp·wp)≥0,∀i(13c)∑i=1S(tim−ti0)=T(13d)ti+1m=ti0,i=1,2,…,(S−1)(13e)tSm=t10(13f)ti0>0,∀i(13g)tim>0,∀iEq. (13b) constrains the assignment of the vehicle to service cycle. Eq. (13c) ensures that the summation of the duration of all service cycles is equal to the study period. Eqs. (13d) and (13e) constrain non-overlapping for two service cycles. Eqs. (13f) and (13g) define the start and end times of a service cycle to be positive values. The decision variables are S, s,tim,ti0, and δi, kfor all i. The optimal S*, s*,tim*,ti0*, andδi,k*for all i can be determined as a result of maximized profit based on Eqs. (13a)–(13g). With a price discount, on the other hand, the objective function in Eq. (13a) can be restated as follows:(14)Maxπ′=∑i=1S(∑∀p(b¯p(1−θ)−bp)·Qip)−∑i=1SLi,kwhere θ denotes the price discount factor. The decision variable in Eq. (14) is price discount factor θ; θ > 0. Assuming a constant number and time-window of delivery cycles, the price discount strategy is adopted only if it results in more profitable than that without a price discount, i.e. π' > π.We apply the proposed model to a logistics case study in Taiwan to determine optimal delivery strategies for a distributor with consideration of carbon pricing mechanism and demand–supply interactions. Due to the carbon pricing mechanism is not yet implemented in Taiwan, this study refers to the Australian carbon pricing mechanism. According to the Australian Clean Energy Regulator (n.d.), the carbon tax is AUD 23.00 per ton of CO2; hence, the unit carbon emissions cost in Taiwan is set as NTD11The dollar unit in the case study is New Taiwan Dollar (NTD). AUD 1.00 is approximately equivalent to NTD 27.00.600.00 per ton, or NTD 0.0006 per gram. Suppose that the distributor's market area is 350 square kilometers (g = 350) with 15 retailers. The study period is 1 week measured in units of day (T = 7). The distributor has three vehicle types (k = 3) in its fleet: 3-ton, 8-ton, and 12-ton vehicles. The average speed of vehicles, regardless of type, is 60 kmkilometers per hour (l = 60). The estimation of total distance traveled Diin Eqs. (1) and (2) was found by Eilon, Watson-Gandy, and Christofides (1971).22According to Eilon et al. (1971), Di= e · (g · ni)1/2, where g is the market area, niis the total number of retailer stops in service cycle i, and e is a distribution network parameter as 0.75.The fixedtransportation costs of vehicles are estimated by purchase costs and average depreciation rates, in which vehicle purchase costs are adopted from a local dealer Zdcar (n.d.). The distributor carries four diverse products (p = 4): tissue, notebook computer, wine, and bottled water. Distributor's acquisition costs of the products are approximately 80 percent of the selling prices. Table 1 summarizes the values of the base demand and the supply parameters.Fig. 1 shows the time-dependent demand from the retailer, in which the unit of demand is 1 box.Two scenarios are analyzed: without and with a price discount. Assume that the number and time-window of service cycles and fleet make-ups are identical for these two scenarios. The results and objective values without a price discount are obtained based on Eqs. (13a)–(13g); whereas those with a price discount are obtained based on Eq. (14). The revised approximated method (Hsu &#38; Li, 2006) is employed to solve the problem. The proposed model is programmed using Visual C++, a computer modeling program developed by Microsoft. Table 2and Fig. 2 report the solution results.Table 2 shows that the optimal number of service cycles is 4: the 1st and 4th cycles last for 2 and 3 days, respectively; whereas the 2nd and 3rd cycles just take 1 day. Taking the 1st service cycle as an example, the orders placed on Sunday and Monday will be accumulated and delivered to the retailer on Tuesday. However, as the distributor has a lead time, the order placed on Tuesday will not be delivered until the end of next cycle, i.e. Wednesday. The delivery strategies include use of an 8-ton vehicle and a 12-ton vehicle, but not a 3-ton vehicle, to serve the retailers in different cycles as the 3-ton vehicle is too small to accommodate the four diverse products (tissue, notebook computer, wine, and bottled water). Besides, use of a 3-ton vehicle is apparently lacking cost efficiency—it implies the most frequent delivery, thereby significantly increasing both transportation costs and carbon emissions. The increase in demand due to frequent delivery may not offset the increased total costs. Table 2 also shows that the total carbon emissions amount to 69,083 grams when there is lack of a price discount. With the aforementioned unit carbon cost being only NTD 0.0006 per gram, the total carbon emissions cost is merely NTD 41.45. The rather small amount of emissions cost implies almost no significance to the delivery frequency decision making. In other words, the major influence on delivery frequency is the transportation cost, not the carbon emissions cost. Thus, to effectively curb carbon emissions, Taiwan government should consider introducing substantially high carbon taxes. Or, the jurisdictions may introduce separate CO2 regimes for vehicles.There is a trade-off between demand and revenue with regards to the price discount. When the distributor introduces a price discount, the optimal discount factor is 1 percent (Table 2). Such a price discount will lead to a slight increase in distributor's demand by two boxes but will reduce the distributor's profit. Since the total demands from all retailers during 1 week are 1149 boxes (Fig. 1), the distributor's market shares, with and without a price discount, can be estimated by Eq. (11) as 24 percent, implying the retailers are not sensitive to the price discount. In other words, with a price discount the increased demands fail to offset the decreased revenue. Thus, the distributor should carefully investigate the impact of price on both demand and revenue when determining the proper price discount.Fig. 2(a), (b) and (c) respectively examines the cost, the demand and the profit under different numbers of service cycles. Fig. 2(a) shows that the total transportation cost is positively related to the delivery frequency because more vehicles are dispatched as frequency increases. Fig. 2(a) also shows that the carbon emissions cost increases when the frequency is reduced, and that the emissions cost decreases for delivering five, six and seven times a week. For a decreased service cycle, a larger-sized vehicle is required because the amount of product per shipment increases considerably. This substantially heavier load with a larger-sized vehicle results in an increased amount of carbon emissions. The results suggest the importance of the demand and its relationship with vehicle utilization on the total cost while determining the delivery strategies. Fig. 2(b) portrays that an increased delivery frequency leads to an increased retailer demand to the distributor. However, the increase in retail demand decreases as the number of service cycles increases. Fig. 2(c) demonstrates that the profit is maximized at four service cycles per week. However, there exists a largest carbon emissions cost among all numbers of service cycles (Fig. 2(a)).If the carbon tax is raised substantially, the distributor would employ less dispatch or infrequent delivery strategies to avoid the increased carbon emissions cost. However, the increased delay in receiving the ordered products may upset the retailers. In this circumstance, the distributor may consider introducing a price discount to offset this inconvenience. However, such a price discount is justified only if the profit is larger than that without a discount. The study further explores the influence of changes in unit carbon emissions cost on the optimal price discount factor. The results are presented in Table 3. It shows that a price discount can influence the distributor's profit in different ways. Since the gross revenue depends on product selling price and total demand, a discounted price would lead to a rise in gross revenue only when the demand is elastic. The price discount is suggested only when the increased revenue could offset the increased carbon emissions cost and yield an increased profit. When the carbon tax increases from NTD 0.0006 to NTD 1.00 per gram, Table 3 shows that the distributor decreases the delivery frequency from four to three times a week. Furthermore, the distributor is forced to employ a least service cycle, two times a week, when the carbon tax is increased to NTD 1.10 per gram. The increased carbon taxes do curb the total carbon emissions. The price discount underlying different carbon taxes in Table 3 would decrease the gross revenues and thus the total profit, implying the demand is inelastic. The results also imply that the price discount has little impact to the delivery frequencies and delays in receiving the ordered products since the lower price has eroded the revenue considerably; thus, the price discount is not warranted.The impacts of demand elasticity on price discount policy are further examined by varying the values of time for retailers. Assume the distributor employs the same delivery service cycles as in Table 2 to serve retailers in different markets in which the distribution of values of time for retailers is normal (mean = 1360, standard deviation = 1135). The settings suggest that most of the retailers have decreased values of time with rather elastic demand. The results are presented in Table 4. It shows that when most retailers value product prices more than the delays in receiving the ordered products, the delivery cycles without a price discount policy would generate less profit (NTD 76,077) for the distributor. However, providing a discounted price does change the behavior of the retailers and would yield a larger profit (NTD 76,576), suggesting price elasticity of demand can be a determinant for adopting a price discount policy. If the retailers are sensitive to the product prices, in lieu of delays, price discount can lead to an increased profit for the distributor.Table 5 compares the results from models with and without considering the demand–supply interactions. In the comparison, the distributor has the identical market share (i.e., 24 percent). From Table 5, the number of service cycles using models without demand–supply interactions is only two, which is half of the counterpart with demand–supply interactions. It implies that the distributor pursuing a minimized total cost with an inelastic demand will employ a strategy of least delivery frequency. Using Eqs. (6), (8), (9a), and (9b) to calculate the revised results yields a lower demand, implying that the distributor overestimated its market share. The lower demand can be ascribed to increased delays in receiving the ordered products due to the least frequent services rule. For models with demand–supply interactions, the results show that the impact of number of service cycles on the demand to the distributor decreases as the delays in receiving the products ordered increases. In addition, the demand influences the total cost of the distributor. Finally, Table 5 also indicates that the optimal number and optimal time-window of service cycles can result in higher profits.A carbon tax offers a potentially cost-effective means in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The results from the case study have confirmed that the distributor's decisions will remain unaffected by carbon taxes when carbon emissions cost is small compared to transportation cost. In this circumstance, distributors tend to employ frequent service cycles in order to stimulate demands, resulting in increased carbon emissions. The sensitivity analysis has also confirmed that carbon emissions can be effectively decreased by least frequent delivery services under the pressure of considerably high carbon taxes. The results have confirmed that demand and supply interacted together have significant influences on delivery schedule. The increased profits and market share demonstrate the superiority of the proposed models with consideration of demand–supply interactions. Last but not least, the case results have shown that a strategy employing a fleet of same large-sized vehicles burdens the distributor with increased transportation and carbon emissions costs because the vehicles cannot be well utilized in most circumstances. A fleet of same large-sized vehicles can be a good strategy only when the delivery cycles are infrequent.Specifically, as indicated in Table 2 and Fig. 2(a), a decreased carbon emissions cost has been noted for all delivery service cycles. This insignificant cost is attributed to the low unit carbon emissions cost, i.e. NTD 0.0006 per gram. Table 2 shows that there are four delivery cycles in 1 week. The sensitivity analysis further explores how the optimal delivery frequency is influenced by the carbon cost. Fig. 3shows the total profits resulted from service cycles of three and four times a week under various unit carbon emissions costs. The results from the base case are also indicated in Fig. 3.As shown in Fig. 3, the unit carbon emissions cost between three and four delivery cycles is NTD 0.483 per gram, which is trivial; thus, employing either three or four service cycles could result in the same profit for the distributor. In view that frequent shipments would result in increased carbon emissions, the strategy using three delivery service cycles is suggested when the unit emissions cost is higher than NTD 0.483 per gram. In contrast, one has better to increase the frequency of delivery cycles when the unit emissions cost is below NTD 0.483. This strategy enables the distributor to increase revenues because the demand is stimulated by a decreased delay in receiving the ordered product. It implies that the distributors will not incorporate carbon emissions into the decision making process unless the carbon pricing mechanism has provided sufficient disincentives for them.The fixed cost of transportation, reflecting the expenses of depreciation and maintenance, is related to the size and type of vehicles used. Due to economies of scale, a distributor with many vehicles of a similar type would operate more efficiently than a distributor with several different types of vehicles. In our case study, employing both 8-ton and 12-ton vehicles results in an increased profit. This study further discusses how a fleet of the same type and size of vehicles would influence the number of delivery service cycles. We employ a multiplier to measure how much the fixed costs of transportation would decrease when operating a fleet of vehicles with the same size and type. Fig. 4shows the threshold of a fleet with the same vehicles and that of a fleet with mixed vehicles by comparing the number of delivery service cycles and the multiplier. The results from the base case are also indicated in Fig. 4.The determination of whether or not to operate a fleet of vehicles with the same size lies in weighing the advantages against the total transportation cost, which is directly related to the demand. As shown in Fig. 4, a mixed vehicle fleet favors the distributor when the benefits of same-sized vehicle fleet are insignificant. A decrease in vehicle utilization burdens the distributor with increased transportation cost when employing a 12-ton vehicle fleet. Fig. 4 also shows that the 12-ton vehicle fleet does not fit the strategy of frequent deliveries since the shipment carries sparse loads. The results imply that operating a large-sized vehicle fleet is an option when infrequent deliveries are calling for. A large-sized vehicle fleet emits substantial carbon and is subject to higher amount of carbon taxes; the decrease in transportation costs far outweighs any carbon taxes however. The results from Fig. 4 can serve as a useful reference for the distributors when determining the vehicle composition of a fleet.The case study suggests that the distributors would not incorporate carbon emissions into their delivery decision-making unless the carbon pricing mechanism has sufficient disincentives to them. It is important to recall that the carbon tax level is based on Australia's experience because Taiwan has no such a carbon tax as of today. Apparently, Australian carbon tax may be too low to Taiwanese drivers who are insensitive to it. Nonetheless, the policy makers may start out with a low carbon tax so as to make it more politically and administratively feasible. In practice, the distributor may consider introducing small-size vehicle, while maintaining the same delivery frequency, to lower the transportation cost during a decreasing-demand period. In an increasing-demand period, the distributor should keep using large-size vehicle but may slightly reduce the delivery frequencies in response to the carbon tax. Although the delivery service becomes a little more infrequent, the consolidation shipment with large-size vehicle would enable the distributor to realize transportation economies and thus a higher profit.For models without demand–supply interactions the distributor merely minimizes delivery cost by assuming fixed demands and applying the least frequent cycles. For models with demand–supply interactions, however, the least frequent cycles would incur increasing delays, which would reduce retailers’ demands and thereby influence the distributor's delivery cost and total profit. In sum, the optimal delivery cycles with demand–supply interactions can result in higher profits than the counterpart without considering demand–supply interactions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Over the past decades, much ink has been spent on optimal delivery strategies in logistics literature. Some research has even devoted to environmental issues and emission concerns. However, an in-depth investigation on the delivery strategies with consideration of carbon emissions and demand–supply interactions is still lacking. This study contributes to logistics literature, particularly the physical distribution problems, by integrating carbon emissions pricing, retailers’ time-dependent demands and demand–supply interactions into the mathematical programming models. The proposed models explore how a distributor can meet the retailers’ demands while maintaining profit and, in the meantime, incorporate carbon emissions cost into delivery strategies.Noting the carbon emissions resulting from transport sector will be doubled in 2020 as compared to those in 1990, the OECD (2002) urged its member governments to develop policies and initiatives to restrict the transport carbon emissions. This paper also contributes to provide a reference for the governments to impose a carbon pricing mechanism upon the logistics transport sector. Taiwan has so far no experience on imposing any carbon tax and Taiwanese drivers may also be insensitive to low carbon tax, yet the policy makers may start out with a low carbon tax so as to make it politically and administratively feasible.The current paper inevitably has its limitations. First, the proposed models are applied to a logistics example in Taiwan where some parameters are presumed or adopted from other countries. A precise measurement of local parameters should be deliberated in the future so as to attain more trustworthy results. Particularly, the carbon emissions measurement—an essential element to ensure the effectiveness of emission policy—requires an in-depth exploration. Second, use of the proposed models in different contexts can be attempted to draw more robust conclusions and policy implications. Last but not least, the resolution in this study involves a two-stage computing: delivery service optimization and then price discount. The delivery service cycles are determined in the first place in which a price discount is not considered. Then, the relationship between discounted price and total profit is analyzed under fixed supply parameters. In the future, more sophisticated modeling approaches may be explored.