@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective approach with soft constraints for water supply and wastewater coverage improvements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A multi-objective approach for water supply and wastewater coverage improvements.Optimization model that formulates strategies to minimize time and costs incurred.Uses hard and soft constraints, assembled to deal with key sustainability concepts.Uses a mixed integer-linear programming optimizer that resorts to branch-and-bound.Paves the way forward in improving the access to water and wastewater services.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple criteria analysis,Branch and bound,Combinatorial optimization,Reference point approach,Coverage of water and wastewater services,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In Brazil, due to public health, social and economic cohesion problems, access to water and wastewater services is certainly one of the main concerns of the different stakeholders in the Brazilian water sector. But as the focus is mainly on the expansion and building of new infrastructures, other features such as the robustness and resiliency of the systems are being forgotten. This reason, among others, highlights the importance of sustainable development and financing for the Brazilian water sector. In order to assess that goal, a multi-objective optimization model was built with the aim of formulating strategies to reach a predefined coverage minimizing time and costs incurred, under specific hard and soft constraints, assembled to deal with key sustainability concepts (e.g., affordability and coverage targets features) as they should not be left apart. For that purpose, an achievement scalarizing function was adopted with three distinct scaling coefficient vectors for a given reference point. To solve this combinatorial optimization problem, we used a mixed integer-linear programming optimizer that resorts to branch-and-bound methods. The work developed, paves the way toward the creation of a decision-aiding tool, without disregarding the number of steps that need to be taken to achieve the proposed objectives.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Water is a key prerequisite for human and economic development, as well as for ecosystems maintenance. However, poor governance and inadequate investment leave large populations without access to the water services they need and the failure to manage this situation has seriously jeopardized service delivery. Above all, those concerns greatly undermine some developing and transition economies (OECD, 2009).Brazil is one of such countries. Therefore, due to public health along with social and economic reasons, among others, access to Water supply and Wastewater Services (WWS) is certainly the main concern of stakeholders in the Brazilian water sector. From water utilities, to customers, regulators or politicians, no one denies that this is a top priority in this country. Those services mostly cover drinking water supply and wastewater collection and treatment. Despite the substantial investments done in the past years, the access to improved water supply, and mainly, the access to improved wastewater collection and treatment is still unquestionably low (IBGE, 2011).Huge investments are also required to improve the quality of service, or the robustness and resiliency of the systems. Lack of continuity, high water losses, untreated and inappropriate drinking water supplied, inefficient and inadequate wastewater treatment are also other troublesome issues which have a tendency to worsen in the future as the focus is centered on the expansion and building of new infrastructure (Marques, 2013a).The most surprising issue is that in Brazil the lack of financial resources is not the bottleneck, like in most countries around the world, despite its great regional heterogeneity. In Oliveira, Scazufca, and Marcato (2011), the authors highlight that the difficulty to carry out water and wastewater projects, and the infrastructure systems’ management, are related to a set of factors. The institutional confusion and the enormous bureaucracy are some of the most important. To deal with this situation, the Federal Government delegated to the Ministry of Cities the development of a national plan, the PLANSAB (Plano Nacional de Saneamento Básico, translated to English as National Plan for Water, Wastewater, Drainage and Urban Waste Sectors), to create an investment forecast by producing guidelines to support sustainable and continuous long run policies (SNSA, 2013a).The PLANSAB refers to the need of investing R$ 304 thousands of millions (Brazilian real), of which R$ 122 thousands of millions relate to water supply and R$ 182 thousands of millions to wastewater collection and treatment in order to achieve a desired universalization in 2030 (99 percent in water supply and 92 percent in wastewater), being the date later postponed to 2033. However, the past investment trends suggest otherwise, raising doubts about the values and deadlines presented. Indeed, if the current status quo remains, this target will not be fulfilled and the cost of universalization will be much higher. Note that the PLANSAB also predicts further relevant investments in drainage and solid waste service, although those services go beyond the scope of this analysis.From the improvement of access to WWS perspective, the problem relies on the assumptions made, what data is considered as a viable input (e.g., the principles that account for improved WWS, the technological options to be adopted). In the related literature, as far as investments needed in low-income countries (Hutton, 2013; Mugisha & Borisova, 2010; OECD, 2011; UNDP, 2006; WHO, 2012) are concerned, many situations adopted (e.g., network solutions vs individual) do not always make sense for Brazil, particularly in the South, Southeastern and Center-Western regions. Note that some individual solutions might be inadequate, since some of them are very rudimentary. That is the reason why these individual solutions should always be under the responsibility (for maintenance purposes) of designated providers. The policy for the water sector (e.g., PLANSAB) does not take into account those principles and, politically speaking, the hypothesis of different solutions for the Brazilians is not well accepted or welcomed. Due to the above mentioned uncertainties, the current paper analyzes the desired service’s expansion, resorting to an Operations Research approach, from the Ministry of Cities point of view, as the supervisor of the water sector sustainable development. In order to achieve that goal, a multi-objective optimization (MOO) model was built, so as to formulate strategies to reach a predefined coverage minimizing time and costs incurred, under specific hard and soft constraints, assembled to deal with important sustainability concepts (e.g., affordability), those types of constraints (i.e., the use of soft and hard constraints) are broadly documented in literature surveys (van den Bergh, Beliën, de Bruecker, Demeulemeester, & de Boeck, 2013; Greenberg, 1995).In this a posteriori approach, the computerized Decision Support System (DSS) aims at finding, or approximating the set of efficient solutions, to deliver a range of desirable options for the Decision Maker (DM) to consider. The use of a reference point method is particularly adequate to deal with this kind of situations by using an achievement scalarizing function to make a projection of the reference point onto the Pareto frontier. Thus, three distinct scaling coefficient vectors for a given reference point were used to build a set of options able to guide the decision making process in this Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA).This method of projecting a given reference point (also labeled as reservation or aspiration points) that represents the objective, criteria or outcome values desired by the DM, onto the set of efficient solutions, has been widely developed; see, for example, Wierzbicki, Makowski, and Wessels (2000). The vast application of this methodology range from its use in discrete multicriteria problems where no function is optimized (Cabello, Ruiz, Pérez-Gladish, & Méndez-Rodríguez, 2014), to MOO reference point based approaches applied in the design of interactive systems for adaptive traffic control (Dujardin, Vanderpooten, & Boillot, 2015), or in determining regional public budget assignments among hospitals (Ruiz, Luque, Miguel, & del Mar Muñoz, 2008). From a different perspective recent cases apply the mentioned methodology with metaheuristic algorithms, see Figueira, Liefooghe, Talbi, and Wierzbicki (2010) for an application on a bi-objective flow-shop scheduling problem using multiple reference points implemented in a parallel evolutionary algorithmic framework. Furthermore, the model was compiled using the IBM ILOG Cplex Optimization Studio v12.6© program, hereafter Cplex. This document is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the Brazilian context, analyzing prior investment trends in the Brazilian water sector so as to devise a scope of action for the posterior sections. Section 3 briefly highlights particular MOO concepts, and Section 4 displays the MOO model built and the results achieved. Finally, Section 5 provides concluding remarks and draws relevant perspectives.In this section, the Brazilian context will be briefly described by stating the current situation and analyzing the investments trend. Thus, the WWS framework and some of its problems will be first discussed. Then, by comparing the investments undertaken with coverage improvements achieved, the scope of action of the model will be outlined.In order to understand the Brazilian status quo, it is necessary to mention that although there is a complete and diversified set of information available, it is sparsely aggregated and the questionnaire methods used have a significant room for improvements (Marques, 2013b, chap. 8) . As for the input needed, they had to be found in different databases belonging to distinct Ministries, namely:1.IBGE – the national statistics, including demographic censusfrom 2000 and 2010, a national search of water and wastewater (PNSB) from 2000 and 2008, a national household search (PNAD) from 2001 to 2011;SNIS – general information on water and wastewater from 2010, from the Ministry of Cities;Sisagua – water quality for human consumption from 2010 to 2012, from the Ministry of Health, and;Sedec – Department of National Defence, from 2007 to 2009, from the Ministry of National Integration.Another important aspect is related to what is considered as an improved service, which is highlighted in Table 1for the WWS. However, this classification is quite demanding, meaning that summarizing improved water supply services to in-house piped connections without interruptions and within quality parametric values, along wastewater collection network services, linked to further treatment facilities, and septic tanks, is quite a golden plate standard for a country as heterogeneous as Brazil. Still, the principles of improved water supply or improved wastewater services adopted in low-income countries may not always make sense for Brazil, at least for some areas, particularly in the South, Southeastern and Center-Western regions. But for most of the other regions they are an inherent reality (SNSA, 2013b).The policy for the water sector (e.g., PLANSAB) does not take into account those principles and, politically speaking, the hypothesis of different solutions for the Brazilians, as referred to, is not welcomed. Indeed, the expansion desired covers mainly network services. The only exception refers to a sparse use of those septic tanks already mentioned. Nonetheless, other individual solutions are widely accepted and should be welcomed (and considered in coverage statistics) as long as the responsibility for their operation and maintenance belongs to designated providers (UNDP, 2011).The urban water sector in Brazil is completely detached from the rural counterpart. The protagonists, including the providers and ministries involved, and even the working rules, are different. The coverage levels presented in Table 2encompass both urban and rural population. However, they will be lower in the rural areas which nowadays correspond to only a 15.6 percent (29,829 of 190,775, in thousands of inhabitants) of the Brazilian population (IBGE, 2012). Some of those rural areas are indeed in a dire situation with poor wastewater services coverage levels, lower than 25 percent.On the one hand, it is arguable to talk about water supply coverage when it involves population served with untreated water or only for a few hours a day or not in a continuous way. There is not a rigorous knowledge about the current performance of the Brazilian water sector and much less of the investments required to reach adequate levels of service. However, the feeling is that it can correspond to several tens of $R thousands of millions. On the other hand, subsidization is still rare and most of the time it does not match the right target, which are the poor. Thus, the water supply coverage does not correspond necessarily to the access that the population has to these essential services. The effective access to WWS is what really matters for people and society or, from a conceptual point of view, for the progress and development of the country (Kauark-Leite, Vinçon-Leite, Deroubaix, Loireau, Silveira, & Haddad, 2008).Furthermore, we should highlight that the definition of coverage used here is related to the number of dwellings and not to the population, thus it is likely that the actual coverage is even a little bit worse, since empty dwellings are more usual in areas with piped water and wastewater services (e.g., seasonal population). Other features that worsen the situation are related to the data referring to piped networks coverage, since it does not take into account the lack of connection to households due to financial or technical difficulties. The wide existence of slums (e.g., favelas, cortiços) also intensifies such problems (Dagdeviren & Robertson, 2011), those subnormal agglomerations, or informal settlements, are characterized by (UN-Habitat, 2003): (a) overcrowding; (b) poor housing conditions, and; (c) inadequate access to improved WWS and other infrastructure services. Still, there are documented attempts to slightly counter those statistical flaws (SNSA, 2011).In light of the dire situation that covers the WWS in Brazil, many institutions compete, in different levels of government, for the responsibilities in the sector and sometimes at the same level as well (Ministry of Health, Ministry of Cities and others) in the different roles performed (e.g., provision, regulation, financing). For the financing role, the institutional confusion is also evident, as there are diverse programmes that confer specific attributions. Table 3 reveals the most important programmes in such area of the WWS domain.Despite this state of affairs, the Ministry of Cities has an important role in the articulation between federal government, states and municipalities, in order to promote a coherent infrastructure funding. The objective is to manage resource allocation in accordance to established priorities and needs, based on performance criteria, to avoid wasting resources and promoting project continuity, intermunicipal cooperation and environmental awareness. Capacity building, poverty eradication and the stimulation of sustainable and continuous long run policies are also important objectives of this Ministry. Pragmatically, the focus is on the financing of WWS, as these utilities are unquestionably critical to poor households.To analyze the current investment forecasts, there is a requirement to understand how investments have developed in the past, mainly who are the protagonists and how they can evolve. The source of investments changed slightly overtime, but since the last national plan in 1971, the main resources have been made available from:•Non-onerous resources – from an annual budgetary law, mainly designated by OGU (Orçamento Geral da União – federal budget);Onerous resources – financing funds like FGTS and Fat (laborer related funds that offer very interesting rates);Onerous resources – international loans from mainly the World Bank (IBRD) and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB);Own resources – from the providers superavits, and;Others – fees from the water resources use (regional level), still just slightly used even if they are paramount for the water basin management system.In the period between 1995 and 2011 (in 2012 prices) most of the investments were applied directly by the water utilities (about 90 percent) and the remaining by the states or by the municipalities. Table 4details their distribution through the 5 macro regions, totalizing $R 120.629,46 (in millions). The average of total investments per year, according to the specified sources, amounts to $R 7.095,85 (in millions).The ambitious targets defined in PLANSAB for the universalization of the WWS in Brazil are, respectively, 99 percent and 92 percent in 2033. These targets correspond to the weighted average between the targets for the rural population and urban population (dwellings/ households). However, in specific situations more options should be considered, besides the main possibility of piped networks, e.g. the use of septic tanks should be further considered as a valid option.Of course, in the estimation of investments a greater productivity could be assumed, but this is not expected since greater volumes of investments in shorter periods lead precisely to the opposite situation, i.e., sliding in the deadlines and costs (waste of resources). Conversely, the investments made for the improvement of quality regarding the services provided are not accounted for. When compared to the equivalent improvement in coverage, the investments showed a largely inefficient trend, as a significant part of them are non-productive (Oliveira et al., 2011). In that same publication the authors illustrate that while there were (and there are, on-going) investments to expand the production capacity, the water losses reached unbearable scores (more than 60 percent of total in some systems) and there are no adequate policies for water conservation (the authors mention that those cases were published in the Ministry of Planning’s website, but they were later removed).This way, it is quite challenging for the Brazilian water utilities to reach the targets established in PLANSAB. In fact, the pace demanded to build the infrastructure is quite unfeasible. Besides, if until now it was not possible to leverage the level of investments and to be more effective, in scaling-up the WWS coverage, the same problems and impediments still remain. History shows that even to reach the committed investments, there is a huge struggle (SNSA, 2013a). In Fig. 1, both investments and coverage development (from the same source) are highlighted for comparison. Note that for the wastewater services, coverage improvements, mainly network services are considered, since individual solutions are usually built at the owners’ (i.e., customer) expenses in doubtful conditions.A different troublesome issue is the amount of investments required. The PLANSAB estimates that to attain the universal service targets, R$ 122 thousands of millions are required for water supply, while wastewater collection and treatment will demand R$ 182 thousands of millions. Moreover, as the coverage level grows, the level of investments required (per percentage of coverage) will rise as well, instead of the uniform ratio used in the PLANSAB. In wastewater the situation is alike, but here the level of coverage does not capture accurately the investments required in the wastewater treatment.In sum, taking into account the past experience and the current status quo, it is not likely that targets defined in PLANSAB related to the universal service (water supply and wastewater) will be fulfilled. Reforms and changes in the Brazilian water sector are required to reverse this situation, the expectation lies in the structuring funds that are further included in the PLANSAB, being paramount to understand to which extent were they accounted for.A general Multi-Objective Optimization Problem (MOOP) can be defined by a set of objective functions f1(x), f2(x), …, fn(x) with n ≥ 2. We will assume without loss of generality that all the objective functions are to be minimized. A vector x = (x1, x2, …, xk) of decision variables, where x ∈ X, X being the set of feasible solutions; and an objective vector z = (z1, z2, …, zn) with z ∈ Z, taking into account a vector functionf:X⟶Z,where Z = f(X) denotes the set of feasible points in the objective (or criterion) spaceRn(Z⊆Rn). Therefore, a MOO problem can be formulated in a compact way as follows (Figueira et al., 2010):(1)minf(x)=(f1,f2,…,fn(x))subjectto:x∈X.Generally, a MOO problem has no single solution, being important to use specific techniques to get several solutions (called efficient or Pareto solutions) of the problem at hand in a suitable duration. Therefore, we use the achievement scalarizing functions, an approach proposed by Wierzbicki (1980), which is specifically appropriate to work with reference points.A reference point gives desirable or acceptable values for each one of the objective functions. These objective values, in general, are called aspiration levels and the resulting objective vector is called a reference point and can be defined either in the feasible or in the infeasible region of the objective space. One of the families of achievement functions can be stated as follows:(2)σ(z,z0,λ,ρ)=maxℓ=1,2,…,n{λℓ(zℓ−zℓ0)}+ρ∑ℓ=1nλℓ(zℓ−zℓ0),where σ is a mapping from Z ontoR,z0=(z10,z20,…,zn0)is a reference point vector, λ = (λ1, λ2, …, λn) is a scaling coefficients vector (weighting coefficients), and ρ is an arbitrary small positive number (0 < ρ ≪ 1). The word family is used here to state that several functions can be built according to the variability of the weighting coefficients and the reference points. Now, the following achievement problem can be built:(3)minσ(z,z0,λ,ρ)subjectto:x∈X.Note that the weighting vectors can be normalized, and the set of all feasible normalized scaling coefficients vectors can be represented as follows:(4)Λ={λ=(λ1,λ2,…,λn)|∑ℓ=1nλℓ=1,λℓ>0,ℓ=1,…,…,n}.Using different λ vectors for the same reference point z0 can lead to different Pareto optimal solutions for the achievement problem defined in 3. Thus, concerning the generation of a reference point, we considered that depending on the formulation used we could acquire different solutions for the same aspiration point (and decision maker). Additionally, we took into account that in further interactions the choice of the reference point would influence the structure of the model, resulting solutions and, perhaps, the behavior of the decision maker (Buchanan & Gardiner, 2003).In this section, we briefly provide a description of the problem in order to present the MOO model (i.e., sets and indices, parameters, decision variables, constraints and objective functions) and the results obtained.With the PLANSAB, the role of the Ministry of Cities as supervisor is paramount, highlighting the demand for a coherent WWS infrastructure funding forecast to reach universalization. Consider the promotion of access (improvement in coverage) to WWS by relying on a logical investment forecast able to take into account the inherent sustainability tradeoffs (economic and social). Due to the reality mentioned in Section 2.1 the prospect service possibilities need to cover specific WWS options. Such reasoning must consider all 27 Brazilian states which enjoy different realities depending on their urban/rural reality features. Likewise, this macro analysis requires to be measured on a timeline. The citizens should have the ability to pay for the service (mostly operating costs). Bearing in mind that both access to WWS and the water disposed/supplied treatment have known benefits for the society (Haller, Hutton, & Bartram, 2007) , the following can be highlighted: time savings due to easier access; gains in productive time and reduced health care costs saved due to less illness, and; prevented deaths. As for the percentage of coverage achieved, it is important to compare it with the most relevant initiatives at the moment. Those include the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), particularly goal 7 target 10 (promoted by the United Nations in 1990) to reduce by 2015 the households that lack such services by half (WHO, 2012), and the targets proposed in PLANSAB. The main data sources are highlighted in Appendix A (Table A.1).Decision maker: Ministry of Cities (federal level).The sets and indices used for•I={1,…,i,…,n¯}is the set of regions;J={1,…,j,…,m¯}is the set of services:–J1⊂J is the set of improved water supply services;J2⊂J is the set of improved wastewater collection network services;J3⊂J is the set of improved wastewater treatment plants for network services;J4⊂J is the set of improved individual (septic tank) services;K={1,…,k,…,ℓ¯}is the set of years;R={1,…,r,…,s¯}is the set of constraints that contribute to a quality solution.The model designed has some parameters that are single values, others vary with the region, the inherent service, or the year itself (projections), as follows:•cijis the the unitary cost (R$ Brazilian real) of providing access to a household with service j in region i, for all i ∈ I, and j ∈ J.wijis the operating cost (R$ Brazilian real) perhousehold in region i for service j, for all i ∈ I, and j ∈ J.zijis the cost (R$ Brazilian real) linked to the lack of service j in region i, for all i ∈ I, and j ∈ J.dikis the disposable income per household (R$ Brazilian real) in region i for year k, for all i ∈ I, and k ∈ K.fkis the maximum level of available investments (R$ Brazilian real), at year k, for all k ∈ K.yij0 is the initial number (k = 0) of households in region i that have service j, for all i ∈ I, and j ∈ J.yij00is the number of households (in the year 1990) in region i that have service j, for all i ∈ I, and j ∈ J.hikis the total number of households in that same region i at the time k, for all i ∈ I, and k ∈ K.hi00is the total number of households (in the year 1990) in that same region i, for all i ∈ I.aiis the area (km2) of region i, for all i ∈ I.p is the affordability threshold that each household can spend of their disposable income on WWS.giis the maximum household density (unity/square kilometer) where is allowed the construction of septic tanks for region i, for all i ∈ I.u1, u2, u3, u4, u5, u6, u7 are coverage ratios that work as a threshold.The decision variables considered were:•xijk∈N0,is the number of households belonging to region i, that will be covered by service j on year k, for all i ∈ I, j ∈ J, and k ∈ K, where:x¯ijk=yij0+∑{ℓ∈K:ℓ⩽k}xijℓ,is the total number of households belonging to region i, that will be covered by service j on year k, for all i ∈ I, j ∈ J, and k ∈ K.tijk∈ {0, 1}, is a binary variable connected with the expansion of households belonging to region i, covered by service j on year k, for all i ∈ I, j ∈ J, and k ∈ K.qikr∈ {0, 1}, is a binary variable that contributes to the quality of the solution by satisfying in region i on year k, the rthsoft constraint, for all i ∈ I, k ∈ K, and r ∈ R.There are several types of constraints:(a)Upper bound on the number of households for water supply(5)x¯ijk⩽hik,i∈I;j∈J1;k∈KUpper bound on the number of households for wastewater collection services(6)∑j∈J2∪J4x¯ijk⩽hik,i∈I;k∈KUpper bound on the number of households for wastewater treatment services(7)x¯ijk⩾x¯imk,i∈I;j∈J2;m∈J3;k∈KWastewater service choice constraints (maximum household density for septic tanks)(8)hikaitijk⩽gi,i∈I;j∈J4;k∈KInvestment constraints(9)∑i∈I∑j∈Jxijkcij⩽fk,k∈KTime binary constraint(10)xijk⩽ntijk,i∈I;j∈J;k∈K;n≫0Achievement of a minimum acceptable coverage level(g1)Improved water supply coverage level(11)x¯ijkhik⩾u1,i∈I;j∈J1;k={20}∈KImproved wastewater collection coverage level(12)∑j∈J2∪J4x¯ijkhik⩾u2,i∈I;k={20}∈KImproved wastewater treatment coverage level(13)∑j∈J3∪J4x¯ijkhik⩾u3,i∈I;k={20}∈KAchievement by 2015 of the WWS MDGs goal 7 target 10(h1)improved water supply coverage level(14)hik−∑j∈J1x¯ijkhi00−∑j∈J1yij00⩽(1+nqikr)u4,i∈I;k={5}∈K;r={1}∈R;n≫0Improved wastewater collection coverage level(15)hik−∑j∈J2∪J4x¯ijkhi00−∑j∈J2∪J4yij00⩽(1+nqikr)u4,i∈I;k={5}∈K;r={2}∈R;n≫0Achievement of a nearly universal coverage level(i1)Improved water supply coverage level(16)x¯ijkhik⩾(1−qikr)u5,i∈I;j∈J1;k={20}∈K;r={3}∈RImproved wastewater collection coverage level(17)∑j∈J2∪J4x¯ijkhik⩾(1−qikr)u6,i∈I;k={20}∈K;r={4}∈RImproved wastewater treatment coverage level(18)∑j∈J3∪J4x¯ijkhik⩾(1−qikr)u7,i∈I;k={20}∈K;r={5}∈RAffordability constraints(19)∑j∈Jtijkwij⩽pdik(1+nqikr),i∈I;k∈K;r={6}∈R;n≫0There are three objective functions:•Cost function (CF)(20)min∑i∈I∑j∈J∑k∈Kxijkcij+∑i∈I∑j∈J1∑k∈K(hik−x¯ijk)zij+∑i∈I∑j∈J2∪J4∑k∈K(hik−x¯ijk)zij+∑i∈I∑j∈J3∪J4∑k∈K(hik−x¯ijk)zijTime function (TF)(21)min∑i∈I∑j∈J∑k∈KtijkQuality function (QF)(22)min∑i∈I∑k∈K∑r∈RqikrThe Combinatorial Optimization Problem (COP) presented throughout Section 4, was successfully solved in Cplex, by using its Mixed Integer-Linear Programming (MILP) optimizer that resorts to Branch-and-Bound (BB) methods.The structure of this COP has its conceptual foundations on the investment trends described in Section 2.2, that is, the minimum coverage considered was calculated based on a slight increasing trend based in historical values. As for the objective functions, each one of them was solved separately in order to achieve optimal solutions for each function, those values were then manipulated to be considered the reference point. Thus, as for the reference point, and since we did not have at this stage any preference information from the DM, we opted to use the ideal point with a small perturbation. This allows to have a far enough reference point to cover the non-dominated region and be able to get any of the non-dominated points.The calculation process of that MOOP is guided by a scalarizing function (augmented weighted Chebyshev function), finding the nondominated solution closest to the ‘ideal’ one through that function. In that calculation process we also normalized the values, as suggested in Figueira et al. (2010); Miettinen and Mäkelä (2002), in order to (approximately) give the same amplitude to each objective function. The process itself can be further used interactively with a DM to improve its role in the decision making situation, perhaps, in a similar process as the one developed by Słowiński, Soniewicki, and Weglarz (1994). Hence, regarding the values of the weighted coefficients, we opted for fixing three different sets of “weights” in order to get diverse non-dominated points.Furthermore, the use of scalarizing achievement functions allows to significantly overcharge the model without a relevant increase in processing time, which is a key feature in the model. Indeed, the average runtimes achieved range from 9 seconds to less than a minute for a model with over 15125 variables and 10175 constraints (Fig. 2). As for the parameters used, Table 5 highlights the most relevant.The authors are aware that affordability measures are not always the best option to infer the righteousness of what the consumers pay. Rather, Willingness To Pay (WTP) is in our point of view, what really matters. However, there are no such relevant studies for Brazil. Still, since we want to depict the impact of those prices on the population in the sense that each marginal service connection is possibly being built to a family that will not be allowed to pay for it, the average disposable income can be a robust indicator (OECD, 2009). Note that cross-subsidies can be considered afterwards, and thus the median or the lowest quartile average are not necessarily a preferred indicator.The most important results achieved with the previous model were the accomplishment of a structured investment plan to regions that need it the most based on the social-economic costs. See, for instance, the way the cost objective function was computed. For the matter, it is also important to mention that if necessary, the timeline could be expanded and the costs needed to reach a targeted coverage (e.g., universalization) could be calculated in a trivial way. The main results are highlighted in Table 6.The feature lack of quality describes the distance required to overcome the status quo, meaning that a solution with a significant lack of quality (e.g., 1350) is clearly a “do nothing” situation, when getting over those constraints, significant improvements are achieved in coverage, affordability and costs avoided. However, the achievement of universalization in WWS is not possible within this model framework as it costs slightly more than what was forecasted. As for the development of WWS coverage Fig. 3 illustrates for the three solutions the difference in improvements in water supply coverage.Fig. 4 highlights for those solutions the difference in wastewater collection coverage improvements.Fig. 5 shows the differences in wastewater treatment coverage improvements.In order to improve the coverage of water supply and wastewater services in Brazil, major bottlenecks will have to be solved. For that purpose, the PLANSAB’s creation will surely bring awareness and cooperation between multiple stakeholders, being important to counter the identified threats, depicted in Section 2. However, the mentioned plan has numerous flaws, (e.g., the reduced options considered to achieve universalization, and the investments needed for the improvement of quality regarding the services provision) which are not accounted for. Indeed, the plan seems to be too straightforward toward the improvement of access to water supply, without taking into much account other important features.We considered the total investments available, granting an important contribution to investment selection. Furthermore, that selection is triggered not only based on the highest contribution to increase coverage, but also on the costs incurred by the lack of service in those areas. The aspects considered were: time savings due to easier access; gains in productive time and reduced health care costs saved due to less illness, and prevented deaths. However, we could have gone further in that analysis by taking into account real estate and tourism improvement valuations, added value due to scholar attendance and further raises in income received, but although those have an impact on the population they can be considered as less significant benefits. Nonetheless, in a local analysis they should probably be assessed (Larson, Minten, & Razafindralambo, 2006). Those concepts, mainly used in some cost-benefit analysis (Hutton, Haller, & Bartram, 2007), are valuable principles that can be used with a MOO approach giving a sound basis to the model.Additionally, there is the need to highlight that if counting with the needed infrastructure replacement costs, they would likely be, at least, half of the total costs previously calculated. However, the dispersed origin of the data used and the adaptions made to the model emphasize that care should be taken in developing farfetched conclusions, but by no means do they raise any doubt concerning the model itself.At the end, the model features a macro analysis (covering the whole country) and for the sake of simplicity we chose to highlight the model per se instead of a full developed approach (by considering the municipalities as the regions dimension). Nevertheless, a more locally detailed analysis can also be performed with this model granting, perhaps, a possibility to further design environmental concerns and to include important topics as the variation in leakage/consumption and the operating costs. From that perspective we highlight that with this technique along with the reference points we can, in a future research work, design an interactive reference point based procedure for helping the DM to obtain the most interesting solutions for him/her. An interesting possibility would be an interactive approach based on Ruiz, Saborido, and Luque (2014), where an achievement scalarizing function is used framed in an evolutionary algorithmic framework. The mentioned methodology classifies individuals at each generation according to the values that each solution takes from the reference point and different weighting coefficient vectors, allowing to approximate the part of the Pareto front that can be projected from a reference point, identifying all the different solutions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
