@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance replication of the Spot Energy Index with optimal equity portfolio selection: Evidence from the UK, US and Brazilian markets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Index-tracking problem for a spot energy index.Application of evolutionary algorithms by investing in stock portfolios.Rebalancing trading strategies outperform the buy and hold strategy.Increasing the rebalancing frequency only has marginal effects.Investment strategies are less risky, efficient, and cost-effective.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Energy markets,International equities,International investment,Index tracking,Evolutionary algorithms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper reproduces the performance of a geometric average Spot Energy Index by investing only in a subset of stocks from the Dow Jones Composite Average, the FTSE 100 and Bovespa Composite indexes, and in two pools that include only energy-sector stocks from the US and the UK respectively. Daily data are used and the index-tracking problem for passive investment is addressed with two evolutionary algorithms – the differential evolution algorithm and the genetic algorithm. The performance of the suggested investment strategy is tested under three different scenarios: buy-and-hold, quarterly and monthly rebalancing, accounting for transaction costs where necessary.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sixty years have passed since the pioneering publication of Harry Markowitz in the Journal of Finance (Markowitz, 1952), which laid the foundations of Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT). Until today, there is a plethora of financial models being developed which are based on the very same principles of the MPT for optimal portfolio construction, asset allocation, utility maximization, and investment diversification. As Fabozzi, Gupta, and Markowitz (2002) point out there have been numerous applications that have directly or indirectly resulted as an outcome of the MPT; among them tracking error budgeting, index and mutual funds, as well as diversification and asset allocation among different asset classes, the latter being the focus of this paper.It is well-documented in the literature that investors can benefit from getting exposure in commodities as part of their long-term asset allocation plan. Over the past decade, impressive gains have been witnessed in commodity prices, with this pattern recently accelerating. The aforementioned trend, along with empirical evidence supporting the idea that passive strategies are better than active ones (see Barber & Odean, 2000; Konno & Hatagi, 2005; Malkiel, 1995; Sharpe, 1992; among others), especially in the longer term, have made passive strategies increasingly popular. One of the most popular forms of passive trading strategies is index tracking (Beasley, Meade, & Chang, 2003), a method that attempts to replicate/reproduce the performance of an index. This has attracted investors’ attention and led to a considerable growth of index investing in the commodity markets. In general, there are three major ways of investing in a commodity index: first, by choosing an index and replicating it by following the related Rule Book; second, by investing in a fund that replicates the chosen index; and finally, in what is currently the most popular approach, by buying shares of an Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) whose strategy is to follow the respective commodity index. This trend has been recognized by investors, and prompted the set-up of the first commodity ETF in November 2004.1The first listed commodity ETF was the streetTRACKS Gold Shares ETF, with its sole assets being gold bullion and, from time to time, cash. As of January 2010, the market capitalization of that first commodity ETF exceeded $39billion US dollars, competing with numerous other commodity-related ETFs established since then, investing in physical commodities, futures, and commodity-related equities.1Based on the principles of MPT, the aim of this paper is to replicate the unique price/return behavior of direct-energy commodity investment by selecting optimal equity portfolios. The proposed approach is based on previous research findings that discovered that, in the case of equally weighted long-only portfolios of commodity futures with a changing composition over the studied period, the statistically significant returns are similar to those of stocks (Bodie & Rosansky, 1980; Fama & French, 1987; Gorton & Rouwenhorst, 2006). In addition, it is documented in the literature that after the 2000s, commodities went through a financialization process, exposing them to wider financial shocks (Tang & Xiong, 2010).Nonetheless, the question of whether returns on equity portfolios can be used to replicate the performance of physical-energy price returns, aggregated in a portfolio and proxied by a spot index, has received little attention in the existing literature. This paper is accomplishing the latter by proposing a new approach; that of reproducing the performance of a geometric average Spot Energy Index (SEI) by investing only in a subset of stocks from various equity pools. For the purposes of this study, the Dow Jones Composite Average, the FTSE 100 and Bovespa Composite indexes, and two pools that include only energy-sector stocks from the US and the UK respectively, are used. Daily data are analyzed and the index-tracking problem is addressed by two evolutionary algorithms – the differential evolution algorithm (DEA) and the genetic algorithm (GA). The performance of the resulting investment strategy is tested under three different scenarios: buy-and-hold, quarterly, and monthly rebalancing, after accounting for transaction costs in all cases.The main contribution of this paper to the literature is that investors are provided with the opportunity to select portfolios of equities, picked from their domestic equity market – that may appeal more to their investing criteria/preferences – which are able to track the spot energy markets. The latter is proxied by a stable benchmark, namely the Spot Energy Index (SEI). Hence, the proposed methodology allows investors to be more comfortable with their investment selection, which follows the minimization of a pre-determined risk-return trade-off, and also take into account any domestic stock market constraints. Second, this is the first time that a broad energy index incorporates electricity market prices in its calculation. This makes the SEI more suitable for replicating the energy sector price dynamics as it represents the full spectrum of energy commodities and their by-products, and not just the commonly used crude oil and its refined fuels. Finally, the price behavior of direct energy commodity investment is being replicated using equities, by applying both the DEA and GA in this specific index-tracking problem.The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review on energy commodity investing and the relationship between commodities and equities. In Section 3, the problem formulation is described, and the two evolutionary algorithms (DEA and GA) are explained. Section 4 gives an explanation of the constructed SEI and the data used in the analysis. Section 5 offers the empirical results of the study and, finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.In recent years there have been an increasing number of direct-energy commodity-based products available to investors, such as the respective energy futures contracts that require constant active management, and the energy commodity indexes. There is a large number of mutual funds, hedge funds, Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs), Exchange Traded Notes (ETNs) and OTC return swaps that follow the energy sector through index investing; there are various types of these Energy Index Funds, based either on the construction type of the fund (single- or multi-contract, long-only or bearish2Bearish Energy Index Funds have the same structure as bullish (long-only) funds, with the major difference that investors are not only allowed to buy the fund, but also to put on a short position (sell the fund).2), or on the energy sector it tracks (broad energy or sector-specific).In the US alone, assets allocated to commodity index strategies via futures contracts have risen from $13billion in 2003 to $260billion as of March 2008, with an estimated 70% of these funds invested in the energy sector (Hamilton, 2009). Of the total commodity index investment in the US exchanges, about 42% is conducted by institutional investors (pension and endowment funds), 25% by retail investors (ETFs, ETNs and similar exchange-traded products), 24% by index funds (a client/counterparty with a fiduciary obligation to match or track the performance of a commodity index), and 9% by sovereign wealth funds (CFTC, 2008).Nonetheless, there are several risks and disadvantages associated with futures-based commodity indexes. In the case of a futures index, unlike a passive equity portfolio which entitles the holder to a continuing stake in a company, contracts specify a certain date for the delivery of the physical commodity. In order to avoid the delivery process and maintain a long futures position, a passive futures portfolio requires regular transactions; nearby contracts must be sold and contracts with later deliveries must be purchased. This process is referred to as “rolling”. The difference between the prices of the two contracts – the nearby and the more distant-delivery one – is called the “roll yield”. Even though the term structure of commodity prices has historically been an important driver of realized commodity futures’ excess returns, there is no guarantee that the term structure will remain the same in the future. Also, there is a possibility that the futures term structure of an individual commodity may be, on average, in backwardation,3When a futures contract’s price is at a discount (premium) to the spot price of the underlying, the resulting shape of the futures curve is in backwardation (contango). Towards the expiration of a futures contract, when futures markets are in backwardation, it converges or “rolls up” to the spot price. This price difference is the roll yield that investors can capture when commodities futures markets are in backwardation. However, when futures markets are in contango the reverse occurs, with investors making losses from the futures contracts that converge to a lower price. The levels of contango and backwardation can swing drastically both in terms of magnitude and sign, making the term structure of commodity futures contracts the main driver of the return differences among commodity futures.3yet the particular contract that an index mechanically rolls into might be in contango. Commodity markets in contango could result in negative roll yields that would adversely affect the value of the futures index.Furthermore, although most of the energy commodities have liquid futures contracts with monthly expiration, there are some that expire less-frequently; rolling forward can thus be more costly due to higher bid-ask spreads, and exposed to longer duration and smaller liquidity of the respective futures contracts. Moreover, Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) find that commodity futures contracts become illiquid in the delivery month, as most traders avoid delivery of the physical commodities. Another major disadvantage is the explicit rolling procedure that needs to be used when tracking a commodity futures index. Any transparent index publishes the specific rules of rebalancing, making them available to all market participants. This means that other traders and speculators can take advantage of the known future transactions mandated by those rules. Under the prevailing trend of these index funds constantly to grow in size, they will only become more vulnerable to such trading exploitation. Another issue that complicates the historical analysis of commodity futures index returns is the lack of a universal way to define their composition, as they cannot have a market-capitalization-based portfolio-weighting scheme; this is because at any time, the value of all open long-futures contracts is offset by the value of the open short-futures contracts (Black, 1976).Moreover, in the past few years, speculation in the commodities markets has been at the centre of a heated debate within industry and policy circles, centring on whether speculation is the driver of excessive price increases, and the resulted excessive price volatility, in the energy and food markets; this is mostly attributed to increased volume on the buy side of futures contracts to support index investing. Following these debates, there have been increasing calls for a more stringent supervision of the energy markets, and in particular of their paper markets, from both the industry’s bodies as well as various national governments.Research evidence suggests that before the 2000s, commodity indexes had negative correlation with equities, e.g., Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006), and Erb and Harvey (2006). However, after the 2000s, commodities were heavily promoted as a new asset class, with various instruments based on commodity indexes attracting billions of dollars from wealthy individuals and institutions, resulting in a financialization process that exposed commodities to the wider shocks of financial markets, as shown in Tang and Xiong (2010). These last authors also find that this exposure gradually increased, especially after 2004, with the spillover effects of the recent financial crisis contributing to the subsequent large increase in commodity price volatility. Equities and other financial assets mainly derive their value from future cash flows, whereas commodities, being real assets, derive their value from physical supply-and-demand conditions. Despite this fundamental difference between equities and commodities, the need for commodity producers and consumers to share price risk with the broader investment community was the main driver behind the integration of commodities and financial markets.Investing in commodity-related4Commodity-related equities are the securities of those companies that are mainly engaged in the production and distribution of commodities and commodities-related products, the so-called pure-play companies.4equities is considered the best alternative for avoiding some of the previously outlined inefficiencies of futures returns, as they can play a crucial part in providing exposure to the commodity markets. It is generally accepted that commodity equities are not too far removed from the actual commodity, as the value of a commodity company is directly tied to the value of the commodities it produces/trades. Moreover, there are plenty of strategies, and their related opportunities, connected to energy production, distribution, and trade finance that are not directly available to futures investors, irrespective of whether their approach is passive or active. These opportunities are only available to investors via the equities markets, as part of the respective companies’ valuation. In general, any increase in the underlying commodity price should result in an increase in the company’s earnings, leading into an increase in shareholder value, which in turn is reflected in the share price. Most of the above-mentioned risks and disruptions can be avoided when following the investment strategy proposed in this paper by using as a performance benchmark for the energy markets the SEI, which allows investors to get closer to the underlying commodity price trends by investing in the selected equity portfolios. Investors can then optimally select their portfolios for tracking the SEI without spending time, effort, and money trying to identify which stocks can simultaneously act as a profitable investment and a good commodity play.Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) have been applied to numerous optimization problems in business, engineering, and cognitive and applied sciences (Goldberg, 1989). More specifically, since the 1980s, a rapid expansion of their practical and theoretical financial applications has been witnessed. Some of the applications include portfolio optimization (Lorashi and Tettamanzi, 1996; Beasley et al., 2003; Chang, Yang, & Chang, 2009), insurance risk assessment (Hughes, 1990), technical trading rules and market timing strategies (Allen & Karjalainen, 1999; Bauer, 1994; Neely, Weller, & Dittmar, 1997), and time series forecasting and econometric estimation (Dorsey & Mayer, 1995; Leinweber & Arnott, 1995). Primarily, there are three paradigms that can be identified as different techniques that belong to the family of EAs; these are the Genetic Algorithms (Holland, 1962, 1975), Genetic Programming (Koza, 1992, 1994), and Evolutionary Programming (Fogel, Owens, & Walsh, 1996).In the context of this study, the Differential Evolution Algorithm (DEA) and a Genetic Algorithm (GA) are employed for optimally replicating the proposed Spot Energy Index (SEI). Both algorithms are well established in the computational intelligence literature, easy to implement and (as the above brief literature overview indicates) well suited for complex financial optimization problems, particularly in the context of index tracking and constrained portfolio optimization. The consideration of both algorithms enables the examination of the robustness of the results under different solution approaches.To test the performance of the proposed heuristic, three different scenarios are examined. In the first one, both algorithms are tested without rebalancing the tracking portfolios for the out-of-sample period; in the second scenario, the portfolios are rebalanced quarterly; and finally, in the third scenario, the portfolios are rebalanced on a monthly basis. In both cases of rebalancing, transaction costs (0.5% per transaction) are taken into consideration. For each case examined, N number of stocks is held within the in-sample time period [1,2,…,T] that the price of the index is being tracked. The goal is to create tracking portfolios consisting of maximum K stocks (K<N), and to replicate the tracked index during the out-of-sample period [T, T+Δt]. The tracking portfolios are created based on the stocks that the algorithms choose, always using the available data from the in-sample period. To decide which stocks will form the tracking portfolio, two main objectives are employed: the tracking error and the excess return.The tracking error (TE) is measured through the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) as expressed by the following equation:(1)TE=RMSE=∑t=1T(rt-Rt)2Twhere rtand Rtare the returns for the tracking portfolio and the index respectively. Portfolios’ returns are adjusted for transaction costs when rebalancing occurs. The RMSE criterion is used as, according to Beasley et al. (2003), it is one of the most effective measurements for addressing this type of index-tracking problems. Using only the variance of {(rt−Rt)|t=1,… ,T} as a tracking error measure (see Connor & Leland, 1995; Franks, 1992; Larsen & Resnick, 1998; Rohweder, 1998) could potentially lead to erroneous results, as the tracking portfolios would constantly underperform the index because they would ignore the proportion (rt−Rt). For example, let M>0 be a constant; when rt=Rt–M ∀t the tracking portfolio has a zero tracking error, but will always underperform the benchmark index.The mean Excess Return (ER) over the benchmark index is defined as follows:(2)ER=∑t=1T(rt-Rt)TLet PiTdenote the price of stock i at time T, C the available capital, and withe weight of each stock that participates in the tracking portfolio. The complete formulation of the objectives and constraints used to solve the index tracking problem is the following:(3)Minimize:λ×RMSE-(1-λ)×ER(4)Under the constraints:∑i=1NPiTwi=C(5)ziεC⩽PiTwi⩽ziC∀=1,…,N;ε⩾0.05*C(6)∑i=1Nzi⩽Kwi⩾0,zi∈{0,1}∀i=1,….,Nwhereλ(0⩽λ⩽1)is a constant controlling for the trade-off between tracking error and excess return. In case λ=1, the tracking portfolio has as its main objective minimization of the tracking error (pure index tracking), whereas when λ=0, the portfolio’s main goal is to maximize the excess return. The first constraint ensures that the value of the portfolio at the end of the in-sample period will be equal to the capital available to the investor, C. Using the rolling window method, the same rule applies for every rebalancing period. The last two constraints relate to the weights and total number of each participating stock in the portfolio; variable ε represents the minimum weight of each stock set at 5% of the available capital,5Parameter ε is used to impose a lower bound on the proportion of the capital invested in each stock; mainly in an effort to minimize transaction costs by limiting the number of buy and sell transactions on every rebalancing period.5and variable z is a decision variable which takes the value one (zero) when a stock is (is not) included in the basket. Finally, it is assumed that all portfolios are long-only and also fully invested.As mentioned above, evolutionary algorithms have become particularly popular in solving complex combinatorial problems, such as the optimization model (3)–(6), which are difficult to solve with analytical techniques. The most popular technique in evolutionary computation research is the Genetic Algorithm (GA). A GA implements stochastic search schemes to evolve an initial population (set) of solutions through selection, mutation and crossover operators until a good solution is reached. See Appendix A.1 for a more detailed explanation of the GA operators.DEA, on the other hand, is one of the latest heuristic approaches that also belongs to the family of Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) and has been developed by Storn and Price (1995) for solving nonlinear and non-differentiable continuous space functions. DEA is a stochastic optimization method which can minimize a function capable of modelling the problem’s objectives, while at the same time incorporating all necessary solution constraints. More specifically, DEA has the following advantages over rival approaches: fast convergence; use of few control parameters; ability to find the true global minimum irrespective of the initial parameter values; robustness; and ease of use (Storn & Price, 1997).What is more, DEA’s claimed advantages are apparent when it is applied to the index-tracking problem. Maringer and Oyewumi (2007) show evidence for the latter from the Dow Jones Industrial Average by analyzing the financial implication of cardinality constraints for tracking portfolios when using a subset of its components. DEA does not use binary encoding or a probability density function to self-adapt its parameters as a simple EA; there are, however, modified GAs that use real-number representation, similar to the one used in this paper. The DEA has also been used in other recent studies using hybrid and multi-objective schemes (Krink, Mittnik, & Paterlini, 2009; Krink & Paterlini, 2011), as well as in the context of loss aversion (Maringer, 2008) and mutual fund replication (Zhang & Maringer, 2010). Other recently proposed algorithmic procedures include immune systems (Li, Sun, & Bao, 2011), hybrid algorithms (Ruiz-Torrubiano & Suárez, 2009), robust optimization (Chen & Kwon, 2012), and mixed-integer programming formulations (Canakgoz & Beasley, 2008; Stoyan & Kwon, 2010).There are various approaches in respect to the way mutation is computed and to the type of recombination operator used to solve the global optimization problem (Storn & Price, 1997). In this paper, the “DE/rand-to-best/1/exp” variant is used, where “rand-to-best” indicates that the population vectors are selected to compute the mutation values that lie on the line defined by the randomly generated and the best-so-far vectors; “1” is the number of pairs of solutions chosen (how many vector differences contribute to the differential); and finally, “exp” means that an exponential crossover scheme is used. Instead of the basic version of the DEA, this scheme is used in this paper because it enhances the greediness of the algorithm by incorporating the current best vector into the scheme.6By enhancing the greediness of the algorithm we are allowing for potentially improved performance of our tracking portfolios compared to the benchmark index, while at the same time focusing on the primary goal of performing at least as good as the benchmark index.6See Appendix A.2 for a more detailed explanation of the DEA operators.Both algorithms are implemented with a real-valued solution representation scheme. In particular, each solution is represented by a real-valued vectorx∈RN, where N is the number of stocks in the sample. The K largest positive elements of x are used to identify the stocks comprising the tracking portfolio,7If the number of positive elements of x is smaller than K, then all positive elements of x are used.7and after normalization (to sum up to 1) they define the corresponding stock weights (w1,… ,wN). The number of units bought from each stock can then be specified as xi=Cwi/PiT. The parameters of the algorithms were calibrated after experimentation in order to achieve a good balance between the quality of the results and the solution times. The following table (Table 1) summarizes the selected parameters for both the GA and the DEA.Because a number of commodities lack centralized trading, the most reliable spot prices are for those that trade active and liquid futures contracts, since these are typically used as a pricing benchmark. In the case of energy commodities, the NYMEX is the world’s largest futures exchange. Following Nomikos and Andriosopoulos (2012) who investigate the behavior of spot prices in eight energy markets that trade futures contracts on NYMEX, a spot-price energy index is constructed, constituting daily prices of the following six energy commodities:1.Heating Oil, New York Harbor No. 2 Fuel Oil, quoted in US Dollar Cents/Gallon.Crude Oil, West Texas Intermediate (WTI) Spot Cushing, quoted in US Dollars/Barrel.Gasoline, New York Harbor Reformulated Blendstock for Oxygen Blending (RBOB), quoted in US Cents/Gallon.Natural Gas, Henry Hub, quoted in US Dollars/Million British Thermal Units.Propane, Mont Belvieu Texas, quoted in US Cents/Gallon.PJM, Interconnection Electricity Firm on Peak Price Index, quoted in US Dollars/Megawatt hour.The Spot Energy Index (SEI) is constructed as an unweighted geometric average of the individual commodity ratios of current prices to the base period prices, set daily at January 31, 2006 until February 1, 2010. The base date for the SEI refers to the date of the equity sample. Considering that the boom in commodity index investing is a relatively new phenomenon, recent data are utilized to test the proposed investment strategy. The index’s construction methodology is similar to that of the world-renowned CRB Spot Commodity Index. The SEI is designed to offer a timely and accurate representation of a long-only investment in energy commodities using a transparent and disciplined calculation.Geometric averaging provides a broad-based exposure to the six energy commodities, since no single commodity dominates the index. It also helps increase the index diversification by giving even to the smallest commodity within the basket a reasonably significant weight. This avoids the errors to which other types of indexes are subject, like potential errors in data sources for production, consumption, liquidity, or other errors that could affect the component weights of the index. Furthermore, through geometric averaging the SEI is continuously rebalanced, which means that the index constantly decreases (increases) its exposure to the commodity markets that gain (decline) in value, thus avoiding the domination of extreme price movements of individual commodities.8When a constituent commodity increases in value, and thus captures a greater percentage of the index’s value, the following day the index will rebalance and will reduce its share of that market so that it will be constantly equally weighted by all six constituent commodities.8As Erb and Harvey (2006) point out, the indexes that rebalance annually eventually become trend-followers because commodity price-movements constantly change the weightings, whereas those that rebalance daily stay closer to the original intent of the index.The mathematical specification used to calculate the geometric average Spot Energy Index (SEI) is the following:(7)SEIt=∏i=1iPtiP0i1n×100=Pt1P01×Pt2P02×⋯PtiP0in×100;i=1,2,…6;n=6where SEItis the index for any given day, i represents each one of the six commodities comprising the index,Ptiis the price of each commodity for any given day, andPoiis the price of each commodity in the base period.The SEI provides a stable benchmark so that end-users can be confident that historical performance data is based on a structure that resembles both the current and future composition of the index, making SEI suitable for institutional investment strategies. The continuously equal weighing of the index is an important element, because when the composition of an index changes over time, the average return of the index does not equal the return of the average index constituent. The latter makes historical index performance a bad proxy to prospective index returns, thus distorting the information that investors seek (Erb & Harvey, 2006). Moreover, it is a better tool for evaluating the movement in energy commodity prices because it is based on spot prices and not on futures, which are subject to contango and backwardation. Both private and institutional investors can use the SEI as an investment benchmark for actively or passively managed portfolios that would track its performance. In addition, there could be numerous other ways to invest in the SEI, such as OTC swaps, structured notes, or products offered by third-party asset managers that provide energy-commodity exposure benchmarked on the index.As far as the equity data sample is concerned, it includes daily prices for stocks picked from the Dow Jones Composite Average, FTSE 100, and Bovespa Composite9Recent reforms and regulations in Brazil brought transparency, sophistication, and additional liquidity to its financial markets, which among other developments, since 2008 led to a strategic partnership between the CME Group and the BM&F Bovespa Exchanges. It is this reliability in the Brazilian stock market data that led to the selection of this market for testing and implementing the proposed investment strategy. In addition, while recently many developed countries have sputtered amid weak economic growth, Brazil has continued to thrive, given its rich reserve of natural resources and growing middle class, now standing as the fifth-largest economy in the world.9indexes. The SEI is also tracked with portfolios that include stocks from a unique pool of energy-related stocks from the US and the UK markets, respectively. These two energy-related equity pools are used because, according to Scholtens and Wang (2008), oil-related firms’ earnings are more likely to be affected by changes in oil prices, as explained by the highly significant estimated coefficients of the earnings-to-price-factor returns for their total oil firms’ sample. Employing a multi-factor APT model, Al-Mudhaf and Goodwin (1993) find that oil price changes in a period surrounding the 1973 oil shock can explain the return differences in 29 US oil companies that they examine.The selection of the equities included in the two pools is made according to the Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB) jointly developed by Dow Jones and FTSE. In the sample used, the two energy-related filtered pools include all stocks from the US and UK stock markets (named US Filter and UK Filter, respectively) that are engaged in the various phases of energy production and processing, listed in the following four sectors: (1) Oil and Gas Producers; (2) Oil Equipment, Services and Distribution; (3) Alternative Energy; and (4) Electricity.To test the proposed heuristic approach and the efficiency of both the DE and the GA as index-tracking methodologies, five data sets are selected. All stock prices are closing prices adjusted for capital gains according to the annualized dividend yield, and all are obtained on a daily basis for the period January 31, 2006 to February 1, 2010 from Thomson Financial Datastream. All stock prices are in US dollars, thus reflecting in the applicable cases the local currency exchange rate against the USD at every point for the period examined. Should a company cease trading due to an event (merger, bankruptcy, etc.) within the test period, it is dropped from the sample; that is why the total number of stocks in the FTSE 100 and Bovespa pools is less than the total number of stocks included in each index. Moreover, after adjusting for all US and UK statutory holidays, 1,008 observations are sorted to calculate daily returns for each stock; in the case of the Bovespa Composite stock prices, the data are adjusted separately for all Brazilian holidays as there are major differences between the local calendar and the US and UK ones. Considering 252 trading days in a calendar year, the heuristic approach is tested under various assumptions by selecting the first year as the in-sample period and the last three years as the out-of-sample period.10The base date remains the same for each subsequent optimization model used in our heuristic approach.10The final five data sets have the following number of stocks: N=41 (UK Filter), N=53 (Bovespa Composite), N=65 (Dow Jones Composite Average), N=77 (US Filter), and N=97 (FTSE 100 Index).By tracking the performance of the energy sector with the selected stocks, a cost-effective implementation and true investability are promoted for the popular segment of energy-style investors, as they can get closer to the underlying commodity-market price trends, something they cannot achieve using a futures price index. Historically, futures-index returns have lagged behind price-index returns, with this decoupling of performance being a constant frustration for index investors. For comparisons, in Fig. 1, the performance of two well-established energy excess return indexes, namely the Dow Jones–UBS Energy Sub-Index and the Rogers Energy Commodity Index, is reported against the performance of the constructed SEI and four financial indexes; the S&P 500 Composite, the Dow Jones Composite Average, FTSE 100, and Bovespa Composite.When global markets entered the recent global economic recession towards the end of 2007, a big price correction in both equities and commodities markets followed. It is observed that energy commodities delivered higher returns for about one year, until the end of 2008, proving to be a better investment during the recession period.11This observation aligns with Weiser (2003), who concludes from a study of the period 1970–2003 that commodity futures perform well in the early stages of a recession, when stocks usually tend to disappoint.11Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) also find that during late-expansion and early-recession periods of the business cycle, commodity returns are generally above their average, outperforming stocks and bonds, which are generally below their average. These points prove that there is huge potential for various timing and index-tracking strategies, such as the one proposed in this paper, to be applied to energy commodities markets and deliver superior returns to investors. In addition, the financial indexes from the US and UK equity markets are not capable of following the upward trend of energy commodities, with the exception of the Bovespa index, which follows rather closely the high commodities’ returns during the recession period; it had a faster rebound during the last year, outperforming all other equity and commodity indexes. This reflects the unique significance of Brazil to the global energy scene, and thus justifies the inclusion in this paper of stocks from the Bovespa pool to track the performance of the SEI.After developing an investable model for seeking returns comparable to the SEI, the performance characteristics of the proposed strategy are examined. The stocks picked by both the DEA and the GA from the available stock pools are used to track the performance of the SEI. The initial capital of the investment portfolio is set equal to C=$100,000, where both the DEA and the GA converge at the end of the in-sample period. In the empirical analysis, tracking portfolios consisting of maximum K stocks are used with K=10, 15, and 20.12This aligns with the findings of Chang et al. (2009) that investors should include in their tracking portfolios about one-third of the total assets included in the search space, since those tracking portfolios that included more assets constantly underperformed. In another study, Maringer and Oyewumi (2007) show that including roughly 50% of the available assets is satisfactory enough to get the desirable properties in the tracking portfolios.12Three different trade-offs between tracking error and excess return are also considered, with λ=0.6, 0.8, and 1; thus, moving from maximizing excess return to minimizing tracking error. The heuristic is then repeated ten times with the same set of parameters per run, from which the best solution is chosen.Fig. 2displays the SEI against quarterly rebalanced portfolios selected from the DEA and GA respectively. The portfolios consist of a maximum of 15 stocks, the FTSE 100, DJIA, Bovespa, and UK Filter and US Filter respectively; results are shown for λ=0.8. Looking at the figures, it is clear that during and towards the end of the recession period, the benchmark index can be best tracked with the Bovespa baskets, followed by the UK Filter baskets; whereas during the last year (2010) it is the US Filter and DJIA baskets that perform better. The portfolios comprised of optimally selected energy-related stocks can successfully track the SEI, generating similar returns for most of the out-of-sample period. This is in line with Hammoudeh, Dibooglu, and Aleisa (2004), who conclude that WTI spot prices and their respective NYMEX future prices explain the stock price movement of oil-related firms, with the spot and futures prices volatility having a volatility-echoing effect on the respective stock prices. However, there are contradictory views in the literature, as Schneeweis and Spurgin (1997) conclude that direct stock and bond investment cannot provide consistent risk/return attributes similar to various commodity and managed-futures indexes.In this study, the US Filter and UK Filter results verify that when energy-related stocks are selected, they can better replicate the risk and return trade-off of the SEI. The same applies for the Bovespa baskets, since the Brazilian stock exchange has a large number of energy- and commodity-related listed companies that would closely follow any developments in the international energy markets. In addition, between the DEA and GA selected portfolios, from the graphs it seems that the latter ones can follow more closely the performance of the SEI, achieving highest excess returns for the final out-of-sample year.Table 2presents the root mean squared errors and the mean excess returns of both the Genetic and Differential Evolution algorithms employed, under all three rebalancing strategies – buy-and-hold, monthly, and quarterly rebalancing. Using formal statistical evaluation criteria, the better tracking performance of the UK Filter and US Filter baskets is also confirmed. In terms of the competing portfolios, when comparing RMSEs, the DEA is more consistent across the various portfolios, whereas the GA selects portfolios that exhibit larger differences between the worst- and best-performing ones. Additionally, in general, GA tends to select portfolios that have lower tracking errors and thus track better the benchmark index when compared to the ones selected from the DEA. Another interesting observation is that, although the RMSEs are improved when rebalancing occurs, increasing the frequency from quarterly to monthly has only a marginal effect. These results are more profound for the portfolios selected by the DEA, and align with Dunis and Ho (2005), who find that, when comparing alternative rebalancing frequencies, a quarterly portfolio update is preferable to monthly, semi-annual or annual reallocations. In terms of their excess returns, in most cases, the portfolios selected by the GA tend to outperform the ones selected by the DEA. The UK Filter and US Filter baskets, which also have the lowest tracking errors (see panels D and E), have excess returns that in some cases are positive, indicating that the selected portfolios, on average, over the out-of-sample period, outperform the SEI. In the case of the US Filter baskets selected by the GA, the index is constantly outperformed in terms of excess returns (8.10% for K=20 and λ=0.6 under monthly rebalancing, and 6.14% for K=15 and λ=0.6 under quarterly rebalancing); there is only one exception for both rebalancing frequencies, in which λ=1 and K=10 when the portfolios under-perform the index. This is an indication that the trade-off criterion does work, and leads to portfolios that compromise any excess return over a better tracking performance as expressed by the smaller RMSEs. Thus, taking into account the fact that commodity indexes performed better compared to the financial indexes over the three-year out-of-sample period (except the Bovespa Composite, see Fig. 2), with the methodology employed the performance of the SEI is closely replicated, and in the case of the energy-related stock portfolios, the benchmark index is even outperformed.In terms of the risk/return trade-off (λ), it is observed that results are very similar among portfolios where λ=0.8 and 1. In most cases, the risk/return trade-off criterion tends to perform well, selecting portfolios with higher returns and also relatively higher RMSEs. Moreover, the portfolios selected by the GA tend to be more consistent when the risk/return trade-off rule is applied, compared to the ones selected by the DEA. Overall, when considering both the tracking performance and the excess returns of the various portfolios, those with λ=0.8 should be preferred.As far as the criterion regarding the maximum number of stocks is concerned, in all three rebalancing scenarios, portfolios with K=10 tend to perform worst in terms of RMSEs, but they do slightly better in terms of excess returns, for both the DEA and GA selected portfolios. This is also an indication that the more stocks that are included in the portfolio, the higher the transaction costs when a rebalancing occurs. Overall, it is suggested that portfolios with a maximum of 15 stocks should be selected, as there still seems to be a valuable compensation for the additional information and diversification when rebalancing, against the extra rebalancing costs.According to the results, for both algorithms, monthly rebalancing is, overall, the best option in terms of RMSEs, closely followed by quarterly rebalancing; whereas when looking at excess returns, quarterly rebalancing appears to improve portfolio performance. The return of a buy-and-hold portfolio may be higher than that of a rebalanced portfolio when transaction costs are considered, but it is important to determine the source of the higher return – whether it is greater capital efficiency as expressed by a higher Sharp or Information ratio, or greater risk. Plaxco and Arnott (2002) showed that rebalanced portfolios typically have higher Sharpe ratios than buy-and-hold portfolios, a finding that suggests that the possible outperformance of a buy-and-hold portfolio may be the result of greater risk. Results are more apparent for the GA portfolios, as for the DEA portfolios the difference between monthly and quarterly rebalancing is only marginal. In the case of the UK Filter basket, picked by the GA, there is an obvious difference in performance when rebalancing quarterly as opposed to monthly rebalancing. A more in-depth analysis comparing the portfolios’ information ratios is presented in the following section.On average, based on the results from Table 2, K=15 and λ=0.8 is the most desirable combination providing the best results for most tracking portfolios. It is, of course, up to the investors’ risk/return appetite to decide whether rebalancing the portfolio quarterly, which comes with an extra cost, it is better than no rebalancing at all. The same applies regarding whether λ=0.8 should be used instead of the more risky trade-off when λ=0.6.Table 3presents some distributional statistics of the selected portfolios’ returns under the quarterly rebalancing scenario.13The results for both the “No rebalancing” and “Monthly rebalancing” scenarios are available upon request.13Also, in panel F of each table, the statistics and relevant performance measures for the following indexes are reported for comparison reasons: two Total Return Energy Commodity Indexes – the DJ UBS-Energy and Rogers Energy Commodity; the three stock indexes from which stocks were drawn to construct the tracking portfolios – Bovespa, DJIA, and FTSE 100; and, finally, the most commonly used benchmark in the finance industry, the S&P 500. According to the historical annualized volatilities for the out-of-sample period, the SEI is more volatile than the DJ UBS-Energy and Rogers Energy Commodity Indexes – 48.40% as compared to 36.21% and 41.11% respectively. The respective volatility of the equity indexes is in the range of 27–38%. However, when comparing the information ratios, only the Bovespa index is able to generate a better risk-return performance compared to the SEI.Moving from no rebalancing to monthly rebalancing, the information ratios tend to go down in all cases, except in the case of the US Filter baskets for GA, and that of the UK Filter baskets for both DEA and GA. This can be explained by the higher transaction costs, which have a greater impact on the portfolios’ returns, especially in falling markets. It can be argued that when rebalancing, the additional information available from the latest price data does make a difference in reducing the portfolios’ volatility, but the small return improvement coupled with the rebalancing costs outweighs the volatility benefits. Results are consistent for all cases for the risk-return trade-off λ. Between monthly and quarterly rebalancing, the differences are relatively small, but the information ratios are, in most cases, higher for the quarterly rebalanced portfolios. Under the buy-and-hold scenario, the best performance in terms of information ratios is reported for the Bovespa portfolios, and under both monthly and quarterly rebalancing this is reported for the US Filter portfolios. In most cases, negative information ratios are reported, indicating that these portfolios over the out-of-sample period underperform against the benchmark, as they are associated with the lowest excess returns.14Note that investors who would have taken short positions on these baskets would realise the highest excess returns.14This observation can be explained by the fact that energy markets, as represented by the SEI, have been resistant to the recent economic recession, even though they have experienced one of the most severe up-and-down trends in their history.The relatively low correlations of the selected equity portfolios with the SEI (between 9% and 31%) suggest that investors who want to participate in the energy sector can still benefit from the addition of the selected baskets to a well-diversified portfolio of assets. This observation aligns with the findings of Buyuksahin, Haigh, and Robe (2010) that the correlation between equity and commodity returns is not often greater than 30%, besides some noticeable fluctuation that occurs over time. Also, correlation is not the most appropriate performance measure, as it only measures the degree to which the selected equity baskets and the SEI move in tandem, and does not capture the magnitude of the returns and their trajectories over time. Moreover, as is well-documented in the literature and also verified in the results presented in this paper, equity returns, represented by the financial indexes and the selected portfolios, deviate from a normal distribution displaying skewness and fat tails. The same is true for the returns of the SEI which exhibit positive skewness and relatively high excess kurtosis. Both futures commodity indexes have excess kurtosis similar to the SEI, with their skewness, however, being negative. Most equity portfolios selected by both the DEA and GA exhibit negative skewness, indicating that the equity portfolios have more weight in the left tail of the distribution, in contrast with the SEI, which has more weight in the right tail.Finally, as a robustness check, a “naïve” strategy of randomly selected stocks has been tested, forming equally weighted portfolios constituted of 10, 15, and 20 stocks. The stocks are selected from the same five equity pools used by the EAs, from a uniform distribution, thus giving equal probability for all stocks to be chosen. The evidence confirms that the strategy and methodology used in this paper are much more efficient and stable in achieving a good tracking performance (low RMSEs), and good returns relative to the SEI (positive or very small negative ERs). Under the “naïve” strategy there is a large dispersion of outcomes and no consistency.15The results of the “naive” strategy are available upon request.15

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Building on the merits of MPT and its influence in the practice of portfolio management, in this paper, a Geometric Average Spot Energy Index is constructed and then its performance is reproduced with stock portfolios. This is achieved by investing in small baskets of equities selected from five stock pools, the Dow Jones, FTSE 100, Bovespa Composite, and the UK and US Filters. The investment methodology used employs two advanced EAs, the GA and the DEA. Both algorithms are self-adaptive stochastic optimization methods, superior to rival approaches when applied to the index-tracking problem. To test the performance of the tracking baskets, three different rebalancing scenarios are examined, also taking transaction costs into consideration: (a) buy-and-hold, (b) monthly rebalancing, and (c) quarterly rebalancing.Results indicate that energy commodities, as proxied by the SEI, can have equity-like returns, since they can be effectively tracked with stock portfolios selected by the investment methodology followed in this paper. Overall, during the three-year period examined, which reflects a period before, during and towards the end of the recent global economic recession, an investor would realize positive returns by investing in commodities, as the SEI returns suggest. With the methodology employed in this paper, that performance is closely replicated, and in the case of the energy-related stock portfolios and those selected from the Bovespa equity pool, the benchmark index is even outperformed. In most cases there seem to be no major differences between the DEA and GA selected portfolios, though the GA tends to select portfolios that have a lower incidence of tracking error.On average, based on the results of this paper, portfolios with 15 stocks and a risk-return trade-off value of 0.8 are the most desirable combination, providing the best results for most tracking portfolios. Also, it is found that when rebalancing, the additional information available from the latest price data does make a difference in reducing the portfolios’ volatility; the resulting return deterioration, however, outweighs the volatility benefits, leading to smaller information ratios. Between monthly and quarterly rebalancing, the differences are relatively small in terms of the portfolios’ return and volatility performance; however, the information ratios are in almost all cases higher for the quarterly rebalanced portfolios. It is thus logical to conclude that greater capital efficiency can be achieved with rebalancing, preferably every quarter, compared to the buy-and-hold strategy.There are many investment houses around the globe that use evolutionary algorithms for tactical asset management.16First Quadrant, a US-based investment firm, started using EAs in 1993 to manage its investments, at the time $5billion USD allocated across 17 countries around the globe, and claim they have made substantial profits (Kieran, 1994).16The work and findings presented in this paper can encourage asset and fund managers to set up funds that will track the constructed Spot Energy Index. To that end, the proposed methodology suggests an effective, and at the same time, least-expensive way to operate such a fund, giving the full flexibility of any investment style, long or short, that equities can provide.Further research in this field can use more sophisticated algorithmic procedures (such as immune systems, robust optimization and mixed-integer programming formulations) that could potentially provide improved results. Moreover, further research could propose a substitute of the user-defined coefficient λ, which could instead be optimally defined by incorporating for example, a bi-level optimization framework that would minimize the objective function.