@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Condition-based maintenance using the inverse Gaussian degradation model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper studied the joint optimal replacement policy and optimal inspection interval when the unit degrades over time.Unit heterogeneity is considered, which leads to a monotone control limits policy.The sensitivity to different cost parameters and model parameters is studied.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal replacement,Inverse Gaussian process,Heterogeneity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Condition-based maintenance has been proven effective in reducing unexpected failures with minimum operational costs. This study considers an optimal condition-based replacement policy with optimal inspection interval when the degradation conforms to an inverse Gaussian process with random effects. The random effects parameter is used to account for heterogeneities commonly observed among a product population. Its distribution is updated when more degradation observations are available. The observed degradation level together with the unit’s age are used for the replacement decision. The structure of the optimal replacement policy is investigated in depth. We prove that the monotone control limit policy is optimal. We also provide numerical studies to validate our results and conduct sensitivity analysis of the model parameters on the optimal policy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper considers the condition-based maintenance (CBM) of a unit subject to a continuous-time stochastic degradation, and monitored through periodic inspections. CBM suggests regular inspections using modern sensor technology. Maintenance actions are then made based on the inspection of working conditions. Because CBM makes use of the in situ information, it most often outperforms the traditional age- and block-based maintenance policies. Therefore, the use of condition monitoring techniques and CBM has increased rapidly over recent years (see Wang, 2002; Jardine, Lin, and Banjevic, 2006, for reviews and examples).The choice of the stochastic process that characterizes the physical deterioration, the so called prognostic models, will obviously affect the prediction of remaining useful life, and therefore influence the decision of the maintenance strategy and its economic performance. In the literature, many prognostic models have been proposed. In particular, when the health states are directly observable (Jardine et al., 2006) as in our study, they can be classified based on whether the degradation states are discrete or continuous. In the scenario with discrete states, Markov chain models (e.g. Chen, Chen, and Yuan, 2003; Xiang, Cassady, and Pohl, 2012; Yeh, 1997; Bloch-Mercier, 2002) are often adopted. After specifying the probability transition matrix among all states, these models can be used to calculate the time-to-failure distribution from any state. The Markov chain models are particularly useful when the degradation states of the unit cannot be precisely measured, and a rough category (e.g., good, moderate, weak) has to be adopted instead.In recent decades, the fast development of sensing technologies enables accurate online measurements of the degradation levels. Under such circumstance, the degradation states are considered continuous as opposite to discrete. Consequently, stochastic models with continuous states are commonly used (e.g. Albin and Chao, 1992) to characterize the degradation process. Notably among them, the Wiener process, Gamma process, and the inverse Gaussian (IG) process, including their variants, attract significant attention because of their nice mathematical properties and clear physical interpretations (see Ye and Xie, 2014, for review). An attractive feature of these models is that they possess independent degradation increments. This property significantly simplifies the prediction of the remaining useful life given the historical degradation observations. As a result, it becomes much easier to determine the optimal maintenance policies. For example, optimal CBM policies based on the Wiener process degradation models have been extensively investigated (e.g. Hontelez, Burger, and Wijnmalen, 1996; Elwany, Gebraeel, and Maillart, 2011; Guo, Wang, Guo, and Si, 2013). However, since the Wiener process is not always monotone, it fails to model many degradations well such as crack growth and wears. For such monotone degradations, Gamma processes and IG processes are more suitable as they inherently impose the monotone constraints on the sample paths. CBM policies based on Gamma processes can be found in the literature as well. See Dieulle, Berenguer, Grall, and Roussignol (2003), Grall, Berenguer, and Dieulle (2002a), Liao, Elsayed, and Chan (2006) for examples and van Noortwijk (2009) for an excellent review. Nevertheless, different from Wiener process or Gamma process, which have been studied for a long time, IG process draws significant attention only recently. IG process was introduced by Wang and Xu (2010) to the reliability literature, and further investigated by Ye and Chen (2014). They had demonstrated significant advantages of IG process, including but not limited to, (i) clear physical interpretation for degradation caused by accumulated small damages; (ii) dual relationship with Wiener process, providing intuitive understanding; (iii) flexible ways to incorporate random effects and covariates to account for different types of heterogeneities; (iv) explicit analytical formulas for important quantities, such as PDF and CDF of remaining useful life distribution. However, despite the increasing attention on IG process (see e.g. Wang and Xu, 2010; Ye and Chen, 2014; Ye, Chen, Tang, and Xie, 2014; Peng, Li, Yang, Huang, and Zuo, 2014; Liu, Ma, Yang, and Zhao, 2014), there is scarce literature on CBM policies based on IG processes despite their useful applications.While most of existing CBM policies assume that the prognostic models are fixed for all units across the population, this assumption is increasingly challenged. Because of diverse usage and environmental differences, the degradation characteristics of units from the same population are often different. As reported in many studies (e.g., Lawless and Crowder, 2004; Gebraeel, Lawley, Li, and Ryan, 2005; Chen and Tsui, 2013; Liao and Tian, 2013), heterogeneities often exist across the population, causing different degradation patterns. Many degradation models have been proposed to integrate the heterogeneities. Generally speaking, there are two approaches to take into account the heterogeneities. The first one is to use random effects models while the second is to impose a prior distribution on one or some of the model parameters. The crux of these two approaches is essentially the same, that is, some parameters are unit-specific and different across unit. The rest are common parameters shared by the entire population. As more degradation observations are collected, unit-specific parameter(s) can be estimated more precisely and can characterize the degradation process better. Unfortunately, while accounting for heterogeneity becomes common and has been well-recognized in degradation modeling and analysis, it also makes the optimal CBM policy difficult to find because the degradation process becomes nonstationary and age dependent.In this paper, we develop an optimal inspection/replacement policy for units whose degradation can be modeled by an IG process. We incorporate the random effects in the IG process to model the unit-specific heterogeneity, and investigate the effects of such a heterogeneity on maintenance planning. The unit is inspected periodically. Upon each inspection, we make the decisions on whether a preventive replacement is needed. Failure is not self-announcing and can only be revealed through inspections. Operating in the failure state, the unit incurs a downtime cost. Our goal is to find the optimal inspection interval and replacement policy to minimize the total operational costs which include inspection cost, preventive/corrective replacement cost and downtime cost. We formulate the problem as a Markov decision process, and analyze the structural properties of the optimal policies. Our model shares some common features with the one proposed in Elwany et al. (2011), but it also differs from it in many aspects. The main differences are summarized as follows. First, the failure mechanism in our model is different. Elwany et al. (2011) used a Wiener process with linear drift to model the degradation, whose degradation paths are not strictly increasing. However, in many applications, the degradation is monotone. We consider the IG process with heterogeneity which is more suitable in such scenarios. Second, in Elwany et al. (2011) zero inspection cost is assumed, and the inspection interval becomes irrelevant to total operational cost. In practice, inspection costs might not be negligible, and it becomes crucial to determine the optimal inspection schedule to minimize the total cost. In our model, we explicitly consider the inspection costs and seek for optimal inspection interval in addition to the replacement policy. This formulation contains their model as a special case, and is expected to be more widely applicable. Third, we consider the downtime cost in our model. Since the failure is not self-announcing, the unit often incurs additional cost due to efficiency or quality loss when operating in the failure state. The downtime cost is especially alarming if the inspection interval is long, and consequently it becomes one deciding factor on the optimal inspection interval. Last but not least, we introduce a proof framework based on likelihood ratio ordering and associated properties. This technique is more generic, and can be applied more widely to other degradation models (e.g., Gamma processes with random shape parameters).The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the IG process and identifies important stochastic properties related to CBM. Section 3 formulates the CBM problem as a Markov decision process, and analyzed the structural information of the optimal policy in depth. Section 4 presents numerical studies to validate the theoretical results. It also provides sensitivity analysis to examine the effects of different parameters on the optimal maintenance decisions. Section 5 concludes the article with discussions. Some technical details and supplementary information are provided in Appendix A.The inverse Gaussian (IG) process is recently proposed as a degradation model because it has many nice properties and it is flexible in dealing with covariates and random effects (Ye and Chen, 2014). Similar to the Gamma process, the IG process possesses monotone degradation paths. Mathematically, the IG process {Yt, t ≥ 0} satisfies many important properties. It has independent increments, i.e.,Yt1−Ys1is independent ofYt2−Ys2for t2 > s2 ≥ t1 > s1 ≥ 0. In addition, the increment Yt− Ysfollows an inverse Gaussian distributionIG(μ[Λ(t)−Λ(s)],η[Λ(t)−Λ(s)]2),where the transformed time scale function Λ(t) is monotonically increasing with Λ(0) = 0, andIG(a,b),a,b>0denotes the IG distribution. In addition to Λ(t), the process parameters μ, η > 0 control the degradation rate and degradation volatility.In practice, different units often exhibit different degradation patterns due to a number of reasons, e.g., heterogeneous working conditions (Ye, Hong, and Xie, 2013) or variations in the raw materials. To accurately model and predict the degradation for each individual unit, it is important to account for such heterogeneity. In this article, we consider an IG process model with random effects where the degradation rate μ is assumed to be random. Different units have different realizations of μ, causing heterogeneities in their degradation rates. This model is called random-drift model throughout the paper. Prior to any degradation observations, μ−1 is typically assumed to follow a truncated normal distributionTN(ω,κ−2),κ>0to exclude negative values, which has probability density function (PDF)(1)f(μ−1;ω,κ−2)=κ·ϕ[κ(μ−1−ω)]1−Φ(−κω),μ>0,where ϕ( · ) and Φ( · ) are PDF and cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the standard normal distribution, respectively.Suppose the degradation of a unit is observed at times tj, j = 1, 2, …, n with degradation levelsYj=Ytj. Let Λj= Λ(tj). Given the observations Yn= [Y1, Y2, …, Yn], μ−1 is still truncated normal. It is readily shown that〈μ−1|Yn〉∼TN(ω˜n,κ˜n−2)withκ˜n=ηYn+κ2andω˜n=(ηΛn+ωκ2)/κ˜n2. The updated parameters of the truncated normal distribution only depend on Ynand Λn. In particular,κ˜nincreases as Yn. When Ynis large,κ˜n−2becomes small and thus 〈μ−1|Yn〉 tends to degenerate to the true (but unobservable) value. Compared with the unconditional distribution of μ−1, the conditional distribution 〈μ−1|Yn〉 is more accurate to predict the future degradation level. Using the updated distribution 〈μ−1|Yn〉, the distribution of the degradation level at time tn + 1 can be obtained by first conditioning on μ and then marginalizing over 〈μ−1|Yn〉. Following Ye and Chen (2014), we havef(Yn+1=y|Yn)=1−Φ[−ωˇκˇ]1−Φ[−ω˜nκ˜n]·κ˜nκˇη(Λn+1−Λn)22π(y−Yn)3·exp[ωˇ2κˇ2−ω˜n2κ˜n22−η(Λn+1−Λn)22(y−Yn)],where y > Yn,κˇ=ηy+κ2andωˇ=(ηΛn+1+ωκ2)/κˇ2are functions of y. It is noted that with heterogeneity, {Yt} still has the Markov property as 〈Yn + 1|Yn〉 only depends on Yn.Although the conditional distribution of future degradation has explicit density function, it does not belong to any familiar distribution class. Nevertheless, we can establish some interesting stochastic orders which are extremely useful in characterizing the IG process with heterogeneity. To begin with, we first review two important definitions of stochastic orders.DefinitionA random variable X is said to be smaller than a random variable Y in the stochastic order, denoted by X≺Y, if P(X ≤ t) ≥ P(Y ≤ t)  ∀t.A random variable X is said to be smaller than a random variable Y in the likelihood ratio order, denoted by X≺LRY, if the ratio of their respective PDFs fY(t)/fX(t) is non-decreasing in t over the unions of the supports of X and Y.From the definition, we can find that the stochastic order between two random variables is solely determined by their CDFs. Therefore, we also use FX( · )≺FY( · ) to denote the relationship X≺Y, where FX( · ), FY( · ) are the CDF of X and Y respectively. Some useful properties regarding the stochastic orders are placed in Appendix A.1 for reference.The stochastic orders provide a concise framework in studying the degradation behaviors when heterogeneity exists. Because the degradation rate μ is unknown for any particular unit, it needs to be estimated based on historical degradation data. Intuitively, at age t, a unit with a higher degradation level (larger Yt) means it is likely to degrade faster in the stochastic sense. As a result, it is also expected to have larger degradation increments in the future. In contrast, if a unit reaches a given degradation level y at a later stage, it is likely to degrade slower in the stochastic sense, and we expect its future degradation increments to be smaller. This intuition can be graphically illustrated in Fig. 1, and formally stated in Lemmas 1 and 2.Lemma 1〈Yt + Δ|Yt〉 is stochastically non-decreasing in Yt, i.e., 〈Yt + Δ|Yt= y1〉≺〈Yt + Δ|Yt= y2〉 provided y1 ≤ y2.〈Yt + Δ|Yt〉 is stochastically non-increasing in t, i.e.,〈Yt1+Δ1|Yt1=y〉≺〈Yt2+Δ2|Yt2=y〉provided t1 > t2 and Λ(t1 + Δ1) − Λ(t1) ≤ Λ(t2 + Δ2) − Λ(t2).Their proofs can be sketched as follows. We first establish the likelihood ratio order 〈Yt + Δ− Yt|μ1〉≺LR〈Yt + Δ− Yt|μ2〉 when μ1 < μ2. We further showed that 〈μ|Yt= y1〉≺LR〈μ|Yt= y2〉 when y1 < y2. Combining two orders and using Proposition A.2, Lemma 1 can be proved. Similar proof can be constructed for Lemma 2. The details are provided in Appendices A.2 and A.3 respectively.RemarkThe stochastic orderings of the stochastic process Y(t) in terms of age and degradation level are essential to ensure the structural properties of the replacement policy developed subsequently. Therefore, we expect that the proposed framework is applicable to other stochastic processes with similar properties, such as Wiener process with random drift rates (Wang, 2010), Gamma process with random shape parameters (Lawless and Crowder, 2004). Even though details of the proofs might vary according to the processes under study, similar statements to Lemmas 1 and 2 are expected to hold.In this section, we consider the CBM policy when the periodic inspection is employed to check the unit’s degradation. The degradation follows the IG process with random drift parameter μ. For notation simplicity, we focus on the stationary IG process with Λ(t) = t, and we use “replacement” and “maintenance” interchangeably throughout the paper.The unit is considered failed when its cumulative deterioration exceeds the failure threshold D. After failure, the unit works non-properly and the failure can only be revealed through inspections. However, before the failure is detected, downtime costs are incurred to represent the efficiency or quality loss. Inspections are equally spaced in the planning horizon. Upon each inspection, if the unit is already failed, corrective maintenance (CM) is performed immediately; otherwise, the decision maker decides whether to conduct a preventive maintenance (PM) or not based on existing degradations. We assume that all maintenance actions are instantaneous, which can be justified in the cases when the maintenance time is relatively short comparing to the inspection intervals. We also assume that both corrective and preventive maintenance are perfect, restoring the unit to a as-good-as-new state. Let cidenote the inspection cost, cddenote the downtime cost per time unit, cpdenote the preventive maintenance cost, and cfdenote the corrective maintenance cost (cf> cp). The cost incurred at time t has a discounting factor exp ( − rt) where r is a fixed and known constant. We want to find the optimal inspection interval δ and corresponding maintenance policy to minimize the total operation costs.According to the model assumptions, the inspections are carried out at equally spaced times {0, δ, 2δ, …, kδ, …}. We denote τkas the unit age, which is the time since last maintenance, at kth inspection;Yτkas the degradation level at age τk. Based on the properties of IG process,(τk,Yτk)forms a discrete time continuous state Markov chain with age-dependent transition probability. As a consequence, the maintenance policy can be formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP). In more detail, at kth decision epoch (inspection) k = 0, 1, … , the unit age and its degradation are revealed, denoted by(τk,Yτk). They form the state of the MDP. At each state, one of the three actions from {PM,CM,NULL} can be chosen, where NULL denotes no action. IfYτkis larger than the failure threshold D, CM needs to be conducted immediately with cost cf. The unit then restores to the as-good-as-new state (0, 0) because both the age and degradation level become 0 afterward. On the other hand, ifYτk≤Dand the action PM is chosen, PM is conducted immediately with cost cpand the unit returns to the state (0, 0) as well. However, if action NULL is chosen, no maintenance action is taken and the decision is deferred to the next inspection. Before that, the unit may fail with unknown failure time Tkbetween τkand τk+ δ. According to the model assumption, the discounted downtime cost (relative to kδ) before (k + 1)th inspection can be calculated as(2)ρ(Tk)=∫Tkτk+δcdexp[−r(t−τk)]dt=cd(e−r(Tk−τk)−e−rδ))r,τk≤Tk≤τk+δ,and ρ(Tk) = 0 otherwise. Since the exact failure time is never known, we can define the expected downtime cost based on current state instead, i.e.,Wδ(τk,Yτk)=E[ρ(Tk)|τk,Yτk].At each decision epoch k, we define the value function Vk, δ(u, v) for all u = 0, δ, 2δ, … , andv∈R+. The value function Vk, δ(u, v) represents the minimum total discounted cost starting from epoch k until the end of the horizon with initial state (u, v). In this paper, we focus on the infinite horizon decision problem. As a result, the Vk, δ(u, v) does not depend on k starting from the same state (u, v). We can therefore drop the subscript k in the remainder. By definition, the value function should satisfy the Bellman equation (Puterman, 2009)(3)Vδ(u,v)={min{e−rδUδ(u,v)+Wδ(u,v),cp+Vδ(0,0)},v≤Dcf+Vδ(0,0),v>D,whereUδ(u,v)=E[Vδ(u+δ,Yu+δ)|τk=u,Yτk=v]is the expected value function with one period transition from the state (u, v). Instead of including the inspection cost ciin the value function, we choose to consider them as a separate cost component to make the trade off on inspection interval δ explicit. In fact, with inspection interval δ, the total discounted inspection cost can be easily computed(4)S(δ)=∑k=0∞ciexp(−rkδ)=ci1−exp(−rδ).It becomes clear that S(δ), the total inspection cost, is decreasing as δ increases. On the other hand, Vδ(0, 0) represents the expected total maintenance cost, including CM, PM, and downtime cost, starting from a new unit installation. Putting both costs together, we want to find the optimal inspection interval δ and maintenance policy to minimize S(δ) + Vδ(0, 0).Different from Elwany et al. (2011), we consider the inspection interval as a decision variable. In addition, we account for the downtime cost due to improper operation in the failure state, which is more natural when the failure could not be self reported. We want to emphasize that the downtime cost is essential. If it is not considered, we can expect that the optimal δ is ∞, a trivial and non-interesting solution. In the next, we take a two-step approach to solve the optimization problem. We first fix δ and find the optimal maintenance policy and corresponding Vδ(0, 0), then we find the δ that can minimize the total cost.In this part, we fix the inspection interval to be δ, and solve the MDP problem (3) to obtain the optimal maintenance policy. For notation simplicity, we omit the subscript δ in this subsection when there is no confusion.Based on the results in Section 2, we know that even when Λ(t) = t, the heterogeneity and uncertain drift parameter μ cause different stochastic orders in 〈Yτ + δ|Yτ〉. These stochastic orders are crucial to help us analyze the property of different cost functions. We summarize the key results as follows.Lemma 3The expected downtime cost W(u, v) is a non-decreasing function of v, and non-increasing function of u.Lemma 3 is intuitive. Since the downtime cost is only incurred if a failure occurs before next inspection, its cost is determined by the conditional failure time distribution given current state. When the current degradation level is larger, the unit is likely to fail at an earlier time before next inspection, and thus incurs higher downtime cost. On the other hand, if the unit reaches the same degradation level at a later stage, it degrades slower and is expected to have a later failure time (if any). As a result, W(u, v) increases with v while decreases with u. The detailed proof to Lemma 3 is provided in Appendix A.4.Similarly, we can establish the monotone property of the cost function U(u, v). RememberU(u,v)=E[V(u+δ,Yu+δ)|τk=u,Yτk=v]and 〈Yu + δ|Yu〉 is stochastically increasing in Yu. Therefore, if V(u, v) is non-decreasing in v, we can conclude U(u, v) is also non-decreasing in v according to Proposition A.1. The monotone relation with respect to u can be established as well. The results are formally stated in Lemma 4 with proof provided in Appendix A.5.Lemma 4The optimal value function V(u, v) is non-decreasing in v, and non-increasing in u.Lemma 4 enables us to explore the structure of the optimal maintenance policy. Because of the monotone property of the value function, the optimal maintenance policy can be shown to have a simplistic structure. This structural information not only provides insights on the maintenance policies, but also reduces the computation time in numerical solutions.Theorem 1Given δ, the optimal maintenance policy that minimizes V(0, 0) is a monotone control limit policy. Equivalently, there exists a non-decreasing sequence {ξk, k = 0, 1, …} such that the optimal action at state (kδ, y) is PM if y > ξk, and NULL otherwise.The optimal action can be determined through the value functions. In particular, when y ≤ D, the optimal action in state (kδ, y) isa(kδ,y)={PM,e−rδU(kδ,y)+W(kδ,y)>cp+V(0,0)NULL,Otherwise.If there exists ξk≤ D such that e−rδU(kδ, ξk) + W(kδ, ξk) > cp+ V(0, 0), then ∀y ≥ ξkwe have e−rδU(kδ, y) + W(kδ, y) ≥ cp+ V(0, 0). This is because both U(kδ, y) and W(kδ, y) are non-decreasing in y and cp+ V(0, 0) is a constant. This result establishes that the policy is a control limit policy.In addition, if there exists j such that the e−rδU(jδ, y) + W(jδ, y) ≥ cp+ V(0, 0), then for all k ≤ j, the inequality holds as well because U(kδ, y) and W(kδ, y) are non-increasing in k. In other words, we should have ξk≤ ξj∀k ≤ j, which means {ξk, k = 0, 1, …} is a non-decreasing sequence.□Theorem 1 shows some unique features when the heterogeneity is considered. In particular, we note that the control limits for PM are monotonically increasing in the unit ages. This can be interpreted as an early screening strategy. In more details, a unit with high degradation rate should be identified and replaced early to reduce the failure risk. Because of the stochastic evolution, the unit with given rate μ might cross the threshold ξ1 at age t1 or cross the threshold ξ2 at t2 when ξ1 < ξ2, t1 < t2. To screen units with higher degradation rates, it becomes natural to use non-decreasing ξkfor different ages. In addition, the uncertainty in 〈μ|Yt〉 reduces as t and Ytincrease, which allows the maintenance policy to be less conservative (or equivalently higher limit). As a comparison, when there is no heterogeneity and the degradation rates of all units are the same, the control limits become constant over age τ.Corollary 1With periodic inspection at kδ for k = 0, 1, …, if κ = ∞, which means no heterogeneity in the population, the optimal maintenance policy is a constant control limit policy ξk= ξ0, ∀k.The proof of Corollary 1 is provided in Appendix A.7. Intuitively, when κ = ∞, the degradation rate μ is a fixed constant rather than random. This means that the observed degradation levels have no effect on μ. Because 〈Yt|μ〉 is a stationary process, the transition probability in the MDP remains the same at different ages. Consequently, we would expect a constant control limit at all ages. Corollary 1 can demonstrate the impact of heterogeneity from a different perspective. When κ = ∞, the degradation rate μ is a constant. In this case, when μ is larger, we need a lower (constant) control limit to balance the failure cost and preventive maintenance cost. In addition, the optimal inspection interval tends to be smaller to be more conservative. This trend is well demonstrated in Fig. 2. It clearly shows that even when the degradation rate is observable (no heterogeneity), the control limit reveals monotone trend in terms of 1/μ. Not surprisingly, when the degradation rate is unobservable (with heterogeneity), we expect a monotone control limit in age as a result of estimating μ from the observations and finding the optimal control limit based on 〈μ|Yt〉 simultaneously.RemarkAt the beginning of the section, we assume Λ(t) = t for notation simplicity. In fact, all the results can be naturally extended to arbitrary monotone increasing functions Λ(t). The key is to employ age-dependent inspection intervals δτsuch thatΛ(τk+δτk)−Λ(τk)≤Λ(τj+δτj)−Λ(τj),∀τk≥τj. If the inspection interval is constant, Λ(t) can be any concave functions. On the other hand, for an arbitrary Λ(t), we can carefully choose the inspection times τkso that {Λ(τk)} is a sequence of equally spaced points. In this case,Λ(τk+δτk)−Λ(τk)is a constant for all k. This design is also intuitively appealing. If the units degrade at an increasing speed, it is natural to inspect more frequently to reduce the risk of failures. Similar dynamic inspection schedule has also been used in (e.g. Grall, Dieulle, Berenguer, and Roussignol, 2002b). For readers of interests, we provide a simplified proof to the Theorem 1 with concave Λ(t) and periodic inspections in Appendix A.8. We also include a numerical example for demonstration.To minimize the total cost, including inspection cost S(δ) and maintenance cost Vδ(0, 0), we can search the optimal inspection(5)δ*=argminδS(δ)+Vδ(0,0),which is only a one dimensional optimization problem. For any given δ, Vδ(0, 0) can be found using value iteration algorithm (Appendix A.6) or policy iteration algorithm. Derivative free search methods can be used to find the optimal δ*.It is easy to show that S(δ) is decreasing in δ: less frequent inspections have lower cost. In addition, we can also show that Vδ(0, 0) is an increasing function in δ. As δ → ∞, only down time cost will be counted toward the total maintenance cost while S(δ) → 0. As a result, the objective function approaches a constantlimδ→∞[S(δ)+Vδ(0,0)]=E[cde−rTr|Y0=0].Fig. 3demonstrates that as the inspection interval changes, S(δ) and Vδ(0, 0) change accordingly. It shows that while S(δ) approaches to 0 and Vδ(0, 0) approaches to a constant, their sum has a minimum at δ*, the optimal inspection interval. In addition, the optimal δ* is also very robust as the total cost is flat in the region near δ*. In other words, a rough estimate of the optimal inspection would not inflate the total operational cost significantly.We let the unit degradation follow the IG process with random-drift model with Λ(t) = t and η = 1. In addition, the degradation rate μ−1 follows a truncated normal distribution (1) with ω = 1.2, and κ = 4. The unit fails when the degradation reaches the failure threshold D = 10. In the numerical study, we consider the optimal replacement policy. Suppose the unit is inspected periodically with inspection cost ci= 0.05. If the degradation level is less than the failure threshold D yet larger than the control limit, a preventive replacement is conducted with cost cp= 3. On the other hand, if the unit fails unexpectedly (degradation exceeding the failure threshold D), a corrective replacement is required with cost cf= 10. The unit downtime cost is cd= 1, and the cost discount factor is r = 0.01.Given the parameters of the random-drift model and the cost parameters, the optimal maintenance policy can be obtained using the value iteration algorithm or the monotone policy iteration algorithm (Puterman, 2009). To make the computation feasible, we discretize the continues degradation states into fine intervals and use a time horizon that is long enough to approximate the infinite horizon. This practice is commonly used in similar studies (e.g., Elwany et al., 2011). Fig. 4shows the optimal maintenance policies when different δs are used. The optimal inspection interval is found to be δ* = 1.4. Regardless the δ, Fig. 4 clearly shows that the optimal control limits are monotonically increasing in age τ. When a smaller than δ* inspection interval is used, the maintenance policy becomes less conservative (higher limits). In contrast, when δ > δ*, the control limit is more conservative.It is also interesting to find how much improvement we can make when we consider the degradation heterogeneity in the maintenance policy. To compare, we investigate the optimal maintenance policy when the degradation follows IG process without heterogeneity. The degradation rate parameter is μ0 = 0.876, which is the same as the expected degradation rate from the heterogeneous degradation. Other model parameters and cost parameters are kept the same. Fig. 5compares the optimal maintenance policy and inspection when the heterogeneity is not considered (denoted byΠhomo,δhomo*) with the policy when the heterogeneity is considered (denoted byΠhetero,δhetero*). It shows that Πhomo has a constant control limit independent of the unit’s age, as stated in Corollary 1. However, when the degradation has population heterogeneity, using this simple control limit may result in sub-optimal results. For example, if we use Πhomo for maintenance of the heterogeneous population, the expected total discounted cost is 38.817. In contrast, the Πhetero has expected total discounted cost 36.264.We also conduct the sensitivity analysis of the parameters on the optimal CBM policies. Based on the model studied in Section 4.1, we vary the parameter values and obtain the corresponding optimal policies. Table 1summarizes the parameter values used in the sensitivity analysis. The Base row contains the parameter values used in Section 4.1, and the Low and High rows list the alternative values used in the sensitivity study.We first investigate how the optimal policy changes with the different cost parameters. By changing the cost parameters, we can obtain the optimal maintenance policies as well as the optimal inspection interval δ*, as summarized in Fig. 6. Fig. 6a shows that as the CM cost cfincreases, the policy becomes more conservative in terms of shorter inspection interval and lower control limits. In other words, the preventive replacement becomes more cost effective. In contrast, Fig. 6b demonstrates the opposite. As cpincreases, it becomes less attractive to replace the unit before its failure. Therefore, the control limits increase monotonically in cp. Nevertheless, the inspection interval still becomes shorter as the overall maintenance cost increases. Fig. 6c shows that the downtime cost does not have much impact on the optimal policy. When cdincreases, the optimal inspection interval decreases to reduce the expected downtime cost. Since the optimal policies in this example are far from the failure threshold D, the downtime costs have minimal impact on the control limits. Last but not least, Fig. 6d shows the effects of inspection cost. Not surprisingly, as ciincreases, the optimal inspection interval becomes longer. To safeguard against the risk of failures, the control limits also decrease to make the policy more conservative.In addition to cost parameters, we also investigate the effects of model parameters, particularly the ones related to the heterogeneity ω, κ. Fig. 7shows the optimal policies for different values of ω and κ. These two parameters determine the distribution of the drift rate μ in the degradation model. A larger ω leads to a smaller μ on average, and hence slower degradation. A larger κ reduces the heterogeneity. Fig. 7a clearly indicates that a larger ω leads to higher control limits at early ages. This is because only limited degradation observations are available during this period, and the decision relies more heavily on the prior distribution of ω, κ. A higher ω (a lower μ) means the policy can be less conservative. As the age increases, more observations are available. The effect of ω reduces in maintenance decision. As a result, we can observe the control limits “converge” for different ω rates. On the other hand, a larger κ indicates a higher precision in μ, and hence a smaller heterogeneity. Fig. 7b shows that as κ increases, the jumps in the control limits ξkbecome smaller. This is because κ represents the uncertainty in μ. For a smaller κ, the degradation process is more age dependent. Therefore, control limits vary more at different ages. In contrast, for a larger κ or even κ = ∞, the degradation rate is almost certain, depending much less on age and observations. As a result, the control limits converge to a constant eventually.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
