@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Data and queueing analysis of a Japanese air-traffic flow

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Pre-scheduled traffic flows exhibit a serial correlation structure.We solved a special case and analyzed the transient properties of the corresponding queueing system.Based on this we derived a strategic rule for delay management.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Queueing,Applied probability,Air traffic management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Congestion is a major cause of inefficiency in air transportation. A question is whether delays during the arrival phase of a flight can be absorbed more fuel-efficiently in the future. In this context, we analyze Japan’s flow strategy empirically and use queueing techniques in order to gain insight into the generation of the observed delays. Based on this, we derive a rule to balance congestion delays more efficiently between ground and en-route. Whether fuel efficiency can be further improved or not will depend on the willingness to review the concept of runway pressure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many airports and airspaces are already congested today, but growing traffic demand will cause increasing delays in the future if no actions are taken (ICAO, 2005; JPDO, 2010; Sesar-Consortium, 2007). Congestion delays materialize either on the ground, where aircraft have to wait before accessing a runway or during the flight, where they are deviated from their intended trajectory. When the schedule buffers are tight, delays may also propagate through the whole transportation network. Congestion delays can be managed on a strategical level (by runway expansion or shorter separation standards), a pre-tactical level (by splitting flows and sectors) or a tactical level (by sequencing and re-sequencing aircraft).Fig. 1shows the typical situation. Prior to take-off, departure slots are allocated in order to balance demand with available capacity. Before landing, flows are merged and sequenced in order to efficiently use the runway. In this context, one speaks of radar vectoring, when traffic controllers ask the pilots to stretch their flight paths in the form of specific flight angles and of holding stacks, when pilots are asked to circulate in the vicinity of the airport. Departure slot allocation and en-route sequencing operations create delays, and we call them metering delays in this paper.The Japanese flow managers currently allocate up to 10min of metering delay to the en-route phase and the remaining delay to the ground. One can argue that en-route delays are unnecessary, once ground delays are correctly allocated. At least, speed control shall synchronize traffic flows so that radar vectoring can be reduced. But due to arrival-time uncertainties, en-route delays serve as buffers in order to keep a high pressure on the runways. On the other hand, future reduction of arrival time errors promises to reduce en-route delays, allocating more and more delay on the ground. The benefits are smoother traffic flows, less controller workload and reduced fuel consumption. In this paper we derive a decision rule to quantify this new balance.The deterministic ground delay and aircraft sequencing problems are well known in the OR and the transportation communities, see for example Erzberger (1995), Beasley et al. (2000), Bayen et al. (2004), Lulli and Odoni (2007), Artiouchine et al. (2008) and Balakrishnan and Chandran (2010). The stochastic phenomenon of congestion was pioneered by Cox (1955), defining it as(i) a flow of customers needing service,(ii) some restrictions on the availability of service, and(iii) irregularity in the flow of customers, the servicing operation or both.Moreover, when average demand is higher than available capacity (e.g. during peak hours or bad weather conditions), predictable congestion occurs. Phenomena with the above characteristics, such as telecommunication networks, passenger flows, and many more, are often modeled as stochastic or deterministic queueing systems (Newell, 1982; Wolff, 1989). The air transportation system also exhibits the classical queuing behavior: as demand approaches capacity, delays increase sharply (Ball et al., 2010).Early contributions in this regard are by Bell (1949) and Dunlay and Horonjeff (1976). Often, arguments for Poissonian arrival flows are elaborated on which steady-state control strategies are based. A homogeneous Poisson process assumes essentially that the numbers of arrivals in disjoint time intervals are independent random variables, and that no more than one arrival takes place per time instant (see Daley and Vere-Jones (2003) for an axiomatic derivation and historic derivations from Erlang and Bateman). Also since long time, the existence of steady-states in air transportation are questioned (e.g. Barnhart et al., 2003; Janic, 2000). One of the few transient analyzes is Peterson et al. (1995), based on an algorithmic approach. We will later show that the Poisson hypothesis is not unreasonable whenever congestion is moderate, and that steady-states can be reached for pre-scheduled flows in the order of a few hours.The assumptions of homogeneous Poisson flows have been relaxed in at least three ways. Non-homogeneous queueing models allow for variations of arrival and service rates. This seems more realistic to capture high traffic peaks, particularly during bad weather. Typically, time-dependent Poisson arrivals are modeled with time-dependent service distributions (Bäuerle et al., 2007; Fan and Odoni, 2002; Hansen et al., 2009; Knessl and Yang, 2002; Pyrgiotis et al., 2013; Yang and Knessl, 1997). Models with deterministic service times serve as lower bounds and models with exponentially distributed service times as upper bounds to the real delays (Barnhart et al., 2003). Multiple arrivals per time instant (batch arrival models) are another relaxation of the Poisson assumption. Corresponding queueing models are proposed for aircraft landings (Falin, 2010; Krishnamoorthy et al., 2009). More recently, a third departure from Poisson arrivals was presented in Guadagni et al. (2011) and Guadagni et al. (2013). They clarify that the numbers of arrivals in subsequent time intervals will be negatively correlated, whenever aircraft are pre-scheduled at a critical resource but arrive with random errors. Pre-scheduled queues are also studied in the field of ‘appointment scheduling’, where customers receive initial assignments, but may arrive with a positive or negative delay. From the queueing methodology point of view, there was some activity in the 1960’s and 1970’s, but it loses its traces then (Bloomfield and Cox, 1972; Mercer, 1960, 1973; Winsten, 1959). Today, the field is widely occupied with algorithmic questions (e.g. Begen and Queyranne (2011), Green (2008) and the references therein) or numerical approaches (Nikoleris and Hansen, 2012).The remainder of the article is organized as follows: in the next section we describe a radar-data analysis of arrival traffic for a Japanese airport. We then analyze two types of queueing models as generators for metering delays: pre-scheduled random arrivals (PSRA) and Poissonian arrivals. Based on this, we derive a rule how to balance metering delays between ground and air efficiently.We analyzed available radar data in order to get a first impression on the statistical properties of the traffic flows and the generated delays. We selected nine days of ‘normal’ traffic from the months August, October and December 2008, i.e., where no exceptional events or delays were reported. We removed outliers by hand (about 10% of missing or erroneous fields in the source data). As main results we found empirical evidence for and against a Poisson hypothesis during moderate congestion and physical evidence against a Poisson hypothesis during very high congestion.We first verified the three-dimensional structure of the problem: aircraft enter the sector on different routes and different altitudes but leave it as a single flow on the same altitude. Average ground speed at the sector entry grew with the altitude, ranging between 484kt and 522kt (knot). At the sector exit, the average speed was equally about 380kt with 27kt standard deviation. The time-separationsmat the metering point was on average 1.4min, with standard deviation of 4s. This corresponds exactly to the 10NM (nautical mile; 1NM=1.852km) rule based on the ground speed. No unexpected patterns were found on this level of analysis.Fig. 2helps to better understand why delays occur. The top panel shows the flow (aircraft (ac)/5min) at the metering point between 7:30 and 21:00. The red1For interpretation of color in Figs. 1, 2 and 4–9, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.1bars are from the flight plans, the green ones from the radar data. One can see a fluctuating demand, with slightly higher periods in the morning and evening hours. Note that these flight plans are already pre-scheduled to meet the available capacity. The dotted horizontal line is the daily average arrival flowλwith approximatelyλ≈0.3ac/min (it is almost the same for the planned and the realized flights). The bold horizontal line is the capacity at the metering pointμ=v¯out/sm=0.63ac/min, wherev¯outis the average speed of all aircraft at the sector exit. While the flight plans sometimes exceed the capacity, the radar data generally lies below it. The middle panel shows the sample sector densityρ(t+1)=ρ(t)+qin(t)-qout(t)(number of aircraft in sector in time slott+1) (green) and total delay (black). Here,qin(t)andqout(t)are the corresponding sample flows (ac/5min). One can see oscillating sector load with a period of approximately 30min throughout the day. At the end of each oscillation, the total delays take peak values. The red bars are the demands where the capacity at the metering point is exceeded. Accordingly, the sample cross-correlation function between inflow and total delay has two peaks of about0.6and0.4at lags 3 and 4 respectively, corresponding to the average sector traversal time of 15–20min (bottom panel).An important question is if demand fluctuations can be predicted in advance or if they occur spontaneously. For example, peak hours should lead on average to more demand than the rest of the day. This is one of the reasons to study non-stationary models of air traffic in the U.S. (e.g. Hansen et al., 2009, Tu et al., 2008). On the other hand, Japanese flow management distributes departure slots on a permanent basis. This is similar to Europe, but differs from the practice in the U.S., where ground delay programs are only initiated during severe weather conditions. As Odoni et al. (2011) show, the delay patterns in the European case are more regular than in the U.S.In order to identify systematic changes in the arrival rate, we plotted sample paths of the counting process. Without any structural assumptions, we are just given an increasing sequence of positive random arrival times(Tn)n∈N, defined on the eventsω=(ω1,ω2,…)∈Ωof an underlying probability space(Ω,F,P). A counting processNω=(N(t))t∈Ris a family of (dependent) random variables(1)N(t)=∑n⩾11Tn⩽t,where1Eis the indicator function for the event E. A sample path ofN(t)is a realization ofNωfor a particular outcomeω. It has the shape of a step function, increasing by one each time an arrival occurs. This is shown in Fig. 3for the nine days of data. The plotted lines are reasonably straight, showing little indication of a change in frequency of arrivals over the day.Ruling out systematic changes in the arrival rate, the question is to which extent the flow can be seen as a homogeneous Poisson process. On the one hand, aircraft enter the sector on six different routes and various altitudes. On the other hand, they are pre-scheduled and obey minimum separations. Fig. 4shows quantile plots for inter-arrival distributions of the nine days of data. A quantile plot compares the distributions of two random variables graphically. The red lines are the observed inter-arrival times against an exponential distribution. They are close to a straight line and fluctuate slightly in the tail, which is not uncommon in these plots. The blue and gray lines arise from other models and will be explained below.Under the assumption that successive inter-arrival times are independent and identically distributed, we performed goodness-of-fit tests. The null hypothesis was that the observations are drawn from an exponential distribution with unknown parameterλ, the alternative hypothesis was that they are not (see below for a comment). We used the family of Cramer-von-Mises tests because a parameter of our null hypothesis (the arrival rate) had to be estimated. Given a samplex1,…,xnof a random variable X, these tests compute the differencezn(x)=Fn(x)-F(x)between the empirical distribution function of the sampleFn(x), that is, the fraction of observations that are less than x, and the distribution functionF(x)of X, that is, the probability that an observation is less than x. More formally, the test statistics of the Cramer-von-Mises family areC=n∫-∞∞zn(x)2ψ(x)dF(x),whereψ(x)is a weight which allows to vary the importance of different parts of the distribution. For example,ψ(x)=1leads to the Cramer-von-Mises test statistics (CvM), whereasψ(x)=(F(x)[1-F(x)])-1leads to the Anderson Darling (A-D) statistics. For comparison, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test computes the largest gapDn=supx|zn(x)|(Stephens, 1993).We simulated the distributions of the test statistics under the null hypothesis by Monte Carlo, taking into account the variability of the estimated parameter. These distributions were used to determine the p-value, that is, the probability of drawing a sample that is at least as large as the observed test statistics. In case that such a probability was less thanα%, we considered the null hypothesis as rejected on a level ofα. Table 1shows the results, where the entries summarize the obtained minimum and maximum values from all tests (one for each day of data). In short, in two out of nine samples, the hypothesis of exponentially distributed inter-arrival times was rejected on a 5% level (both tests rejected the same samples). These two samples are plotted in green in Fig. 4. No pattern can be detected, even after re-estimation of the sample quantiles with interpolation methods.We also tested the Poisson hypothesis of numbers of arrivals withχ2goodness-of-fit tests. The tests were performed for time intervals of sizes 5, 10 and 15min. Our samples were always larger than 200, so inference was based on the asymptotic distribution of the test statistics. The results are shown in the lower part of Table 1. In the 5min interval, the null hypothesis was rejected in five out of nine tests. For the 10 and 15min intervals, the p-values were all higher than 5%. An inspection of the results in the 5min intervals showed that high peaks caused the deviations with the Poisson distribution (see Fig. A.11 and Table A.3 in Appendix A).By the logic of hypothesis testing, goodness-of-fit tests cannot lead to affirmations of the null distribution. Moreover, the power of these tests, i.e. the probability to chose the alternative hypothesis when it is true, is difficult to assess. Typically, Monte-Carlo simulations with a number of ‘typical’ alternative distributions are evaluated (Stephens, 1974). We thus conclude that there is empirical evidence for and against a homogeneous Poisson process as a description for our data. This makes sense for two reasons: firstly, aircraft enter our sector on six different routes and various altitudes. Moreover, there is only moderate congestion because we analyzed a gate in an en-route sector. Both suggest a high degree of randomness in the arrival instants. And secondly, it is known that pre-scheduled arrival flows converge in distribution against the Poisson process, when the uncertainties are very high (Guadagni et al., 2011). But under heavy congestion, such as at the runway threshold, traffic flows are highly regular, for which the Poisson model is no accurate description. The gray curves in Fig. 4 illustrate such a case. In any case, a Poisson process does not take into account pre-scheduled trajectories and their prediction errors, because it depends only on one parameter; the arrival rate. In the next section we analyze a model that reflects the underlying pre-schedule. Its inter-arrival distribution competes well with the observed data for both, moderate and heavy congestion. These are the blue lines in Fig. 4.The empirical analysis confirmed that demand fluctuations are the major driver for metering delays, so we modeled the metering gate as a single server queueing system. Input to the system are flows from the different routes. Output is a single flow, separated by at leastsm=10NM. Depending on speed, wind conditions and human factors, it may vary from time to time. We expected from the analysis to further clarify which part of the observed delays is due to metering and which to operational uncertainties. We analyzed this situation by two families of queuing models; pre-scheduled random arrival (PSRA) and homogeneous Poisson arrivals with either deterministic or general service (M/D/1, M/G/1 in Kendall’s notation, meaning that arrival processes are Poissonian, service times are deterministic in the first and generally i.i.d. distributed in the second, each having one server (Kendall, 1953)). Note that in the same paper, Kendall pointed out that pre-scheduled, but randomly delayed arrivals do not exhibit independent inter-arrival times, as it is most often assumed in the GI arrival process models. As mentioned in the introduction, many other authors analyzed M/G/1 models and generalization for air traffic flow prior to us. Our contribution is that we put this model in context with the more realistic model of pre-scheduled arrivals.A recent model of air traffic flow is given by the so called pre-scheduled random arrival process (PSRA) (Guadagni et al., 2011). Aircraft are scheduled to arrive at fixed (deterministic) times, but uncertainties, such as wind conditions, lead to arrival-time errors(2)atai=stai+ξi,wherestaiis the pre-scheduled arrival time and theξi’s are random variables with varianceσi2. Guadagni et al. (2011) and Guadagni et al. (2013) consider the case where the initial schedule is regularly spaced, i.e.stai=iλ(λis the arrival rate) and generalize it by randomly deleting scheduled points. Moreover, they assume that theξi’s are i.i.d. random variables with compact support (having probability 0 on the tails) or exponential distribution. Their model is motivated by strategic cancellations, such as in the U.S., and allows an analytical treatment. The i.i.d. assumption seems strong, for example external factors such as wind or airport congestion might affect large subsets of flights in a predictable way. However, arrival time errors also depend on individual factors, such as aircraft type, weight, and conflict avoidance manoevres. This uncertainty remains at the core of the problem, and assuming independence here seems reasonable (although the distributions might not be exactly identical). We will analyze Guadagni et al.’s model in more detail and generalize it to situations where traffic is pre-scheduled on a permanent basis, as it is the case in Japan and Europe.Fig. 5shows the PSRA process on the time axis. The points illustrate pre-scheduled arrivals. The arrows indicate the possible arrival-time errors. The number of arrivals#·in time slot[t,t+1)is(3)mt=#i:t⩽atai<t+1.This arrival process is serially correlated, which can be seen as follows. We allow the three events ‘deletion’, ‘early arrival’ and ‘late arrival’ for every pre-scheduled arrival: let p be the probability of non-deletion andq=P(ata<sta). Then the event ‘early arrival’ occurs with probability pq and ‘late arrival’ with probabilityp(1-q). Let us further assume that these operations occur independently for every aircraft. Based on this we can obtain the conditional arrival distribution(4)mij=P(mt+1=j|mt=i).For illustration let us further assumeP(∣ξi∣>1)=0, meaning that arrival time errors are almost surely shorter than the minimum separation (the service time), which we normalize to 1. In this case, slots[t,t+1)and[t+1,t+2)are only affected by the realization of the events of three aircrafta,b,cin Fig. 5. We can thus determine the joint probability of all33possible combinations. For example, deletion of all three aircraft has probability(1-p)3and is one of the 4 events contributing toP(mt+1=0|mt=0). In this way we obtain the exact distribution formij. When the jump lengths are larger than 1, the situation gets more complicated. Winsten (1959) already had a similar approach but did not consider the transient properties. Also, methods from particle physics or batch processes might be helpful, as illustrated in Guadagni et al. (2011) and Lucantoni (1993). Intuitively, the more pre-scheduled arrivals miss their time slot, the more aircraft will arrive in the neighboring slots, leading to a negative autocorrelation.This allows us to describe a discrete time queuing system with PSRA input as a bi-variate homogeneous Markov chain. It depends on the queue lengthntand on the state of the arrival processmt(5)(n,m)t+1=(nt+mt+1-1,mt+1)ifnt>0(mt+1,mt+1)else,wherentis the length of the queue immediately before service at time t andmtis the number of arrivals in time interval[t,t+1), as defined previously. Our queueing system is similar to M/D/1 systems. The main difference is thatmtis auto-correlated, as mentioned above. Note also that the states(n,m), withn<mare invalid, for example(0,2)can never occur. These invalid states are removed from the state space.The one-step transition matrixPijkl=P((n,m)t+1=(k,l)|(n,m)t=(i,j))is thenThe column(n,n)of the first row containsm0n. The columns of rows(n,i)withn>0contain the matrix given by Eq. (4) and shifted by Eq. (5). All other elements are 0. The matrix is finite, because at the end of the day, the airspace is closed. So the last rows are truncated. It is also irreducible which can be seen as follows. Given any two valid states(n,i),(m,j), it is always possible to move first to the state(0,0)by a sequence of zero new arrivals. From the empty queue, the states(m,m)can be reached in one step. To reach all other states(m,j),m>j, a sequence of two new arrivals in every time interval leads to(0,0)→(2,2)→(3,2)→⋯→(m-j+1,2). From there, the state(m,j)can be reached in one step by j new arrivals. Thus, there is a unique stationary probabilityπijfor all states(i,j). They form a row vector. Moreover, the states(n,1),n>0have non-zero probability to remain in themselves because these transitions represent the event that one new arrival occurs subsequently. Thus, since the matrix is finite, all states are aperiodic. So the r-step transition probabilitiespijkl(r)=P((n,m)r=(k,l)|(n,m)0=(i,j))converge to their limiting stationary distribution(6)limr→∞pijkl(r)=πkl,∀i,j,k,l.This allows us to compute the transient probability distribution of the queue length(7)λ(r)=λ(0)Pr,whereλ(0)=(pij)is the initial probability distribution of the queue length coupled with the arrival process. Finally, taking expectations leads to the marginal queue length(8)E[(n,.)r]=∑n=0K∑l=0Lnλnl(r),where K is the total number of aircraft in one day (this is why the chain is finite) and L is the largest number of arrivals in one slot.Before we proceed, a generalization of the PSRA model is necessary. In Eq. (2) withstai=iλ, the pre-scheduled flow has a regular separation between two successive aircraft, which is always1/λ. Guadagni et al. (2011) add the possibility of flight cancellations by random deletions. But in Japan and Europe, pre-scheduled flows consist of flights with and without ground delay. In case of ground delay, their separation will equal the minimum separationsm. Otherwise, their flight plans will remain unchanged. So, the pre-scheduled separation between two consecutive flights is(9)si=smifwi>0,sm+aiifwi=0,wheresmis the minimum separation,withe initial queueing delay of aircraft i andai+smis the initial separation according to the flight plans.These three flows—regular pre-schedule, random deletion and pre-schedule with ground delay—differ in their variance. A regular pre-scheduled flow has variance 0. In the case of random deletions,aitakes valuessm,2sm,…,ism. Eq. (9) generalizes the separations for arbitrary pre-schedules. In the remainder we will speak of pre-variance in this context. Since queueing delays depend on the variance of the processes, we expect that the PSRA model with regular separation under-estimates queueing delays in our application.In summary, although a queueing system with PSRA arrivals has similarity to M/D/1 queues, its properties are structurally different from that of a Poissonian system.Empirical metering delaysw̃were determined as the difference between the observed sector crossing times and estimations of nominal sector crossing times per route. Fig. 6shows an example of one of the six routes. Observed crossing times are plotted against the flown distances inside sector T09. One can see a cluster of points in the range 160–170 NM, taking between 13.5 and 16min, and a branch with correlated distance and crossing times. The red points mark the trajectories, where no radar vectors occurred. These trajectories were considered to be nominal. They took place typically in the early morning hours, where no congestion occurred. We verified the selection graphically, by plotting the corresponding lateral and vertical trajectories. The green points mark trajectories on a flight level higher than FL 350. No pattern can be detected, concerning altitude. For all six routes, the nominal crossing times lay between 14 and 15min with standard deviations between 0.6 and 0.9min. As an estimate, we used their sample average per route.2We compared two data sources: flight plan data and radar data. It turned out that with the flight plan data, a large number of flights had negative delays suggesting that the flight plan information is inaccurate to estimate nominal sector crossing time.2This complicates the analysis because it obscures the true metering delays. As an ad hoc idea, we assume that the empirical metering delaysw̃iconsist of two components; the queueing delaywiand an unknown measurement error∊i(10)w̃i=wi+∊i,where∊iis a random variable, and∊i,∊jare independent and identically distributed fori≠j. In the remainder, we will refer to these ‘obscured’ queueing models asPSRA/D+∊/1,M/D+∊/1andM/G+∊/1.We fitted the various queueing models on our instance. The major questions were (i) the transient behavior of the PSRA model, (ii) the difference between PSRA and Poissonian models, (iii) the difference between deterministic and general service times and (iii) delay patterns that cannot be explained by queueing models.In order to validate the transient analysis in Section 3.1, we extracted radar data of a runway configuration change. This is an event that occurs when the wind direction changes. A number of aircraft has then to be rerouted, which causes increased queue lengths for a certain time. The question is how long it takes until the queue length returns to equilibrium. Fig. 7shows typical results. The horizontal axis is the elapsed time, starting at the beginning of the runway configuration change. The vertical axis is the average queue length. A green dot represents the number of aircraft in the queue counted at each touchdown. The black bold lines are the average queue lengths according to our model (Eq. (8)). The black dotted lines are from a Monte Carlo simulation, where we averaged the queue lengths over 500 runs. We see that the model accurately describes the observed data. Its advantage is to predict the time to return to equilibrium for future traffic intensities. These are in the order of a few hours. For comparison, the gray line is from an M/D/1 queue. Here the equilibrium queue length is significantly larger than in our system. From theory, exponential convergence rates are known for finite Markov chains (e.g. Durrett, 2010), but more analytical work is needed to analyze the transient properties of the PSRA process. Moreover, it turned out that non-symmetrical jumps (q≠1/2) matched the simulations more accurately than symmetrical ones. Until now we could not find an explanation for this.The left panel of Fig. 8shows histograms and densities of metering delays. The gray bars show the empirical data. The light-blue and yellow bars are from the obscured Poissonian and PSRA queues. The parameters were: arrival rate 0.32 (ac/min), deterministic service at 10 NM (0.63 ac/min, based on average ground speed) and obscured metering delay with∊∼N(0,0.8)(min, i.i.d). The arrival time error of the PSRA model wasξ∼N(0,5)(min, i.i.d.), and its pre-variance 7.5min. Note that we also performed simulations with compact support arrival time error (uniform distribution). For an analytical solution of the queueing model, this assumption is important, but in the simulations, the Gaussian model fitted better with the empirical data.Both models fit equally well the empirical data. The ‘true’ shape of the density functions, that is with infinitesimal bins and no obscured term, is shown by the dark-blue and dotted black lines. We computed the density for the M/D/1 queue analytically from Shortle and Brill (2005) and approximated it for PSRA arrivals by a histogram with bin-size 0.1min. Both densities include an atom atw=0min and three segments: one segment reaches until a peak atw=1.6min, the metering distance (the service time). Another segment is determined by another service time and lies between1.6<w⩽3.2min. It is slightly concave. The third segment covers the tail. It turns out that with higher traffic intensities, the segments increase in size and get more and more concave. More details on ‘zig-zag’ densities in the M/D/1 queue can be found in Shortle and Brill (2005).The right panel of Fig. 8 shows the probability distribution functionsP(W⩽w). The bold gray line is the empirical data. The yellow and blue lines are again from the obscured queueing modelsPSRA/D+∊/1andM/D+∊/1. Both fit the data quite well. The dotted black line is from the original PSRA model. We can see again the different segments. The bending of the curves differs between the first segmentw≤1.6min, and the second one1.6<w⩽3.2min. This time, the distribution is continuous, but atw=1.6min (the service time), the bending changes, which corresponds to the discontinuity in the density function. In order to keep the figure interpretable, we do not show the distribution function of the M/D/1 model. As can be inferred from the densities, it resembles closely the one for the PSRA arrivals. From both figures we conclude that PSRA and Poissonian arrivals have comparable queueing behavior in the case of our instance.Fig. 9displays the waiting time distributions under three uncertainty scenarios. The current situation is plotted in black. If the traffic intensity remains as today, but the prediction errorσwill reduce to±0.5min, the metering delays will almost disappear (blue). But if the intensity increases, similar delay patterns as today will occur (red). This means that radar vectoring cannot be eliminated completely in the future. The dotted red curve has pre-variance 5min, whereas the bold ones have pre-variance 0. We found in several simulations, that the pre-variance does not affect the delays strongly. But one question is, if two processes with same rate and pre-variance produce the same queueing delay. We generated processes with same pre-variances for Uniform and Exponential distributions. These models (pre-variance 5 and 7.5min) produced the same delays. But more analysis of the relationship between variance and queueing delay is necessary.The queueing delay in PSRA systems depends mainly on the traffic intensityρand the arrival time errorsξ. A decision rule on how to balance ground and airborne delays can be obtained by looking at the relationship between these variables. Fig. 10shows a contour-plot of the quantile functionw90=f(ρ,σ), whereσis the standard deviation ofξ. For example, the linew90=2.00in the figure has the meaning that metering delay is smaller or equal than 2min on this line in 90% of the cases. We display the 90% quantilesP(W⩽w90)=0.9, but average values would produce similar results. We can see that f is an increasing function in both dimensions. In general, the contour-lines represent the combinations of traffic intensity and prediction error that keep the congestion on a constant level. As one can see, the largest quantile takes the value 5min for all traffic and 2.5min for en-route traffic (ρ<0.75). These values were obtained for a pre-variance of 5min. As mentioned before, the current balance between ground and airborne metering delays is 10min airborne delay. We infer that a considerable rebalance in the order of 5min will be enough in the future. On the other hand, the complete elimination of en-route delay is unlikely because even small uncertainties have the potential to create queues in the vicinity of a very busy airport. As long as runway pressure remains a high priority, radar vectoring remains necessary.Until now, we used a deterministic metering distance of 10NM between all aircraft. Although this is the operational rule, human factors and wind conditions certainly have an impact on it. In fact, closer analysis showed that aircraft pairs with large speed difference were often separated more than 10NM. Extracted from the radar data, the distribution had an average spacing between successive aircraft of 1.64min, which corresponds to the 10NM, based on average ground speed. It was skewed to the right, with the majority of its density in the interval between 1.5 and 2.0min. Its standard deviation was 4.6s.The purpose of the analysis in this section was to assess the impact of variation of the metering distance on the generated metering delay. Standard queuing theory predicts higher delay with increase of variability of the service time (Wolff, 1989). We wanted to see if the assumption of constant service time was critical in our context. We thus sampled the service distribution from the radar data in order to understand the impact of varying service rates in our models. Table 2summarizes the aggregated delay probabilities. For reference, the first three rows are from the radar data. For the flows from Central and South Japan, they are similar (rows 1, 2). Those from International (row 3) appear to be smaller, except for the first bin and the extreme tail.The two rows in the middle compare M/D/1 and M/G/1 models. It turns out that they behave equally. Both have problems with the core part of the real distribution and cover well the tail. The next two rows show the results from the obscured queueing models. Here, we added noise on the waiting times before counting frequencies (as described in subSection 3.2). Roughly, both obscured modelsM/D+∊/1andM/G+∊/1match better in distribution with the radar data. The average metering delay in the radar data was 1.02min, 0.95 in the ordinary and 1.1min in the obscured queueing models. Last but not least, the delays from the PSRA model are printed in the last row. As already seen in the figures, no major difference to the Poissonian ones exist.To conclude, the variations in the service time have no systematic impact on the metering delays. Moreover, theoretical delays under first-come-first-served are the minimal delays, because the separation of 10 NM is constant. Observing that the radar delay is almost identical to the queueing delay was thus not surprising. It also means that the controllers solve the metering task efficiently.There was one interesting detail in the radar data: The flow from Central Japan has a slightly higher average delay than the one from South Japan (1.1min vs. 1.0min). Moreover, the flow from International destinations has only 0.8min average delay. But if the metering strategy were first-come-first-served, the delay probabilities should be the same for every aircraft. One reason for these differences seems to be the sector geometry. Some of the six routes allow larger radar vectors than others. And aircraft from Central Japan arrive more frequently on these routes than aircraft from the South. We found a weak pattern in favor of this explanation in the radar data. One can see that the delay frequencies between 3 and 5min for the flow from Central Japan are slightly higher than in the flow from South Japan (0.05 vs. 0.04 and 0.02 vs. 0.01, bold characters). As far as the flow from International (row 3) is concerned, large delays (5–6min) occur more often than for the domestic flows (0.02 vs. 0.01) but very small delays occur more frequently (0.7 vs. 0.6). It looks as if controllers were penalizing International flights in some conditions and prioritizing them in other conditions. But these patterns, if statistically significant at all, are weak.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we analyzed the most congested traffic flow in Japanese airspace. The current strategy balances delays between the ground and en-route in order to take into account arrival time errors. As long-term strategy, flow managers wish to reduce the amount of en-route delay in order to smoothen the flows. Our approach was empirical, supported by standard and non-classical stochastic queuing models.A radar-data analysis revealed ‘almost’ Poissonian flow characteristics in arrival rate and distribution. The result was expected due to the Japanese pre-scheduling strategy and sector geometry. We then analyzed two classes of queueing models in order to gain more insight into the generation of delays. The first class were pre-scheduled random arrivals (PSRA). They are realistic point-process models of air-traffic flows that take into account the regular structure of flight schedules. Their main property is the negative correlation between successive numbers of arrivals. We built a bi-variate Markov Chain to capture these correlations and looked at transient properties of the average queue length. The convergence to equilibrium took place in the order of a few hours. This is encouraging for further analysis and justification for practical use. The second class were Poisson arrivals with deterministic and sampled service-time distribution. Here we reminded the discontinuities in the waiting time density. It turned out that PSRA and Poissonian models behave equivalently during moderate congestion and differ substantially during very high congestion. The advantage of the PSRA model was to assess the impact of reduction in arrival time errors. This is not possible with Poissonian flows, since they are described only by a rate parameter.Based on these results, we derived a strategic rule for delay balancing that improves the fuel efficiency. From the analysis we concluded that it will not be necessary to allocate up to 10min en-route delay in the future anymore. A rebalance in the order of 5min will be enough. On the other hand, the complete elimination of en-route delay is unlikely because even small uncertainties have the potential to create queues in the vicinity of a busy airport. As long as runway pressure remains a high priority, radar vectoring, like Point Merge or traditional ones, remains necessary. But before applying our results, we encourage more validation, for example by trajectory-based simulation.As far as the methodology is concerned we confirm that non-standard queueing models increase the technical difficulty considerably, although the typical queueing behavior (i.e. rapid growth of delays as soon as demand approaches capacity) is maintained. Therefore, we derived analytical results where possible and used algorithmic and simulation approaches where necessary. We believe that more descriptive and asymptotic properties of the queueing distributions need to be found in order to make work with queueing theory more practical. Also, the variance of the arrival process as driver for the queueing delays shall be further clarified. Transient analysis is more complex in nature but more results on convergence rates are important as a basis for realistic decision making.