@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Demand information and spot price information: Supply chains trading in spot markets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the effect of information updating in a supply chain with spot market.The new demand information also updates the belief on the spot price, and vice versa.Demand information may benefit or hurt the supplier.Spot price information benefits the manufacturer and hurts the supplier.We also study which type of information updating facility to invest in if a choice has to be made.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Information updating,Spot market,Forward contract,Dual sourcing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates the effect of information updating on the members of a two-stage supply chain in the presence of spot market. The supplier decides the contract price. New information becomes available as time progresses. The manufacturer updates his belief on demand and/or spot price and subsequently decides the contract quantity. The demand and spot price are correlated. Thus, the new demand information also updates the belief on the spot price, and vice versa. We model the problem with an information updating Stackelberg game and derive unique equilibrium strategies. Previous studies have considered only the demand information and concluded that improved demand information always benefits the supplier. By contrast, we demonstrate that improved demand information benefits both the supplier and manufacturer if the correlation coefficient between the two uncertainties has a small positive value and benefits the manufacturer but hurts the supplier otherwise. Moreover, superior spot price information benefits only the manufacturer and always hurts the supplier. Surprisingly, superior information fails to improve the performance of the supply chain and only changes the allocation of the profits between the supplier and manufacturer. Our findings likewise provide insights into when the supplier intends to use the contract channel and which type of information updating facility or expertise to invest in if a choice must be made.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Information updating facilitates decision making. Accurate demand information can improve pricing strategy and inventory management. The popularity of spot markets has prompted firms to focus both on the end customer demand uncertainty and the spot price volatility of intermediate goods (e.g., raw material). Accurate information on the spot price is important for firms to manage their procurement costs. Firms collect data not only to forecast demand but also commodity price, and various methods have been explored (Anderson, Kellogg, Sallee, & Curtin, 2011; Chen, Rogoff, & Rossi, 2010). The accuracy of the information on the spot price and/or end customer demand also affects the strategies and profitability of the upstream supplier, as well as the entire supply chain.We investigate an information updating Stackelberg game that involves both demand and spot price information. Specifically, we consider a supply chain that consists of a risk-neutral supplier and a risk-averse manufacturer, which is a simplified situation but reasonably approximates several commodity industries. For instance, the degree of market concentration in the Asian monoethylene glycol (MEG) industry is relatively high due to significant investment and strict environment requests. The suppliers, such as MEGlobal, SINOPEC, and Shell, are large companies that are often publicly listed and can smooth out their profit variabilities. These companies can be considered risk neutral in this supplier–manufacturer game. As raw material suppliers, the companies usually provide forward contracts for their products monthly or quarterly, and the single-price (wholesale) contract is popularly used. The downstream markets are less concentrative than upstream ones and have many medium-sized manufacturers who use MEG to produce different types of products such as polyester fibers, polyethylene terephthalate resins, antifreeze formulations and other fine chemical products. Compared with their suppliers, these manufacturers are private and have relatively weaker capability to deal with risk uncertainties, and are thus considered as risk averse (Chod & Lyandres, 2011). The supplier usually decides on her contract prices several weeks before the targeted sales season, and the downstream manufacturers are required to submit the order (contract) quantity before the targeted sales season. For instance, MEGlobal usually adjusts its Asian contract price (ACP) monthly, and announces the ACP for the targeted month two or three weeks earlier.11Detailed information can be found in www.315.com.cn and www.fibre2fashion.com/news/company-news/meglobal/.To illustrate, Table 1provides the ACP of MEGlobal in 2013. As the Stackelberg follower, the manufacturer typically processes more updated information when making his decision than the supplier who determines the pricing strategy earlier than the manufacturer. Moreover, the downstream firm is risk averse and has an incentive to acquire both demand and price information to control risk exposure. We use “information updating” or “forecasting” in this paper to describe information acquisition. We note that new information can be obtained as time passes even without sophisticated forecasting systems.In addition to contract transactions, the online spot market likewise plays an important role in the Asian MEG industry. The spot market has accounted for 30 percent of the total MEG transactions in Asia, and this proportion continues to increase as the popularity of online trading grows. For instance, BOCE (www.boce.cn) is a leading online spot market in China for trading MEG. As transactions are completed online, the overhead expenses are reduced dramatically, and BOCE has attracted more than 10,000 regular market participants by 2013. Fig. 1 plots the spot price of MEG in BOCE in 2013.Based on the preceding observations, this paper aims to understand the following important questions: (1) How does the accuracy of the demand or spot price information of a manufacturer affect the channel choice between the forward contract and spot market; for instance, does more accurate information induce a tendency of forward contract or spot sale? (2) How does the information-updating accuracy of a manufacturer affect the performances of the supplier, manufacturer, and the entire supply chain? Is a better demand/spot price information always preferred? (3) Which type of information updating is preferred by the manufacturer and supplier, information on demand or spot price? Will an agreement be achieved between the manufacturer and the supplier?We provide the analysis with a general model framework in which the manufacturer conducts both demand and price information updating (BF). To separate the effects of these two types of information updating, we consider two special cases, namely, demand information updating (DF) and spot price information updating (SF). In the case of DF, the manufacturer may have the capability for obtaining better and more precise demand information. This scenario may represent a setting in which the manufacturer pays more attention to the demand side and sales, and this manufacturer is of the revenue-care type. In the case of SF, the manufacturer pays more attention to material procurement cost and can obtain better and more precise spot price information. This scenario may represent the setting in which the manufacturer is more concerned about its supply and procurement costs than demand and sales, and this manufacturer is of the cost-care type.We use the property of bivariate normal distribution to derive the information updating from two random variables and solve the unique equilibrium strategies for the Stackelberg game. We subsequently obtain the condition under which the supplier intends to sell via forward contract. The contract price charged by the supplier always decreases with the spot price information accuracy but may either increase or decrease with the demand information accuracy. We further demonstrate that superior demand information benefits both the supplier and manufacturer if the correlation coefficient between the demand and spot price is small but hurts the supplier otherwise. This finding implies an effect of information different from that of previous studies that only consider demand information updating. Information updating on the spot price always benefits the manufacturer but hurts the supplier. Surprisingly, neither accurate demand nor spot price information improves the overall performance of the entire supply chain. When a choice has to be made between the two types of information updating, we determine that a more risk-averse manufacturer will prefer to forecast the demand, which is preferred by the supplier, when the spot price volatility is relatively large and the demand volatility is not. However, a less risk-averse manufacturer prefers to acquire the spot price information, whereas the supplier selects the demand information. When the demand uncertainty dominates the spot price uncertainty, the manufacturer always prefers the demand forecast regardless of risk attitude. An agreement in information preference between the players is achieved only when the manufacturer is less risk averse.Considerable research has examined the effect of demand information updating on supply chains. However, the effect of spot price information updating has been ignored by researchers, let alone its effect when the two sources of information interact, although firms acquire and use both types of information in practice. Considering the other side of the story allows us to completely understand the pros and cons of information updating for supply chains. For instance, when the two sources of uncertainty are positively correlated, improved demand information actually hurts the supplier, which diverges with the common belief that more accurate demand information of the manufacturer benefits the supplier. Our unique model formulation enables us to provide suggestions to managers on when to improve demand or spot price information updating accuracies. We can recommend a type of information updating facility in which they should invest if a choice must be made.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the related literature. In Section 3, we present the model and describe the information updating process. In Section 4, we solve the equilibrium of the information updating Stackelberg game. In Section 5, we analyze and compare the effects of forecast accuracies on decisions and performances. Finally, we offer concluding remarks and opportunities for future research. We provide proofs and the extension of the model in Appendices A–C.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Online spot market has increasingly become a convenient sourcing channel for manufacturers. The volatile nature of spot price, along with the highly uncertain demand, has become an increasingly important factor that affects the decisions and performance of the manufacturer. Modeling the stochastic nature of spot price and demand and the asymmetric market information on the two uncertainties processed by the supply chain members allows this paper to provide unique contributions to the literature and practitioners through the following conclusions:(1)The contract channel is always used along with the spot market when the spot price volatility is relatively high as compared to the demand volatility, the correlation between the two random variables is low, and the manufacturer is more risk-averse (Proposition 2). Moreover, demand information updating induces the supplier to more likely use the contract sale. However, the superior spot price information causes the supplier to become reluctant to sell through contract. These findings are helpful for the supplier to arrange her channel strategy in advance.The supplier charges a higher contract price as the increase of the demand information accuracy of the manufacturer when the demand volatility is relatively high as compared to the spot price volatility, the correlation is low, and the spot price accuracy is high. Otherwise, the supplier will charge a lower contract price when the manufacturer improves his demand information accuracy (Proposition 3). However, the contract price always decreases as the capability of the manufacturer in spot price forecasting improves (Propositions 4). The expected order quantity of the manufacturer increases with the accuracy of demand information updating, but it is unaffected by the spot price information accuracy (Proposition 5). This finding helps managers adjust their operational and contracting strategies in responding to their market information.With only demand information updating available, the improved information benefits both the supplier and the manufacturer if the correlation between the demand and the spot price has a small positive value. In this case, the players can achieve a Pareto improvement by advancing forecasting capacity. However, if the correlation coefficient is relatively large, the improved demand forecast benefits the manufacturer but hurts the supplier (Fig. 4). With only spot price updating available, accurate information always benefits the manufacturer but hurts the supplier (Fig. 5 and Proposition 6). A surprising insight for policy makers is that improved information on either type has no effect on the total expected supply chain profit (Proposition 7).Comparing the two types of information updating, we find that the manufacturer always prefers the demand forecast when the demand volatility is relatively high as compared to the spot price volatility, the correlation coefficient is relatively high, and the forecast capacity of the manufacturer is low. In this case, the supplier hopes a more risk-averse manufacturer to forecast the spot price and a less risk-averse manufacturer to acquire the demand information. When the demand volatility is relatively low as compared to the spot price volatility, the correlation coefficient is relatively low, and the forecast capacity of the manufacturer is high, the more risk-averse manufacturer selects the demand forecast, whereas a less risk-averse manufacturer prefers to acquire the spot price information, although the supplier always wants the manufacturer to acquire the demand information (Fig. 6 and Proposition 9). This finding provides a unique contribution to supply chain information literature that has focused on demand information. Moreover, by considering the spot price information and correlations between the two random variables, we provide managers with guidance on which type of information is more valuable under a specific situation.In summary, this paper explores the supply chain behavior under asymmetric market information on both demand and spot price. We model the problem with an information updating Stackelberg game in which the supplier decides the contract price; as time progresses and new information becomes available, the manufacturer updates his beliefs on the demand and/or the spot price, and then decides the order quantity. Finally, the supplier and the manufacturer can trade in the spot market to sell the extra supply or buy for the unsatisfied demand. The correlation between the demand and spot price likewise allows updating the demand information to reveal some information on the spot price, and vice versa. We initially derive the posterior distributions of stochastic demand and spot price and then proceed with the equilibrium, strategy, and performance analyses. Several other extensions and avenues are possible for future research. Considering information sharing instead of asymmetric information between a supplier and a manufacturer in the presence of a spot market may be a valuable research direction. Extensions that include a competitive setting of either manufacturers or suppliers might be interesting to pursue as well.