@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated approach for planning a long-term care network with uncertainty, strategic policy and equity considerations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an integrated approach for planning a multi-service network of LTC.We develop a stochastic MILP model that considers uncertainty in demand and supply.The model aims at minimizing expected costs while ensuring satisficing equity levels.The model explores how strategic health policy options can influence LTC delivery.The model is applied to a region of Portugal and equity-cost trade-offs are calculated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,LTC planning,Multi-service,Uncertainty,Equity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Considering key uncertainties and health policy options in the reorganization of a long-term care (LTC) network is crucial. This study proposes a stochastic mixed integer linear programming model for planning the delivery of LTC services within a network of care where such aspects are modeled in an integrated manner. The model assists health care planners on how to plan the delivery of the entire range of LTC services – institutional, home-based and ambulatory services – when the main policy objective is the minimization of expected costs and while respecting satisficing levels of equity. These equity levels are modeled as constraints, ensuring the attainment of equity of access, equity of utilization, socioeconomic equity and geographical equity. The proposed model provides planners with key information on: when and where to locate services and with which capacity, how to distribute this capacity across services and patient groups, and which changes to the network of care are needed over time. Model outputs take into account the uncertainty surrounding LTC demand, and consider strategic health policy options adopted by governments. The applicability of the model is demonstrated through the resolution of a case study in the Great Lisbon region in Portugal with estimates on the equity-cost trade-off for several equity dimensions being provided.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Long-term care (LTC) includes a broad range of health and social services designed for individuals suffering from chronic illness and/or disabilities (OECD, 2005). LTC is currently provided in many developed countries (Brodsky & Clarfield, 2009), but there are differences in the way they organize these services, either by: 1) providing care in a variety of settings, including short-term to longer institutionalizations, home-based and ambulatory services; 2) having the provision of care shared between the family, public and private sectors; and 3) establishing different boundaries between the health and social care services (European Commission, 2008; Kraus et al., 2010). For instance, in countries with a National Health Service (NHS), such as Portugal and England, health and social LTC services are delivered to the population under different schemes: while health-related services are nearly free at the point of use and financed by taxation, access to social care is usually means-tested (Barros, Machado & Simões, 2011; Boyle, 2011).One of the most important challenges for European LTC systems is to be responsive to an increasing demand for care (Knapp & Somani, 2009). This is mainly due to the ageing phenomenon, to an increase in the prevalence of chronic diseases and to changes in family structures. An adequate supply of care is thus required to address this increasing demand, but most healthcare systems are still ill-equipped to meet that challenge (Gibson, 2006). This low supply of LTC results in higher costs for the health system, mainly due to an inadequate utilization of acute care services by LTC patients (Mission Unit for Long-Term Care, 2010). Within this setting, currently investing in and planning LTC networks represent a health policy priority in many European countries. Additionally, in the context of a strong pressure to decrease public health spending, NHS-based countries (for instance, Portugal) are compelled to minimize the delivery costs, while equity becomes a secondary concern. The development of tools to support such decisions is indeed a challenge (Rais & Viana, 2010).Mathematical programming models have been widely used in the health care planning literature (Brailsford & Vissers, 2011), but several challenges still need to be addressed in this area. In particular, there is a lack of research on developing mathematical programming planning models in the LTC sector and comprehensively considering key features, such as i) the multi-service nature of health care services, ii) the effect of uncertainty and of strategic health policy decisions on planning decisions over time, and iii) the joint effect of cost and equity considerations.Our study aims to address this gap by proposing an integrated approach based on a two-stage stochastic mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model – the LTC2SSmodel, with 2SS standing for Two-Stage Stochastic model – to support the planning of strategic and tactical decisions in the LTC sector. The model is set for the context of an NHS-based country and takes into account cost and equity concerns. The main objective is the minimization of expected cost, while equity considerations – namely, equity of access, equity of utilization, socioeconomic equity and geographical equity – are modeled as constraints, in the form of satisficing equity levels that need to be respected in LTC delivery. The LTC2SSconsiders the impact of demand uncertainty and of strategic health policy options in the planning of an LTC network, as well as the multi-service nature of LTC by accounting for a wide range of institutional, home-based and ambulatory services. The LTC2SSprovides planners (hereafter generically named as decision-makers, DMs) with detailed information regarding: i) where and when should multiple LTC services be located and with which capacities (in terms of beds and human resources); ii) how should this capacity be distributed across services and patient groups; and iii) which changes are needed in this network over time, including capacity adjustments and the opening/closure of services. The LTC2SSmodel is applied at the county level in the Great Lisbon region in Portugal for the 2014–2016 period.Section 2 of this article presents a brief literature review on related methods. The problem under study is stated in Section 3. The mathematical formulation of the model is presented in Section 4, with the case study and key results being explored in Section 5. Some conclusions and lines for future research are included in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
