@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operational risk: Emerging markets, sectors and measurement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introduce a method to measure operational risk in emerging markets.Operational risk is higher in emerging markets than developed ones.Operational risk dependent on industry sector.Market development more dominant influence on operational risk than sector.Shape of operational risk distribution affected by market development and sector.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Operational risk,Emerging markets,Sector,Risk management,Investment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The role of decision support systems in mitigating operational risks in firms is well established. However, there is a lack of investment in decision support systems in emerging markets, even though inadequate operational risk management is a key cause of discouraging external investment. This has also been exacerbated by insufficient understanding of operational risk in emerging markets, which can be attributed to past operational risk measurement techniques, limited studies on emerging markets and inadequate data.In this paper, using current operational risk techniques, the operational risk of developed and emerging market firms is measured for 100 different companies, for 4 different industry sectors and 5 different countries. Firstly, it is found that operational risk is consistently higher in emerging market firms than in the developed markets. Secondly, it is found that operational risk is not only dependent upon the industry sector but also that market development is the more dominant factor. Thirdly, it is found that the market development and the sector influence the shape of the operational risk distribution, in particular tail and skewness risk. Furthermore, an operational risk measurement method is provided that is applicable to emerging markets. Our results are consistent with under investment in decision support systems in emerging markets and imply operational risk management can be improved by increased investment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Operational risk, the risk arising from operational activities, has been gaining increasing attention as a source of risk within firms (Beroggi & Waliace, 2000). The role of decision support systems in reducing costs and operational risks is well established within literature; there has been much research documenting that decision support systems improve operational performance (see for instance Chan, Jiang, & Tang, 2000; Beroggi & Wallace, 1994; Clark & Chapman, 1987; Repede & Bernardo, 1994).Despite this, little analysis has been done to quantify the degree of operational risk in firms, yet a key role of decision support systems is reducing operational risk. Consequently, the importance of decision support systems in relation to managing operational risk is not fully understood. For instance, is operational risk sufficiently low enough (compared to other firms) or is additional decision support systems investment required? Did past decision support systems investments improve (or worsen) operational risk and if so by how much?The ability to answer such questions and benchmark one’s operational risk performance is especially important in emerging markets, where it is recognised that companies tend to be exposed to greater operational risk e.g. system errors, fraud etc. (see for instance (Ray & Das, 2010; Smimou, 2014), who cites fraud as an important factor in emerging markets). Emerging markets have attracted significant interest in industry and research (e.g. Dong, Kouvelis, & Su, 2013; Kallio, Kuula, & Oinonen, 2012; Vidal-Garcá & Vidal, 2014; Zmeškal, 2005). Despite that operational risk is an important factor in emerging markets, there is a lack of investment in decision support systems in emerging markets when their firms are compared to their peers in developed markets (see Berardi, Patuwo, & Hu, 2004; Meng & Lee, 2007). This is even more puzzling given that there exist incentives to invest in decision support systems; foreign investors tend to avoid emerging markets solely due to operational risk issues (see Khanna & Palepu, 2006; Khanna et al., 2005).The fact that incentives exist to implement decision support systems in emerging market firms but do not invest in them suggest that they do not fully comprehend their level of operational risk exposure. This has been due to a number of interacting reasons. Firstly, most research relating to operational risk has not focussed on emerging markets. Hence emerging market firms have less understanding on their operational risk, which in turn impacts decision support systems expenditure. Secondly, emerging markets typically present significant data acquisition challenges and so applying any quantitative methodology becomes impractical. Hence, the understanding and analysis of operational risk in emerging markets has been limited.Thirdly, there has been little development in techniques to quantify operational risk. The current methods of quantifying the impact of decision support systems have not focussed upon operational risk or any risk measurement, rather they have focussed around event studies (such as in (Chai, Kim, & Rao, 2011; Meng & Lee, 2007)) and cost-benefit analyses (for example (Gayialis & Tatsiopoulos, 2004; Ozdamar, Bozyel, & Birbil, 1998; Santhanam & Kyparisis, 1996)). The cost-benefit analyses typically focus on cost reductions and efficiency savings; the event study method examines the benefit in share returns from introducing systems. Both methods do not quantify risk but also they focus on the operational gains from a single system, rather than examining the operational risk of the overall company, hence their analysis is limited in scope.In the past decade, operational risk literature has significantly developed; various methods and techniques have been developed which now enable us to analyse operational risk more effectively. For instance, models and data are now being utilised to quantify the operational risk of firms (Chorafas, 2004; Loader, 2002). This now enables us to compare the operational risk between firms, markets and sectors and so enable us to determine whether firms are adequately managing their operational risk (e.g. through sufficient decision support systems investment). However, the literature on decision support systems and operational risk in emerging markets has been practically non-existent. Furthermore, many operational risk measurement techniques have demanding data requirements that prohibit their application to emerging markets (since such markets have low data availability).In this paper the operational risk in emerging and developed markets is measured and compared for 100 different firms, over 4 different industry sectors and in 5 different countries. Our operational risk measurement method utilises publicly available financial data that is available in emerging and developed markets; in particular stock price data from 2007 to 2012 is used and other empirical financial data such as balance sheets. Hence our method does not prohibit analysis of emerging markets.This paper makes a number of contributions. Firstly, a method of measuring operational risk is provided that is applicable to developed and emerging markets; it is not prohibited from investigating emerging markets by circumventing significant data demands. Secondly, it is shown that operational risks are dependent on the level of market development (specifically emerging or developed), suggesting that emerging market firms are significantly underfunded in decision support systems. Thirdly, it is found that there is a dependency on operational risk to industry sector, which is expected since differing industries have differing exposure to operational risk. Fourthly, it is found that the level of market development is more important than the industry sector in determining operational risk. Finally, market and sector factors affect the shape of the operational risk distribution, in particular skewness and tail risk. Such results are consistent with insufficient investment in decision support systems in emerging markets.The rest of the paper is organised as follows: in the next section operational risk is introduced, defining it, the motivation for study and providing a literature review of related research. The next section explains the method for measuring operational risk, its implementation and calibration. The proceeding section explains our method, data, presents our results and analysis. The paper finally ends with a conclusion.Risk management is one of the key functions of any business (see for instance (Ansaripoor, Oliveira, & Liret, 2014; Fertis, Baes, & Lüuthi, 2012; Gaivoronski, Sechi, & Zuddas, 2012; Mitra, Date, Mamon, & Wang, 2013; Singh, Murthi, & Stefes, 2013)), although the 2008 financial crisis demonstrated the continued existence of weak risk management practices (Voinea & Anton, 2009). Operational risk is the risk arising from the operational activities in conducting business, rather than the business’s ‘financial’ risk; in Hahn and Kuhn (2012) defines operational risk as the result from the uncertainty of future events in the ordinary course of business. Examples of operational risk include I.T. failure (physical or software), damage to physical assets (e.g. through natural disasters), administration errors (e.g. incorrect data entry), fraud and other operational activities. Operational risk is therefore encountered by all types of businesses, regardless of industry sector.Operational risk has increased over the years as operations have begun to play an increasingly prominent role in businesses. The primary reasons for this are that firstly companies use highly sophisticated technologies to manage operations nowadays (Chowdhury, 2003). This typically increase the risk in operations and so the likelihood of unpredictable losses. Secondly, businesses have increased their degree of reliance upon operational activities over time, hence they become increasingly more vulnerable to operational risks. For instance, Westland (2002) and Ngai and Wat (2005) discuss the operational risks associated with e-commerce and the impact on businesses.The literature on decision support systems playing crucial roles in reducing operational risk has been well established. For example, in Ngai and Wat (2005) the importance of operational risk is highlighted in e-commerce and its impact on businesses. In Hong and Lee (2013) the operational risk confronting procurement processes is investigated and decision support systems are proposed to model various operational risks that exist. In Garcıa-Dastugue and Lambert (2003) discuss the use of internet specific decision support systems in reducing operational risk facing companies in supply chain related risks. In Kim, Altinkemer, and Bisi (2012) yield management decision support systems reduce operational losses but also improve workforce utilisation.Despite the acknowledged importance of decision support systems in improving operational risk management in firms, it has been recognised in various studies that emerging market firms typically do not have the same level of decision support systems as in developed markets. For instance Berardi et al. (2004) point out that emerging market firms are unable to take advantage of decision support systems due to emerging markets firms having inadequate systems. In Meng and Lee (2007) it is discussed that the gap between developed and developing countries is widening due to the slow adoption of IT systems.A potential explanation for the lack of decision support systems investment in emerging markets could be attributed to a lack of investment demand in such firms, however, emerging market firms typically attract high investment demand. In fact, the emerging markets have attracted significant investment demand from investors in developed markets. This can be explained by a number of factors. Firstly, they offer potentially relatively higher returns than their domestic counterparts. Secondly, investment in emerging markets enables one to diversify his portfolio. Thirdly, stringent capital controls have become increasingly relaxed, which has encouraged foreign investment in emerging markets.The lack of investment in decision support systems is even more puzzling given that a key cause for discouraging foreign investors in emerging markets arises from poor operational risk management. For instance in Khanna et al. (2005) the operational risk arising from a lack of regulatory systems in emerging market firms lead to foreigners avoiding investment in such firms; in fact American firms believe they operationally perform better in their home country than in emerging markets. In Khanna and Palepu (2006) emphasise the importance of operational execution and governance in building world class companies in emerging markets, yet there are varying degrees of emphasis placed on governance (Khanna & Palepu, 2006).Despite that incentives exist to invest in decision support systems, the shortfall in investment therefore suggests there is a lack of understanding operational risk within emerging market firms. This can be attributed to a number of key reasons: data issues, lack of operational risk techniques and a deficiency of operational risk or decision support systems studies in emerging markets. Firstly, with respect to insufficient operational risk or decision support systems studies in emerging markets, the majority of literature on operational risk or decision support systems has been primarily focussed on developed markets (Chowdhury, 2003). For example in Blass, Yafeh, and Yosha (1998) they comment that most corporate governance research has focussed on developed markets, rather than emerging markets, yet such governance is crucial to operational risk management.Secondly, operational risk analysis in emerging markets is scarce because there is typically insufficient data for the studies (see for instance Chai et al., 2011; Chowdhury, 2003). The required data for emerging market firms is frequently unavailable, either publicly or from proprietary databases, as the relevant data is not recorded. Moreover, current operational risk methods have been known to be highly restrictive in application due to their non-trivial data requirements. Consequently, applying any methodology to emerging markets is non-trivial.Thirdly, there has been inadequate development of operational risk techniques in the past, hence the examination of the impact of decision support systems upon companies has been practically non-existent. The majority of studies examining the impact of decision support systems on firms in emerging markets have taken the form of event study methodologies; see for instance Chai et al. (2011) and Bose and Pal (2012). Event studies examine the impact on share prices due to the introduction of some system, for instance Meng and Lee (2007) analyse the impact on Chinese share prices following the introduction of a new IT system. However, event studies require choosing an expected returns model and the choice can significantly vary between studies, yet results can be significantly impacted by model choice. Other decision support systems studies have examined their impact in terms of costs and benefits yet risk is not analysed. Although some decision support systems studies perform operational risk analysis it is highly non-quantitative (see for instance Van Wyk, Dahmer, & Custy, 2004) and so has limited analytical use.In all the previously mentioned methods, given that operational risk in firms is not typically analysed, our comprehension of decision support systems in managing operational risk is impacted. The understanding is limited and the non-quantitative analysis of operational risk that is undertaken has minimal insight. Furthermore, all of these methods are typically focussed upon analysing the operational benefits arising from a single source, system or entity. Therefore, the entire operational issues or operational risk of the entire firm are not examined, hence the analyses are typically limited in scope.In the past decade the literature in operational risk has significantly grown (see for instance Chorafas, 2004; Loader, 2002). Using such literature and techniques it is now possible to measure operational risk in firms more effectively; operational risk of firms can be quantified in different sectors and markets. However, there is still insubstantial literature with respect to operational risk in emerging markets; this has also been exacerbated by a lack of data in such markets. Moreover, many operational risk measurement techniques have significant data requirements (to be discussed in the proceeding section) which prohibit their application to emerging markets. This leads us to devising an operational risk measure that allows us to measure operational risk in emerging markets, based on the Single Index Model (Zvi, Alex, & Alan, 1999), and to address the following research questions:–To compare the operational risk of emerging markets to developed markets and to determine to what extent emerging market firms are (more or less) riskier than developed markets?To compare the operational risk across different industry sectors to determine to what extent operational risk varies between sectors?To determine how the shape of the operational risk distribution varies with market development and industry sector, in particular with respect to skewness and tail risk?In this section the operational risk measurement methodology is introduced, explaining the operational risk measure, its calibration and implementation.To measure operational risk in emerging markets requires a measure that does not impose stringent data requirements. This is because emerging markets are typified by scarcity of any data in general; given that operational risk data is frequently unavailable in developed markets, therefore emerging markets will not provide substantial operational risk data (see for instance Chai et al., 2011; Chowdhury, 2003).The specification of an operational risk measure with undemanding data needs is a non-trivial requirement, given that many operational risk measures impose significant data requirements. For instance, Cummins, Lewis, and Wei (2006) requires a proprietary database to measure operational risk; such databases are difficult to obtain for confidentiality reasons but also are unlikely to exist for emerging market firms. In Allen and Bali (2007) operational risk is examined without a proprietary database but still requires large amounts of empirical data that may not exist in emerging markets.Other operational risk measures exist that have fewer data requirements (such as the Basic Indicator Approach and Standardised Approach) but they are inappropriate for this study for 2 key reasons. Firstly, such measures are typically focus towards particular industry sectors and so would not be applicable to a range of sectors, as required in our paper. Secondly, such measures can be theoretically inconsistent, for instance they explicitly imply that higher profitability must lead to higher operational risk. Yet higher profitability can directly arise from lowering operational risk.From risk measurement theory one can quantify risk by applying some appropriate statistical measure to the return distribution (Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, & Heath, 1997); examples are quantiles (or Value at Risk) and standard deviation (Szegö, 2005). To measure operational risk therefore requires applying some statistical measure to the return distribution attributed to operational risk only. A popular definition of operational risk assumes that total risk of company A, R(A), is given by(1)R(A)=RM(A)+RC(A)+ROR(A),whereRM(A),RC(A),ROR(A)are the market, credit and operational risk, respectively, of company A. Therefore operational risk is measured as the residual risk remaining once market and credit risk are removed (Loader, 2002).To obtain the return distribution due to operational risk (from which one can obtain a measure of operational risk using a statistical measure), one can quantify the returns from operational risk using the Single Index Model (SIM) and Eq. (1). The SIM is a well established financial model for stock prices in academic literature and it is also used in industry. The SIM has been widely studied in a number of papers (see for instance Ahmed, 2007; Bilbao, Arenas, Rodrguez, & Antomil, 2007; Chen & Brown, 1983; Kwan, 1984) and an accepted model for stock returns. Furthermore, the SIM is applicable to any sector and it is able to account for stock returns whilst also being consistent with the financial theory of risk; such properties are important to risk measurement in our paper.Under SIM the return of asset i at time t,ri(t), is given by(2)ri(t)=αi+βi[rM(t)-rf(t)]+rf(t)+ei(t),(3)andE[ri(t)-rf(t)]=αi+βiE[rM(t)-rf(t)],where:•rM(t)denotes the return of the market or a stock market index;rf(t)denotes the riskless rate;αi,βiare the alpha and beta of asset i, respectively;ei(t)is the residual of asset i.In the SIM model the market risk returns are given by(4)βiE[rM(t)-rf(t)],hence the total stock return with returns due to market risk removed is given by(5)ri(t)-βiE[rM(t)-rf(t)].One also notes in passing that this equation is also equal to(6)αi+rf(t)+ei(t),by applying Eq. (2).Using Eq. (1), one can therefore obtain stock returns due to operational risk if one can remove returns due to credit risk from Eq. (5). In other words, returns due to operational risk factors for asset i,φi(t), is given by(7)φi(t)=ri(t)-βiE[rM(t)-rf(t)]-yi(t),or alternatively,(8)φi(t)=αi+rf(t)+ei(t)-yi(t),whereyi(t)is the returns from credit risk factors. Once one can calculateφi(t)one can then obtain a distribution of operational risk returns ofφi(t)and therefore apply some risk measure to calculate the operational risk.Our measurement of operational risk has a number of advantages. Firstly, compared to many operational risk measures, it does not have demanding data requirements. The method requires data that is easily obtainable, such as stock prices and other market data (e.g. interest rates). Hence our method can be applied to developed as well as emerging markets, which is the main purpose of this study. If one were to use risk measures using operational loss databases then one could only study a limited number of markets and sectors.Secondly, our method can be applied to a range of sectors. The SIM model (and calculation ofyi(t)to be discussed in the proceeding section) can be applied to any sector. As mentioned previously, some operational risk measures are not applicable to all industry sectors, however our method allows measurement and comparison of operational risk across different sectors. Thirdly, the measure does not pose significant calibration and implementation problems. The SIM model is known for its parsimony of calibration and implementation (Zvi et al., 1999); the credit returnsyi(t)calculation will be discussed in the next section.To measure operational risk requires obtaining the distributionφi(t)and applying some statistical measure to it. To determineφi(t)requires estimating market risk returns, which requires estimation ofβiandrM. TherMis observable from any stock market index return data, which is typically available from public sources (in developed or emerging markets), hence does not require estimation. Similarly,rfdata is also publicly available in any market and so does not require estimation. Theβiis estimated by standard linear regression; one regresses(9)Y=mX+C+∊i(t),where•Y=ri(t)-rf(t);m=βi;X=rM(t)-rf(t);C is a constant;∊i(t)is the error term.Thereforeβiis estimated from the gradient of the regression equation. There exist numerous built-in functions for standard linear regression for different packages; Matlab was used for our regression.A method of estimatingyi(t)was required and the SIM theory provides no method on measuring credit risk returns. Additionally, our measurement method must enable measurement in a range of sectors and emerging markets. An obvious measure of credit risk returns would be corporate bond yields for each stock, however such data is not always readily available, especially in emerging markets. Other possible models to estimate credit risk returns include analytical models such as the Leland and Toft model (Leland & Toft, 1996) or Denzler, Dacorogna, Müller, and McNeil (2006), however these make unsuitable assumptions for our study (e.g. credit risk is independent of the sector) and more stringent data requirements than using corporate bonds. Reduced form models (e.g. Jarrow-Turnbull model, Jarrow & Turnbull, 1995) also have demanding data requirements but also the results are significantly sensitive to calibration.An appropriate method for calculatingyi(t)is Merton’s structural model of default (Merton, 1974); this method has been applied in academic research and industry. The principal idea behind Merton’s model is that the credit risk event of default behaves like a financial option. One assumes that a company has an amount of debt due at a future time T and that the company defaults if the value of its assets is less than the required debt repayment at time T.The shareholder’s equity value is given in Merton’s model byE(T)=[A(T)-D(T)]+,where•T is the expiry date of the debt;E(T) is the market value of company’s total equity at time T;A(T) is the total value of company assets at time T;D(T) is the total value of company debt at time T.As credit default behaves like a European call option it is possible to apply the Black–Scholes equation (Black & Scholes, 1973) and obtain the credit risk return associated with a stock. In Hull, Nelken, and White (2004) the credit risk returnyi(t)is given by(10)yi(t)=rf(t)-(ln[N(d2)+(N(-d1)/L)])/(T-t),where(11)d1=-lnL/(σA(T-t))+0.5σA(T-t),(12)d2=d1-σA(T-t),(13)L=D(t)e-r(T-t)/A(t)=D∗(t)/A(t),and•T is the credit risk return period foryiat time t (and the expiry date of the debt);σAis the volatility of company i asset value;A(t) is the total value of company i assets at time t;D(t) is the total value of company i debt at time t;N(.) is the cumulative distribution function for the standard Normal distribution.To estimateyi(t)requires estimation of L, which in turn requires D(t). The total liabilities for D(t) are obtained using the same methodology in Hull et al. (2004); one uses company financial statements and these are typically available for all publicly traded companies in emerging markets.To determineyi(t)one needs to calculateA(t)andσA. To estimate the variablesA(t)andσAone uses a set of equations from Merton’s credit risk model:(14)E(t)σE=N(d1)A(t)σA,(15)σE=σAN(d1)/(N(d1)-LN(d2)),where•E(t) is the market value of the company’s total equity at time t;σEis the stock price volatility.The stock volatilityσEcan be estimated by standard econometric methods andE(t)can be observed at time t as it is the stock price multiplied by the number of shares issued in the company.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
