@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-mode resource constrained multi-project scheduling and resource portfolio problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new multi-project environment with resource dedication policy is proposed.A resource portfolio within budget limit is determined under resource dedication.Mathematical formulation for this new multi-project environment is presented.We employ genetic algorithm and combinatorial auction using preference for resources.Results show proposed solution approaches to be computationally efficient.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Project scheduling,Resource portfolio problem,Multi-project scheduling,Resource dedication,Resource preference,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a multi-project problem environment which involves multiple projects with assigned due dates; activities that have alternative resource usage modes; a resource dedication policy that does not allow sharing of resources among projects throughout the planning horizon; and a total budget. Three issues arise when investigating this multi-project environment. First, the total budget should be distributed among different resource types to determine the general resource capacities, which correspond to the total amount for each renewable resource to be dedicated to the projects. With the general resource capacities at hand, the next issue is to determine the amounts of resources to be dedicated to the individual projects. The dedication of resources reduces the scheduling of the projects’ activities to a multi-mode resource constrained project scheduling problem (MRCPSP) for each individual project. Finally, the last issue is the efficient solution of the resulting MRCPSPs. In this paper, this multi-project environment is modeled in an integrated fashion and designated as the resource portfolio problem. A two-phase and a monolithic genetic algorithm are proposed as two solution approaches, each of which employs a new improvement move designated as the combinatorial auction for resource portfolio and the combinatorial auction for resource dedication. A computational study using test problems demonstrated the effectiveness of the solution approach proposed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-project problem environments define the nature of business in most manufacturing and service companies. Different studies also point out this fact. Lova, Maroto, and Tormos (2000) states that 84% of the companies work with multiple, simultaneous projects and Payne (1995) notices that 90%, by value, of all projects occur in the multi-project context. Large construction companies (Liberatore, Pollack-Johnson, & Smith, 2001), for example, regularly execute multi-project scheduling procedures. Resource related decisions are one of the prominent aspects of multi-project environments, since the resource based relations define the environment as a multi-project problem by coupling individual projects. The characterization of resource use by the individual projects in a multi-project environment is called the resource management policy (Besikci, Bilge, & Ulusoy, 2013). Resource management policy can differ with respect to the environment characteristics (e.g., geographical distribution of projects, specific resource characteristics, etc.). A common approach for solving the multi-project scheduling problems in the literature assumes a resource sharing (RS) policy among the different projects forming a shared pool for each renewable resource. This policy cannot be applied in certain multi-project environments where resource sharing is not applicable because of various reasons. The most common ones are listed as follows:•The project characteristics may not allow RS. This scenario can be seen in various Research and Development (R&D) projects where the development process is highly technology intensive. Another example can be geographical limitations, where projects are so distributed across the world that resource sharing becomes impractical.The resource characteristics may not allow RS. For example, in software development projects, it is not desired to allocate developers to different projects because of the learning curve concept. An additional example can be offered in situations in which the sharing of heavy machinery equipment among projects is not possible due to the prohibitive installation costs.These cases require a different resource management policy, which identifies the unique characteristics of a particular environment. To define a problem environment with the aforementioned characteristics, Besikci et al. (2013) propose the resource dedication (RD) policy. Under the RD policy, resources are not shared from a common pool but dedicated in certain amounts to individual projects throughout their durations.In RS policy, the general resource capacity corresponds to the size of the shared pool for each renewable resource. Under RD policy, on the other hand, general resource capacity corresponds to the amount of each renewable resource to be distributed among the projects. In multi-project scheduling problems, the general resource capacity is taken as a given. But here, determining the set of general resource capacities becomes a decision in itself to be made according to a given total budget for a given set of projects. The determination of the general resource capacities subject to a total budget and the solution of the multi-project scheduling problem subject to these capacities under the RD policy is referred to as the Resource Portfolio Problem (RPP) in this study. Both the mathematical model and the proposed solution approach for RPP are the original contributions of this study.The remainder of the paper continues with a brief literature review of resource considerations in project scheduling literature. In Section 3, RPP is defined and its mathematical formulation is presented. In Section 4, both the proposed two-phase genetic algorithm (GA) and a so-called monolithic GA approach are explained in detail. The computational study and its results are given in Section 5. The conclusions and further research directions are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
