@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quasi-fixed cyclic production schemes for multiple products with stochastic demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a cyclic production scheme for multiple products with stochastic demand.We impose bounds for the cycle length in order to achieve a regular schedule.We consider sequence-dependent setup times, service levels and storage capacity.The computational study based on real world data compares six strategies that control the cycle length.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Production,Cyclic production scheme,Stable cycle length,Stochastic demand,Service level requirement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we present an approach to generate cyclic production schemes for multiple products with stochastic demand to be produced on a single production unit. This scheme specifies a fixed and periodic production sequence, called a cycle, where each product may occur more than once in the sequence. In order to stabilize the cycle length alternative control strategies are introduced. These strategies keep the cycle length close to a target length by means of adding idle time to the cycle, cutting production short or overproduction. On basis of the selected control strategy as well as a base-stock policy target inventory levels are determined for each production run in the cycle. Demand can be backlogged but a certain service level is required. Setup times are sequence-dependent and the storage is capacitated. Employing the developed strategies we investigate the tradeoff between stability of cycle length and total cost induced by the production schedule in a computational study based on both, real world data and random test instances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we address the problem of producing multiple products using a single production unit with finite capacity. This system is commonly found in the process industry. Here, we often encounter significant and sequence-dependent setup times and the production unit is usually highly utilized due to specialized equipment entailing significant fixed costs. Demand for final products is stochastic and the storage for these products is limited. We aim at a production schedule minimizing total inventory holding costs while a given service level for each product and the storage capacity constraint is fulfilled. Note that companies can do little to quantify setup costs which are therefore neglected in this paper. The deterministic version of this problem is known as the Economic Lot Scheduling Problem (ELSP) which is NP-hard (see Hsu, 1983). As can be seen from Elmaghraby (1978) there is a comprehensive body of literature on the ELSP for quite some time. However, solutions to the ELSP can be applied to a stochastic environment only with severe limitations. Here, one has to hedge against stockouts due to variations in demand of all products. Assuming a stationary stochastic demand for final products the problem we are facing resembles the Stochastic Economic Lot Scheduling Problem (SELSP), see (Winands et al., 2011) for a survey. Research on the SELSP was scarce until the 1980s but has been payed more attention to in the last decades. The existing literature on the SELSP distinguish two general approaches. The first one is a dynamic production sequence, as it allows variations in the production sequence at any time to accommodate demand fluctuations. Models belonging to this approach can be found, among others, by Altiok and Shiue (2000); Babai et al. (2011); Qiu and Loulou (1995); Sox and Muckstadt (1997) and Zipkin (1986). The second approach is a cyclic schedule where the production sequence is fixed once is decided. This sequence may have multiple occurrences of the same product and is repeated indefinitely. On the one hand a fixed production sequence reduces the flexibility to address variations in demand. On the other hand limited capacity of the production unit calls for a small total setup time. When setup times vary significantly and the production unit is highly utilized the minimization of total setup time may even be necessary just in order to ensure feasibility. This reduces the flexibility of dynamic sequencing significantly and thus the drawback of fixed sequences. For example, Vaughan (2007) demonstrated the advantage of cyclic schedules in the presence of significant setup times or a high utilization rate. In addition a cyclic schedule is beneficial with regard to informational and organizational costs (see Gallego, 1990 and Gelders and Van Wassenhove, 1981) and it is easy to implement. Hence, fixed sequences become more popular in the process industry (see Hall, 1988).In order to generate a cyclic production scheme multiple decisions have to be made. The first decision is about the number of production runs (PRs) of each product per cycle. A higher frequency of a product may reduce the average inventory level of the corresponding product as well as the storage requirement, respectively. However, increasing the number of PRs in a cycle tends to increase the cycle length due to an additional setup operation. All other parameters being equal the average inventory level of the remaining products is increased. These two impacts have to be balanced against each other carefully. Algorithms for determination of frequencies can be found by Doll and Whybark (1973); Elmaghraby and Yao (2001); Federgruen and Katalan (1998); Fransoo et al. (1995) and Haessler and Hogue (1976). The first two approaches determine the number of cycles between consecutive PRs of a product with a power-of-two restriction. Fransoo et al. (1995) and Haessler and Hogue (1976) determine a product-specific cycle length for all products. The product with maximum cycle length occurs exactly once per cycle while the frequency of the remaining products depends on the relation of the product-specific cycle length to the maximum value. Both approaches are based on a heuristic method. Federgruen and Katalan (1998) develop a lower bound mathematical program in order to determine frequencies in the presence of sequence-dependent setup-times. Their approach is based on backorder cost rates instead of service levels.The second decision is about the sequence of PRs. For a pure rotation sequence, i.e., each product occurs exactly once in a cycle, usually the production sequence minimizing total setup time can be chosen. However, this approach cannot be straighforwardly adapted to sequences with multiple PRs for a product. In this case minimizing the total setup time will lead to clusters of PRs of identical products which renders having multiple PRs per product effectless. Ideally, multiple PRs of the same product are allocated uniformly in the cycle which reduces inventory costs for this product as much as possible. However, this may come at the cost of a higher total setup time. Again, these two effects have to be considered carefully. Besides the cost criterion the limited storage capacity is an issue when creating a sequence. It may be necessary to have multiple PRs, that are uniformly distributed in the cycle, for products with considerable space requirement. Procedures for sequencing of PRs are presented by Dobson (1987); Itai and Rosberg (1984); Wagner and Smits (2004) and Zipkin (1991). All of them allow for multiple PRs per product. However, setup times and costs are assumed to be product-dependent only. Naturally, if setup times are sequence-dependent sequencing becomes more complicated. Löhndorf et al. (2014) heuristically determine a general sequence with sequence-dependent setup times preventing PRs of the same product to be consecutive. Note that this does not necessarily lead to an uniform allocation of PRs in the cycle.The third decision is about the lot sizing strategy and the cycle length. Several lot sizing strategies are discussed in the literature (see Kämpf and Köchel, 2006 for a brief overview). We can distinguish between two fundamental classes of strategies with regard to the information used. Applying a global strategy lot sizing depends on the state of the entire system, i.e., the inventory position of all products. Using a local lot sizing strategy this decision only depends on the inventory position of the current product. For local strategies further policies can be distinguished, e. g. constant-lot-size policies, limited-time policies or base-stock policies. In order to reduce the informational requirement while being capable to react to short-term demand variations a base-stock policy is often used in practice (see e. g. Fransoo et al., 1995; Kämpf and Köchel, 2006 and Winands et al., 2011) and has been studied extensively in literature (see e. g. Brander and Forsberg, 2006; Federgruen and Katalan, 1996; Fransoo et al., 1995; Löhndorf and Minner, 2013; Rappold and Yoho, 2014; Vaughan, 2009 and Wagner and Smits, 2004). When using a base-stock policy two further distinction can be made, i.e., an exhaustive or a gated service policy can be applied. In the first case production continues until the base-stock level has been reached. In the second case the lot size is determined as the difference between the base-stock level and the inventory position before the production unit is setup. As in the process industry short-term decisions on the lot size are not possible or even forbidden (particularly in the pharmaceutical industry) a gated service policy is primarily used in practice.With regard to the cycle length which is the time between two successive completions of the production sequence a fixed or a dynamic cycle length can be used. Obviously, the capability of reacting to short-term demand variations is higher when lot sizes are not restricted and the cycle length therefore is allowed to fluctuate. In case the demand is highly volatile this may lead to significant variations of the cycle length. In process industry stable production cycle lengths are highly desirable in order to stabilize lead times (see, e. g. Bourland and Yano, 1994 and Rappold and Yoho, 2014). A stable cycle length simplifies the planning of raw material requirements as well as the personnel deployment planning. In literature several approaches for stabilizing the cycle length can be found. For instance, Bruin (2010) and Erkip, Güllü, and Kocabiyikoglu (2000) present approaches that allocate a fixed production time to each product in the sequence that can be used for production to meet a previously determined base-stock level. In case this level is reached before the end of the allocated production time the production unit idles. Assuming that setup times and production rates are constant, cycle length is constant, as well. On the one hand little cycle length variability leads to small variability in total demand during the cycle and thus safety stocks can be decreased. On the other hand the average cycle length is increased since we have idle time once in a while. As a result the average inventory level needs to be higher to provide a given service level. Additionally, a safety stock to hedge against production cutbacks is necessary.Vaughan (2009) investigates several cycle length control mechanisms. Among others, a “no idle time” control strategy is considered where no restriction on the actual cycle length is imposed. This strategy is reported to minimize the average inventory required to provide a given service level. Of course, using this strategy the cycle length may vary considerably. Thus, it appears that the two objectives to minimize inventory costs and to minimize cycle length variability are in conflict with each other. As a compromise between stabilization and costs, Vaughan (2009) proposes several control strategies adding idle time in order to impose a lower bound on the cycle length while no upper bound is put. Among others, he proposes two schedule-dependent strategies. The first strategy is to add idle time after the lth cycle such that the next cycle does not start before l · CL where CL is the target cycle length. We use this strategy as benchmark in our computational study and refer to it throughout the paper as Strategy 4. The second one is to add idle time after a PR in cycle l if this PR ends prior to the expected completion time with respect to the start time of cycle l. This strategy stabilizes the time distance between corresponding PRs in consecutive cycles. We use this strategy as benchmark as well and refer to it as Strategy 5. Nevertheless, since both strategies try to keep only the long run average cycle length close to a target length and no upper bound on the cycle length is imposed both strategies may yield considerable variability in cycle lengths. However, no safety stock accounting for production cutbacks is necessary. Additionally, capacity shifts between PRs are possible. Finally, since the ‘‘no idle time” strategy leads to minimum inventory costs we use it as a third benchmark and refer to it as Strategy 6.Rappold and Yoho (2014) propose a control strategy that imposes both, a lower bound and an upper bound, on the cycle length for a system with five products. At the beginning of each cycle the expected cycle length is computed considering backlogs and inventories, expected demand, and setup times. If the expected cycle length is below the lower bound the lot size of all products in the cycle is increased proportionally. If this length exceeds the upper bound production is cut short.As a fourth decision, a base-stock level has to be calculated for each PR in the sequence. This base-stock level consists of two components. The first component is called cycle stock which represents the expected demand in the interval between lot sizing decision and arrival of the next lot. The second component is a safety stock accounting for the variations in demand and the cycle length. The computation of these components is nontrivial. Federgruen and Katalan (1996) state that no satisfying analytical method is known to determine the cycle length variation even for a setting without a bounded cycle length. In case of a bounded cycle length, Vaughan (2009) states that the true distribution of total demand between PRs of the same product depends on the control strategy and is very difficult to determine. In order to cope with this problem the base-stock levels are often computed by means of simulation (see Vaughan, 2003; 2007; 2009).The contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we develop an approach making the decisions detailed above in order to minimize inventory costs considering finite storage capacity, backlogging, service levels for each product, and cycle length stability requirement. Second, we propose three control strategies. As opposed to the approaches by Vaughan (2009) we do not only impose lower bounds but also upper bounds on the cycle length. Third, we investigate the trade-off between inventory costs and cycle length variability employing these control strategies.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 specifies the production environment and the control strategies in detail. Section 3 proposes a nested solution approach which makes the decisions in order to instantiate the production scheme. Section 4 provides computational experiments evaluating the efficiency of the proposed control strategies based on real world data as well as random data. Furthermore, the trade-off between inventory costs and cycle length variability is investigated. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.We consider a setI={1,…,n}of products. The demand for each product is distributed according to a stationary compound Poisson process and is independent of other products’ demands. That is, interarrival times of orders are exponentially distributed with an arrival rate μii=1,...,nand the order quantity follows a Poisson distribution with rate δifor each producti=1,...,n. The demand rate for i then is denoted byλi=μi·δi. All products are produced on a common production unit with a deterministic production rate πi. The utilization rate of i is given asρi=λi/πiand that of the entire system isρ=∑i=1nρi. It is assumed that ρ < 1, i.e., the system is stable. Due to the experience of the employees and highly automated processes setup times si, jfori,j=1,...,nare assumed to be known and deterministic. All products can be clustered into |G| product groups whereas G is the set of groups and each group g is defined by a subset Igof products. The product group that contains product i is denoted by g(i). A group contains products that are based on the same raw material (e.g. in the pharmaceutical industry) or products for which the same packaging material is necessary (e.g. in the beverage industry). These groups are determined typically by a master scheduler of the corresponding company. This leads to very short cleaning or machine preparation times between products of the same group. A change between products of different groups is significantly more time consuming and depends only on the groups involved.Each product i can be stored at inventory holding costs hiper unit of i and per unit of time. The storage space requirement per unit of product i is denoted by τiand the total available space is denoted by C. CTotal available storage space Note that we consider a one-dimensional storage capacity that can be freely distributed on the product units. In particular, no compartments partitioning the storage space are considered.If demand cannot be fulfilled from existing stock, it is backordered. In the following the on-hand inventory level is referred to as inventory level, the on-hand inventory level minus the backordered quantity is referred to as net inventory level, and the net inventory level plus outstanding production quantities is called inventory position. Since delivery reliability is an important issue a product-dependent α - service level between 95% and 99% is required for all products. The aim is to find a production scheme that minimizes total inventory holding costs per unit of time while the required service level for each product is fulfilled and the occupied storage space does not exceed C. It is assumed that a batch is available only at the end of a PR.As indicated in Section 1 we propose to use a cyclic production scheme with a general sequence and a gated service policy. Using a gated service policy a lot size is determined before the production unit is setup for the corresponding product as the difference between the base-stock level and the inventory position. In order to control the cycle length three strategies that limit the cycle length variability are proposed.Strategy 1 applies a lower as well as an upper bound to the cycle length as follows. If the time between the completion of two corresponding PRs in consecutive cycles exceeds a maximum cycle length UBCLproduction is cut short. If it is lower than a minimum cycle length LBCLidle time is added after the corresponding PR to reach LBCL. The total cycle length then is in [LBCL, UBCL] as well. We refer to CL as target cycle length and letLBCL=(1−ϵ)·CLandUBCL=(1+ϵ)·CL. This strategy is illustrated in Fig. 1. The sequence includes seven products with product 5 being setup twice per cycle while the grey blocks represent setups. We illustrate three examples on how CL and ϵ influence lengths of PRs. The difference of completion times of PRs for product 1 is less than LBCLand thus idle time is added. The first PR of 5 in cyclel+1ends within [LBCL, UBCL] time after the first PR of 5 in cycle l and hence neither idle time is added nor production is cut short. The PR of 2 in cyclel+1would end later than UBCLtime after the PR in cycle l and therefore is cut short in order to end exactly UBCLlater.Strategy 2 does not apply a bound to each PR but only to a full cycle. Thus, we have a designated first PR in the cycle and the time interval between two consecutive starts of this PR has to be within [LBCL, UBCL]. Idle time is added only at the end of the cycle and production is cut short only at the of the cycle as well. Strategy 2 allows higher flexibility at the cost of PRs at the end of the cycle having higher probability to be cut short. Base-stock levels of PRs towards the beginning of the cycle therefore do not need to account for much of a safety stock to hedge against production cutbacks. Hence, these levels tend to be smaller than the corresponding ones employing Strategy 1. However, base-stock levels of PRs towards the end of the cycle need to account for uncertainty in the timespan available for production.Strategy 3 is based on the insights delivered by Vaughan (2009). Here, a strategy without idle time turns out to dominate strategies using idle time. Consequently, Strategy 3 is identical to Strategy 1 except the lower bound of the cycle length is reached not by idling the machine but by overproduction (with respect to the base stock level) of the current product. However, if we reach the storage capacity during a PR we still insert idle time when necessary in order to reach the lower bound of the cycle length.In order to instantiate such a strategy the decisions outlined in Section 1 have to be made. Obviously, these decisions cannot be taken independently and therefore we propose a nested solution approach that makes these decisions simultaneously. This approach is presented in the next section.An overview of variables and parameters introduced in the section at hand and used throughout the paper is given in Appendix A.The nested solution approach comprises three levels. On the first level an iterative procedure to determine the number of PRs per cycle for all products is applied. This procedure increases the number of PRs of products step by step using level 2 and 3 of our approach in order to evaluate each setting. On the second level we decide the sequence of PRs. In particular, we balance the clustering of PRs according to groups and distribute PRs of the same product equidistantly. Furthermore, a target cycle length and bounds on the actual cycle length are derived. On the third level we determine base-stock levels for each PR by means of simulation. This fully instantiates a production scheme according to Strategies 1 to 3 as described in Section 2. Finally, the production scheme is evaluated. Here, the maximum occupation of storage capacity and total costs incurred are considered as performance measures. The structure of our approach is depicted in Fig. 2.The three level approach aims at a production scheme minimizing total inventory holding costs per time unit among schemes using no more than the available storage space or – if there are no such schemes – the production scheme minimizing additional storage space occupied. We say that a scheme is better than another one in the following if the former has lower requirement for additional storage space or additional storage space requirements of both schemes are identical and the former scheme induces lower inventory costs per time unit. All levels are outlined in detail in Sections 3.1 to 3.3 while a detailed flowchart of the nested solution approach is provided in Appendix B.In order to reduce planning complexity we do not consider products individually on the first and second level. We instead determine the number of PRs for products of each group homogeneously on the first level. Additionally, we determine a sequence of groups on the second level and assume that each product of a group is produced whenever its group is next in sequence. Since inner-group setup times are very small, we obtain the opportunity to produce all products in a group for a very small price once the machine is setup for one product of the group. Note that this simplification indeed does not reduce solution quality if setups between products of the same group equal zero. Admittedly, this is not always the case. Still due to the huge differences of inter-group setup times and inner-group setup times it is a reasonable approach reducing complexity significantly.In order to determine the number of PRs per cycle for each groupg=1,…,|G|,denoted by Fg, an iterative procedure is proposed. We refer toF1,…,F|G|as frequencies in the following. As an initial solution of this procedure a pure rotation sequence withFg=1for each g is used. We evaluate these frequencies using level 2 and 3 of our approach and set benchmark values for the additional storage capacityCmin+used as well as the total costs ICmin .Now, in each iteration we modify the current set of frequencies in order to derive |G| new ones. In each new one the frequency of exactly one group is incremented by one. Each new set of frequencies is evaluated using level 2 and 3 of our approach. We determine a threshold of total costsIC¯=ψ·ICminand additional storage space requirementC¯=ψ·Cmin+with ψ > 1. Among all candidates that are considered in an iteration the one that leads to the minimum additional storage space requirement is accepted as the new one if it does not exceedC¯. If there is more than one such candidate the one with minimum costs is accepted. Note that this means that only candidates that do not need additional capacity are considered once we found one. If each candidate exceeds the thresholds, the procedure aborts and returns the best scheme found so far. Otherwise, we updateCmin+and ICmin  if necessary.Note that we may accept a scheme even if it is not better than the former current one. This is advisable as a higher frequency for one group may not lead to a better schedule whereas a higher frequency for two groups will. This effect is depicted in Fig. 3.The upper sequence which constitutes a full cycle contains five product groups. The dark blocks represent setup times. Assume thatF1=2leads to the best new set of frequencies in the first iteration. The corresponding sequence is displayed in the middle of Fig. 3. Both PRs of group 1 are distributed uniformly in the cycle such that the average inventory level of products in group 1 are lower as in the upper sequence. However, due to the significant additional setup time the target cycle length increases leading to a higher average inventory level of all products. Hence, we assume that the second set of frequencies is slightly inferior to the first one. However, if we accept this candidate and considerF5=2in the next iteration the total setup time and therefore the target cycle length remain the same in this example. Since the average inventory level of products in group 5 is decreased the third set of frequencies may be superior to the first one.It remains to detail in which order we consider groups in order to increase the respective frequencies. For this purpose we determine a value γgfor each group g ∈ G which reflects the relation of demand and inventory holding cost rates of products in g and the number of PRs Fgof g:γg=∑i∈Ighi·λiFg.Groups are then considered in order of non-increasing γg. As a result groups that contain products with a high inventory holding cost and/or a high demand rate are considered first in each iteration. These groups have higher potential to lead to good benchmark valuesCmin+and Imin . Having good benchmark values early allows us more often to abort evaluation of further sets of frequencies that do not have potential to lead to even better benchmark values (see Section 3.3 for details).As mentioned above each product of a group is produced whenever its group is next in sequence. Thus, the overall sequence of PRs can be found in two steps. We first determine the sequence of PRs within each group. Here, we aim at a sequence with minimum total setup time. Note that choosing the same sequence for each occurrence of a group in the sequence is the best we can do. Second, we determine the sequence of groups. Note that the former problem can be seen as a special case of the latter since each product occurs exactly once in the group-specific sequence. We therefore focus on the second step in the following and assume for the sake of simplicity the sequence of PRs in each group to be predetermined.As stated in Section 1 we have to balance two effects when determining the sequence of groups. Minimizing total setup time may lead to a rather uneven distribution of multiple PRs of the same group which in turn may cause high average inventory levels of these products. The challenging part here is to balance the reduction of setup times and the even distribution of PRs. Consequently, we consider a subproblem where the freedom for distributing PRs of the same group is bounded and total setup time is to be minimized with respect to this bound. We vary this bound (within a given range) and therefore obtain a set of sequences being Pareto efficient with respect to minimization of total setup time and maximization of distribution smoothness. An example of the application of such a bound is given in Fig. 4.Assume that we have a tight bound for the upper sequence whereF1=2. As a result both PRs of group 1 are uniformly distributed at the expense of significant additional setup times and therefore a large target cycle length. In case the inventory holding cost rates of products in group 1 are relatively high the cost saving for group 1 may exceed the additional costs for the remaining products. Otherwise, it may be profitable to distribute both PRs less evenly (by setting a less tight bound) in order to save setup time. The lower sequence in Fig. 4, e.g., has lower total setup time and therefore shorter target cycle length. In this case the average inventory level of products in group 1 may be higher compared to the upper sequence which reduces the cost advantage of setting up this group twice. Due to the smaller cycle length the cost savings may still exceed the additional costs of the remaining products.Thus, multiple candidate sequences are considered, each for a different value of the bound. For each candidate sequence base-stock levels are determined and each of them is evaluated by using level 3 of our approach. In the following we first describe how we evaluate the smoothness of distribution of PRs given a sequence in Section 3.2.1. Then, we outline our neighbourhood search heuristic for finding a sequence of PRs in Section 3.2.2.Given a sequence of PRs with total setup time TS the minimum feasible cycle length CL amounts toCL=TS1−ρ.In the absence of setup costs (Vaughan, 2007) stated that variations in demand are most efficiently addressed via increasing the base-stock levels, rather than by achieving cycle length stability via adding idle time. We therefore use the minimum feasible cycle length as target cycle length. The average production runtime of each PR of product i ∈ I then is derived fromPTi=CL·ρiFg(i).Note that the actual runtime of a PR of i depends on the actual timespan ti, mbetween the end of the mth PR and the end of the next PR of i. Starting with PTias runtime of each PR of i we sweep the whole sequence and decrease the planned runtime of each PR if appropriate. More specifically, we set the planned runtime PTi, mof the mth PR of i toPTi,m=ti,m·ρiif the current planned runtime is higher. Note that this process may be iterated several times but converges ultimately. Afterwards, we complement the aforementioned procedure by increasing the planned runtime of the mth PR of i toPTi,m=ti,m·ρiif the current planned runtime is lower. We again iterate this process until it converges. We end up with the planned runtime as an approximation of the actual average runtime for each PR corresponding to the given sequence.On basis of the average production runtimes as well as setup times we can easily derive the current value tg, mfor each group g andm=1,…,Fgas the expected time between the end of the mth and the beginning of the next PR of g. Assuming a perfectly even distribution of occurrences in the sequence, tg, mwould amount totg*=CL·(1−∑j∈Igρj)−TSg·FgFgfor each g where TSgis the total setup time between products of g during a single occurrence of g. Note that the numerator intg*can be interpreted as the portion of the cycle time used neither for production of products in g nor for inner-group setups in g. Now, we can derive the weighted relative deviation Δgof group g asΔg=max{|tg,m−tg*|tg*∣m=1,…,Fg}·∑i∈Ighi·λi∑g′=1G∑i∈Ig′hi·λi∀g∈G.The maximum relative deviation is weighted by the normalized product of the inventory holding cost and demand rate of all products of the corresponding group since deviations from the ideal distribution have a higher impact if the demand rate or the inventory holding costs of the corresponding products are high. Finally, in order to evaluate the given sequence with respect to smoothness of distribution of PRs we determineΔ=max{Δg∣g∈G}.In order to find a set of sequences based on varying bounds for the distribution smoothness we apply the following scheme. We start with a very tight boundΔ¯=0. Obviously, for bounds close to zero it is unlikely that a sequence withΔ≤Δ¯exists at all. We therefore consider sequences that minimizemax{Δ−Δ¯,0}as feasible in each neighbourhood. In case we have multiple feasible sequences we break ties by minimum total setup time. After the neighbourhood search has terminated the sequence obtained is evaluated with respect to the additional storage capacity used and total inventory costs employing level 3 of our approach. We then increaseΔ¯by ϕ and restart the neighborhood search using the last sequence as initial solution. We repeat this procedure untilΔ¯≥1which allows PRs of the same group to be sequenced consecutively.Recall that as opposed to Strategies 1 and 3 it does matter which PR is considered to be the first in a cycle when Strategy 2 is applied. Therefore, for Strategy 2 we do not only consider a sequence itself but also each sequence we can obtain by rotating groups. Doing so, we consider each group to be the first one in the cycle.In the following we detail how to find the initial sequence forΔ¯=0and the neighbourhood search itself. Initially, we do not have any good estimates for the actual production runtimes at hand (note that these are estimated for a given sequence as described in Section 3.2.1). We therefore determine an initial sequence distributing PRs of groups evenly with respect of the number of PRs in between (as opposed to the duration of PRs in between). Here, we can apply the Golden Ratio policy discussed by Itai and Rosberg (1984) as has been done for similar purposes by Boxma et al. (1993) and Federgruen and Katalan (1998). A number is assigned to each PR of a group on the basis of the Golden Ratio that is related to the Fibonacci numbers. Subsequently, the PRs of all groups are sorted in non-decreasing order of the assigned numbers.For eachΔ¯a neighbourhood search mechanism is started based on the respective initial solution. The neighborhood for the current solution is defined by the set of sequences which can be obtained by swapping a single pair of PRs of groups in the current solution. Each solution is evaluated according to the smoothness of distribution Δ and the total setup time. In each step we adopt among the feasible neighbour sequences one with minimum total setup time if it is better than the current one. If no new solution can be adopted, a perturbation mechanism swaps multiple pairs simultaneously. The number of pairs to be swapped as well as the pairs itself are chosen randomly. After a certain number pert of perturbations the neighbourhood search terminates.We use the target cycle length CL in order to determine initial base-stock levels which is detailed in Section 3.3.1. Subsequently, an iterative method using simulation for determination of the final base-stock levels is presented in Section 3.3.2.The base-stock level Si,mis determined as the expected demand RPi,m· λiwithin the risk period RPi,mplus a safety stock accounting for the variations in demand and the cycle length. The risk period consists of the review period and the replenishment lead time and amounts to the time distance between the start of the setup for the mth PR of a product and the completion of the next PR of the same product. We derive this time span from average runtimes PTi,mand the setup times between the corresponding PRs (recall that at his level the sequence is given). As mentioned in Section 1 the cycle length variation is difficult to determine. We therefore ignore the safety stock accounting for variations in the cycle length and use a reduced version of the formula proposed by Bowersox (1978) as(1)Si,m=⌈RPi,m·λi+sf·RPi,m·ωi2⌉,where ωiis the standard deviation of demand. The safety factor sf can be calculated by the inverse standard normal distribution using the value of the target α - service level. For example, to provide a service level of 99% a factor ofsf=2.33is necessary (see Wirtz, 2007).We use a discrete event simulation in order to adjust base-stock levels iteratively such that all service levels are fulfilled. Note that this simulation procedure uses each respective control strategy when evaluating base-stock levels. In each iteration we simulate the production scheme based on the current set of parameter values in a series of SR simulation runs each covering a period of P days (plus a preceding warmup period). For each simulation runs=1,…,SRthe following parameter values are tracked. First, the service levelαisof each product i is recorded. Second, the cumulated order quantityQi,mswhich is necessary to meet the service level αiin the risk period RPi, mis determined (we can easily derive it from the set of orders in risk period RPi, m). Third, we observe the amountηi,msby which the mth PR of i is cut short on average. Finally, we determine total costs ICsand the additional storage space requirementC+sas the maximum amount by which total storage requirement exceeds the available capacity over time. After a set of simulation runs has been executed the median of the corresponding SR values is determined which are denoted byαim,Qi,mm,ηi,mm,IC andC+. It remains to outline how base-stock levels are adapted after simulation which is conducted in two stages.In the first stage the base-stock level of the mth PR of product i is set to the average order quantity that is necessary to meet the required service level (Si,m=Qi,mm). The simulation procedure is iterated until all base-stock levels have been converged sufficiently, i.e., the change ofQi,mmis less than 1% for all PRs. Note that this procedure allows for an increase as well as a decrease of single base-stock levels. The latter may be necessary due to the true distribution of demand within the cycle which may not be uniform for all risk periods of the same product. After conducting the first stage, base-stock levels are sufficient assuming that PRs are not cut short.In the second stage we employ the value ofηi,mm. Since the amount by which the mth PR of i is cut short has to be produced earlier and therefore not later than in PRm−1we increase the base-stock levelSi,m−1byηi,mm. Note that this quantity might be produced even before them−1th PR if this PR is cut short as well. We thus increase this value after each set of simulation runs if the value determined by simulation exceedsηi,mm. The procedure is iterated until all service levels are fulfilled.In order to provide an intuitive understanding of the impact of usingηi,m+1we have a closer look at what happens when we adapt base-stock levels in the second stage. If the(m+1)th PR of i is cut short by a certain amount on average we increaseηi,m+1and therefore the base-stock level at the mth PR of product i. Hence, the mean inventory level of i between completion of the mth PR of i and the completion of the next PR of i is increased accordingly. Assuming that the base-stock level of the(m+1)th PR of i has not been modified the average amount of i produced in the(m+1)th PR then drops by the same amount which leads to a reduced amount by which production is cut short.After such a modification of Si, mwe may observe that production of the mth PR of i is cut short. In this case the base-stock level of the preceding PR is increased. Ultimately, we either distribute the total amount of i produced within one cycle such that production is not cut short or we increase the base-stock level of each PR of i. In the second case we may still observe that production is cut short but the service level is improved, nevertheless, since the inventory level of i has been increased throughout the cycle.A full production scheme is evaluated by the median of total costs IC and the median of additional storage capacity requirementsC+which are measured in the final set of simulation runs. Remember that the simulation procedure is aborted if these values exceed the corresponding threshold as described in Section 3.1.In this section we provide computational experiments evaluating the efficiency of the proposed control strategies based on real world data as well as random data. Also, the trade-off between inventory costs and cycle length variability is investigated.We conducted the computational study on a Dual Core Intel processor with 16 GB RAM and 3.4 GHz clockpulse. The parameter values have been determined in preliminary tests. For the threshold parameter ψ a value of 1.05 is used. The value ofΔ¯is adjusted withϕ=0.1and the number of perturbations pert is(∑g=1GFg)2. The number of simulation runs SR is set to 20 and the simulated period of time for each run isP=365days.As proposed in Section 3 Strategies 1 to 3 are compared to the two schedule-dependent strategies (Strategies 4 and 5) and to the “no idle time” strategy (Strategy 6) as described in Section 1.The real world data is detailed in Section 4.1. The corresponding results are presented in Section 4.2. Randomly generated instances are outlined in Section 4.3 while the corresponding results are presented in Section 4.4.We consider a globally operating soft drink company. Here, we focus on one multi-purpose packing unit at a production site which is representative with respect to planning complexity. On this unit products with different flavours and can sizes are boxed and palletized. The company offers 23 different flavours to its customers while up to 2 different can sizes can be used for each liquid. Cans are packed into boxes of different size (6 different sizes). The combination of a liquid, can size, and box size constitutes a final product. Ultimately, we have 63 final products. The unit is supplied with filled cans as well as other required input materials.The packing process consists of two steps. First, boxes are filled with cans by an industrial robot which finally stacks filled boxes on a pallet. The number of boxes that can be packed and stacked on a pallet in one hour is given by πifor product i. The production rate can be considered as deterministic in this case as actual rates hardly fluctuate. The finished pallets are delivered to company-owned warehouses.The packing process faces a number of considerable challenges. Different can and box sizes lead to sequence dependent setup times. The box size drives setup times most, as every change leads to a setup time of up to 3 hours. Changing can sizes plays a minor role as such a changeover requires no more than 15 minutes. Cleaning operations can be neglected in this particular setting. Final products are grouped according to box sizes as well as can sizes. We end up with|G|=12product groups with negligible setups between products of the same group and major setups between products of different groups.Since beverages are subject to a low value-to-weight ratio, cost for capital lockup are rather low while storage space is expensive compared to the products value. Consequently, currently facing a fully stretched physical storage capacity C the company strives to avoid paying for additional external storage space. The space requirements τiand the inventory cost rates hiper box of product i are given. Due to the low value-to-weight ratio inventory cost rates of products are very homogeneous (about 0.00014 € per box and hour).The demand is sporadic for some products. A part of this variability results from predictable factors such as season of the year. However, uncertainties such as short term weather changes remain. Large and short term orders due to promotions increase the overall demand variability. Nonetheless, since longterm trend and seasonal trend is relatively small we assume a stationary demand in general. As sales orders representing real customer demand are not available the demand rateλi=μi·δiof the stationary compound Poisson process is derived from cumulated sales data for every product i. This is an appropriate estimate as the current service levels range between 95% and 99%. Sales data are available for a full year for every product i on a daily basis. Interarrival times are from the range [24, 260] hours and order quantities vary between 72 and 4,200 boxes. In total this leads to an utilization rate ρ of 91%.The second instance is provided by a north american beverage company. The packaging process at this company is very similar to the one of the first instance but differs in several parameter values. It comprises 56 products. A change of case sizes requires a setup time between 2 and 4.5 hours whereas no more than 10 minutes are necessary for a change of can sizes. Again products are grouped according to box sizes and can sizes leading to|G|=11. Demand is rather periodic for all products. Interarrival times thus are from the range [24, 38] hours and order quantities vary between 96 and 2,400 boxes. This leads to an utilization rate ρ of 62%. The inventory cost rate hiof product i ∈ I is about 0.00017 € per box and hour.We consider a multi-purpose packing unit in a german pharmaceutical company that produces tablets. The packing process consists of two steps. First, tablets are blister-packed and blister packages are then packed into boxes. In particular, 8 tablets that differ in the active substance and its dosage have to be packed while up to 6 different box sizes can be used for each tablet. We end up with 42 final products. The unit is supplied with tablets, carton as well as other required input materials. The number of boxes that can be packed in one hour is given by πifor product i which can be considered as deterministic again. The finished products are delivered to company-owned warehouses.Tablets differ in the active substance and its dosage which leads to sequence dependent setup times since intense cleaning is necessary. Changing the active substance or the dosage leads to setup times between 3.5 and 5 hours. Changing the pack size requires only minor setups of up to 45 minutes. Final products are therefore grouped according to active substances and dosages. We end up with|G|=8groups.The space requirement τiof each product i depends on the box size. Contrary to the beverage case the value-to-weight ratio of products is high. Since this ratio depends on the active substance and its dosage inventory holding cost rates of products differ significantly. More precisely, these rates differ between 0.00008 € and 0.00025 € per box and hour.The demand rateλi=μi·δiof the stationary compound Poisson process is derived from actual sales data for every product i. Again, this approximation is a suitable assumption as the current service levels range between 98% and 99%. Sales data are available for a full year for every product i on a daily basis. The interarrival time is between 15 and 38 hours for all products and order quantities vary between 4,000 and 25,000 boxes. The utilization rate is about 93%.The last case is provided by a north american pharmaceutical company that produces 16 different tablets. For each tablet up to 3 different box sizes can be used. Overall, we have 45 final products. Changing active substances or dosages leads to setup times of up to 7 hours. Changing the pack size requires only minor setups of up to 0.8 hours. Final products are grouped according to active substances and dosages yielding|G|=16groups. The inventory cost rate of final products is known and varies between 0.00006 € and 0.00032 € per box and hour. Demand is more sporadic compared to the previous case as order arrival times vary between 13 and 3,600 hours and the order quantity of all products varies between 1,000 and 36,000 boxes. The utilization rate is about 82%.As in all cases (as well as for the random instances considered in Section 4.3) Strategy 6 yields the minimum inventory costs which is in line with Vaughan (2009). We obtain a unique picture for all instances as well when comparing Strategies 4, 5, and 6. Strategy 5 slightly dominates Strategy 4 with respect to minimization of inventory costs and minimization of cycle length variability (again, this confirms results by Vaughan (2009)). Both, Strategies 4 and 5, yield lower cycle length variability but higher inventory costs than Strategy 6.As opposed to Strategies 4 to 6 our Strategies 1 to 3 allow to vary cycle length variability by setting ϵ. We use different values for ϵ. The minimum value isϵ=0.1and we increase ϵ in steps of 0.05 until the cycle length variations of Strategies 1 to 3 have converged to the one of Strategy 6. Recall that settingϵ=∞we obtain the “no idle time” strategy. We provide a specific production scheme for each value of ϵ and obtain corresponding inventory costs and cycle length variations as depicted by the dots in Fig. 5. Note that no product group g ∈ G is set up more than once per cycle for all strategies due to the high inter-group setup times, a high utilization rate as well as homogeneous inventory cost rates for all products.The variation of the cycle length as well as total inventory costs for Strategy 1, 2 and 3 obviously depend on the value of ϵ. Also – as expected – we can clearly see the tradeoff between inventory costs and cycle length variations which can be grasped rather intuitively. A lower cycle length variation leads to less flexibility in production quantities. Therefore, a larger portion of the volatility in demand has to be accounted for by a safety stock. Although each of these strategies shows the same characteristics of the tradeoff we can see that Strategy 3 dominates Strategy 2 which in turn dominates Strategy 1. We cannot compare Strategies 1 through 3 to Strategies 4 through 6 in general. However, forϵ=0.3Strategies 1 to 3 are dominant to Strategies 4 and 5.Table 1outlines average cycle lengthsCL^and average idle times per cycle W according to Strategies 1 to 3 for different values of ϵ as well as according to Strategies 4 to 6 (which do not have parameter ϵ). We can see that for higher amounts of average idle time we observe higher cycle lengths which is intuitively clear. Furthermore, for each value of ϵ both values are lower for Strategy 3 (2) than for Strategy 2 (1). Note that forϵ=0.4virtually no idle time is inserted and hence the average cycle length equals the one of Strategy 6.Comparing Table 1 and Fig. 5 we continue to see that inventory costs are increasing with idle time which again is in line with Vaughan (2009). However, we need to accept idle time in order to obtain a certain cycle length stability. Interpreting the values in Table 1 we can conclude that the main advantage of Strategy 3 is the small amount of idle time (due to overproduction being allowed). Hence, the application of idle time in order to stabilize cycle lengths seems to be more expensive compared to overproduction. Strategies 1 and 2 perform pretty similar. Strategy 2 slightly dominating Strategy 1 can be explained as follows. As mentioned before, Strategy 2 is more flexible regarding production quantities of most PRs. Its drawback is that PRs at the end of the cycle have a relatively high probability of being cut short. We have products with sporadic demand in this problem instance. These are suitable to be positioned at the end of the cycle since we do not need a high safety stock for them. Therefore, the potential drawback of Strategy 2 does not have a significant effect.A sequence given, a higher average cycle length due to the application of idle time (see Strategies 1, 2, 4 and 5) reduces the setup frequency, within the limits of available process time, compared to the “no idle time” strategy which has an average cycle length equal to the minimum feasible target cycle length. Thus, in case we have to take account of significant setup costs these strategies may be superior to Strategy 6 as it is demonstrated by Vaughan (2009). In other words, when applying Strategies 1 and 2 for certain values of ϵ – for values from the range [0, 0.4) in this particular case – or Strategies 4 and 5, respectively, total setup and inventory holding costs may be lower than these of Strategy 6. Note that this effect may be observed for a comparison with Strategy 3 as well.The runtime for applying Strategy 1 is about 334 seconds. Runtime for Strategy 2 is about 985 seconds. The time to generate the final production schedule for this strategy is much higher since each PR is considered to be first in a sequence as an option on its own. Runtimes for Strategy 3, 4, 5, and 6 are about 262, 368, 368, and 392 seconds, respectively.Fig. 6summarizes our results for the second case. In the following we only highlight the insights that differ from those in Section 4.2.1.First, although the demand is rather periodic for most products one product group is set up twice per cycle according to all strategies while the remaining groups are set up once. This confirms that an additional PR of groups may be beneficial. The utilization rate is significantly lower compared to that of the first case while the average inter-group setup time is only slightly higher. Therefore, the target cycle length and the additional inventory cost for the remaining products increases only slightly when adding PRs. Second, Strategy 1 outperforms Strategy 2 which may be due to the rather regular demand for all products. In such a case, there are no products that are suitable to be positioned at the end of a cycle (see Section 4.2.1 for the details of the reasoning). As idle time is added between PRs for Strategy 1 instead of a single idle time at the end of the cycle a higher stability between the same PR of a product in consecutive cycles is achieved. Third, the cost advantage of Strategy 3 is comparably low. This effect can be explained by the low utilization rate rendering idle time less expensive in terms of inventory cost. Fourth, Strategies 1 to 3 are not dominant to Strategies 4 and 5 for any ϵ but yield similar results for certain values of ϵ. Fifth, the descent of the tradeoff curves is rather flat compared to Fig. 5 due to the more regular demand. When demand is more regular we can benefit less from loose bounds of the cycle length.Runtimes for Strategies 1 to 6 are 447, 1308, 349, 493, 486, and 522 seconds, respectively. Runtimes are higher compared to the first instance mainly due to the higher number of iterations executed on the first level.The results of the third instance are presented in Fig. 7. As in Section 4.2.2 we can see that Strategy 1 dominates Strategy 2 due to the rather regular demand. Again the descent of the tradeoff curve is rather flat compared to Fig. 5. Strategies 4 and 5 are dominated by Strategies 1 to 3 forϵ=0.25. Runtimes for Strategies 1 to 6 are 158, 674, 106, 181, 181, and 198 seconds, respectively.Result of the last instance are similar to these of “Beverage Company 1” as the demand is rather sporadic for some products and the utilization rate is still high. The advantage of Strategy 3 thus is significant and the performance of Strategy 4 and 5 weakens. As candidates with a low demand and inventory cost rate can be positioned at the end of the cycle Strategy 2 outperforms Strategy 1. Results are depicted in Fig. 8.Runtimes for Strategies 1 to 6 are 458, 2535, 2535, 526, 526, and 575 seconds, respectively.The results in Section 4.2 give the impression that Strategy 1 performs best when demand is rather periodic and inventory costs among products are similar. If volatility in demand is high or inventory holding costs differ significantly Strategy 2 seems to perform slightly better than Strategy 1 while the superiority for Strategy 3 increases. In order to confirm these impressions we generate data sets which are aligned to the real world instances used before.We consider|G|=12product groups with numbers of products per group randomly drawn from{1,…,8}. For each group a product type (e.g. can size or active substance, dosage and pack size) is determined randomly. Setup times between products of the same group range from 0.5 to 0.75 hours and large setup times range from 3 to 5 hours. Each setup time is drawn randomly according to uniform distributions from one of these intervals. The same procedure is applied for the production rate and the service level of each product. Production rates and service levels vary between 25,000 and 35,000 and between 90% and 99%, respectively. The available storage space C is assumed to be unlimited.With these values determined, two scenarios regarding demand and inventory holding costs are distinguished. In the first one, demand is periodic as both, mean interarrival time and mean order quantity, are rather small and identical for all products. In addition, the inventory holding costs differ only slightly. In the second scenario, mean interarrival times as well as the mean order quantities may differ significantly between products while the minimum of both values is at least the minimum of the values in the first scenario. The variance of demand thus is significantly higher for most products in the second scenario. Furthermore, the difference in inventory holding costs is higher than in Scenario 1. For both scenarios 100 instances are generated.Scenario 1: The first scenario uses a mean interarrival time of 24 hours and a mean order quantity of 15,000 units for all products. If the utilization rate ρ is below 0.85 or above 0.95 an utilization rate within this interval is determined randomly and the production rate for all products is adjusted proportionally to meet this rate. The inventory holding cost rate is at least 0.00008 € and is limited to a maximum of 0.00025 € .Scenario 2: The second scenario uses a mean interarrival time between 24 and 48 hours and the mean order quantity may vary between 15,000 and 30,000 units. The utilization rate as well as production rates are adjusted when necessary as it is described above. The inventory holding cost rate is at least 0.00008 € and is limited to a maximum of 0.0005 € .The results of the first and second scenario are presented in Fig. 9and 10, respectively. Both Figures depict the average values for the 100 instances.The results confirm the insights we concluded from the practical instances. In the first scenario Strategy 1 outperforms Strategy 2. Since only a small number of groups is set up more than once in the cycle (about 0.2 groups) the target cycle lengths are similar. Strategy 3 outperforms Strategy 1. Strategies 4 and 5 do not perform significantly worse than Strategies 1 to 3.In the second scenario more groups are produced more than once per cycle (1.4 groups) due to significant differences in demand and inventory cost rates. Since demand is much more volatile Strategy 2 outperforms Strategy 1. Strategy 3 outperforms Strategy 2 significantly. Strategies 4 and 5 are weaker compared to Strategies 1 to 3 as in Scenario 1.In this paper we proposed a nested approach to determine a cyclic production scheme for a single production unit. This approach determines the number of PRs per product and cycle, the sequence of PRs within the cycle and the base-stock levels. Given a service level for each product to be reached and a storage space capacity we aim at finding a production scheme yielding minimum total inventory holding costs per unit of time. We use an iterative procedure increasing frequencies of products one by one. For each candidate of frequencies a neighborhood search heuristic is employed in order to find a sequence with low total setup time and PRs of the same product being smoothly distributed in the cycle. Finally, for each candidate sequence the target cycle length and the base-stock level for each PR is determined by repetitively evaluating candidates by simulation.In order to increase the schedule’s stability the actual cycle length is bounded both, from below and above, by means of idle time, production shortages or overproduction. In total the stabilizing efficiency of two alternative lot sizing strategies from Vaughan (2009) in addition to those proposed in this paper is investigated. Results for these strategies are compared with a “no idle time” strategy, i.e., a strategy that does not limit the cycle length at all. A comprehensive computational study is conducted using four real world instances as well as random instances. These instances differ in demand intensity and demand process (periodic or sporadic).Results of this study demonstrate that the “no idle time” strategy is the best choice if the minimization of total inventory holding costs is the only concern. Note that our strategies implement the “no idle time” strategy for parameters chosen appropriately. Minimizing inventory costs is achieved at the expense of the cycle length stability. Results further indicate that all of the remaining strategies may reduce the cycle length volatility but strategies that use overproduction instead of adding idle time to the cycle are most efficient. If demand is rather periodic a strategy that uses idle time and production cutbacks between PRs outperforms a strategy that uses a single idle time or cutback of PRs at the end of the cycle. Additionally, these strategies perform as good as these proposed by Vaughan (2009). In case demand is rather sporadic the opposite is true for both findings. Finally, we can state that frequencies of product groups mainly depend on the utilization rate as well as the additional setup time and the inventory holding cost rate while it is independent of the selected control strategy. Summarizing, in those scenarios evaluated each of our strategies performs at least as good as the three benchmark strategies. Each of our strategies outperforms the two stabilizing strategies from Vaughan (2009) for some scenarios. Our strategies are designed general enough such that they can implement the “no idle time” strategy and, on top, allow to finetune the balance between cycle length variation and inventory costs (as opposed to the three benchmark strategies).Future research may consider one or more of the following issues. First, we notice that products with sporadic demand are obviously hard to handle using a cyclic and regular production schedule. An opportunity to account for that might be to classify products into those with sporadic demand and those with regular demand and to generate a cyclic scheme for the latter ones having idle time periods. The idle time periods can be used for PRs of products with sporadic demand. The decision which product with sporadic demand to produce next can be made online. We then obtain a production schedule where PRs for products with regular demand are scheduled regularly and PRs for products with sporadic demand are scheduled ad hoc. A second area of research is the evaluation of other control strategies, e.g., strategies that determine the lot size for all PRs at the beginning of a cycle and adjust them proportionally to maintain the cycle length boundaries as proposed by Rappold and Yoho (2014) and Packowski (2014). Finally, multiple production stages might be considered. Using a cyclic production scheme production needs to be synchronized among stages in order to reduce total idle time. The synchronization becomes even more important when multiple production units have to be taken into account in each stage.αimMedian of all service levels of productiobserved in theSRsimulation runsαisObserved service level of productiin simulation runsαiRequired service level of productiΔTotal deviation from balanced PRs in a cycleΔgDeviation from balanced PRs in a cycle for groupgδiExpected order quantity of productiϵParameter that determines the maximum permissible deviation of the cycle length from the target cycle lengthηi,mmMedian of all average production cutbacks at themth PR of productiobserved in theSRsimulation runsηi,msAmount by which themth PR of productiis cut short on average in simulation runsγgPriority value of groupgfor selection on the first level of the solution approachCL^Average cycle lengthλiDemand rate of productiμiArrival rate of productiωiStandard deviation of demand of productiΔ¯Parameter that defines the scope for distributing PRs of the same group in the cycleC¯Threshold for the additional storage space requirementIC¯Threshold for the total inventory holding costsϕParameter that varies the scope for distributing PRs of the same group in the cycleρTotal utilization rateρiUtilization rate of productiτiStorage space requirement per unit of productiCTotal available storage spaceCmin+Additional storage space requirement of the best known scheduleC+sAdditional storage space requirement observed in simulation runsC+Median of all additional storage space requirements observed in theSRsimulation runsCLTarget cycle lengthg(i)Index of the group that contains productihiInventory cost rate of productiISet of final productsIgSubset of products that form groupgICMedian of all total inventory holding cost values observed in theSRsimulation runsICsTotal inventory holding costs observed in simulation runsICminTotal inventory holding costs of the best known scheduleLBCLLower bound for the cycle lengthPSimulated period of timeQi,mmMedian of all cumulated order quantities necessary to meet the service levelαiin themth risk period of productiobserved in theSRsimulation runsQi,msCumulated order quantity which is necessary to meet the service levelαiin themth risk period of productiobserved in simulation runsRPi,mRisk period for themth PR of productisi,jSetup time for a change between productsiandjsfSafety factorSRNumber of simulation runstg*Expected time between PRs ofgfor a perfectly even distribution of occurrences in the sequencetg,mExpected time between the end of themth and the beginning of the next PR ofgTSTotal setup time in a sequenceUBCLUpper bound for the cycle lengthWAverage amount of idle time per cycle

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
