@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy analytic hierarchy process: Fallacy of the popular methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Found fuzzy numbers oppose the logic of fuzzy set theory.Found the operation rules of fuzzy numbers oppose the logic of the AHP.Found fuzzy AHP cannot give an acceptable method to rank fuzzy numbers.Analysis the validity of the AHP/ANP in complex and uncertain environments.Found fuzzy ANP is a false proposition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision analysis,Multiple criteria analysis,AHP,Fuzzy AHP,Fuzzy numbers,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (fuzzy AHP) is a very popular decision making method and literally thousands of papers have been published about it. However, we find the basic logic of this approach has problems. From its methodology, the definition and operational rules of fuzzy numbers not only oppose the main logic of fuzzy set theory, but also oppose the basic principles of the AHP. In dealing with the outcomes, fuzzy AHP does not give a generally accepted method to rank fuzzy numbers and a way to check the validity of the results. Besides, we discuss the validity of the Analytic Hierarchy/Network Process (AHP/ANP) in complex and uncertain environments and find that fuzzy ANP is a false proposition because there is no fuzzy priority in the super matrix which provides the basis for the ANP. Although fuzzy AHP has been applied in many cases and cited hundreds of times, we hoped that those who use fuzzy AHP would understand the problems associated with this method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), a theory for the measurement of intangibles side by side with tangibles, has been extensively used as a multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) tool and as a way for computing priorities (Saaty, 2010). Some researchers, however, have thought that it is better to make the judgments fuzzy when dealing with decisions in complex and uncertain environments. They think 1–9 fundamental scale of the AHP is a scale of crisp numbers and thus resolved to fuzzify those numbers. They assume that by using fuzzy judgments (e.g. triangular; trapezoidal; interval and fuzzy numbers) instead of the usual 1–9 fundamental scale in making pairwise comparisons, they offer a better decision model. The fuzzy judgments idea is widely used in AHP applications, as evidenced by more than one thousand journal publications, in which the authors take for granted that they need to fuzzify the judgments to make applications with greater validity.As we know, there is a large number of papers on applications of fuzzy AHP, so Thomas L. Saaty, the architect of the AHP, has paid close attention, and written three papers (Saaty, 2006, Saaty and Liem, 2007, 2010) noting that: the fundamental scale of the AHP is already fuzzy, and has shown through examples that the fuzzy approach does not yield better results than the original eigenvector procedure in the AHP. In addition to Saaty and Tran, Wang, Luo, and Hua (2008) point out with numerical examples that the extent analysis method of triangular fuzzy AHP proposed by Chang (1996) yields zero-weight for some criteria or alternatives. Zhu, Jennifer, and Yang (2012) provide a theoretical proof why Chang’s method (1996) yields zero-weight and expose other problems such as poor robustness, unreasonable priorities and information loss. Zhu (2013) proves that the outcome of triangular fuzzy AHP (Laarhoven & Pedrycz, 1983) is less valid in practice than the eigenvector priority outcome of the AHP. Dubois (2011) shows that in the fuzzy AHP the reciprocal condition cannot be guaranteed and fuzzy eigenvalues are hard to define in a rigorous way.However, the above researchers are concern more about specific fuzzy AHP approaches. They do not give a general critique on the basic logic of fuzzy AHP. In this paper we give general comments on the basic mathematical logic of fuzzy AHP which include the relationships between fuzzy AHP and fuzzy set theory, the definition and operational rules of fuzzy numbers, and the efficiency of fuzzy judgments. On the basis of these analyses, we expect to help decision makers get to know the flaws in fuzzy AHP approaches.Because the fuzzy AHP ranges over a number of topics, a point-by-point response to these arguments would become tedious, and detracts from the major point of our observations. Thus we choose three traditional research papers Laarhoven and Pedrycz (1983), Buckley (1985b) and Chang (1996) because they have a wide influence on the theories and applications of fuzzy AHP evidenced by a great number of citations in Google Scholar 1287, then 1238, and 1127 respectively. Of course, there are some literatures about fuzzy AHP which do not belong to the three papers we listed above and they can be divided into two categories: one is fuzzy preference relation, and the other is interval fuzzy number. The former uses fuzzy binary relations satisfying reciprocity and max–min transitivity (Tanino, 1984). This method uses elements in [0,1] to define a fuzzy binary relation, which is different from the three traditional and influential fuzzy AHP papers. Therefore, we do not consider this method. The latter is identical with the three traditional papers in mathematical logic. The difference is that they use different methods to derive the fuzzy weight. For example, Cheng (1996) changes fuzzy matrix into a crisp matrix and uses a-cuts to compute the eigenvector (weight vector) from the crisp matrix. Fedrizzi and Pereina (1995) discuss a way of finding fuzzyλmax, whereλmaxis the largest eigenvalue of a fuzzy matrix. Thus, the latter is similar to the three traditional and influential fuzzy AHP papers, and we consider it in our manuscript.This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we review the AHP, fuzzy set theory and the basic logic of fuzzy AHP. The major thrust of this paper begins in Section 3 where we argue that fuzzy AHP is not really a fuzzy set theory because of the improper definition of fuzzy number and also because no membership grade is used in fuzzy AHP. In Section 4, we argue that fuzzy AHP lacks mathematical validity as it violates the basic principles of the AHP including the reciprocal and continuity axioms and the operational rule of consistency. Section 5 states that fuzzy AHP as a decision making approach lacks a generally accepted method to rank fuzzy numbers and a valid method to check the consistency index. In Section 6, we discuss the validity of the AHP and show why the AHP and its generalization the ANP without fuzziness are more effective than fuzzy AHP. In this section, we also find that fuzzy ANP is a false proposition because there is no fuzzy priority in the super matrix which provides the bases for the ANP. We conclude the paper in Section 7 by summarizing our findings and conclusions.In this section, we gave background materials on the AHP, fuzzy set theory and the mathematical logic of fuzzy AHP.Saaty (1972, 1977, 1980) developed the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) on the basis of four relatively simple axioms: reciprocal judgments, homogeneous comparisons, hierarchic network structures and syntheses and finally meeting desirable expectations (Saaty, 1986). Up to now, AHP has been widely used in solving many complicated decision-making problems, such as human acts (Saaty & Shang, 2011) and consistency test (Ergu, Kou, Peng, & Shi, 2011; Grošelj & Zadnik, 2012).To derive the priorities for reasons of transitivity of inconsistency, AHP must rely on the principal eigenvector to estimate the priorities. The eigenvalue method (EM) is the solution of the eigenvalue problem:(1)Aw=λmaxwwhereλmaxis the largest or principal eigenvalue of the pairwise comparison matrix A and w is the corresponding principal eigenvector.Let aijrepresent the relative dominance of Aiover Aj. Let the matrix corresponding to the reciprocal pairwise relation be denoted by A=(aij) with the reciprocal property aji=1/aij. The relative dominance of Aiover Ajalong paths of length k is given by:∑j=1naij(k)∑i=1n∑j=1naij(k)whereaij(k)is the (i, j) entry of the kth power of the matrix (aij). The total dominance w(Ai) of alternative i over all other alternatives along paths of all lengths is given by the infinite series:(2)w(Ai)=∑k=1∞∑j=1naij(k)∑i=1n∑j=1naij(k)which coincides with the Cesaro sum:limM→∞1M∑k=1∞∑j=1naij(k)∑i=1n∑j=1naij(k)When Bellman and Zadeh (1970) introduced fuzzy set into decision-making, they gave a precise definition of a fuzzy set as follows:DefinitionLet X={x} denote a collection of objects (points) denoted generically by x. Then a fuzzy set A in X is a set of ordered pairs:(3)A={(x,μA(x))},x∈Xwhere μA(x) is termed the grade of membership of x in A, and μA: X→M is a function from X to a space M called the membership space. When M contains only two points, 0 and 1, A is non-fuzzy and its membership function becomes identical with the characteristic function of a non-fuzzy set.LetX={1,2,…}be the collection of non-negative integers. In this space, the fuzzy set A of “several objects” may be defined (subjectively) as the collection of ordered pairs:A={(3,0.6),(4,0.8),(5,1.0),(6,1.0),(7,0.8),(8,0.6)}We review the mathematical logic of fuzzy AHP from the three earliest researchers: Laarhoven and Pedrycz (1983), Buckley (1985b) and Chang (1996) because these three papers have a wide influence on the theories and applications of fuzzy AHP evidenced by a great number of citations in Google Scholar 1287, then 1238, and 1127 respectively.The earliest work on fuzzy AHP is proposed by Laarhoven and Pedrycz (1983) which uses fuzzy judgments with triangular fuzzy numbers. Later, Buckley (1985b) extended Laarhoven and Pedrycz’s method by using trapezoidal fuzzy numbers to determine fuzzy priorities. Nearly ten years later, Chang (1996) gave an extension method of Laarhoven–Pedrycz’s to obtain a crisp priority vector instead of fuzzy priority vector. Now, we demonstrate the operational rules of fuzzy AHP.A. Definition of triangular fuzzy AHP (Chang, 1996; Laarhoven & Pedrycz, 1983)For a fuzzy number M on(R=(-∞,+∞))to be a triangular fuzzy number, its membership functionμM:R→[0,1]must be equal to:(4)μM(x)=1m-lx-lm-l,x∈[l,m]1m-ux-um-u,x∈[m,u]0otherwisewith l⩽m⩽u, l and u stand for the lower and upper value of the support of M, respectively, and m for the modal value. The triangular fuzzy number, as given by Eqs. (4), will be denoted by (l,m,u). The support of M is the set of elements{x∈R|l<x<u}. The operations on triangular fuzzy numbers will be shown as follows:–for reciprocal:–for addition:–for multiplication:B. Definition of trapezoidal fuzzy AHP (Buckley, 1985b):A fuzzy number is a fuzzy subset of R described by:(α/β,γ/δ)where α, β, γ and δ are real numbers and α⩽β⩽γ⩽δ. The graph of the membership grade function μ is determined by these four numbers: zero to the left of α, continuous and strictly increasing from (α,0) to (β,1), a horizontal line segment from (β,1) to (γ,1), continuous and strictly decreasing from (γ, 1) to (δ, 0), and zero to the right of β. The fuzzy numbers used by the experts have α, β, γ and δ. Later, some fuzzy numbers researchers (Abbasbandy & Asady, 2006; Yager & Filev, 1999) give abstract equations for membership grade function of trapezoidal fuzzy numbers:(8)μM(x)=μL(x)x∈[α,β]1x∈[β,γ]μR(x)x∈[γ,δ]0otherwisewhere μL: [α,β]→[0,1] and μR: [γ,δ]→[0,1] are left and right membership grade functions of fuzzy numbers.The operations on trapezoidal fuzzy numbers are shown as follows:–for reciprocal:–for addition:–for multiplication:“In the preceding section, we accept only relative weight contained in the feasible region,Sα′,for0⩽α⩽1.⋯,α=1represents the most stringent case in that if a solution exists inS1′, then a solution will exist inSα′, for all lower levels of α.”Thus, we use 1-level cut to check the validity of fuzzy AHP. And the 1-level cut of Eq. (11) is:(12)(α1/β1,γ1/δ1)⊙(α2/β2,γ2/δ2)=(α1α2/β1β2,γ1γ2/δ1δ2)In this section, we analyze the improper definition paradox of fuzzy numbers and no-membership-grade-employ issue in fuzzy AHP and conclude that fuzzy AHP is not really based on the fuzzy set theory.From Section 2.2, we know that the definition of a fuzzy set includes three items: a fuzzy set A, a collection of objects X={x} and membership grade μA(x). To say that the membership grade μA(x) connects A and x means that the membership grade of objects x is μA(x) and attached to the set A. Here, X={x} is collection object. For some decision problems, X is a continuous closed interval; and for other decision making problems, X is discrete. We know, the collection objects in the AHP are discrete, and it is also true for fuzzy AHP because they have the same hierarchy and all data are collected from experts’ judgments. However, the definition of triangular/trapezoidal fuzzy number depends on the continuous function – the membership function, which obviously violates the discrete character in the AHP or fuzzy AHP. For example, fuzzy judgment M=(1,2,3) is equivalent to:M={(1,μM(1)),(2,μM(2)),(3,μM(3))}={(1,0),(2,1),(3,0)}However, according to the definition of triangular fuzzy number, the pairs (1.5,0.5), (2.6,0.4), etc. also belong to M. There are infinite objects in M, which would not occur in the AHP.Moreover, according to Eq. (8), if the membership functions μL(x) and μR(x) are nonlinear functions, two different fuzzy numbers may have the same form. For example, the following two trapezoidal fuzzy numbers (see Fig. 1) have the same form (α/β,γ/δ).The improper definition also makes the membership grade function μM(x) have two owners. By the definition of a triangular fuzzy number in Section 2.3, μM(x) is the membership grade function of the triangular fuzzy number M=(l,m,u). However, according to Bellman and Zadeh’s (1970) definition, μM(x) means that the membership grade of objects x attached to the set M, thus μM(x) is the membership grade function of set X={x}. It is unclear whether the owner of membership grade function μM(x) belongs to M=(l,m,u) or set X={x}. If the membership grade function μM(x) is defined as in Eq. (8), then a trapezoidal fuzzy number has the same problem.The improper definition shows that the definitions of fuzzy numbers are arbitrary. Actually, fuzzy AHP researchers sometimes are confused with the definition what they made, such as Buckley (1985b) at odds with the numbers α, β, γ and δ which he defined as:Fuzzy number is a fuzzy subset of R described by …, where α,β,γ and δ are real numbers …, the fuzzy numbers used by the experts haveα,β,γandδ∈{0,1,2,…,L}, for L a positive integer.It is obvious that the author defines α, β, γ and δ as real numbers and at the same time says they are fuzzy numbers when used by the experts.In fuzzy AHP, the calculation process is totally separate from the calculation of the characteristic of fuzzy set theory because no membership grade is employed. In fuzzy set theory, the subtraction and addition of fuzzy numbers are valid if and only if they have the same membership grade and at the same side of the number with one membership grade. When we meet the operation on fuzzy numbers, we should consider their membership grade. Unfortunately, either the trapezoidal fuzzy AHP, or the triangular fuzzy AHP, no one considers the membership grade when meet the operation of fuzzy numbers. This leads to a serious problem that numbers with different membership grade can be added or subtracted.Taking trapezoidal fuzzy AHP for example, according to Eq. (8), the membership grade of α, β, γ and δ are:μM(α)=μL(α),μM(β)=1,μM(γ)=1,μM(δ)=μR(δ)BecauseμM(α)andμM(β)are not always equal, when doing addition or subtraction operations on α and β, one should consider their membership grade. Unfortunately, fuzzy AHP researchers do not consider that. Eq. (13) is from the core formulas of trapezoidal fuzzy AHP (Buckley, 1985a) which can serve as a case.(13)fi(y)=∏j=1m(βij-αij)y+αij1/mwhere (αij/βij,γij/δij) is a trapezoidal fuzzy judgment.In fact, the membership grade function is only used in the definition of a fuzzy number. In the whole process of fuzzy AHP application, from data collection (experts give fuzzy judgment) to the final priorities obtained (operations on fuzzy comparison matrices), the membership grade function is never employed. Interested readers can check the three earliest paper of fuzzy AHP by Laarhoven and Pedrycz (1983), Buckley (1985b) and Chang (1996).When using the α-cut method to deal with fuzzy priorities, fuzzy AHP users still forget the membership grade. For the fuzzy number A=(a1/a2, a3/a4), its α-cut is defined as (Buckley, Feuring, & Hayashi, 2001):(14)Aα=[(a2-a1)α+a1,-(a4-a3)α+a4]By Eq. (8), the membership grade of a1, a2, a3 and a4 are not always equal. Thus, one cannot make the subtractions a2−a1 and a4−a3 directly. If the membership grade in Eq. (14) is not used, we cannot guarantee one-to-one correspondence between a fuzzy number and its α-cut. Table 1provides numerical examples of different fuzzy numbers with the same α-level have the same α-cut result.We know that the membership grade function is a core concept in fuzzy set theory. A method without it cannot belong to fuzzy set theory. The operation of fuzzy numbers and the α-cut method in fuzzy AHP never employ the membership grade function. Thus we believe that fuzzy AHP is not really a fuzzy set theory.In 1986, Thomas L. Saaty, the creator of the AHP, provided the axiomatic foundations for the AHP. He proposed four axioms for the AHP and the first one is the reciprocal judgments. However fuzzy AHP violates the first axiom which states:Axiom 1ReciprocalFor all judgments aij, its reciprocal judgments ajisatisfy the relations:(15)aji=1/aijwhich can be written as:(16)aijaji=1For triangular fuzzy numbers we have:(17)ãij⊙ãji=(l1,m1,u1)⊙1u1,1m1,1l1≃l1u1,1,u1l1≠(1,1,1)For trapezoidal fuzzy numbers, we use 1-level cut to calculateaij⊙ajiand we have:(18)ãij⊙ãji=(α1/β1,γ1/δ1)⊙δ1-1/γ1-1,β1-1/α1-1=α1δ1β1γ1,γ1β1δ1α1≠(1,1,1,1)It is clear that Eq. (16) cannot be guaranteed in fuzzy AHP.Thus Axiom 1 cannot be guaranteed in fuzzy AHP.Our analysis is similar with Dubois’ (2011) that the reciprocal condition cannot be guaranteed in the fuzzy AHP.Consider the following numerical example (Table 2).Example 1The product of the judgmentã12and its reciprocalã21is given by:ã12⊙ã21=12,1,2which is obviously not equal to one.In addition, fuzzy AHP sometimes leads to meaningless reciprocal judgments. According to Axiom 1, we have the following consequence:Consequence 1A judgment and its reciprocal are identical if and only if they are equal to one.However, fuzzy AHP violates this consequence. Consider the following fuzzy judgments (see Table 3). They are identical with their reciprocals, but they are not equal to one.In fact, fuzzy AHP will meet this problem as long as the numbers satisfy:For triangular fuzzy numbers: the lower value is the reciprocal number of the upper value and the modal value is equal to one.For trapezoidal fuzzy numbers: the first and second numbers are the reciprocals of the fourth and third numbers respectively.Thus, we derive that fuzzy AHP often violates the axiom of reciprocal and leads some reciprocal judgments meaninglessIn the AHP, when all judgments are consistent, we have:(19)aikakj=aij,for alli,j,andkFuzzy AHP also has a definition for consistency, such as the one provided by Buckley (1985b),Definition 1A fuzzy positive reciprocal matrixA‾=[ãij]is consistent if and only ifãik⊙ãkj=a¯ij. This definition is the extension to fuzzy positive matrices of the definition of (ordinal) consistency for positive reciprocal matrices. If A=[aij] is a positive reciprocal matrix, then A is consistent if and only if aikakj=aij.However, the definition of consistency in fuzzy AHP is just an abstract concept. While using the multiplication operation of fuzzy AHP to check it, one would obtain contradictory results.Because every 2-by-2 positive reciprocal matrix is consistent (Saaty, 2009), we employ it to check our statements.Consider a 2 by 2 matrixA‾=[ãij].For triangular fuzzy AHP:Letã12=(3,4,5), and we have:ã12⊙ã21=(3,4,5)⊙15,14,13≃35,1,53≠a¯11=(1,1,1)For trapezoidal fuzzy AHP:Letã12=(3/4,5/6), and we have:ã12⊙ã21=(3/4,5/6)⊙1615,1413=12130,41545,542112,-56Fuzzy AHP uses α -level cut to obtain the result ofa¯12⊙a¯21. Consider a 1-level cut:ã12⊙ã21=1245,542≠a¯11=(1/1,1/1)Thus we see that fuzzy AHP often violates the operational rule of consistency.In utility theory, preferences obey the following axiom (Dyer, 1990),Axiom 2ContinuityGiven judgment X, Y and Z such thatX≻Y≻Z, there exists a probability p in (0,1) such thatY∼pX+(1-p)Z.Not only does utility theory obey Axiom 1, but general decision making theories, including the AHP, also obey the axiom of continuity. However, fuzzy AHP fails to obey the continuity axiom. Consider the triangular fuzzy judgments M1=(1/2,1,3/2), M2=(2,5/2,3) and M3=(4,5,6). It is clear that:(20)M1<M2<M3According to the continuity axiom, it should exist a probability p0 in (0,1) satisfying:(21)M2∼p0M3+(1-p0)M1Substituting the values of M1, M2 and M3 into Eq. (21), we have:(22)2∼4p0+(1-p0)×1/25/2∼5p0+(1-p0)×13∼6p0+(1-p0)×3/2Eq. (22) can be written as:(23)p0∼3/7p0∼3/8p0∼1/3It is clear that no p0 satisfies Eq. (23) and hence no p0 in (0,1) satisfies Eq. (21). The conclusion is also true for trapezoidal fuzzy AHP. Thus we come to the following conclusion: When the judgments of fuzzy AHP are determined, they often violate the axiom of continuity.When Laarhoven and Pedrycz (1983) introduced triangular fuzzy judgment into the AHP, they did not give a method to rank triangular fuzzy numbers. Buckley (1985a) also did not propose a method to rank trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. Perhaps those two earliest fuzzy AHP researchers thought that the rank of fuzzy numbers is the same as that of the ordinary real numbers. However, in the applications of fuzzy AHP, some fuzzy numbers are difficult to compare.Taking triangular fuzzy judgments for example, most conflicts are about the intersection of fuzzy numbers which cause a lower or an upper value of one fuzzy number to be greater than the corresponding values of the others, meanwhile the midpoint value which lies between the two values can have the reverse order with respect to the other midpoint value. This is also the same case in trapezoidal fuzzy judgments. As Sevastianov (2007) writes: “fuzzy numbers can be only partially ordered and hence cannot be compared in the ordinary sense.” Therefore, “fuzzy numbers have no natural order” (Wang & Kerre, 2001). Many fuzzy AHP researchers are concerned with this issue and propose different methods to rank fuzzy numbers, but these methods often contradict each other. Taking the three triangular fuzzy numbers in Fig. 2as example, where A1=(1,2,6), A2=(2.5,2.75,3), A3=(2,3,4).In Table 4we use the 4 methods to compare the above cases of fuzzy numbers in Fig. 2. It is clear that these methods give confusing results of ranking fuzzy numbers.In Fig. 3, we show that the number of articles about “ranking fuzzy numbers” from 1981 to 2011. Until now, there are more than 200 papers about how to compare fuzzy numbers. In the last three years 2009–2011, there are 30, 27 and 34 articles respectively. The numerous recent papers on ranking fuzzy numbers reveal that fuzzy AHP is still an immature method since it was proposed in the early 1980s. Until now there is no generally accepted method to help a decision-maker compare fuzzy numbers.Because there is no generally accepted method of ranking fuzzy numbers, some researchers have proposed alternative methods such as (1) using the mid-number or (2) converting a fuzzy number to a real number. We show below that these two methods in turn lack validity.For the mid-number method, the ranks obtained by fuzzy AHP would be the same as or inferior to that obtained by the AHP as we have proved in reference (Zhu, 2013). Taking triangular fuzzy AHP for example, assume two judgment matrices,A=(aij)nn,aij=(aijL,aijM,aijU)andB=(aijM)nn.Because the mid-number of the final priorities only depends on the mid-number of triangular fuzzy judgments (Laarhoven & Pedrycz, 1983), the final ranking obtained from matrix A is the same as that of matrix B. Actually, Zhu (2013) has proved that the priorities obtained by triangular fuzzy AHP (LLSM method) are the same as that obtained by the geometric mean, which was proved to be inferior to the eigenvector method in producing the correct ranking (Saaty, 1990). Therefore, when using mid-numbers to rank the final priorities, the mid-number-judgment matrix can yield the same rank as one obtained without fuzziness by using the AHP. Thus we get back to the AHP because one does not need to use the lower and upper values of the judgments.As for the converting to real number method, the process has two shortcomings: (1) if one could convert fuzzy priorities to real numbers, why not use this method from the beginning and convert fuzzy judgments into real judgments? If it happens, there is no need to use fuzzy AHP. Instead one can just use the AHP because all fuzzy judgments can be converted to real numbers and (2) the conversion methods cannot guarantee one-to-one correspondence between fuzzy numbers and real numbers. For example, the defuzzification method proposed by Kaufmann and Gupta (1991) converts trapezoidal fuzzy numbers to real numbers by using the arithmetic mean. However, according to their method, the fuzzy numbers (2/2.8,3.2/4) and (1.5/2,3.9/4.6) have the same defuzzification real number “3”. Thus, we can say that the conversion methods may cause information loss.A significant characteristic of the AHP among the traditional decision making methods is that judgments need not satisfy the axiom of transitivity. AHP allows intransitivity because it occurs in real life, as Luce and Raiffa’s (1957) say:No matter how intransitivities exist, we must recognize that they exist, and we can take only little comfort in the thought that they are an anathema to most of what constitutes theory in the behavioral sciences today.When the judgments contain intransitivity, the consistency of the judgment matrix cannot be guaranteed. The AHP uses consistency ratio (C.R.) to measure the deviation of judgment matrix from consistency.C.R.≡λmax-n(n-1)R.I.where R.I. is the random index.Some fuzzy AHP researchers have proposed that fuzzy AHP could improve the consistency of judgments, but actually most fuzzy AHP applications do not have a consistency check because they lack a valid method to do that. Those that have a method turn out to be inaccurate as we now show with an example.Consider the pairwise comparison matrix in Table 5.Using the principal eigenvector method given byw=(0.33,0.25,0.17,0.24)withC.R.=0.09Table 6gives the triangular fuzzy pairwise comparison matrix corresponding to Table 5.Using Wang and Chin’s (2011, p. 543) logarithmic fuzzy preference programming (LFPP) method, we have:w=(0.35,0.24,0.19,0.22)andC.R.=0.2271Clearly, the inconsistency index C.R. obtained by fuzzy AHP is greater than that obtained by the eigenvector method.In this section, we discuss the validity of 1–9 fundamental scale and the validity issue of the AHP in a complex and uncertain environment from the standpoint of fuzzy AHP. Before doing this, we address fuzzy critiques of the AHP.Fuzzy AHP uses fuzzy judgments to make decision and many fuzzy AHP applications use this approach. Few people consider why fuzzy AHP is needed. Here we list some reasons for why fuzzy judgment is regarded necessary from the most influential papers of fuzzy AHP. A main reason is that these authors think the crisp number cannot express human complex behavior, but complex scale (fuzzy judgment) could serve the work.The earliest paper about fuzzy AHP (Laarhoven & Pedrycz, 1983) argue that,In this paper we have presented a concrete application of fuzzy set theory and fuzzy arithmetic to a decision process, where the choice is between a number of alternatives under conflicting judgments made on the basis of decision criteria. By offering the decision-makers the possibility to express their – essentially fuzzy – opinions in fuzzy numbers, the new method should provide more realistic results than the original non-fuzzy method.Buckley (1985b) in his most influential paper illustrates why fuzzy AHP is needed by writing,Fuzzy numbers can express an expert’s feeling that a ratio aij is approximately 5 to 1 instead of exactly 5/l, or that a ratio is between 6 to 1 and 8 to 1 instead of exactly 7/l. We all recognize that it is difficult for people to always assign exact ratios when comparing two alternatives. When comparing A1 and A5 a person might feel that A1 is much more important than A5. Does this mean that al5 equals 7/l, or 8/l, or 9/l? Using fuzzy numbers the expert can respond that al5 is between 7 to 1 and 9 to 1. Also, a person could feel that Al is a little more important than A5. An appropriate fuzzy ratio in this case might be approximately 3 to 1. Fuzzy numbers automatically incorporate the vagueness of these replies.Unfortunately, in another most influential paper of fuzzy AHP (Chang, 1996), the author does not argue why fuzzy judgment is necessary, but just proposes a new method. Besides these principal researchers, most fuzzy AHP researchers and applicants hold the idea of Laarhoven and Pedrycz (1983) and Buckley’s (1985b), such as Wang, Elhag, and Hua (2006):Due to the complexity and uncertainty involved in real world decision problems, it is sometimes unrealistic or even impossible to require exact judgments. It is therefore more natural or realistic that a decision maker is allowed to provide fuzzy judgments instead of precise comparisons.Here, we do not agree with the comments on AHP because we believe that it has been sufficiently demonstrated with numerical applications. We hold the idea that the AHP with crisp numbers is more effective than by the fuzzy judgments in complex and uncertain environment.Fuzzy AHP researchers claim that fuzzy judgments are easier than the AHP which uses crisp judgments. However, no one has given valid evidence on why they think the fuzzy judgments are superior to the 1–9 scale. Here, we discuss this issue from two standpoints: whether 1–9 fundamental scale should be fuzzied or not and can the fuzzy judgment help human people to increase efficiency of complex decision making?Whether 1–9 fundamental scale should be fuzzied or not?Here, we should clarify that all the fuzzy judgments in the manuscript refer to fuzzy numbers in fuzzy AHP. The fuzzy numbers from fuzzy sets are beyond our research.We know, the fundamental scale of the AHP has its own psychophysical basis, as Saaty wrote (Saaty, 2012),The fundamental scale of the AHP can be derived from the logarithmic response function of Weber Fechner in psychophysics as follows. For a given value of the stimulus, the magnitude of response remains the same until the value of the stimulus is increased sufficiently large in proportion to the value of the stimulus, thus preserving the proportionality of relative increase in stimulus for it to be detectable for a new response. … By fundamental scale we are able to distinguish ordinal between high, medium and low at one level and for each of them in a second level below that also to distinguish between high, medium and low giving us nine different categories.In classical AHP, Saaty has given explanation for the absolute numbers based on the psychophysical basis of the AHP, seeing Table 7, where each scale has its semantic meaning. Users can assign the corresponding number for pairwise comparison. If DMs do not understand the difference of 1–9 scale, they should stop the decision making. Users should learn more knowledge and skills to support their decision. Then restart the decision.Therefore, 1–9 scale is not crisp in the first place, it has its mathematical logic and fuzzy linguistic and does not need to be made fuzzy again. Such as “3” represents “moderate important” which means “experience and judgment slightly favor one activity over another” (Saaty, 1980). Thus, the fuzzification of “3” just like in fuzzy AHP makes no sense because fuzzy “moderate importance” has no meaning.Can fuzzy judgment help human people to increase efficiency of complex decision making?Fuzzy AHP researchers claim that fuzzy judgment is suitable for human thinking. We acknowledge that human being’s thinking is complex, but it does not mean we have to use complex paradigm to express human complex decision behavior.We hold the opinion that it is not necessary to use a complex paradigm to express complex things, sometimes a simple paradigm may be better. In social science, we assume people to be rational. We know that human beings are very complex social animals. They have numerous irrational acts such as taking offense, becoming angry, having an aversion, and expressing emotions in an exaggerated way. If classical economists took irrational acts into consideration, they would fail to establish classical economic theory. Thus we conclude that it is not necessary to use a complex paradigm (fuzzy AHP) to express human complex decision behavior unless the complex paradigm is more efficient than a simple one (the AHP).Therefore, fuzzy judgments using in the AHP make no sense because it lacks a mathematical logic and cannot give a theoretical proof to show that it is more effective than the 1–9 fundamental scale. We have examined a large amount of fuzzy AHP literature and found that there is no theoretical evidence or application to show fuzzy AHP can obtain better outcomes than the AHP.As we stated in the beginning of Section 6, fuzzy AHP researchers claim that the AHP cannot tackle complex and uncertain decision making problems in the real world because it uses crisp number to express judgments. We cannot agree with this observation for two reasons.First, the AHP has been used widely around the world to make decisions and there has never been a cry asking for use of better numbers to represent judgments. In fact, the use of crisp number in the AHP has been validated in numerous examples that can fill a book both for the single judgment matrix case and also when the numerical result was known in the hierarchical case. There are examples where the AHP has generated priorities that are close to the corresponding real life answers. Here is an example that was published in a scientific journal of a real life application of the AHP to chess competition before the answer was known (Saaty & Vargas, 1980). In this example, not only the winner was identified but also the number of games in the match was determined.Second, when one encounters complex and uncertain decisions with dependence and feedback, the Analytic Network Process (ANP) has been applied to hundreds of cases. Thus fuzzy AHP even fuzzy ANP make no sense because the AHP and ANP already can tackle intangible decision making problems. Again we show for the ANP as we have for the AHP that unfortunately, the fuzzy ANP approach is a false proposition. We have examined many literatures about fuzzy ANP on Google Scholar and found those fuzzy ANP approaches of which we mention three here (Chang, Wu, & Chen, 2007; Guneri, Cengiz, & Seker, 2009; Mohanty, Agarwal, Choudhury, & Tiwari, 2005) have defuzzified fuzzy priorities in the super matrix. This is an interesting observation. We know the super matrix is a core part of the ANP. If no fuzzy numbers can be used in the super matrix, we cannot call it “fuzzy ANP” because fuzzy priorities do not play a role in the networks. The question is why we cannot put fuzzy numbers in the super matrix? Because if so, we cannot obtain final priorities. The proof is as following:In the super matrix W of the ANP, the sum of each column is equal to one because the numbers in each column is zero or a normalized weight vector. This characteristic ensures the super matrix is column stochastic and hence the values of limk→∞Wkconverge to a real positive number. Therefore we can obtain final priorities for Wk. (Detailed proof is available in Saaty’s book, 2010, p. 178–186).However, when we put a fuzzy weight in super matrix W, we cannot guarantee that the sum of each column is equal to one. And hence the super matrix is not column stochastic which leads to the values of limk→∞Wkconverge to zero or diverge to infinity, and we cannot obtain the final priorities for Wk. This completes the proof.Moreover, the defuzzification method in fuzzy ANP is like that in fuzzy AHP as we show in Section 5.1 which has severe problem that it cannot grantee one-to-one correspondence between fuzzy numbers and the defuzzification results. For example, Chen and Yang (2011) use Eq. (24) to defuzzificate triangular fuzzy numbers, yet it is clear that (1,3,7/2) and (3/2,5/2,4) have the same defuzzificated result 2.75.(24)MCrisp=(4m+l+u)6Therefore, we conclude that fuzzy AHP which uses a complex decision method (fuzzy judgment) leads to lower efficiency when compared with the simple and direct method in current use.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
