@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Instance-based credit risk assessment for investment decisions in P2P lending

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use an instance-based model to assess a loan’s credit risk.We formulate P2P lending into portfolio optimization with boundary constraints.We describe the similarity of two loans using default likelihood distance.We use kernel weighting to smooth risks of loans.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data mining,P2P lending,Credit risk assessment,Instance-based method,Investment decisions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent years have witnessed increased attention on peer-to-peer (P2P) lending, which provides an alternative way of financing without the involvement of traditional financial institutions. A key challenge for personal investors in P2P lending marketplaces is the effective allocation of their money across different loans by accurately assessing the credit risk of each loan. Traditional rating-based assessment models cannot meet the needs of individual investors in P2P lending, since they do not provide an explicit mechanism for asset allocation. In this study, we propose a data-driven investment decision-making framework for this emerging market. We designed an instance-based credit risk assessment model, which has the ability of evaluating the return and risk of each individual loan. Moreover, we formulated the investment decision in P2P lending as a portfolio optimization problem with boundary constraints. To validate the proposed model, we performed extensive experiments on real-world datasets from two notable P2P lending marketplaces. Experimental results revealed that the proposed model can effectively improve investment performances compared with existing methods in P2P lending.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Peer-to-peer (P2P) lending, also known as person-to-person lending, allows individuals to directly lend to and borrow from each other on an Internet-based platform, without the involvement of traditional financial intermediaries. In this marketplace, borrowers submit applications for loans, called listings, by specifying loan details, such as loan amount and description. Then, prospective lenders are allowed to fund these listings partially by specifying the loan amounts they will provide. If the total dollar amount requested by a listing is fulfilled within a pre-specified period of time, the listing becomes a loan. Due to the elimination of a traditional financial intermediary, and a more dynamic environment that taps into the collective intelligence of the crowd, P2P lending has the potential to reduce financing costs and increase efficiency of the financial market.To help personal investors manage risk, state-of-the-art P2P lending platforms, such as Prosper and Lending Club, provide risk ratings for each loan. Such ratings take into account many variables about the loan and the applicant, such as FICO scores, the amounts and terms of the loans, borrowers’ assets, debts, types of employment, and so on. This process of credit rating is similar to those traditional evaluation techniques commercial banks employ to evaluate the risk levels of borrowers. As a result, loans are categorized into a small number of risk groups. For example, Prosper uses a seven-level risk rating (i.e., AA, A, B, C, D, E, NR). This “rating-based” model provides basic evaluation of loans’ credit risk, and the loans within each rating group are assumed to bear the same level of risk. In order to diversify their portfolios, investors are allowed to pick loans from different risk groups, according to their risk-return preferences.Rating-based credit risk assessment models are practical and has been widely utilized by financial institutions for issuing loans. However, this model may be too coarse to meet the needs of personal investors in P2P lending. Since traditional financial institutions possess large amounts of cash, they are able to fund millions of loans, which facilitates myriad opportunities for diversification. For P2P lending, each personal investor has much less money for investment. However, because they are allowed to partially fund each loan, effective diversification has been made possible. Therefore, investors in the P2P lending marketplace not only need to decide which loans to fund, but also how much money to allocate to each of them, which minimizes risk for a given expected return. While this feature presents as a typical portfolio optimization problem, it is very challenging to accurately assess the credit risk of each individual loan for P2P lending, which will serve as necessary input for portfolio optimization. Moreover, real-world P2P lending marketplaces typically impose minimum investment amount constraints. For example, the minimum required investment on each loan is $25 at Prosper. Such constraints are substantial for individual investors in P2P lending, due to their limited amount of total funds. Thus, a new decision making tool is required for lucrative P2P lending.In this study, we propose a more accurate credit risk model for P2P lending, which allows personal investors to optimize investment decisions. Without enough historical data of closed loans for each individual borrower, it is impossible to predict the performance of new loans based on a borrower’s past ones. As a result, we identified past loans with similar attributes, and aggregated performance outcomes to predict the performance of a new loan. This is called an “instance-based” approach.Specifically, in the proposed instance-based model, we first defined the similarity of loans as the difference between their probabilities to default, which was derived from a logistic regression of borrower’s credit attributes. We then predicted the return of each loan as a weighted average of similar loans, and the risk as the weighted variance, where the optimal weights were learned within the mathematical framework of kernel regression. Furthermore, based on this instance-based credit risk model, we formulated the investment decisions in P2P lending as a portfolio optimization problem with boundary constraints. To validate the proposed model, we performed extensive experiments on real-world data from two state-of-the-art P2P lending marketplaces. Experimental results demonstrated that the proposed model effectively outperforms existing rating-based models.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A literature review is performed in Section 2, and a description of the data is provided in Section 3. Section 4 is devoted to describing the instance-based model for credit risk assessment. Combined with a formal formulation of portfolio optimization in P2P lending, Section 5 describes the investment decision model. To better explain the model, an end-to-end example of the instance-based credit risk assessment and investment decision process is provided in the appendix. In Section 6, we report empirical results on effectiveness of the proposed model. Finally, Section 7 concludes this work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we proposed an instance-based credit risk assessment model to quantify the risk of each loan in the P2P lending marketplace, and formulated the investment decision in P2P lending as a portfolio optimization problem with boundary constraints. The proposed credit risk assessment model has at least three major advantages. Firstly, it has the ability of quantifying the credit risk of each individual loan, instead of categorizing the loans into a small number of risk groups. Such granularity provides an easy way to compare risks of different loans, and the potential of more accurate predictions. Secondly, this model can assess the credit risk of a new loan based on its default likelihood distances to past loans, without requiring detailed historical observations of the same borrower. Finally, the weights of past loans are determined within the mathematical framework of kernel regression, which guarantees the optimality and does not require strong statistical assumptions. As demonstrated by experimental results on two real-world datasets, the proposed model has better performances than existing models available at the P2P lending marketplaces.