@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cold supply chain design with environmental considerations: A simulation-optimization approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The cold supply chain design problem is modeled as a concave MIP.A new Lagrangian approach embedded in B&B is developed to solve it.Unknown inventory functions are estimated using simulation-optimization.The global warming impact of both CO2 and refrigerant gases is considered.Realistic cases with different characteristics are solved to optimality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory-location problem,Distribution,Simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In response to strict regulations and increased environmental awareness, firms are striving to reduce the global warming impact of their operations. Cold supply chains have high levels of greenhouse gas emissions due to the high energy consumption and refrigerant gas leakages. We model the cold supply chain design problem as a mixed-integer concave minimization problem with dual objectives of minimizing the total cost - including capacity, transportation, and inventory costs - and the global warming impact. Demand is modeled as a general distribution, whereas inventory is managed using a known policy but without explicit formulas for the inventory cost and maximum level functions. We propose a novel hybrid simulation-optimization approach to solve the problem. Lagrangian decomposition is used to compose the model into an integer programming subproblem and sets of single variable concave minimization subproblems that are solved using simulation-optimization. We provide closed-form expressions for the Lagrangian multipliers so that the Lagrangian bound is obtained in a single iteration. Furthermore, since the solution of the integer subproblem is feasible to the original problem an upper bound is obtained immediately. To close the optimality gap, the Lagrangian approach is embedded in a branch-and-bound framework. The approach is verified through extensive numerical testing on two realistic case studies from different industries, and some managerial insights are drawn.Annual fixed cost for opening a warehouseAnnual fixed CO2-equivalent emissions from a warehouseUnit shipping cost from a plant to a warehouseExpected annual product demand from a retailerCO2-equivalent emissions for shipping a product between a plant and a warehouseAverage CO2 emissions from shipping a product between a plant and a warehouseAverage HFC gas leakage for shipping a product between a plant and a warehouseVolume-dependent capacity cost functionAnnual CO2-equivalent emissions from a warehouse as a function of its volumeGlobal-warming potential of a HFC gasNumber of units shipped of a productNumber of shipments using a truck typeAnnual CO2-equivalent emissions for serving a retailer from a warehouseAnnual cost of serving a customer from a warehouseMaximum inventory functionInventory cost functionProduct volumeVolumetric capacity of a truck typeBinary decision variables for assigning retailers to warehousesNumber of products shipped from a plant to a warehouseBinary decision variables for locating warehouses

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Global warming has become a pressing issue in the last few decades, particularly with the plethora of recent scientific research providing strong evidence for its existence and showing its severe negative effects (Solomon et al., 2007). Currently, specialists concur that the radioactive forcing attributed to the anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is the main cause of the global warming phenomenon (NRC, 2005). Thus, many endeavors have been made by governments, organizations and firms around the world to reduce the emissions of GHG.In many industries, supply chain operations are a significant source of GHG emissions. It was estimated that more than three quarters of the GHG emissions associated with many industrial sectors are attributed to supply chain activities (Huang, Weber, & Matthews, 2009). Companies have devoted considerable attention to reduce the environmental footprint of their supply chains, aiming to achieve their sustainability commitments, mitigate risk on their brand value, and satisfy their environmentally-conscious customers (EPA, 2010). Nowadays, several global companies including IBM, Johnson&Johnson and PepsiCo require their suppliers to report or control their GHG emissions, whereas other companies are taking steps to control their supply chain emissions. For example, Wal-Mart has recently announced that it is on track to reduce GHG emissions from its supply chain by 18 million metric tons by 2015 (WALMART).In cold supply chains, products must be stored and transported at low temperatures near or below the freezing mark. This necessitates the use of refrigerated warehouses and trucks that consume large quantities of energy for refrigeration. Higher energy consumption is associated with higher carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in power generation facilities. Furthermore, refrigeration systems utilize large quantities of HydroFluoroCarbon (HFC) gases that have high global warming potential (GWP) and very long lifetime in the atmosphere. Regular and catastrophic leakage of HFC gases from cold supply chain constitutes a significant component of their global warming impact. Therefore, these gases must be taken into account when determining the best design and operations of cold supply chains.In this paper, we study the cold supply chain design problem and provide a mathematical model to represent its economic and environmental effects. The problem is formulated as a concave mixed-integer programming problem, where the objective is to minimize the expected total cost of the supply chain, including capacity, transportation and inventory costs, in addition to costs associated with the global warming impact due to GHG emissions. We consider the environmental effects of both CO2 emissions due to energy consumption and leakage of refrigerant gas in warehouses and vehicles.To solve the model, we propose a novel Lagrangian approach embedded in a branch-and-bound framework. Unlike classical Lagrangian relaxation approaches that use iterative methods such as subgradient optimization or cutting plane methods, we are able to provide a closed-form expression for the best Lagrangian multipliers, so we get the Lagrangian bound in a single iteration. Since the solution of the main subproblem is feasible to the original problem, we also get an upper bound immediately. A branch-and-bound algorithm is used to close the optimality gap. The proposed approach requires the evaluation of the inventory cost and the maximum inventory level at the branching points. Since we address the case of general demand pattern and inventory policy where explicit formulas for the inventory functions are rarely available, we resort to a simulation-optimization algorithm to estimate these functions. Discrete-event simulation is embedded into a bisection search algorithm to find the best control parameters of the inventory system.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in the next section we review the recent literature in the area of environmentally-conscious supply chain design . Sections 3 and 4 discuss the economic and environmental aspects of cold supply chains. The mathematical formulation of the cold supply chain design problem is presented in Section 5. In Section 6, a solution method combining Lagrangian decomposition, branch-and-bound, and simulation-optimization is presented in detail. Numerical testing on two case studies from different industries are conducted and the results are presented in Section 7. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we developed a new mathematical model for designing cold supply chains with environmental considerations and proposed a novel approach to solve it efficiently. The model links the different components of the design problem by minimizing the capacity, inventory, and transportation costs simultaneously while accounting for realistic considerations such as stochastic demand, the inventory policy used in warehouses, and economies of scale inherent in different aspects of the system. Our model differs from the traditional green supply chain models found in the literature in three main aspects. (1) It considers the entire global warming impact of the cold supply chain, including the effect of refrigerant gas leakage in addition to the CO2 emissions related to energy consumption. (2) It does not stipulate any restrictive assumptions regarding the demand pattern or inventory policy implemented at warehouses except concavity of the inventory functions. (3) It bases the determination of the warehouse capacity on the actual storage requirements as determined by the inventory policy and not on the throughput.The solution approach combines the efficiency of optimization methods with the accuracy of simulation methods. We were able to provide a closed-form expression for the best Lagrangian multipliers so that the Lagrangian bound is obtained in a single iteration alongside a feasible solution. Lagrangian decomposition is embedded in a B&B framework to close the optimality gap. When the inventory functions cannot be expressed explicitly in the mathematical model, a simulation-optimization algorithm is used within the Lagrangian approach to estimate these functions at the branching points.The proposed approach was tested on two realistic cases representing industries with different logistical characteristics. The results show that it is possible to substantially reduce the global warming effect of cold supply chains with a small increase, and sometimes with virtually no increase, in cost. Furthermore, we shed light on how the contribution of the different cost components affect the design of the cold supply chain. The managerial insights drawn from these results enable the decision-makers to identify and target the primary cost and emissions drivers in their supply chain networks. Also, through these tests, the proposed approach is shown to be versatile and can be tailored to suit many real life situations including different demand patterns, inventory policies, transportation modes, and operational constraints.