@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigating the effects of mailing variables and endogeneity on mailing decisions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Distinguish between different types of mailing variables.Control for unobserved heteregoeneityControl for endogeneity.Find (super-)saturation effects of mailings.Perform dynamic optimization of mailings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
(D) OR in marketing,Specification of mailings,Mixture of Dirichlet Processes,Endogeneity,Dynamic optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Determining the optimal amount of mailings being sent to customers is crucial. However, this decision depends on various aspects. First, it is important to specify relevant mailing variables. By distinguishing different types of mailings and considering their sizes, we set our study apart from the majority of existing studies. To deal with unobserved heterogeneity we estimate a Mixture of Dirichlet Processes (MDP) whose components are Tobit-2 models. A policy function approach is used to take endogeneity into account. We investigate whether and how consideration of endogeneity leads to different managerial implications. To this end, we determine mailings by dynamic optimization for three individual customers which are prototypical for the segments discovered by the MDP model. We find out that mailings should be avoided altogether more frequently for all three customer types according to the model which takes endogeneity into account.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In order to induce purchases, mail order companies rely on mailings that they target to their customers. These mailings may differ from one another w.r.t. the season or clearings (Gönül, Kim, & Shi, 2000) or types of mailings such as main catalogs and regular mailings (Holland, 1993, chap. 9). Past studies suggest that the use of mailing variables is crucial when modeling purchase probabilities (e.g., Naik & Piersma, 2002). Gönül and Shi (1998) find that mailing variables have a positive influence on purchase probability. However, research also shows that mailings do not generally lead to positive effects on purchases or sales. In fact, if a company sends too many mailings, customers may become irritated and abstain from further purchases (e.g., Van Diepen, Donkers, & Franses, 2009).If such situations arise, mailings are said to display saturation effects. These are generally characterized by high levels of mailings at which further increases are not accompanied by more purchases or higher sales. As a progression of this effect, super-saturation is possible, i.e., purchases or sales decrease if mailings are increased (Hanssens, Parsons, and Schultz, 2001, chap. 3).We make use of different types of mailing variables in order to model the influence of these mailings and express (super-)saturation effects. Besides, we also include a model which takes endogeneity into account. We show that not controlling for endogeneity may lead to different optimal targeting suggestions.Table 1contains studies that model saturation effects. We do not only refer to mail order companies but to charities as well. To keep terminology consistent, we refer to solicitations from mail order companies and charities as mailings. Consequently, we call the response of a customer to a mailing purchase (with corresponding sales) no matter which industry is involved. Based on the specification of mailing variables, these studies can be categorized into three groups.The first group consists of publications (Baumgartner & Hruschka, 2005; Hruschka, 2010; Hruschka, Baumgartner, & Semmler, 2003) which consider number of mailings (NOM) as one of the predictor variables and assumes that its effect is static. All three studies transform the respective variables in order to assess saturation effects. S-shaped response functions (Baumgartner & Hruschka, 2005; Hruschka et al., 2003) show positive but degressive effects of mailings on purchase behavior. Only Hruschka (2010) corrects for endogeneity and finds biased estimates when he compares to models that do not account for endogeneity. All three publications use cross-section data, which means that they have for each customer only one value for the dependent variables. Therefore, they cannot perform dynamic optimization and have to use a static optimization approach.In the second group of publications NOM is one of the predictors, but timing of mailings (Naik & Piersma, 2002; Van Diepen et al., 2009) or customer behavior (Gönül et al., 2000; Rhee & McIntyre, 2008) are taken into consideration as well. Whereas Gönül et al. (2000) calculate NOM depending on the previous purchase Rhee and McIntyre (2008) differentiate their mailing variable further. In this approach, two versions of NOM are calculated. One depends on recent the other on prior mailings. Similar to the first group, saturation is examined by different transformations of mailing variables. Except for Naik and Piersma (2002) all authors correct for endogeneity. In contrast to Gönül et al. (2000), Van Diepen et al. (2009) find endogeneity biases. Rhee and McIntyre (2008) do not report whether such a bias exists. Of these studies only Gönül et al. employ optimization by using a static approach.The paper of Campbell et al. (2001) is the only one which belongs to the third group which is characterized by also taking into account the content of mailings. To make saturation evident, these authors use similarity matrices based on pairwise comparisons between two mailings w.r.t. common mailing contents. They take the revenue of products that show up in both mailings as indicator for the greatest possible saturation if these mailings were mailed on the same day. Besides, they also control for timing of mailings. As a result, they calculate a saturation matrix by combining the similarity and timing matrices. The authors do not investigate endogeneity. In terms of optimization a dynamic approach is employed.Our approach differs in several ways from related extant publications. Most previous studies consider only one (binary) mailing variable, which indicates whether a customer receives a mailing or not. We on the other hand include three different mailing variables. One refers to the type of catalogs, the remaining two take care of the size of mailings. Please note that mailings often consist of several catalogs (to target customers more individually) and hence different amount of pages. To measure size of an actual mailing we use a variable defined as the number of remaining pages, i.e., the number of pages not considering the main catalog. Besides, we use a second size variable which equals the total discounted number of previous pages across catalogs sent to a customer.These extended mailing variables allow to derive optimal mailing rules specific to individual customers which not only tell whether or not a mailing should be sent to a customer, but also how large such a mailing should be in terms of total pages. To this end, we employ dynamic optimization because our model comprises dynamic effects by means of stock variables which are based on the size and sales of previous mailings received by a customer. To the best of our knowledge our study is the first in which a dynamic problem is solved which also deals with the optimal size of mailings and is not limited to the assignment of catalogs to individual customers. The use of policy functions further sets our study apart from most other publications on direct mailings which neglect the concept of endogeneity altogether.Unobserved heterogeneity is of vital importance as can be seen from most of the studies which take it into account. Ignoring unobserved heterogeneity may lead to spurious state dependence and biased parameter estimates (Popkowski Leszczyc & Bass, 1998). Whereas the majority of researchers follow continuous mixture approaches, we use a Mixture of Dirichlet Processes (MDP) model. The MDP is capable to reproduce multimodal and skewed distributions and determines the number of latent segments alongside the estimation process (e.g., Hruschka, 2010). Unlike, e.g., Van Diepen et al. (2009) we apply the concept of unobserved heterogeneity to all our model parameters.We employ a Tobit-2 model (Amemiya, 1985, chap. 10). Research done by Levin and Zahavi (1998) shows that such a model is preferable over regression or logit models which are widely used to analyze the effect of direct mailing (for a general overview of models used in direct marketing please refer to Bose & Chen (2009)). Tobit-2 models deal with two decisions of customers simultaneously, i.e., the response to a mailing and the amount of sales a customer spends. If customer i responds to a mailing τ the first dependent variable, response Riτ, is equal to one. Only in this case the second dependent variable, the amount of sales Aiτ, assumes a positive value as can be seen from Eqs. (1) and (2) (Donkers, Paap, Jonker, & Franses, 2006; Van Diepen et al., 2009):(1)Riτ={1ifRiτ*>00otherwise(2)Aiτ={Aiτ*ifRiτ*>00otherwise.The two latent variablesRiτ*andAiτ*are specified as linear combinations of explanatory variables contained in vectors xRiτand xAiτto which the respective error term (ϵRiτ, ϵAiτ) is added:(3)Riτ*=xRiτ′βR+ϵRiτ(4)Aiτ*=xAiτ′βA+ϵAiτ.βR=(β0R,β1R,β2R,β3R,β4R,β5R,β6R,β7R)andβA=(β0A,β1A,β2A,β3A,β4A,β5A,β6A)symbolize the two coefficient vectors. Note that we eliminate one predictor from the amount equation in order to ensure identification (Cameron and Trivedi, 2009, chap. 4 and 16).Residuals of the Tobit-2 model follow a bivariate normal distribution with mean values equal to zero, varianceσA2for the amount of sales, and covariance σRAbetween residuals of the first and second equation. To ensure identification, the residual variance of the purchase equation is set equal to one (Cameron and Trivedi, 2009, chap. 4 and 16). Thus, residuals are correlated with correlation coefficientρ=σRA/σA.In contrast to most of the studies cited above, we distinguish several types of mailings which can range from so called main catalogs to regular mailings. Main catalogs advertise products over the whole range of the company’s assortment and mark the beginning of the new season. Their offerings remain valid throughout the whole half-year season (Holland, 1993, chap. 9). Regular mailings on the other hand have a shorter validity. They have a magazine-like appearance whereas main catalogs appear like a big book. Consequently, response rates and sales may differ across mailings. Usually, main catalogs receive more attention than regular mailings. We have to consider two disjunctive constellations: mailing vs. no mailing of a main catalog.Therefore our model comprises a binary dummy variable, called main_cat, which is set to one if the respective mailing includes a main catalog. As in our data set sizes of mailings to customers differ considerably, we define the remaining number of pages as second variable (r_pages). Please note that this variable only captures the number of pages without counting the pages of the main catalogs. In such mailings, catalogs are typically wrapped together. Each catalog clearly states the name of the company. With this variable we are able to control for the fact that customers might be annoyed when they receive a package of catalogs (that might fall apart as soon as they open the package). Besides, we also refer to previous mailings and sales taking into account dynamic effects. In line with other studies (e.g., Naik & Piersma, 2002; Van Diepen et al., 2009) we assume that exposure to previous mailings has an influence on the decision to buy as response to the current mailing. On the one hand, a customer might become familiar with the company if she/he received several mailings in the past. Hence, the second (new) mailing might serve as a reminder (Gönül & Shi, 1998). On the other hand, past mailings may also lead to boredom and influence the current response decision negatively (Gönül et al., 2000). For the third type of mailing variables we follow the approach of Van Diepen et al. (2009) by using customer specific stock variables and weight previous mailings implicitly. Eq. (5) shows the construction of a stock variable Ziτfor customer i and mailing τ:(5)Ziτ=∑l=1τ−1λtτ−tτ−lziτ−l,0<λ<1.Hence, variables of previous mailingsziτ−lare summed until the most recent previous mailing, i.e., the current mailing is not taken into consideration. We expect that previous mailings have different influences on the creation of stock variables. Mailings that have taken place a long time ago are suspected to have a smaller influence than more recent mailings. Therefore, we weight variables of previous mailings with a decay parameter λ. Its exponenttτ−tτ−lequals the time span (in years) between a previous and the current mailing. As λ lies in the interval of [0, 1] more recent mailings are emphasized compared to earlier mailings. Our stock variables are based on sizes (in pages) and sales (in Euros) of previous mailings. They differ from the stock variables of Van Diepen et al. (2009) who only consider whether a mailing has been sent or not. Values of stock variables size_stock and sales_stock are obtained by substituting size and sales of mailings forziτ−lin Eq. (5). Values of size_stock (sales_stock) are high for customers who received large mailings (who had a large amount of sales) recently or who are targeted with (buy from) mailings more frequently. Size_stock constitutes our third mailing variable. Table 2gives an overview of the variables we use in our model.In analogy to regular advertising, a higher size of (previous) mailings may not generally lead to an increase in sales for several reasons. Blattberg, Kim, and Neslin (2008, chap. 28) mention lack of attention as one cause, but give three more reasons as to what drives saturation. Firstly, customers might have bought in response to another mailing and do not feel the need to buy again. This is in accordance with Campbell et al. (2001) who state that short timing intervals between mailings are more likely to cause saturation effects. Secondly, several experiments w.r.t. information amount (Eastlick, Feinberg, & Trappey, 1993; Jacoby, Speller, & Kohn, 1974) and amount of choice alternatives (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000) indicate that increasing the respective amount may have negative impacts on purchases or sales. As a result, authors state that if amounts or alternatives are too large, customers may become confused (Jacoby et al., 1974) or are more satisfied when the amount is rather small (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000). In fact, Campbell et al. (2001) experience an increase in profits by reducing NOM. Thirdly, and as a progression in feelings, customers may become irritated by receiving mailings (Chun, 2012; Francis & Holland, 1999). As a consequence, customers may stop responding to future mailings.From Table 1 it becomes obvious that there are different possibilities to model saturation effects. However, among the parametric models used in these studies only the inclusion of a quadratic term is able to reproduce super-saturation as well (Hanssens et al., 2001, chap. 3). The total effect of a variable Ziτsuspected to exert super-saturation can be written as follows:(6)θ1Ziτ+θ2Ziτ2where θ1 and θ2 are the respective coefficients of the (quadratic) variable. A variable Ziτis subject to super-saturation if this total effect increases at a decreasing rate with higher values of the variable and declines if the variable exceeds a threshold. We speak of saturation if the total effect increases at a decreasing rate and converges to a maximum, but never declines.We expect (super-)saturation effects for most of our mailing and sales variables. Reason 1 (recent purchases) is captured by appropriate coefficients of (quadratic) sales_stock. Due to reasons 2 and 3 confusion or irritation w.r.t. high amounts of mailings might occur. In addition, a (high) amount of previous mailings can be expressed by appropriate coefficients of the (quadratic term of the) variable size_stock.In addition, we also investigate the effect of current mailings. Hence, a negative coefficient of r_pages reflects saturation as well, i.e., it indicates that the effect decreases for a higher number of pages of the catalogs other than the main catalog.Endogeneity implies that at least one of the predictors is correlated with the error term(s) of the model. However, most models are based on the assumption that they are uncorrelated. As a rule, companies send more mailings to customers that purchase more often as response to mailings than to customers that are rather inactive. As a consequence predictors are correlated with the error term which reflects the unobservable factors as well (Chintagunta, Erdem, Rossi, & Wedel, 2006).Manchanda, Rossi, and Chintagunta (2004) circumvent the endogeneity problem by estimating a policy function for the respective marketing variable. Predictors of the policy function in Manchanda et al. consist of coefficients from a count regression model for unit sales and timing information. According to Hruschka (2010) the use of policy functions is suitable if the company bases the mailing decision on activity of customers. In analogy to Van Diepen et al. (2009) we include policy functions for two predictor variables of the Tobit-2 model (i.e., main_cat and r_pages) which we suspect to be endogenous. We simultaneously estimate two policy functions and a Tobit-2 model. As main_cat is a binary variable, we specify the respective policy function as binary probit model. The policy function referring to the metric variable r_pages is a linear regression model.Our model comprises the two equations of the Tobit-2 model and the two policy functions. The heterogenous Tobit-2 equations obtained from Eqs. (3) and (4) by adding the customer-specific subscript i to coefficients look as follows:(7)Riτ*=βR0i+βR1iageiτ+βR2imain_catiτ+βR3ir_pagesiτ+βR4isize_stockiτ+βR5isize_stockiτ2+βR6isales_stockiτ+βR7isales_stockiτ2+ϵRiτ(8)Aiτ*=βA0i+βA1iageiτ+βA2ir_pagesiτ+βA3isize_stockiτ+βA4isize_stockiτ2+βA5isales_stockiτ+βA6isales_stockiτ2+ϵAiτ.Note that in the heterogenous model coefficients θ1 and θ2 of expression (6) are replaced by coefficient pairs (βR4i, βR5i), (βR6i, βR7i), (βA3i, βA4i), (βA5i, βA6i). They are estimated on the individual level like all the other parameters.The two homogenous policy functions for the latent variable main_catiτ*and the observed variable r_pagesiτare:(9)main_catiτ*=B1main_cat,iτδ1main_cat+B2main_cat,iτδ2main_cat+ζmain_cat,iτ(10)r_pagesiτ=B1r_pages,iτδ1r_pages+B2r_pages,iτδ2r_pages+ζr_pages,iτwhereB1main_cat,iτandB1r_pages,iτcontain all coefficients (i.e., βRiand βAi) from the Tobit-2 model.Besides, both matrices include a constant. Hence, similar to Manchanda et al. (2004) and Van Diepen et al. (2009) the first part of the policy functions refers to the coefficients of the Tobit-2 model. To capture the response behavior of customers w.r.t. the mailings we include the respective coefficient as one of the predictors of the probit or regression model. The second part refers to the timing of mailings. We identify different timing strategies for the variables main_cat and r_pages. In fact,B2main_cat,iτconsists of five andB2r_pages,iτof 46 variables that are set to 1 if mailing τ has been sent to customer i in the respective timing interval. Whereas the number of timing intervals differs, the intervals themselves are commensurate.δ1main_cat,δ1r_pages,δ2main_cat,andδ2r_pagesconstitute the corresponding homogenous coefficients. Error termsζmain_cat,iτandζr_pages,iτboth follow a (standard) normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation equal to 1 andσr_pages,respectively.We estimate three full models (M2–M4) with all predictor variables contained in Eqs. (3) and (4) which we compare to a homogenous constant model (M1). M1 does not include independent variables. In other words, both the response and the amount of sales equation of M1 only consist of a constant term. Moreover, M1 corresponds to a Tobit-2 model with σRAset to zero. M2 is a homogenous version of a Tobit-2 model which is compared to heterogenous models M3 and M4. As suggested by two anonymous reviewers we compare each of the models M2, M3, and M4 to related alternative versions which we describe in Section 4.2.To account for unobserved heterogeneity, we make use of a MDP. In a MDP the distribution of the parameters G follows a Dirichlet Prior (DP) and depends on a baseline prior distribution G0 which is equivalent to a homogenous Tobit-2 model and a precision parameter α. Hence G ∼ DP(G0, α). Whereas G0 defines the location of the prior (Burda, Harding, & Hausman, 2008) α determines the amount of segments. The higher the value of α the larger the number of segments (e.g., Hruschka, 2010). We allow coefficient estimates (βRi, βAi), (co-) variances (σRAi,σAi2), and decay parameters (λi=λsize_stock,i,λsales_stock,i) to vary across customers. This property of our model sets it apart from Van Diepen et al. (2009) who estimate heterogenous coefficients only. We use Algorithm 7 developed by Neal (2000). To account as well for endogeneity, we simultaneously estimate policy functions in the most comprehensive model M4. We also estimate a MDP model M3 which ignores endogeneity.Our process of estimation for model M4 can be characterized as follows. We use Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation. Each iteration consists of six steps of which the first three deal with allocating customers to different segments. This allocation decision is based on the value of the likelihood function for customer i which equals the product of the likelihood valuesLiτ(τ=1,…,Ti)across the Timailings. Tidenotes the NOM customer i receives during the period of observation.According to the Tobit-2 model the likelihood value Liτfor mailing τ of customer i differs between non-purchase (Riτ=0) and purchases (Riτ=1). For a non-purchase it can be written as (Amemiya, 1985, chap. 10; Cameron and Trivedi, 2009, chap. 4 and 16):(11)Liτ=Pr(Riτ*≤0)=1−Φ(xRiτ′βRi).Pr denotes the response probability,Φthe standard normal distribution function. The expression of the likelihood value for a purchase is (Amemiya, 1985, chap. 10; Cameron and Trivedi, 2009, chap. 4 and 16):(12)Liτ={f(Aiτ*|Riτ*>0)Pr[Riτ*>0]}=Φ{[xRiτ′βRi+σRAiσAi−2(Aiτ−xAiτ′βAi)][1−σRAi2σAi−2]1/2}σAi−1ϕ[σAi−1(Aiτ−xAiτ′βAi)].f() denotes the conditional density, ϕ the standard normal density.The fourth step is concerned with estimating segment specific model parameters of the Tobit-2 model. In steps 5 and 6 coefficients of the policy functions and the precision parameter are sampled, respectively. A more detailed description of the estimation process can be found in Appendices A (overview of the MCMC simulation) and B (parameter sampling for segments) .Our models need different amounts of burn in iterations. 10,000 prove to be sufficient for our homogenous models M1 and M2. We need 100,000 and 70,000 iterations for M3 and for M4, respectively. Estimates are based on the following 50,000 iterations for models M3 and M4, whereas 10,000 additional iterations are sufficient for the homogenous models M1 and M2.After MCMC iterations are complete, we employ a deterministic relabeling K-means style algorithm on parameters sampled for model M4. This way we avoid the label switching problem. According to Celeux, Hurn, and Robert (2000) averages of the resulting clusters can be used as segment specific estimates.The data set has been provided by a mail order company. We have a time span of three years at hand. To avoid having recently joined customers in the data set, we only include customers who received 18 mailings at least. The maximum NOM per customer equals 105 which implies an average mailing interval of 16 days. The minimum number of catalogs is one, the maximum amounts to six catalogs. Mailing size ranges between 81 and 721 pages. The mailings only contain one category of consumer non-durables (like apparel). We perform estimation on a random sample of 1073 customers. This number results after deleting recently joined customers, customers that are not regular customers (but rather business customers), and outliers. The number of observations (57,079) equals the sum of mailings across customers ∑iTi. Table 3shows the means and standard deviations of the observed variables.We assess model fit with the deviance information criterion (Carlin and Louis, 2000). If the conditionp(D)=−2*(LL¯)+2LL(β¯Ri,β¯Ai,σ¯RAi,σ¯Ai,λ¯i)>0is satisfied, the deviance information criterion (DIC) is calculated as follows:(13)DIC=−4*(LL¯)+2LL(β¯Ri,β¯Ai,σ¯RAi,σ¯Ai,λ¯i).Hence, the condition and the DIC criterion depend on the average log-likelihood across samples(LL¯) and the log-likelihood based on averaged model parameters. A model with a smaller DIC value is preferable over alternative models.We use every 20th iteration once the burn in phase is completed (i.e., 10,000/20 = 500 and 50,000/20 = 2500 samples for the homogenous and heterogenous models, respectively). One obtains the respective log-likelihood of a sample by inserting its parameter values into Eq. (11) if a non-purchase or Eq. (12) if a purchase is observed.Table 4contains DIC values for the four investigated models. Differences of these values indicate a large improvement of the heterogenous models M3 and M4 over M1 and M2. Like in Hruschka (2010) the model not accounting for endogeneity is preferable over other models. However, as M4 in contrast to M3 takes endogeneity into account and the difference of DIC values between M3 and M4 is relatively small, we report on the results for model M4 in the following section.Before we start interpreting our estimation results, we report on results for different model specifications and on several checks of model variables suggested by two anonymous reviewers. Instead of using the variable r_pages (which was suggested by an anonymous reviewer) we estimate our models with a variable counting the number of additional catalogs (besides the main catalog) that customers receive from the mail order company. DIC values of these alternative models M2a (52,243), M3a (50,495), and M4a (50,506) show that such a specification performs worse.To see if our model suffers from multicollinearity, we calculate variance inflation factors for all independent variables. As they are all well below 10 we conclude that multi-collinearity is not an issue (Wooldridge, 2009, chap. 3).We also examine whether results are sensitive to the exclusion of the variable main_cat from the sales equation. In order to do so, we regress the residuals of Eq. (8) on main_cat. As the difference of the two Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) values between Eq. (8) and this regression is close to zero (Raftery, 1995), we do not lose much information by excluding the variable main_cat.Finally, we check whether our stock variables are weakly exogenous. We estimate expected stock variables from a linear regression of stock variables on their lagged value (i.e., the value at the previous mailing). In a second step, we regress (latent) residuals from the purchase and the sales equations on the interaction of the original and the expected stock variable. We obtain differences of BIC values close to zero between these equations and the regression model containing the interaction term (Raftery, 1995). Hence, we conclude that stock variables are weakly exogenous and do not need a correction for endogeneity. The approach we follow here is equivalent to a score test on weak exogeneity assuming Gaussian conditional and marginal densities as well as linear conditional means (Boswijk & Urbain, 1997).We discuss segment specific results which we can infer from the MDP. Table 5contains averages of sampled parameters for each segment. This table also indicates whether a parameter is significant at the 5% level, i.e., whether the ratio of mean and standard deviation of its samples exceeds the critical t-value of 1.96 in absolute terms.Average coefficients are very different between segments. Looking at Table 5 it can be readily seen that this property applies to coefficients both in the purchase and the amount equations.We also note great differences of variances and covariances between segments which show that allowing for heterogeneity of these parameters is beneficial. All segment specific average covariances are negative. These negative correlations reflect the fact that customers whose purchase probabilities are high also spend less than expected on each purchase. These expected values are conditional on all explanatory variables of the model. In fact, this relationship can also be seen based on a descriptive analysis. By calculating quartiles based on the number of purchases we find that customers who are in the group with the smallest number of purchases spend on average 11.81% more than customers in the group with the highest number of purchases. According to an ANOVA and post-hoc tests for unequal variances (e.g., Tamhane’s T2) this difference is significant at α = 0.1.Decay parameters on the other hand have almost identical average values for all segments. Those referring to size_stock variables are much larger than decay parameters for sales_stock. This result shows that customers tend to discount past sales more strongly than the size of past mailings.Fig. 1shows the significant total effects of the z-transformed size_stock and sales_stock variables both in the amount and the purchase equation for the three segments using average parameter estimates of model M4. Several of the curves in Fig. 1 provide evidence for super-saturation, i.e., of size_stock in the amount equation for segment 3 (28% of all customers) and of sales_stock in the purchase equation for segments 1 and 3 which together comprise about 72% of all customers.The effects of sales_stock in the amount equation follow a u-shape for two segments. In other words, the amount of sales at first declines with higher values of sales_stock. This first part of such a curve can be said to reflect super-saturation. But if sales_stock exceeds a threshold, super-saturation disappears and the amount of sales increases. We also obtain a u-shaped curve for the total effect of size_stock in the purchase equation for segments 1 and 3.Similar to size_stock we also get evidence on saturation effects in the amount equation for the other mailing variable r_pages which is indicated by significant negative coefficients in all segments. On the other hand, positive coefficients in the purchase equation imply that response probabilities increase for customers in all segments as well if they receive a large mailing (see Table 5).Based on Tables 6and 7one can observe that the timing dummies influence the company’s mailing decision. The higher the coefficient of a timing dummy is, the more mailings are executed in the respective timing interval. For the first policy function this result implies that in these intervals a main catalog is sent to a high percentage of customers. For the second policy function differences w.r.t. the timing become evident. Whereas most of the dummies influence the targeting decision negatively, several exert a positive impact. In the former case, fewer customers receive large mailings in the respective timing intervals. Like Van Diepen et al. (2009) we find that our coefficients from the Tobit-2 model do not have an impact on the targeting decision. We check however whether we can exclude these coefficients from the policy functions following a request of an anonymous reviewer. We call the respective additional specification M4’ as it considers endogeneity just like M4. But in contrast to M4 the policy functions of M4’ only include the respective timing dummies and a constant. As the DIC value of M4’ (50,764) is higher than the DIC value of M4 we decide to stick with M4 and keep the coefficients from the Tobit-2 model as predictors in the policy functions.In this section we investigate whether and how consideration of endogeneity leads to different managerial implications. To this end, we determine optimal mailings for three customer types. Each customer type is defined as average customer of one of the three segments. We proceed from crisp segment memberships, i.e., each customer belongs to the segment to which she/he has been assigned most frequently in the MCMC iterations after burn in. A customer type is defined by parameter values of models M3 or M4 averaged across all customers of the respective segment. Like the segments to which they belong we call these customer types S1, S2, and S3. Please note that the same approach may be used to optimize mailings for other individual customers on the basis of appropriate averaged parameter values.We distinguish four disjunctive constellations, namely no mailing, mailing of a main catalog only, mailing of a main catalog together with other catalogs, and mailing of other catalogs without a main catalog. main_cat and r_pages constitute the decision variables, the two stock variables (size_stock, sales_stock) constitute the state variables s of the dynamic optimization problem.Current profitΠi(d,s)of customer i for mailing decision d and state s is defined as expected sales minus costs. We compute expected sales conditional on predictor values on the basis of average parameter values. Mailing costs are estimated by ordinary least squares as linear equation containing mailing size as independent variable. For estimation we had at our disposal data on costs and sizes of 326 mailings provided by the mail order company. Nonlinear equations as well as equations differing between catalog types lead to almost identical coefficients of determination of about 0.79.We maximize each customer specific value function Vi(s) over an infinite planning horizon:(14)Vi(s)=maxd(s)∑t=0∞ψtΠi(d,s).Eq. (14) makes clear that the value function is the maximum sum of discounted current and future profits with ψ denoting discount factor ∈ (0, 1]. In the optimizations this discount factor is set in accordance with a yearly interest rate of 0.1.To complete the dynamic optimization problem, we rewrite Eq. (5) for stock variables for a fixed time span of one day and get state transition functions of the following form:(15)Ziτ+1=λi1/365(Ziτ+ziτ).For size_stock ziτequals the size of the mailing, for sales_stock it equals expected sales. Expected sales on their hand depend on stock variables and decision variables.Solution of the dynamic optimization problem provides customer specific optimal values of decision variables given certain values of state variables. We solve the optimization problem by means of the approach of Fackler and Miranda (1999) who discretize decision variables and combine collocation for the approximation of the value function with policy iteration (also see Miranda and Fackler, 2002, chap. 6, 8, and 9). In collocation the unknown value function is approximated by a linear combination of basis functions. We use linear splines and their tensor product as basis functions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
