@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spare parts stocking analysis using genetic programming

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Utilizes a new approach to solve the joint LORA and spare parts stocking problem.Determination of sparing levels is simplified by using genetic programming.The new approach is shown to be better than METRIC-based approaches.The new approach can handle repair networks with more than two echelons.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spare parts,Level of Repair Analysis,Symbolic regression,Optimization,Genetic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Optimal solutions to the Level of Repair Analysis (LORA) and the Spare Parts Stocking (SPS) problems are essential in achieving a desired system/equipment operational availability. Although these two problems are interdependent, they are seldom solved simultaneously due to the complicating nature of the relationships between spare levels and system availability (or expected backorder) thus leading to sub-optimal solutions for both problems. This paper uses genetic programming-based symbolic regression methodology to evolve simpler mathematical expressions for the expected backorder equation. In addition to making the SPS problem more tractable, the simpler mathematical expressions make it possible for a combined SPS and LORA model to be formulated and solved using standard optimization techniques. Three sets of spare parts stocking problems are presented to study the feasibility of the proposed approach. Further, a case study for the joint problem is solved which shows that the proposed methodology can tackle the integrated problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Capital equipment such as weapon systems (e.g., aircraft), are generally maintained using a repair by replacement policy, i.e., failed components are removed and replaced by a functioning spare part. If a functioning spare is not available, then the repair is delayed and consequently, the system becomes unavailable. Moreover, a defective component can either be discarded or repaired. If it is repairable, the repair is often performed through the replacement of a failed subcomponent by a functioning one. In the defense industry, components and subcomponents are commonly named line replaceable units (LRUs) and shop replaceable units (SRUs), respectively (Sherbrooke, 2004). That is, a system (prime equipment) may contain tens or hundreds of assemblies, and probably, hundreds or thousands of sub-assemblies, components, parts etc., organized into multiple indenture levels (Fig. 1), each of which may have multiple repair options. Various levels of maintenance may be carried out at locations that are geographically dispersed with the capabilities of the repair facilities increasing the farther it is from the system operating site (or base). A repair network may therefore consist of multiple echelon levels as shown in Fig. 2. In other words, real world systems are characterized by a multi-indenture product structure and maintained by a multi-echelon repair network.System downtime impacts not only the operational cost but also the profitability and in a military setting, the unit readiness. It is therefore imperative that these downtimes are minimized. This is done by solving the Level of Repair Analysis (LORA) and Spare Parts Stocking (SPS) problems. LORA seeks to determine whether a component should be repaired or discarded upon its failure and at which location in the network the repair should be done. To enable certain types of repairs, resources have to be located in the repair network as well. The goal is to minimize the overall in-service support cost.The spare parts stocking problem on the other hand, seeks to allocate spare parts inventory in the repair/maintenance network such that a certain level of the system availability is achieved or equivalently, a certain level of the expected backorder (EBO) at the operating sites is not exceeded. Although these two problems are interdependent, they are seldom solved simultaneously due to the complicating nature of the relationships between spare levels and system availability. Amongst the relatively few notable papers (Alfredsson, 1997; Barros, 1998; Barros & Riley, 2001; Basten, van der Heijden, & Schutten, 2012; Brick & Uchoa, 2009) on solving LORA models, only the works by Basten et al. (2012) and Alfredsson (1997) address, in a limited fashion, the joint LORA-SPS problem. Alfredsson (1997) proposed a model to address the overall LORA-SPS problem for a multi-echelon multi-indenture system, using marginal analysis, but acknowledged that many simplifying assumptions were made in order to circumvent convexity problems. It was also assumed that the maintenance structure was pre-defined and consisted of only two echelons. Basten et al. (2012) addressed the same problem using a modification of the VARI-METRIC procedure (Sherbrooke, 1986; Slay, 1984), which also relies on marginal analysis, to obtain near-optimal solutions. Several approximations also had to be made to avoid problems with non-convex constraints in the model.Candas and Kutanoglu (2007) provided experimentalevidence of the benefit of an integrated model when compared to the more traditional approach of first designing the service parts network and then setting inventory levels however they considered a single-echelon single-indenture problem with constant replenishment lead times. They modeled their problem as a mixed integer non-linear program (MINLP) whose objective is to minimize inventory, facility and transportation costs while meeting system availability constraints. To make the problem tractable, they created piece-wise linear functions to linearize the system availability constraints. The resulting model often either overestimates or underestimates inventory, sometimes resulting in non-optimal or infeasible solutions. Similarly, Jeet, Kutanoglu, and Partani (2009) also considered a single-echelon single-indenture LORA-SPS problem with constant replenishment lead times and proposed a non-convex MINLP that is solved using a variable substitution scheme. Guide and Srivastava (1997) provided a review on various existing models and solution approaches that have been developed in this area of research.Although simulation (Bier & Tjelle, 1994), queuing networks (Albright & Gupta, 1993; Gross, Kioussin, & Miller, 1987; Gross, Miller, & Soland, 1983) and Lagrangian multipliers (Fox & Landi, 1970) have been used to solve the spare parts stocking problem, the most widely used are the METRIC-like models (Muckstadt, 1973; Sherbrooke, 1968; 2004; Slay, 1984) which employ marginal analysis. The recent book by Muckstadt (2005) is considered the primary reference for spare parts inventory management. Marginal analysis models are computationally expensive to solve even for small instances. Additionally, a drawback of models based on marginal analysis is that they make several assumptions such as infinite repair channels and infinite working item population which are never observed in practice. Also, it can be easily shown that these assumptions lead to the METRIC (Sherbrooke, 2004), MOD-METRIC (Muckstadt, 1973), and VARI-METRIC (Sherbrooke, 1986; Slay, 1984) methods underestimating the system availability (i.e., overestimating the EBO). These shortcomings notwithstanding, the equations used to calculate the EBO and hence the availability, are often non-linear and non-convex which makes it difficult to use with most optimization algorithms or integrated into a LORA model.The focus in this paper is on modeling spare parts stocking problems using relatively simple mathematical expressions for the EBO such that it can be solved without using marginal analysis and easily integrated with LORA to ultimately solve the joint optimization problem simultaneously. The mathematical expressions are derived using a genetic programming (GP)-based symbolic regression methodology. Specifically, a GP-algorithm is exploited to evolve linear combinations of low-order non-linear transformations of the SPS problem’s input variables.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the mathematical formulation of the SPS problem and a brief discussion of the multi-gene symbolic regression algorithm are presented. An integrated LORA-SPS problem is presented in Section 3. Results from a number of case studies are presented to illustrate the proposed approach in Section 4 with concluding remarks and future research directions outlined in Section 5.The objective of the SPS problem is to allocate spare parts inventory in the repair/maintenance network to minimize the expected backorder of the LRUs at the bases subject to a budgetary constraint. For a general multi-echelon multi-indenture (MEMI) system, this problem can be formulated as follows:(1)(EBO-MEMI)min∑c∈C1∑l∈BEBO(sc,l)s.t.∑c∈C∑l∈Lhcc,lsc,l≤Ksc,l≥0andintegerwhere•C is the set of all components and c is the index of a component;C1 ⊆ C is the set of all LRUs;L is the set of all locations where spares can be stored and l is the index of a location in L;B ⊂ L is the set of all bases and b the index of a base in B;hcc,lis the holding cost per spare of component c ∈ C at location l ∈ L;K is the total budget; andsc,lis the spare stock level for each component c ∈ C at location l ∈ L.Additionally, let C2 ⊂ C be the set of all SRUs; Γc⊆ C2 be the set of SRUs of LRU c ∈ C1; λc,l, the demand rate of component c ∈ C at location l ∈ L; Tc,l, the repair time for each component c ∈ C at location l ∈ L; rc,l, the probability that the failed component c ∈ C can be repaired at location l ∈ L;qc,c2,l,the conditional probability that a failure of an LRU c ∈ C1 is caused by a SRU c2 ∈ Γcat location l ∈ L; and Ob,l, the order and ship time from the depot l ∈ L to any base b ∈ B.Given the above definitions, Eq. (A.4) in Appendix A can be used to calculate the EBO (see Sherbrooke, 1986). However, Eq. (A.4) is not in a form that can be solved using standard optimization techniques hence the prevalence of the use of marginal analysis to solve the SPS problem. Under the assumption that a solution to the LORA problem already exists, marginal analysis is used at each iteration to select the component for which an additional stock should be purchased and where that spare should be located to yield the greatest reduction in EBO per dollar (Sherbrooke, 1986). This is repeated until the given inventory budget is exhausted.To overcome the limitations of marginal analysis, Genetic Programming (GP) based symbolic regression is proposed to evolve simpler mathematical expressions that can be used to solve the SPS problem alone or in conjunction with the LORA problem.In this section, a genetic programming-based multi-gene symbolic regression algorithm is proposed to approximate the EBO due to its inherent capability to model problems using low-order mathematical expressions. It has been shown in the literature that a multi-gene symbolic regression approach is generally more accurate and computationally more efficient than other classical and more common GP-based methods (Hinchliffe et al., 1996). Multi-gene symbolic regression is performed by evolving a population of trees, where each tree is referred to as a gene. Specifically, the generated symbolic model is a weighted linear combination of a number of mathematical expressions represented by different GP trees (hence, the name multi-gene).An example of a multi-gene symbolic regression solution is shown in Fig. 3. It models a problem with one output (y) and two inputs (x1 and x2), where the variable di, i ∈ {1, 2} denotes the weighting coefficient of the ith gene and d0 is a bias/offset term. These coefficients are estimated using ordinary least squares techniques. It can be observed that the model is a weighted linear combination of different genes, each of which may be represented using non-linear terms (e.g., exponential function) specified in a user-defined set of arithmetic operators.Following a similar approach, the process of determining an approximate EBO for the SPS problem can be summarized as follows. Letλc,l¯be a vector of sample data of size n of demand rates drawn from an interval of interest and similarly, forTc,l¯,rc,l¯,qc,c2,l¯,Ob,l¯,andsc,l¯. Given a setS={λc,l¯,Tc,l¯,rc,l¯,qc,c2,l¯,Ob,l¯,sc,l¯}of sample data and the corresponding EBO values derived from the VARI-METRIC function (as given in Eq. (A.4)), one wants to find a functionEBO^such thatEBO^≈EBOfor all data points in the set S. This can be accomplished efficiently using GP-based multi-gene symbolic regression. A sketch of the proposed approximating algorithm is given in Algorithm 1:The multi-gene symbolic regression implementation used in this work is GPTIPS (Searson, 2009; Searson, Leahy, & Willis, 2010). Initially, a random population of GP trees is created. The number of genes per tree (Gmax) and the maximum tree depth (Dmax) are user defined parameters. This allows for some control over the complexity of the evolved models. Setting the value of Dmaxto five or less allows for the evolution of relatively simple and compact models that are linear combinations of low order non-linear transformations of the input attributes (Searson et al., 2010). This is particularly useful in the case of the spare parts stocking problem since a low-order mathematical equation will permit its integration with LORA to ultimately solve the joint optimization problem simultaneously.Current existing methodologies tend to treat the SPS and LORA problems as independent and often assume that a solution to the LORA problem already exists when solving the SPS problem. However, these problems are interrelated since the repair decisions of the LORA model affect the spare stock levels required to guarantee the desired system availability (or desired EBO). Consequently, it is essential to integrate the LORA and spare parts problems in one mathematical model.The structure of a repair network is defined by specifying the locations and transportation links between locations. Let the set L represent the locations where spares may be stored and facilities for repair and disposal may be installed. Let A be the set of directed transportation links between the locations in L. The locations l that can receive components from base b constitute the set Φband the bases that can supply components to location l form the set Bl. Let F be the set of all failure modes f, in the system and F(c) ∈ F be the set of failure modes specific to component c ∈ C2 (i.e.,⋂F(c)=∅). Let θfbe the failure rate for the failure mode f. Each occurrence of failure mode f requires a decision d ∈ D to be taken. The setD={1,2,3}consists of the possible repair and discard decisions that can be made for each failure mode f ∈ F:•d = 1: LRU c is repaired by repairing one of its SRUs c2 ∈ Γc,d = 2: LRU c is repaired by discarding and replacing one of its SRUs c2 ∈ Γc,d = 3: LRU c is discarded.Let R be the set of resources and Ωrthe set of tuples (f, d) such that (f, d) ∈ Ωrif and only if failure mode f ∈ F requires resource r ∈ R in order to enable decision d ∈ D.The parameter ur,f,dis the required capacity of the resource r ∈ R used to service failure f by the execution of decision d where (f, d) ∈ Ωr. The installation of one unit of resource r at location l costs rcr,land each installed unit provides a capacity Qr,l. Installing resources at a particular location has a fixed cost of fcr,l. The maximum number of units of resource r that can be installed at location l is Mr,l. Inventory of spare parts incur a holding cost, hcc,l, which is the holding cost per spare of component c ∈ C at location l ∈ L. The variable cost, vcf, b, d, l, consists of transportation cost (tcc,b,l) and either maintenance cost (mcc,l) or discard cost (dcc,l) where f ∈ F(c) (see Table 1for details).The demand rate for the failure mode f at base b ∈ B, θf,bcan be calculated as:θf,b=ηbγbηcηc2,cθfwhere ηbis the quantity of units of the capital equipment installed at an operating base, b, γbis the annual operating time of the system at base b. ηcis the number of LRU c in the capital equipment andηc2,cis the number of SRU c2 in LRU c.The decisions required in the integrated problem are where to locate resources, which repair/discard decision to assign to each failure mode and at which location that should be performed, and how many spares to store at each location. The optimization model is given below:(2)(LORA-SPS)min∑f∈F∑b∈B∑d∈D∑l∈Lvcf,b,d,lθf,bXf,b,d,l+∑r∈R∑l∈Lrcr,lYr,l+∑r∈R∑l∈Lfcr,lZr,l+∑c∈C∑l∈Lhcc,lsc,ls.t.∑d∈D∑l∈ΦbXf,b,d,l=1,∀f∈F,∀b∈B(3)∑(f,d)∈Ωr∑b∈Blθf,bur,f,dXf,b,d,l≤Qr,lYr,l,∀r∈R,∀l∈L(4)λc,l=∑f∈F(c)∑b∈Blθf,bXf,b,1,l,∀c∈C2,∀l∈L∖B(5)λc,b=∑f∈F(c)θf,b,∀c∈C2,∀b∈B(6)λc,b=∑f∈F(c2),c2∈Γcθf,b,∀c∈C1,∀b∈B(7)EBO(sc,l,λc,l)≤E,(8)0≤Xf,b,d,l≤1,∀f∈F,∀b∈B,∀l∈Φb,∀d∈D(9)0≤Yr,l≤Mr,lZr,l,Yr,l∈Z,∀r∈R,∀l∈L(10)Zr,l∈{0,1},∀r∈R,∀l∈L(11)sc,l∈Z+,∀c∈C,∀l∈L.where•Xf,b,d,lis the fraction of the demand due to failure mode f generated at base b ∈ B that are attended to by the execution of the decision d at location l ∈ Φb;Yr,lis the number of units of resource r installed at location l ∈ L; andZr,lis a binary variable, with a value of 1 if resource r is installed at location l ∈ L and 0 otherwise.The objective function comprises fixed and variable costs. Fixed costs include costs for installing resources such as test equipment while variable costs which depend on the number of failures, include costs of holding, repairing, and transporting components. Constraints (2) require that for each demand at the base, a decision is taken at some location. Constraints (3) manage the capacity consumption of the resources. Constraints (4) calculate the demand of the SRUs at location l. Constraints (5) determine the demand of the SRUs at the bases and similarly, constraints (6) determine the demand of the LRUs at the bases. The expected backorder constraint is given in constraint (7) and it depends on the spare stock levels sc,land the observed demand rates λc,l.As in the case of the (EBO-MEMI) model, if the left hand side of the expected backorder expression (constraint (7)) in the (LORA-SPS) model is substituted with the steady state probability equations of the EBO presented in Appendix A, then the constraint is highly non-linear and the (LORA-SPS) model is difficult to solve in general. Consequently, instead of substituting the EBO expression with Eq. (A.4), genetic programming is again utilized as described in Algorithm 1 to generate low-order expressions for the EBO constraint in order to make (LORA-SPS) solvable using standard optimization techniques.Four case studies are presented in this section to demonstrate the utility of the proposed approach. The first three are SPS samples and the fourth is an integrated LORA-SPS problem. The parameters shown in Table 2are used for the development of the GP regression equationin each case.Each record (data point) in the data set is generated by selecting a value from a predefined interval for each independent variable for that problem. The value of the EBO is then determined using Eq. (A.4). A data point is discarded if the combination of independent variables produced an EBO value far greater than what is desired in practice. Each data set is randomly sampled and split into training, test and validating data sets. The training data set is exploited to generate a model that best fits the data as determined by a fitness function using the GP-based multi-gene algorithm. The test data is used to assess how the model performs against a new or different set of data. Consequently, if two models perform equally against the training data, then the one that has the better performance against the test data is chosen. The validation data is used to investigate if a better model could have been developed if a data set other than the current training data had been used. There are several basic fitness functions for evaluating the evolved model with the most common based on the error or residual between the model output and the actual value. The fitness function used in this paper is based on the root-mean squared error (RMSE) between the measured and predicted output of the evolved expressions.In this example, it is assumed that the equipment is made up of two LRUs and no SRUs, and the repair infrastructure is located at the base. The variable intervals for the data sets used in the development of the GP regression are presented in Table 3.For this example, the best approximation of the EBO determined using Algorithm 1 is:(12)EBOGP=0.4014−0.01507s23+0.1069s1(s1+1)−0.481(s1+s2)+0.6264λ2T2−0.6264s22−0.274s1λ1T1−0.0061s2λ22T2−0.07678s2λ2T22+0.07371λ12T12+0.01485s12λ1T1+0.774(s22+λ1T1)−0.1801s2λ2T2−0.0064s13+0.01676s22λ2T2+0.1038λ22T22+0.000473s24,where λ1, λ2, T1, T2 are the respective demand rates and the repair times for the two LRUs. The spare stock levels are the variables s1 and s2. Note that the subscripts corresponding to echelons have been dropped. Comparisons of the predicted versus the actual EBO values are shown in Fig. 4. As can be seen from the values of the root-mean squared error between the measured and predicted output and the coefficient of determination, R2, the GP model is able to predict the EBO values with a high degree of accuracy. The RMSE values are 0.0744, 0.0775 and 0.0763 for the training, test, and validation data sets, respectively, and the corresponding R2 values are 99.25 percent, 99.09 percent and 99.24 percent.When dealing with a single base and a single indenture with two LRUs, problem (EBO-MEMI) reduces to:(13)(EBO-SESI)minEBOGP(s1,s2)s.t.hc1s1+hc2s2≤Ks1,s2≥0andinteger,where the objective function refers to Eq. (12) for given demand rates and repair times, i.e., λ1, λ2, T1, T2 are fixed. EBOGPis a convex function of the spare stock level and hence one can efficiently solve (EBO-SESI) to optimality to obtain the optimal spare levels of the components. This and the subsequent SPS models are solved using the Matlab global optimization toolbox.The approximate model is tested on a set of four different instances. Table 4 provides a comparison between the METRIC approach and the presented GP approach for various input parameters. The spare levels of both the GP-optimization (GP-OPT) approach and the METRIC approach are identical whereas the expected backorder value vary slightly. Since the METRIC approach provides the optimal spare parts inventory (under the assumptions given in Sherbrooke, 2004), obtaining the same results as the METRIC is very promising for the GP-basedapproach.In this case, the system consists of a single LRU which in turn contains a single SRU. The repair infrastructure is located at the base. The variable intervals for the data sets are presented in Table 5.Similar to the previous section, the expected backorder is approximated by the function given below.(14)EBOGP=0.1467−0.002678s1(2s1+λ0)−0.01189s0λ0T0−0.09075s1+0.01434T1−0.01434s1T0+0.01434λ0T0+0.007594s1(T0+7.497)+0.007594T1(s1−λ0)−0.09319s0−0.002784(6.867λ0−λ0T0)×(λ0+T1+λ0T0)+0.0003517s1s02−0.0003517T02−0.0003517T0+0.002602(λ0+T1)(s0−T1)+0.223s0+1.2593λ0−0.0002039s02λ0T1+0.03213T1(λ02+λ0)−(0.1627T1+1.22)λ0+0.008327(s1−λ0T1)×(s1+λ0+T0−T1)+0.1853λ0(T0+T1)+0.00359s1+0.00359(s0+λ0)(s0−s1)where λ0 and λ1 are the demand rates for the LRU and the SRU, respectively (they are equal in this case) and T0 and T1 are the repair times for the LRU and the SRU, respectively. Note that the subscript for the echelon has been dropped and since λ1 = λ0, only λ0 appears in Eq. (14). Comparisons of the predicted versus the actual EBO values are shown in Fig. 5. The RMSE values are 0.0362, 0.0362, and 0.0371 for the training, test, and validation data sets, respectively, and the corresponding R2 values are 80.18 percent, 80.15 percent, and 79.63 percent.Similar to case study 1, the resulting EBO function from the GP is convex. An optimization problem similar to (EBO-MEMI) is solved where s0 and s1 are the variables corresponding to the spare levels of the LRU and the SRU respectively.The approach is tested on four different sets of instances. From Table 6, the GP-OPT approach and the VARI-METRIC approach gave the same spare stock level values for the LRU and for the SRU with a comparable expected backorder values. Hence, the results obtained by GP-OPT are optimal for these instances.For the final SPS case study, a system with a single LRU and two SRUs is considered (i.e.,C={0,1,2},C1={0}). The repair network consists of a single depot and a single base (i.e.,L={0,1}andB={1}). The LRU repair times at the base and the depot are 5 and 15 days, respectively and the SRU repair times are 10 and 30 days, respectively. The resupply time, Ob, is 15 days for all components. The LRU mean daily demand rate at the base is 0.1. The LRU is assumed to cost 200 dollars and the SRU 100 dollars and the total budget, K, is 1100 dollars. The variable intervals for the data sets are presented in Table 7.For a given problem, most of the variables except for the demand rates and the spare stock levels at each location would be known. As a result, in this model, the demand rate and the level of spare stocks are the independent variables, i.e., sc,land λc,l, totaling 12 variables in all. The model for the sample problem considered is shown in Eq. (15).(15)EBOGP=2.499λ2,1(s0,1+λ1,0+λ2,0)+1.58+0.01692(λ0,0+s2,1−2λ2,1)(s0,1−λ2,0+s2,1−λ2,1)−379.6λ1,1(λ0,1−λ1,1)+0.4792λ2,0−0.4792s0,1+0.5052(λ0,0+λ2,0)(s1,1−8.127s0,0)(λ0,0−λ11)−0.1949(λ0,0−λ10+s21+2s21λ21)+.05742(λ0,1+λ1,1)(s2,0−λ2,1)(s0,1+s2,1−s0,1λ2,0)−0.0752(2λ0,0−s2,1+s2,0)+0.009018s2,0+0.0405(s0,1+2λ1,0)(s0,1+λ2,0+λ2,1)−0.004509s1,0+0.004509(λ2,0−s2,0)(s2,1−s2,0)where λc,land sc,lcorresponds to the demand rates and the spare stock levels, respectively.Fig. 6provides a comparison between the predicted and the actual EBO values. The RMSE values are 0.02276, 0.02294, and 0.02139 for the training, test, and validation data sets, respectively, and the corresponding R2 values are 90.73 percent, 90.63 percent, and 90.86 percent.For a given instance of the SPS problem, some of the variables in Eq. (15) would be known, e.g. the demand rates of the components. Let the two SRUs have a conditional failure probabilities ofq0,1,l=13andq0,2,l=23, respectively. The LRU is 90 percent base repairable while SRU1 and SRU2 are 60 percent and 71 percent base repairable respectively. Hence, the demand rate for the LRU at the depot is calculated to be 0.01 and for SRU1 to be 0.0153 and SRU2 to be 0.0241. At the base the demand rate is found to be 0.03 and 0.06 for SRU1 and SRU2 respectively. Using this information and Eq. (15), the optimization problem (EBO-MEMI) can be solved to obtain the optimal amount of spares at each location.For the scenario considered, Table 8shows the spare stock level as given by the GP approach and the VARI-METRIC approach. An optimal spare stock level ofs=[031112]is obtained in both approaches, where s is a matrix with entries scl, the spare stock level of component c at location l. Furthermore, the EBO values of the two approaches are comparable (0.0204 compared to 0.0228).In this section, an instance similar to the one presented in Section 4.3 is solved. The repair network consists of a single depot and a single base, (i.e.,L={0,1},B={1}), and the system consists of a single LRU and two SRUs, (i.e.,C={0,1,2},C1={0}). The (LORA-SPS) problem is solved using the formulation presented in Section 3. The input parameters are:•two failure modes f1 and f2 associated with SRU 1 and SRU 2, respectively;two types of resources;a maximum of two of each resource per location is allowed;the resource requirements for each failure mode is two;the resource capacity for each resource type is five;vc, rc, fc, and hc are given in Table 9;the LRU repair times for the base and depot are 5 and 15 days, respectively and the SRU repair times are 10 and 30 days, respectively;the resupply time, Ob, is 15 days for all components;the failure rate, θf,b, is130and230for failure mode 1 and failure mode 2, respectively; andthe target expected backorder, E, is 0.1.Using GP, the EBO function is approximated as a function of λ and s since all of the variables are known except for the spare stock levels and demand rate at each location. The EBO equation employed is the same as that used in Section 4.3. Consequently, Eq. (15) replaces EBO(sc,l, λc,l) in constraint (7). Note that since the EBO expression in Section 4.3 is derived using the VARI-METRIC equations, one needs to take into account the restrictive VARI-METRIC assumptions. In particular, VARI-METRIC does not account for discarding of items. Consequently, only repair decisions can be taken for failed components and hence only decisiond=1is possible in this example. GAMS is used to implement the (LORA-SPS) model and BARON global optimizer is utilized to solve the resulting non-linear mixed integer optimization problem. The total number of variables is 24 with 14 being discrete variables. A Branch-and-Cut algorithm is used with the total number of nodes of the branch-and-cut tree being 83. As seen in Table 10, the total computational time is 0.13 seconds with a resulting objective function value of 10,850 dollars.The optimal solution of the (LORA-SPS) results in repairing both SRUs at the base and the installation of one resource of each type at the base. The number of spares of the LRU required is three at the base and none at the depot (see Table 11). No spares are required for SRU1 and SRU2.Using the VARI-METRIC equations, it is verified that this level of sparing provides an EBOVMof 0.089 which is equal to the one given by GP and is less than the target expected backorder of 0.1.A genetic programming-based approach is proposed to solve the spare parts stocking problem. In particular, multi-gene symbolic regression is exploited to generate relatively low-order mathematical expressions to permit the solution of the spare parts stocking problem without the use of marginal analysis. The most important advantage of using low-order mathematical expressions of the expected backorder as opposed to METRIC-based methods is the ability it provides to integrate a spare parts stocking problem with the LORA optimization model.A comparison of the proposed approach and marginal analysis is done using three sample cases: a single-echelon single-indenture problem, a single-echelon multi-indenture problem and a multi-echelon multi-indenture problem. The results revealed that the proposed methodology produces the same solution (i.e., spare stock levels) as marginal analysis but has the added advantage of producing a tractable optimization model. Furthermore, the EBO approximation technique is key to the solution approach of the mixed-integer non-linear formulation of the joint LORA and SPS problem. This contrasts with approaches in the literature that are based on METRIC models which solve the problems either iteratively or sequentially. The computational study presented shows the utility of using the genetic programming-based approximation to solve the integrated optimization problem.Future research would study how this approach can be combined with simulation to develop expressions that truly reflect the system under consideration. A realistic simulation model, as opposed to analytical models (such as the VARI-METRIC model), would be used to generate the required data for evolving the regression models which would then be integrated into the optimization approach. Additionally, the approach presented in this paper is shown to be efficient in solving small problems to optimality. However, to solve large-scale LORA-SPS problems decomposition techniques need to be adopted to solve the non-linear optimization problem efficiently.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
