@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Licensing radical product innovations to speed up the diffusion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the role of licensing product innovations to speed up product diffusion.We prove licensing can be a profitable strategy.Environment and conditions for the R&D activity moderate the licensing viability.Low IPR protection can easily diminish the financial attractiveness of licensing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in marketing,Differential games,Optimal control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a differential game to study how companies can simultaneously license their innovations to other firms when launching a new product. The licensee may cannibalize licensor’s sales, albeit this can be compensated by gains from royalties. Nonetheless, patent royalties are generally so low that licensing is not an attractive strategy. In this paper we consider the role of licensing to speed up the product diffusion. Word of mouth by licensee’s customers and licensee’s advertising indirectly push forward sales of the licensing company, accelerating new product diffusion. We find evidence that licensing can be a potentially profitable strategy. However, we also find that a weak Intellectual Property Right (IPR) protection can easily diminish the financial attractiveness of licensing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Innovation is about much more than developing new products; it is about exploiting the products through optimal business processes. Instead of commercializing the innovation alone, an innovative consumer product firm can license the product to other firms. Many companies do both things, competing with their own licensees. This behavior cannot be easily explained in an static context, and we present a differential game to explain the phenomenon.A license is a contract by which an IPR holder firm (licensor) transfers the right to exploit its innovation to another firm (licensee) under certain conditions and for a certain period of time. Licensing generates two forces on licensor’s profit (Fosfuri, 2006): revenue effect (licensing payments by the licensees to the IPR holder) and rent dissipation effect (erosion of licensor’s profit due to additional competition in the product market). At first glance, licensing IPR is a daring decision as the rent dissipation effects might be stronger than the revenue effect. The early literature on licensing is focused on static models (for a review see, e.g., Shapiro, 1985 & Kamien, 1992). More recently, Arora and Fosfuri (2003) develop a framework to understand licensing and competition. Indeed, a monopolist IPR holder will not license as the rent dissipation effect is greater than the revenue effect. Moreover, in practice, we observe that royalties are often low, and licensors capture only a small fraction of the rents from the innovation (e.g., Caves, Crookel, & Killing, 1983; Arora, 1997). Arrow’s (1962) remarks show how striking this feature is: “Patent royalties are generally so low that the profits from exploiting one’s own invention are not appreciably greater than those derived from the use of others’ knowledge”. Surprisingly, licensing is a pervasive phenomenon. According to the License! Global 2008 Annual Report, the total worldwide retail sales of licensed merchandise reached $191.7billion in 2007. How can this contradiction be explained?A potential solution to this conundrum could lie hidden in the dynamics of innovation adoption. The diffusion of new products is typically modeled with first order differential equations where the solution is an “S” shape curve. After commercialization, the early diffusion of innovations is usually characterized by slow growth that is eventually followed by a sharp increase known as sales “takeoff” (e.g., Mahajan, Muller, & Bass, 1990; Rogers, 1995; Golder & Tellis, 1997). This paper considers an alternative reason to license: sales diffusion acceleration. This third effect is neglected in static models of licensing. Competition between licensor and licensees results in faster sales diffusion due to higher innovation awareness through the combined marketing effort and cross word-of-mouth effects. As a result, for a monopolistic IPR holder, sales diffusion acceleration and revenue effects dominate rent dissipation effect (loss of the market to the licensees), and licensing takes place. The marketing literature supports this idea. Armstrong and Collopy (1996) and Luo, Rindfleisch, and Tse (2007) argue that competitor-oriented decisions, such as exclusivity, are harmful to financial performance. Recently, Peres and Van den Bulte (2010) consider that word-of-mouth turns product monopoly suboptimal.This paper studies the use of licenses as a strategy to speed up new product diffusion in the long-term using differential games. We point out that licensing can be a beneficial strategy for the IPR holders because there is an increase in profits due to the acceleration of the sales diffusion process, in comparison to the case of monopoly. However, the success of a licensing strategy also depends on the strength of the IPR system. When the IPR is strongly protected, it seems logical to think that an IPR holder would have more incentives to exploit its innovations in monopoly than in a competitive industry. Several studies have empirically considered the relationship between patent protection and licensing, finding that there is a higher propensity to license in industries with strong patent protection (e.g., Anand & Khanna, 2000; Arora & Ceccagnoli, 2006; Gambardella, Giuri, & Luzzi, 2007). In contrast, we study this phenomenon in a dynamic context, and we conclude licensing could be a sound strategy in the long-term.The moderator role of IPR is better highlighted when we study licensing decision in markets where the IPR holder faces weak competition from pirate companies who sell copy products with lower quality. From the IPR holder’s perspective, licensing is a beneficial decision due to licensing payments and faster sales diffusion. However, pirates are better off when selling copy products than licensed products with higher quality as in the latter case they have to pay licensing fees to the IPR holder. Although not completely ruled out, comparative statics suggests that licensing is a less desirable strategy in the context of weak IPR protection from either the perspective of the IPR holder or the pirates. This can partially explain, for instance, the slowness of music industry to allow licensing through the internet to stop the boom of piracy occurring in the last decade. Pirates are less interested in this arrangement. This is supported by the empirical evidence indicating that licensing is less common in this context (Anand & Khanna, 2000; Arora & Ceccagnoli, 2006; Gambardella et al., 2007).The paper proceeds as follows: For each framework, strong and weak IPR protection, an analytical dynamic model is presented, featuring the licensor–licensee behavior as an open-loop Nash equilibrium in a differential game, computing firms’ optimal policies for marketing mix and licensing fees. We characterize optimal licensing, pricing and advertising strategies, and we analyze the sensitivity of the optimal profits to the main parameters using numerical methods. We conclude the paper with some remarks and suggestions for future research. An Online Appendix contains technical results.The diffusion of new products has drawn considerable attention in marketing literature for both radical product innovations (e.g., Bass, 1969; Mahajan et al., 1990; Sultan, Farley, & Lehmann, 1990; Chandrasekaran & Tellis, 2007; Muller, Peres, & Mahajan, 2009) and incremental product innovations such as “new generations” (e.g., Norton & Bass, 1987; Mahajan & Muller, 1996). A variety of extensions have incorporated competitive marketing mix variables to control the diffusion process (e.g., Robinson & Lakhani, 1975; Horsky & Simon, 1983; Kalish, 1985; Horsky & Mate, 1988; Bass, Krishnan, & Jain, 1994, 2000; Krishnan, Bass, & Jain, 1999). The diffusion literature deals mainly with monopolies of category level growth, but there are some extensions for rival brands (e.g., Parker & Gatignon, 1994; Bayus, Kim, & Shocker, 2000; Prasad & Mahajan, 2003; Savin & Terwiesch, 2005; Libai, Muller, & Peres, 2009; Krishnamoorthy, Prasad, & Sethi, 2010). Usually the diffusion can be controlled by elements of the marketing mix (price, advertising, distribution or product decision variables) considering an optimal control problem (in monopolistic context), or a differential game (when there are few companies competing with each other).Consider n players which maximize an objective function subject to a state equation determined by a set of control variablesuitand a state variablexit. For durable products, the state variablexitusually denotes the cumulative sales for company i since the origint=0. For nondurable products, the state variablexitusually denotes the current sales for company i at period t. Notice thatxitcan be a scalar or a vector (for example, sales to several segments). The diffusion processxt=x1t,…,xntfollows a differential equation,ẋt=gxt,ut,t,x0=c,whereut=u1t,…,unt,gis a continuously differentiable function, and the sales at time t are given bygxt,ut,t. For nondurable products,xtis interpreted directly as sales for all the competing companies. Usuallyc=0, but sometimes sample units are initially given away and the diffusion starts with a different sales level. The catalog of alternative specifications for the differential equation is extremely large. Table 1presents some of the most popular specifications, whereW·denotes a non-negative continuously differentiable function and all the considered parameters are non-negative.In the competitive models, marketing mix controls can be introduced similarly to the monopolistic context. There are many variations on these ideas, even for the simplest models. For example, the following alternatives have been considered for the classical Bass model for durables:Jeuland, see also Floydẋit=p+qxitMM-xit1+γ,Easingwood, Mahajan and Mullerẋit=p+qxitMδM-xit,Nelder, McGowan, and othersżit=p+qzitβ1-zitα,xit=Mzit.These references with some additional examples can be found in Mahajan et al. (1990) and Muller et al. (2009). Applying differential games, Krishnamoorthy et al. (2010) explore optimal pricing and advertising strategies for two competing firms. Note that in empirical applications the estimated parameters of a model can vary widely with the considered data and also with small changes in the specification. For example, in a classical Bass model, the intercept p can take quite different levels if advertising is included to accelerate the diffusion (in the same way that the parameters of a simple linear regression change when a moderator variable is included).The choice of one model or another depends largely on the specific dataset and product category considered. Once the dynamics of the market have been specified, and reasonable values for the parameters are available (estimated from initial data, data from similar markets, using meta-analysis, or qualitative research methods), marketers typically use the model for planning optimal marketing mix policies. This is particularly challenging when several firms compete. When there is competition, the equilibrium path is a solution of a differential game where each player maximizes an objective functionΠiu,x=∫0∞Giut,xt,tdtwhereGiare continuously differentiable functions, and the optimization is constrained by the differential equation system. In particular, for an (open-loop) Nash equilibriumx∗,u∗(1)Πix∗,u1∗,…,uN∗=maxui,xΠix,u1∗,…,ui-1∗,ui,ui+1∗,…,uN∗,subject to a dynamic system constraint, for alli=1,…,N. The solution is characterized by the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman first-order conditions for each agent i, for details see Appendix. In general, the equilibrium satisfies a Boundary Value Problem (BVP), i.e., a differential equation system with initial and end-point conditions. Except for a few simple models, these nonlinear systems cannot be solved analytically; however, they can be accurately solved with numerical methods (see, e.g., Esteban-Bravo & Vidal-Sanz, 2007).We will apply this approach to the licensing problem, where the agreement is settled by contract at the beginning of the diffusion. Given the complexity of these types of problems, in most models the use of numerical methods for computing the solution is necessary.Denote by the letter h the firm (licensor or IPR holder) that holds a license in a market with IPR protection. The IPR holder would be willing to license its innovation if the total return obtained under a licensing agreement is positive and larger than that drawn under a monopolistic strategy. Next, we describe the two possible scenarios: a monopolistic strategy versus a licensing strategy. Under a monopolistic strategy, the sales of the IPR holder firm follow a diffusion process(2)Ṅth=gmonhNth,Ath,pth,where typicallyN0h=0. The return of this strategy is given by the solution to the following problem.Strategy 1Holding a monopolistic position in the market. The IPR holder firm faces the problem of maximizing profit by choosing price and advertising effort:maxΠmonhAth,pth,Nth=∫0∞GmonhAth,pth,Nth,tdts.t.(2),N0h=0,wherephis the product price andAhthe advertising effort. Denote byΠmonhthe monopolist optimal value.Alternatively, the firm can consider licensing its innovation. Then the IPR holder charges each licensee a royalty fee over salesrthand a fixed feefth. We consider a market potential of licensees. In order to make the problem tractable, we also consider that all licensed companies are relatively homogenous with constant marginal costctl, selling at the same priceptl. Therefore, we consider the aggregated sales of all licensees on a single brand l, and we assume thatNtlare the sales of all licensees andAtlis the total advertising effort. The growth rateṄtldepends on the number of licensed companieslt. The sales of the IPR holder are affected by sales and advertising of the licensees. The dynamic system is given by:(3)Ṅth=glichNth,Ntl,Ath,Atl,pth,ptl,Ṅtl=glNth,Ntl,lt,Ath,Atl,pth,ptl,l̇t=flt,Ntl,fth,rth.In this context, the following strategy is considered by the IPR holder and the licensees:Strategy 2Allowing a licensed substitute. Consider two substitutive brands (the patent holder h and the licensee l). The licensing strategy is characterized by a dynamic Nash equilibrium as follows:licensee: Given the decisions of the licensorAth,pth,rth,fth, the licensees solve the problem:maxΠliclAtl,ptl,Ntl,lt=∫0∞GliclAtl,ptl,Ntl,lt,rth,fth,tdts.t.(3),N0h,N0l,l0=0,0,0licensor (ipr holder): Given the decisions of the licenseesAtl,ptl, the licensor solves the problemmaxΠlichAth,pth,rth,fth,Nth,Ntl,lt=∫0∞GlichAth,pth,rth,fth,Nth,Ntl,lt,tdts.t.(3),N0h,N0l,l0=0,0,0For the licensing scenario, we denote byΠlichandΠliclthe optimal profits for licensor and licensee companies, respectively obtained in an open-loop Nash equilibrium as defined in (1). To determine whether the licensing strategy is implemented, we compute the optimal solution with and without licensing.Licensing decisionThe decision to license is viable if and only if:Πlich⩾Πmonh,Πlicl⩾0.The viability of the licensing agreement depends on the considered parametric model, and the value of its parameters. In order to computeΠlich,ΠmonhandΠliclfor a specific case, the first step is to derive the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman first-order conditions for each problem. Then, the optimal controls and states are characterized as the solution of a BVP. In general, it cannot be solved analytically, and we have to use numerical methods. The next section presents an example computed numerically, where the BVP is solved with a Galerkin-Collocation method (for an introduction, see Esteban-Bravo & Vidal-Sanz, 2007).We can consider many variations on the same idea. For example, a software patent holder can commercialize a high quality version of the product, and simultaneously offer a free General Public License (GPL) licensed version. The diffusion of an open source version would not have controls (nor price, advertising, or royalties), being driven by word of mouth, and with the IPR holder benefiting from its indirect effect. Many companies, such as Sun, Alfresco, Actuate, MuleSource, or MySQL are adopting this dual model. It is not the objective of this paper to compute a solution for all possible diffusion specifications, or industrial sectors; but to illustrate the applicability of the model, we consider a specific model for non-durable products. To see whether licensing can be a profitable strategy in some scenarios, we compute its solution numerically and further its comparative statics to see the stability of the results.The purpose of this section is to illustrate numerically the viability of licensing strategies for a non-durable product. As mentioned before, there is a wide variation of models to describe the sales dynamics of a product. However, here we consider one combining the versatility of Libai, Muller and Peres, with a multiplicative impact of the marketing mix variables in the style of Robinson and Lakhani, but with a linear specification.Specifically, for the monopolistic IPR holder of non-durable products, the spread of innovation is given by an innovation factor (a>0) which does not depend on the number of other users, and an imitator factor (u>0) that reflects the influence of their peers. We assumed a total market potentialM>0, and a customer defection rate(kh⩾0), which is the rate at which customers terminate the usage of product or switch to another market. Also, we consider the moderate effect of decision variables such as pricepthand advertisingAth. Then, the basic structure for the current salesNthof a monopolistic IPR holder is(4)Ṅth=a+uNthMM-Nth-khNthWtAth,pth,N0=0.FunctionWtAt,Ptconveys the impact of the marketing mix on the net growth of sales. The diffusion literature usually does not incorporate consumer preference parameters; but price is a core element in the evaluation of the product by the consumer. We assume that customers are preference maximizers and choose the product with a price closest to their ideal point. In this model we allow that the impact of prices depends on the deviation from a reference pricep¯⩾0, which is related to the positioning of the innovation. For certain products we can set it as zero, but for others we cannot (e.g., luxurious goods). Reference prices have been justified using the adaptation level theory (Helson, 1964). Winer (1988) considers alternative notions of reference price (including fair price, reservation price and expected prices typically discounted). We also assume that the reference price evolves according to a reference inflation rate of consumption goodsr⩾0, so that the adoption process is faster when the distanceertp¯-pt2is smaller. The model also assumes a logistic growth of sales in terms of advertising effort. In addition, in case of no advertising effort and price equal to the ideal pointpt=ertp¯, we ensure that there is no effect of prices and advertising on sales (i.e.WtAt,pt=1). Therefore, we considerWtAt,Pt=1+bln1+At-mertp¯-pt2whereb,m>0. In numerical computations we typically obtain large enough levels of advertising effort so that the termln1+Atcan be replaced bylnAtabsorbing one unit in the advertising effort without any practical effect.Furthermore, we consider that the monopolistic IPR holder discounted profits at time t are given byGmonhAth,pth,Nth,t=e-itpth-cthNth-Athwherei>0is the firm time-preference discount rate, the innovation is a variable-costs product with marginal costct=c0eπtwherec0>0, andπcan be negative, zero, or positive, depending on whether the cost dynamics is dominated by industrial inflation or learning effects, or both are balanced (for a recent example of innovation diffusion with cost dynamics with learning effects see Mesak, Bari, Babin, Birou, & Jurkus, 2011).Under the licensing context, the IPR holder firm h and the licensee l sell their brands at different prices, and each firm benefits from the rival advertising to a lesser extent, similar to the model adopted from Libai et al. (2009) and Savin and Terwiesch (2005). Specifically, for the IPR holder, the spread of innovation is given by the innovation factor (a>0), the imitator factor (u>0), and the imitation effect of the new buyers of licensees (g>0). Analogously, for the licensee, the spread of innovation is given by the innovation factor (α>0), the imitator factor (υ>0), and the imitation effect of the new buyers of licensees (γ>0). We assume a total market potentialM>0, and a customer defection rate(kh,kl⩾0)for both licensor’s and licensees’ markets. Further, we consider the moderate effect of decision variables such as pricespth,ptland advertisingAth,Atl.A license is a product with two specific characteristics: non-exclusivity (the innovator can offer for sale as many licenses of his innovation as he wishes) and positive and negative externalities (the welfare of licensees depends positively on the penetration of licensed firms and negatively on the number of competitors who also do). Therefore, we assume that the number of licenseesltimpacts on the spread of innovation of licensees’ sales (χ). We consider a market potential of L licensees. The IPR holder charges each licensee a royalty fee over salesrthand a fixed feefth. The adoption rate of the licensee companiesl̇tdepends on the number of previously adopted companies with a coefficientz2, and on the market penetration level of licensees’ sales with a coefficientz3. Additionally, the adoption rate of the licensees is controlled by the license fees. The IPR holder should specifies the fee mechanism, which will determine the number of licensee entrances. Higher fees should deter new entrances. Here we assume that the IPR holder charges each licensee a royalty fee over salesrthand a fixed feefth.Then, the current sales diffusion of the IPR holder is driven by(5)Ṅth=a+uNthM+gNtlMM-Nth-Ntl-khNthWthAth,Atl,pth,ptl,whereWthAth,Atl,pth,ptl=1+blnAth+slnAtl-mertp¯-pth2+dertp¯-ptl2, whereb,s,m,d>0. The current sales diffusion of the licensees is defined as follows:(6)Ṅtl=α+υNthM+γNtlM+χltLM-Nth-Ntl-klNtl,WtlAth,Atl,pth,ptl,withWtlAth,Atl,pth,ptl=1+βlnAth+σlnAtl+μertp¯-pth2-δertp¯-ptl2, whereβ,σ,μ,δ>0. We considerWthAth,Atl,pth,ptlandWtlAth,Atl,pth,ptlwith positive parameters, therefore for both players we assume that sales growth increases with the advertising of any firm h and l, and sales growth decreases (increases) with an increase of one’s own (competitors’) price distance to the reference price level, i.e. h and l brands are substitutes. As firms generally direct their advertising effort to their targeted segment by emphasizing their own product, and we assume thatb>sandσ>β; i.e., the effect of one’s own advertising on the sales is larger than the competitors’. Following Dockner and Jorgensen (1988), we assume that for price parametersm>d,δ>μ; i.e., the effect of one’s own price is greater than that of the competitors’, which means that if all firms deviate from the reference prices, they will encounter a decrease in their sales growth.The number of companies that make use of a license follows the S-shape curve, as modeled in diffusion of innovations theory: initially there is an increase in licensing demand, and then it begins to flatten out. The different stages will be determined by the licensing fees mechanism. Thus, the number of licensed firms is defined by the following diffusion model:(7)l̇t=z1+z2ltL+z3NtlML-ltLtfth,rth,withLtfth,rth=1-z5ertf¯-fth2-z6ertr¯-rth2,wherez5,z6>0.In this context, the IPR firm h and the licensee l should maximize their discounted profits over the time interval0,∞, with instantaneous discounted profits at time t:GliclAtl,ptl,Ntl,lt,rth,fth,t=e-itptl-ctl-rthNtl-Atl-fthltGlichAth,pth,rth,fth,Nth,Ntl,lt,t=e-itpth-cthNth-Ath+fthlt+rthNtlwherecth,ctlare the unit costs of the IPR holder and the licensee, respectively, which may even be identical if the license covers all the know-how required for production.To solve the viability of licensing for a particular parametrization of the model, we should compute the first-order conditions for each firm, and study if the licensing conditions are satisfied. Propositions 1 and 2 in Online Appendix provide the first-order conditions for the optimal policies based on the licensing or monopoly strategies, respectively, which we solved numerically in Matlab applying a Galerkin-Collocation method.Depending on the parameter set, licensing can be optimal or not. We have computed numerically the optimal policies based on Strategy 1 and Strategy 2. We have run the analysis for different sets of parameters, but the dimension of the parametric space is so large that instead of reporting huge tables, we prefer to report the solution for a specific set, and then report a comparative statics analysis to show the potential impact of changes on each one of the considered values.As a base case, we assume an arbitrary total market size of 4000 units. We use coefficients of innovation ofa=0.002for the licensor sales,α=0.002for the licensee sales and the coefficients of imitation ofu=0.2;g=0.2for the licensor sales, andυ=0.2;γ=0.2;χ=0.02for the licensee sales. We assume that the market of potential licensees isL=90, with a licensee coefficient of innovationz1=2, a coefficient of imitation ofz2=0.5and a sales impact coefficientz3=5. The defection rates for the three populations are set to 0. We also assume that the variable cost is equal toc0=20both for the licensor and licensees (andπ=0). We consider that the ideal-point of prices, royalty fees and fixed fees arep¯=100;f¯=1200;r¯=10; and this benchmark evolves according to an inflation rater=0.07. The sensitivity to the deviations from these ideal-points is set tom=0.0007,d=0.0002for the licensor sales;μ=0.0002,δ=0.0007for the licensee sales; andz5=0.0000015;z6=0.00015for the population of licensees. The efficiency of the advertising is set tob=0.01;s=0.005for the licensor; andβ=0.005;σ=0.01for the licensees. We assume a discount rate ofi=0.1.For this set of parameters, the optimal profit for monopolist isΠmonh=9.6860·106; and the optimal profits of the licensor and the licensee areΠlich=1.0620·107andΠlicl=6.3513·105, respectively. The results are not surprising. The value of licensing isΔ=Πlich-Πmonh=9.34·105. Indeed, there is a clear incentive for the IPR holder to license the innovation, because licensees pay for royalty fees. In fact, the discounted licensing revenue is about 50% of the total profit of the licensor (decreasing from an initial 90% down to around 40%). Fig. 1shows that the discounted profits of the IPR holder increase rapidly to a maximum, and then decay exponentially. However, in the case of licensing, a higher value is achieved at a faster rate. The discounted profits of the licensee are smaller, but in the long term decay quite slowly.Fig. 2depicts how the sales diffusion is accelerated when the licensing strategy is implemented. Initially, the IPR holder has more sales when being a licensor than in a monopolistic position. The IPR holder implicitly also benefits from the advertising efforts and the cross word-of-mouth influence of the licensees, which leads to faster diffusion and, as a result, more sales per period. In addition, it also gains licensing revenues. For the IPR holder, applying the monopolistic strategy provides, after some period of time, a higher level of sales than those obtained if the licensing strategy is implemented. However, aggregated licensor and licensee sales dominate the monopolist sales.Discounted optimal prices and discounted optimal marketing effort investments decay exponentially for all the agents (see Fig. 3).Fig. 4depicts the discounted licensing payments, both royalties and fixed fees. Both of them decay exponentially as the market becomes mature.To obtain in-depth insights on the impact of the licensees, we provide a sensitivity analysis of the model’s parameters. Consider all the parameters on a vectorθ. Using envelope theorem for differential games, we compute how “sensitive” the cumulative profitsΠmonh,Πlich,Πliclare to changes in the value of the parameters in the case of Strategy 1 and Strategy 2, respectively, and the partial derivatives∂Δθ0/∂θ(see online Appendix for analytical details about the envelope theorem; the partial derivatives with respect to each model parameter are available from the authors). These expressions involve some integrals that cannot be solved analytically, and Table 2reports the numerical values of the sensitivity analysis.The results are not surprising. We found negative values of∂Δ∂aand∂Δ∂uimplying that the higher the innovation and word-of-mouth parameters are, the less the IPR holder is willing to license. When both a and u are large, product sales take off rapidly and the advantage of licensing to speed up the rate of diffusion of the innovation is not so clear. In addition, we found positive values of∂Δ∂b,∂Δ∂sand∂Δ∂gimplying that the higher the impact of direct (or cross) advertising and the word-of-mouth on the licensor’s sales growth, the more desirable the licensing strategy is.An increase of licensor’s price sensitivity m implies that licensing is more attractive from the IPR holder’s perspective since the monopoly profits are reduced more than those of the licensing scenario. However, an increase in licensees’ price impact d makes licensing strategy less desirable for the IPR holder. We also found a negative value of∂Δ∂p¯, indicating that for products with higher desired price level the IPR holder prefers to be in a monopolistic position rather than to share the market with licensee companies. Furthermore, the faster the desired price level evolves (higher inflation rate r), the more a monopolistic position is preferred.Interestingly, licensing does not appear to be worthwhile with an increase in the IPR holder’s defection ratekh, as the negative impact of a higher defection rate on monopoly profit is smaller than on licensor profit. Importantly, discounting parameter increments do improve the value of licensing as a takeoff anticipation becomes crucial. In other words, the more impatient a firm is to be rewarded for its innovation, the more an IPR holder is willing to license.There is no a straightforward relationship between market potential M and licensing strategy. Computing the solution with different parameters, we find that when cross-advertising effects are moderate-to-large (higher than 0.005), then the higher the market potential the more desirable a licensing strategy is. By contrast, when the cross-advertising effects are smaller than 0.005, then the higher the market potential the less desirable a licensing strategy is. This strengthens the idea that companies may consider both the cross-benefits of advertising and the size of the market as structural elements to take into account before a decision is made.Regarding the parameters related to the licensee sales growth, the parametric changes which speed up the licensee sales (higher a,β,γ,υ,χ,σ, and lowerkl) make the licensing strategy less desirable. Intuitively, faster licensee sales imply that the IPR holder receives more royalty revenues earlier. However, it also implies that the licensees capture the market faster, leaving the IPR holder with less sales revenues.Moreover, a higher licensee market potential L, largerz1,z2,z3, and smallerz4,z5,z6(speeding up licensee companies’ diffusion and reducing the sensitivity to fees), make licensing a more attractive strategy. This is because if the IPR holder chooses the licensing strategy, he would prefer the licensees to “diffuse” faster so that he gets licensing fees earlier. These results are relatively stable, although we have noticed that for high levels of production costs∂Πlich∂z3becomes small and negative but if cross-advertising effects are simultaneously set to 0.003, the effect is again positive.It is important to note that most of the parametric changes that make a licensing contract more attractive for the licensor decrease the total profits earned by the licensees. However, as long as the licensees get positive profits, licensing is an attractive strategy for the licensees, as the licensees would get zero profits by not accepting the licensing contract.A manager of a company who faces a decision to license (or alternatively, to become a licensee) could perform a similar analysis to get a measure of total lifetime profits from licensing and an optimal product sales path. This would help to make licensing decisions. Also, by possessing external measures of sales sensitivity to marketing mix variables, the manager could use the model to deduce optimal marketing mix decisions. Importantly, this analysis takes into account the word of mouth acceleration effect of the licensee sales on sales growth of the licensor and vice versa.Product licensing decisions should be reconsidered when unlicensed pirate imitations can be “commercialized”. The IPR holder faces a weak type of competition from a substitutive product with worse characteristics. However, piracy also speeds up product diffusion, bringing in some issues that were not present in monopoly. In this context it is not so crucial to allow rival pirates to use legal licenses, given that the license must be cheap enough to engage them in the legal binding.In the weak IPR context, we can study the sales of three possible products: (1) the IPR holder salesNth; (2) the sales of copies produced by the firms without IPRNtc; and (3) the sales of licensed productNtlif a license agreement is signed. We consider that only products (1) and (2), or products (1) and (3) are simultaneously observed in the market. We say that firms that only commercialize products of type (2) follow a pirating strategy. Pirates can also invest in communication through their specific channels.The sales of copied pirate productsNtcalso depend on the number of piratesltc, and the dynamics of these variables is cross-related. The sales of the pirates and the IPR holder are substitutive. We represent this dynamic system by(8)Ṅth=gpiracyhNth,Ntc,Ath,Atc,pth,ptcṄtc=gpiracycNth,Ntc,ltc,Ath,Atc,pth,ptcl̇tc=gpiracycNtc,ltcwithNth,Ntc,ltc=0,0,0, but in some specific applications we could include more crossed relationships if appropriate. Usually the competition of pirates should be milder than that of licensed competitors, as the quality of pirate products is usually worse, and the market differentiates these products from the original ones.Strategy 3Unlicensing benchmark scenario with piracy. The equilibrium is characterized by the dynamic Nash equilibrium as follows:Given the decisions of the IPR holderAth,pth, the pirates solvemaxΠpiracycAtc,ptc,Ntc=∫0∞GpiracycAtc,ptc,Ntc,tdts.t.Eq.(8),Nth,Ntc,ltc=0,0,0Given the decisions of the piratesAtc,ptc, the IPR holder solves the problemmaxΠpiracyhAth,pth,Nth=∫0∞GpiracyhAth,pth,Nth,tdts.t.Eq.(8),Nth,Ntc,ltc=0,0,0Under piracy, we denote byΠpiracyhandΠpiracycthe optimal profits of the IPR holder and the pirates, respectively, obtained in the open-loop Nash equilibrium.Alternatively, a licensing agreement can be signed, and therefore, the IPR holder and the licensee follow Strategy 2 defined in Section 3, rendering profitsΠlich,Πlicl.To determine whether the licensing strategy is implemented, consider the following decision rule:Licensing decisionThe license decision is a viable equilibrium if and only if two conditions hold:Πlich⩾Πpiracyh,Πlicl⩾Πpiracyc.In this context, pirates often are not attracted by the licensing agreement asΠpiracyc⩾Πlicl, but this can depend on the specification of the model and the industry. For example, if pirates’ costs are very high due to policy pressure, the situation could be reverted. The next section presents a numerical example.In this section we present an example for non-durables. Often the quality of the original and copied product is different, and therefore the competitiveness of the IPR holder firm and the pirates is weaker than in the case studied in Section 4. Therefore, we relax the assumption of a joint potential and assume that brands can develop independently, with a market potential ofMhfor products of type (1) andMcfor products of type (2), so thatM=Mh+Mc, and separated diffusions (similar to Parker & Gatignon, 1994; Gupta, Mela, & Vidal-Sanz, 2006)).The sales of pirate productsNtcdepend on the number of piratesltc, and the dynamics of both variables are cross-related. Therefore, if the licensee is not granted, the diffusion of the innovative and pirate products and pirate companies are described by the following equations:(9)Ṅth=a+uNthMh+gNtcMcMh-Nth-khNthWthAth,Atc,pth,ptc,Ṅtc=α+υNthMh+γNtcMc+χltcLMc-Ntc-kcNtcWtcAth,Atc,pth,ptc,l̇tc=z1+z2ltcL+z3NtcMcL-ltc,whereWthAth,Atc,pth,ptc=1+blnAth+slnAtc-mertp¯-pth2+dertpc‾-ptc2,WtcAth,Atc,pth,ptc=1+βlnAth+σlnAtc-δertpc‾-ptc2+μertp¯-pth2.In (9) we assume that in the licensing scenario, products have relatively homogeneous quality, and therefore the demand structure is analogous to model (5), with market potentialM=Mh+Mc, and the sales are distributed among both firms according to this model. Typically the diffusion parameters of the IPR firm productNthand the licensed productNtlare higher than those of the copy productNtc, due to the higher quality of the innovation, which increases the market potential and the speed of the diffusion (i.e.,a>α,u>υ,g>γ), alsob>σ;s>β.The discounted returns for the pirates and the IPR holder at time t are respectively given byGpiracycAtc,ptc,Ntc,t=e-itptc-ctcNtc-Atc,GpiracyhAth,pth,Nth,t=e-itpth-cthNth-Ath.The licensor considers two possible scenarios: competition with pirating strategy versus licensing strategy (Strategy 2) withM=Mh+Mc. In order to determine whether the licensing agreement is viable under piracy, we need to compute the optimal solution based on Strategy 3. The first order conditions are given in Proposition 3 in Online Appendix. The solution is characterized by a BVP, which can be solved numerically. We compute the optimal policies in a weak IPR context for a different set of parameters. Since the number of possible parameters is huge, we have considered a base case, and then we report a comparative statics study to show the potential impact of parametric changes on the equilibrium of the licensing model.As a base case, we assume the set of parameters given in Section 3, arbitrarily decomposing the market size M=4000 in 2000 units for illegal copies and 2000 for licensed products. We also tested other asymmetric decompositions without a strong impact on the results (in particular, the impact of small changes is discussed in the comparative statics section). We assume lower quality of the innovation for the pirates, and thus, slower growth of pirate product sales. For that reason, we considerα=0.001,β=0.00005,σ=0.0001,γ=0.15,υ=0.15, which are lower than the parameters considered in Section 3. For this set of parameters, in the context of the weak IPR protection with pirates, the optimal profits of the IPR holder and the pirates areΠpiracyh=5.6249·106andΠpiracyc=2.7518·106, respectively. In the context of the weak IPR protection with licenses, the optimal profits of the IPR holder and the licensee areΠlich=1.0620·107andΠlicl=6.3513·105, respectively. The result suggests that the licensing strategy might be interesting for the IPR holder (Πlich>Πpiracyh), but not for the pirates (Πlicl<Πpiracyc). As a consequence the license agreement is not implemented. Furthermore, recall that in a strong IPR context with analogous parameters, the optimal profit for the monopolist isΠmonh=9.6860·106, so the difference ofΠmonh-Πpiracyh=4.0611·106is the financial cost of piracy for the IPR holder, i.e. the economic loss caused to the innovator because of a weak IPR regulation. The dynamics of the discounted profits in the equilibrium are similar for both the IPR holder and the pirates; i.e., fast growth followed by an exponential decay to zero. At the maximum the pirates achieve roughly 3 times more than the maximum level of discounted profits obtained by the licensees. However, the profits of pirates decay faster.The previous result also suggests that although piracy may speed up the product diffusion of the IPR holder through the word of mouth and communication by pirates (Fig. 5shows the sales diffusion in a market with pirates compared to that of a monopolist IPR holder), this advantage is not enough to compensate the innovator for the market-share loss. Under a licensing agreement, the royalties would reduce the damage, renderingΠlich=1.0620·107, which is higher than the return in a monopoly. However, pirates do not receive reciprocal benefits from the licensing contract.The dynamic pattern of the optimal discounted prices and marketing effort investments for weak IPR protection scenario is similar to that of an analogous licensor in a strongly protected market. By contrast, pirates invest in roughly 1/8 of the advertising by the IPR holder, and charge approximately half of its price.In this section, we study the effect of parametric changes on the returns drawn from the different strategies in a weak IPR framework. Using the envelope theorem for differential games, we compute the impact of parameter change on the profitsΠlich,Πlicl,Πpiracyh,Πpiracycand the relative advantage of licensing for the IPR holderΔh=Πlich-Πpiracyhand for piratesΔl=Πlicl-Πpiracyc. Table 3shows the numerical values of partial derivatives of the profit functions,∂Δhθ0/∂θi, and∂Δlθ0/∂θifor the different parameters in the model; that is how “sensitive” the relative advantages of licensing are to changes in the value of the parameters of the model.In the context of weak IPR markets, licensing is the recommendable strategy for the IPR holder because an increase in the pirates’ diffusion does not imply an increase in its profits (as pirates do not pay licensing fees). Similar to the case of strong IPR markets, increasing the speed of licensee companies diffusion (largerz1,z2,z3, and smallerz4,z5,z6,) and the market potential of licensees L makes licensing the more attractive strategy.If we keep M constant, and increaseMhwhereas decreasingMc, we can consider the marginal change in the licensing advantage for the IPR holder∂Δh/∂Mh-∂Δh/∂Mc=-1.03×10-4<0, and also the marginal change in the licensing advantage for pirates∂Δl/∂Mh-∂Δl/∂Mc=6.242×10-3>0. When the IPR increases its share of the total market potential with respect to the pirates, then licensing is less (more) attractive for the licensor (pirates).Table 3 also shows that∂Δh∂θand∂Δl∂θgenerally take values of opposite signs with the exception of those related to prices. This result implies that the more desirable licensing is for the IPR holder, the less willing the pirates are to accept the licensing contract. And vice versa – when a parametric change makes licensing more attractive for the pirates, the IPR holder is less willing to offer a licensing contract. Although we do not completely rule out the possibility of licensing contract viability, these results show that obviously the licensing event is less common in a weak IPR framework. This result is in line with empirical evidence by Arora and Ceccagnoli (2006), Gambardella et al. (2007) and Anand and Khanna (2000).Previous research suggests that piracy can be beneficial for an IPR holder, since pirates accelerate diffusion via word-of-mouth (see Givon, Mahajan, & Muller, 1995; Givon, Mahajan, & Muller, 1997). We also find some interesting insights studying the financial loss of the IPR holder due to piracy, which is the difference between the partial derivatives of profits of the IPR holder in a monopolistic scenario (see∂Πmonh∂θin Table 2) and those when pirates are present (see∂Πpiracyh∂θin Table 3). The lower the coefficient of innovation (parameter a) is, the lower the IPR holder’s financial loss caused by piracy. In other words, when the innovation parameter of the IPR holder is very small, the IPR holder could be better off tolerating some piracy. This is in line with the results of Prasad and Mahajan (2003), who find that the lower the coefficient of innovation, the higher the optimal tolerance level of piracy is. Also, the higher the word of mouth parameter u is, the more willing the IPR holder is to be in a monopolist position. This is because for a high u the IPR holder has sufficient word of mouth and is less willing to tolerate pirates (Prasad & Mahajan, 2003, find that piracy toleration is lower when the word of mouth coefficient is either very small or very large). Prasad and Mahajan (2003) find a minor effect of the discount rate on piracy tolerance. In contrast, these results suggest that the higher the discount rate i, the smaller the IPR holder financial loss due to the piracy. This result is reasonable, since when the discount rate is higher, faster diffusion of sales becomes more crucial for the IPR holder. Thus, the IPR holder may even prefer pirates to have some part of the total market potential, given that they speed up the diffusion.Diffusion takeoff time and speed are critical for the company, with deep implications for the supply-chain, inventory and product distribution management. They also have a crucial impact on firm value (an early takeoff increases the net present value of the innovation, as revenues cashed into the distant future are heavily discounted). The time to takeoff in the sales diffusion of radical product innovations can vary considerably (e.g., Mahajan et al., 1990; Golder & Tellis, 1997). There are also demand cultural factors suggesting that sales takeoff can vary in different countries (Tellis, Stremersch, & Yin, 2003). Over the last decade, there has been much interest in explaining sales takeoff of product innovation diffusion. The literature is mostly descriptive, and has established that marketing mix factors, particularly prices and advertising effort, can partially explain the takeoff times (e.g., Stoneman & Ireland, 1983; Golder & Tellis, 2004; Foster, Golder, & Tellis, 2004). Agarwal and Bayus (2002) consider that the entry of new competitors during the early years of the market can push the demand outward, driven by improvements in product quality, distribution infrastructures, and higher awareness, suggesting that firm entrance may dominate the classical marketing-mix factors in explaining the takeoff times. In addition, competition can benefit market size through advertising (Roberts & Samuelson, 1988). Loosely speaking, the affluence of competing firms seems to spur higher innovation awareness through combined advertising and promotional efforts, price reductions due to firm rivalry, and product differentiation by quality improvements that (moderated by socio-demographic and environmental factors) can explain the first large increase in sales. But innovation ownership is usually protected by Intellectual Property Rights generating a temporal grant of monopoly power over the right to make commercial use of ideas. This protection may prevent the entrance of other firms, and therefore delay the takeoff time and/or decrease the diffusion speed.This paper considers the use of licenses as a strategy to speed up the sales diffusion process of new products, commercializing the innovation and simultaneously licensing the product technology to one or more other firms. Our findings show that licensing can be a beneficial strategy for the innovator, who renounces monopolistic power derived from the exclusivity, but draws cash-flow from royalties, and exploits the advertising investment and positive word-of-mouth effects by licensees. The license agreement is feasible in markets with strong IPR, as licensor and licensees benefit from the agreement. We compare this result with a weak IPR context, where piracy speeds up the product diffusion but this does not compensate the IPR holder for the sales loss effect and it would prefer to license in order to get some royalties; pirates, however, do not generally find the licensing agreement of interest.Product innovations vary considerably in their takeoff times and the speed of diffusion. Most managers favor rapid acceleration of sales diffusion in order to receive quicker returns. As far as we know, this is the first paper that analyzes licensing as a strategy to accelerate the diffusion of radical product innovation in different IPR frameworks. We showed that licensing would provide considerable benefits to a firm for a certain set of parameter values, and analyzed the robustness of this property using comparative statics. Thus, a manager could conduct a similar analysis to examine the benefits of product licensing and to have optimal marketing mix and licensing decisions over time.The proposed modeling approach leaves open many possibilities for future research. We assume a model specification that builds upon the new product diffusion literature. In our numerical examples we consider diffusion specification for non-durable products. Further research could consider other specifications, such as durable products, innovation with multiple generations, among others. Although the specification is well grounded, we consider that empirical testing of the model would be important. Unfortunately, the richness of the required data makes it somewhat difficult, particularly for pirates in the case of a weak IPR. To respond to this type of challenge, researchers have suggested using experimental designs as well as computer-based simulations (e.g. Montaguti, Kuester, & Robertson, 2002). We have mostly followed the second strategy. The comparative static analysis yields several testable hypotheses, which we leave for further research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
