@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving reliability of a shared supplier with competition and spillovers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Study spillover effect on competing manufacturers’ incentives to improve a supplier’s reliability.Develop a two-stage model with supplier improvement, random supply and demand, and competition.Characterize manufacturers’ equilibrium inventory decision.Characterize sufficient conditions of existence of equilibrium of manufacturers’ improvement efforts.Explore impact of market characteristics on manufacturers’ improvement efforts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Game theory,Reliability,Spillover,Supplier improvement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Supplier reliability is a key determinant of a manufacturer’s competitiveness. It reflects a supplier’s capability of order fulfillment, which can be measured by the percentage of order quantity delivered in a given time window. A perfectly reliable supplier delivers an amount equal to the order placed by its customer, while an unreliable supplier may deliver an amount less than the amount ordered. Therefore, when suppliers are unreliable, manufacturers often have incentives to help suppliers improve delivery reliability. Suppliers, however, often work with multiple manufacturers and the benefit of enhanced reliability may spill over to competing manufacturers. In this study, we explore how potential spillover influences manufacturers’ incentives to improve supplier’s reliability. We consider two manufacturers that compete with imperfectly substitutable products on Type I service level (i.e., in-stock probability). The manufacturers share a common supplier who, due to variations in production quality or yield, is unreliable. Manufacturers may exert efforts to improve the supplier’s reliability in the sense that the delivered quantity is stochastically larger after improvement. We develop a two-stage model that encompasses supplier improvement, uncertain supply and random demand in a competitive setting. In this complex model, we characterize the manufacturers’ equilibrium in-stock probability. Moreover, we characterize sufficient conditions for the existence of the equilibrium of the manufacturers’ improvement efforts. Finally, we numerically test the impact of market characteristics on the manufacturers’ equilibrium improvement efforts. We find that a manufacturer’s equilibrium improvement effort usually declines in market competition, market uncertainty or spillover effect, although its expected equilibrium profit typically increases in spillover effect.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supplier reliability is increasingly being recognized as a key determinant of manufacturers’ competitiveness. It reflects a supplier’s capability of order fulfillment, which can be measured by the percentage of order quantity delivered in a given time window. A recent survey by Accenture finds that “supplier reliability is seen across the industry as significantly more important than cost” (Erhardt, Langlinais, & Ratta, 2010, p. 10). Manufacturers therefore often help to improve delivery reliability when suppliers are unreliable. Suppliers, however, often work with multiple manufacturers (Markoff, 2001), and hence a manufacturer’s effort to improve supplier reliability may benefit its direct competitors. Empirical evidence suggests that manufacturers are often aware of, and also wary of, the potential spillover effect, but different manufacturers seem to take the issue differently.Farney (2000) describes supplier improvement effort by UTC’s Pratt & Whitney Aircraft unit (P&W) with Dynamic Gunver Technologies (DGT) (now a unit of Britain’s Smiths Group). UTC initiates improvement effort with DGT despite the fact that (a) DGT has close relationship with a P&W’s competitor, Rolls Royce, and (b) “by leveraging its expertise and knowledge gained from working with UTC, Dynamic successfully won bids from Allied Signal, Rolls Royce, and General Electric.” (p. 5). Although being aware of the competitive concerns above, “UTC had attempted to bring process improvements to DGT operations. DGT had received substantial assistance from P&W in the form of workshops in Kaizen process improvement, lean manufacturing, and UTC’s ACE program for quality improvement.” (p. 5). UTC were, however, wary of the spillover effect: “Their goal did not include the scenario where [DGT] competed with UTC for other business and partnered with UTC’s competitors.” (p. 8). In this case, UTC seems to reluctantly accept the existence of spillover effect.Toyota, on the other hand, seems to have a more open mind towards the spillover effect: “Production processes are simply not viewed as proprietary and Toyota accepts that some valuable knowledge will spill over to benefit competitors.” (Dyer & Nobeoka, 2000, p. 358).Yet in Honda’s case, its supplier improvement program implicitly encourages suppliers to work with its competitors: Honda espouses suppliers’ self-reliance, i.e., “balancing responsiveness to Honda’s needs with a sufficiently diversified customer base.” (Sako, 2004, p. 296). In fact, encouraging suppliers to work with multiple manufacturers is often a policy of many firms to avoid the “captive supplier issue.” (Lascelles & Dale, 1990, p. 53).Given the different attitudes exhibited by different firms toward the spillover effect, we explore in this research how potential spillover effect influences manufacturers’ reliability improvement efforts and the resulting expected profits. We consider the scenario where two manufacturers share a common supplier, which has a production process that is subject to random output due to variations in quality or production yield. Both manufacturers may exert effort to improve the reliability (e.g., expected yield) of the supplier’s production process. We develop a two-stage model to investigate the impact of spillover upon the manufacturers’ improvement efforts in a competitive setting. In the first stage, each manufacturer decides its improvement effort and incurs the corresponding improvement cost. In the second stage, as a result of the manufacturers’ improvement efforts, the supplier has a new, more reliable production process. The manufacturers then place orders from the supplier, and compete on service levels in the consumer market.In this model, we show the existence of the equilibrium in the service level competition, and characterize the manufacturers’ equilibrium service levels and corresponding inventory decisions in the second stage. Moreover, we characterize sufficient conditions for the existence of the equilibrium of the manufacturers’ improvement efforts in the first stage. Finally, we numerically test the impact of market characteristics upon the manufacturers’ equilibrium improvement efforts. We find that spillover effect often brings favorable improvement to the manufacturers’ expected profits, regardless of whether the manufacturers are asymmetric or symmetric. When manufacturers are asymmetric, the ex ante more advantageous manufacturer typically exerts a higher proportion of improvement efforts, especially when the spillover effect is large. While such higher proportion of improvement efforts benefits the focal manufacturer, it may benefit, in terms of relative profit, its competitor more. When manufacturers are symmetric, we find that both manufacturers’ improvement efforts decline in market competition, market uncertainty or spillover effect, although their expected profits increase in spillover effect.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we discuss related literature in Section 2, and develop the two-stage model in Section 3. In Section 4, we characterize the manufacturers’ equilibrium service levels and the corresponding inventory decisions in the second stage. In Section 5, we study the manufacturers’ supplier improvement efforts, and characterize sufficient conditions for the existence of the equilibrium in the first stage. In Section 6, we numerically test the impact of market characteristics upon the manufacturers’ equilibrium improvement efforts and profit. In Section 7, we summarize our findings and conclude the paper. All proofs are relegated to Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
