@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operational Research in education

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
OR techniques have been applied to a wide variety of problems in education.These include problems faced by planners, managers and consumers of education.Optimization, data envelopment analysis, timetabling and scheduling are all used.Areas for further applications of OR in education remain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Markov processes,Optimal control theory,Data envelopment analysis,Stochastic frontier analysis,Scheduling and timetabling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Operational Research (OR) techniques have been applied, from the early stages of the discipline, to a wide variety of issues in education. At the government level, these include questions of what resources should be allocated to education as a whole and how these should be divided amongst the individual sectors of education and the institutions within the sectors. Another pertinent issue concerns the efficient operation of institutions, how to measure it, and whether resource allocation can be used to incentivise efficiency savings. Local governments, as well as being concerned with issues of resource allocation, may also need to make decisions regarding, for example, the creation and location of new institutions or closure of existing ones, as well as the day-to-day logistics of getting pupils to schools. Issues of concern for managers within schools and colleges include allocating the budgets, scheduling lessons and the assignment of students to courses. This survey provides an overview of the diverse problems faced by government, managers and consumers of education, and the OR techniques which have typically been applied in an effort to improve operations and provide solutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Education covers a range of sectors from kindergarten, primary and secondary schooling, to post-compulsory and higher education. The expected years an individual might spend in education in total can vary considerably across countries; within the OECD, for example, a person in Indonesia can typically expect fewer than 14 years whilst one in Finland nearly 20 years (OECD, 2013). An interesting dimension of education is that consumption at some levels is compulsory while at other levels it is voluntary; and because an individual's consumption of education has both external and private benefits, it is often (but not exclusively) provided through public funding.11Public spending on education averages 13 percent of total public expenditure across all OECD countries, and is more than 20 percent in some countries (OECD, 2013).This market failure and consequent public funding engender government intervention in the form of planning and resource allocation across the education sectors. These are complex areas, but they are ones where Operational Research (OR) tools can be effectively used to aid policy-makers (Platt, 1962).Top-level planning and resource allocation are not the only areas where OR can be useful. Education managers are faced with a plethora of problems in the day-to-day running of their institutions. These relate, for example, to the optimal allocation of their budget, or simply to where each class should take place and who should teach it. OR also has the tools to address these problems as is testified by the vast OR literature devoted to management, timetabling and scheduling in education.OR originated as a tool to aid the military. In 1936, applied research into radar technology and its application in a military setting was undertaken jointly by British air force officers and civilian scientists. This led to the formation of Operational Research groups in the UK and operations research groups in the USA which brought together scientists from a variety of disciplines to solve problems encountered in a military context – encompassing the army, navy and air force (Gass, 1994; Gass & Assad, 2005; Kirby, 2003; Weir & Thomas, 2009). Once World War II was over, OR groups continued to be supported, with the focus switching to logistics, modelling and planning. It became apparent that OR had a place in solving operational problems in organisations unrelated to the military (Gass, 1994), and so applications of OR techniques to business quickly followed the end the War. Indeed, the competitive advantage and consequent increase in profits enjoyed by firms which successfully applied new OR approaches in their operations were strong inducements to making OR an acceptable approach to solving problems in the business setting (Horvath, 1955).Operational researchers were, however, much slower to apply their skills in areas of public provision of services such as education, health, police and fire services. The lack of profit motive meant that there was a danger that these areas might remain ignored. Early publications called on operational researchers to become involved in studying the complex problems seen in provision of education (Dean, 1968; Griffin, 1968; Horvath, 1955; Platt, 1962; Rath, 1968; Shepherd, 1965) and demonstrated the relevance of OR tools in addressing these issues (Blaug, 1967b; Van Dusseldorp, Richardson, & Foley, 1971). Education has been firmly on the OR agenda since that time.This paper examines the following questions in the context of education. What types of problems has OR typically tried to address? Which OR tools are commonly applied? No attempt is made to provide a review of all OR applications to education but rather to give a flavour of the areas where OR tools have been used. While references are largely confined to mainstream OR journals, there is inevitable reference to similar applications appearing in mainstream economics or education journals where there is often a parallel literature. Each section of this paper addresses a specific topic within the field of education and discusses the techniques which have been used to address it. The main areas of coverage are planning models (Section 2); efficiency and performance (Section 3); and routing and scheduling (Section 4). Section 5 concludes and considers areas in education still to be explored by operational researchers.The call for OR to be applied within education coincided with a burgeoning demand for education and training: the post-War period saw increasing birth rates in many Western economies as well as rapid economic and social changes which required an increasing supply of educated manpower (Blaug, 1967a). There was a growing recognition that economic progress and growth required investment in both physical and human capital (Armitage, Smith, & Alper, 1969; Weisbrod, 1962). The expansion of education provision required accompanying resources, and so it was important to be able to predict student numbers at different education levels and hence resource requirements. Early forays by operational researchers into the field of education were therefore attempts at assisting education and manpower planners (see Schroeder, 1973 for an early review).22The importance of OR in developing models for assisting in educational planning in the UK is revealed in Ladley (1987) who describes the models developed by the OR Unit of the Department of Education and Science.The education sector can be seen as a series of components (i.e. different levels of education such as primary, secondary, vocational and tertiary) which are interconnected in such a way that each individual can follow a pathway which meets his own educational and training aspirations (Tavares, 1995). Education is therefore a system; adopting this view allows operational researchers to model the system using a variety of approaches and provide useful forecasts for managers, planners and policy makers.Planners are interested in projections of students and of needs (in terms of teachers and equipment) at all levels of education. Goal programming can be used to determine optimal numbers of students (at macro- and micro-levels) as demonstrated by an early study of vocational education in Missouri (Atteberry, 1979) and another on determining the optimal admissions policy for an individual institution (Lee & Moore, 1974).A more commonly-used approach to educational planning, however, presents the education system as a series or flow of mathematical relationships (Van Dusseldorp et al., 1971). Studies differ in the mathematical representation – a simple Leontief input-output depiction of interdependence between students at various education levels (Oliver & Hopkins, 1972; Stone, 1965, 1966); a sequence of discrete events in time (students in different modules on a programme, for example) to which simulation can be applied (Saltzman & Roeder, 2012); a Markov chain framework based on students in each state (education level, for example) and their probability of moving to another state – but all are capable of providing forecasts of student numbers.33Of course, if the model is set up in terms of staff or financial resources, then forecasts of those variables can be derived.It is particularly attractive to view the education system in the framework of a Markov process which is defined as an ordered series of states linked by a transition matrix composed of probabilities of moving from one state to another. So in a college setting we might consider students to be in any one of the following states: studying full time; studying part time; on a temporary leave of absence; successfully graduated; or withdrawn (Kwak, Brown, & Schiederjans, 1986). From past data it is then possible to estimate the values of the transition matrix and use these to make predictions of student numbers at any stage.Many examples of the application of mathematical models to education planning exist at both national and institution level (Armitage & Smith, 1967; Brandeau, Hopkins, & Melmon, 1987; Clough & McReynolds, 1966; Correa, 1967; Forecasting Institute of the Swedish Central Bureau of Statistics, 1967; Gani, 1963; Gray, 1980; Harden & Tcheng, 1971; Hopkins & Massy, 1977; Kwak et al., 1986; Massy, 1976; Nicholls, 1983, 1985; Smith, 1978; Thonstad, 1967). Because they are based on student flows from state to state, Markov chain models have proved particularly useful at the faculty and programme levels in providing not just predictions of students but also additional insights into, for example, non-completion both in postgraduate programmes (Bessent & Bessent, 1980; Nicholls, 2007) and undergraduate programmes (Shah & Burke, 1999), required deployment of supervisors in a doctoral programme (Nicholls, 2009), and evaluation of the efficacy of early-retirement programmes for university faculty (Hopkins, 1974). There are fewer examples of the application of simulation to students flows; one such study, however, has proved useful in evaluating the potential effects on students, in terms of their time to complete the programme and graduation rates, of changes in curriculum provision brought about by recent budget cuts (Saltzman & Roeder, 2012).These planning models rely heavily on underlying assumptions such as those relating to the transition rates, and these in turn are often based on historical data. For planning at a school level, the transition proportions will need to be adjusted if, for example, there is a change in birth rates, migration, expansion of educational provision in the local area, or increase in residential building in the catchment area (Smith, 1978). More satisfactory models can be derived by altering the transition proportions to reflect additional uncertainty (Armitage et al., 1969; Massy, Grinold, Hopkins, & Gerson, 1981). Even so, the models are highly descriptive and do not provide any indication of how or why the numbers observed in the system emerge. Only insofar as the system continues to behave in the future as in the past will projections be accurate.These mathematical flow models generally used in planning fail to answer the question of what is the optimal policy for planners (Alper, Armitage, & Smith, 1967; Correa, 1967) and this leads on to the issue of optimal allocation of resources. Governments need to know not just how many students to expect at each education level, but also how much money is required to fund the predicted numbers. An individual education authority or school must also allocate its resources to provide education in line with predicted demand. But for the education system as a whole, or for an organization within the system, potential conflicts between competing objectives must be reconciled. This leads us into multi-objective decision-making in which goal programming is a popular methodological approach, and indeed has been the method of choice in addressing issues of optimal resource allocation at a national level (Benard, 1967; Cobacho, Caballero, González, & Molina, 2010).At the level of the organization, approaches to the problem of resource allocation within the institution have developed over time. Early pioneering work typically used goal programming to derive optimal resource allocation over a single period in a single ‘unit’ of an institution. For example, Lee and Clayton (1972) used goal programming to allocate funds from the central university to the different faculties within the institution; Geoffrion, Dyer, and Feinberg (1972) used a similar approach in a graduate school context to allocate not monetary resources but rather staff time amongst the various tasks of teaching, research and administration.Subsequent studies built on the approach of Geoffrion et al. (1972) either by integrating preference functions,44Further discussion of using preference functions in the context of university decision making, and also of the need to allow preference functions to evolve within the decision model as stakeholders gain a better understanding of the relevant trade-offs and restrictions, can be found in Dickmeyer (1983).relating, for example, to academic outcomes, and using a mathematical programming model (usually goal programming) to obtain optimal budget decisions (Fandel & Gal, 2001; Hemaida & Hupfer, 1994/1995; Hopkins, Larreche, & Massy, 1977; Kwak & Changwon, 1998; Wehrung, Hopkins, & Massy, 1978), or by extending to greater numbers of time periods and/or more units within the institution (Caballero, Galache, Gómez, Molina, & Torrico, 2001; Diminnie & Kwak, 1986; Goyal, 1973; Schroeder, 1974; Sinuany-Stern, 1984; Soyibo & Lee, 1986; Walters, Mangold, & Haran, 1976). Later more sophisticated approaches introduced feedback into the optimization models and solved using optimal control theory (OCT). This approach can be applied at a national perspective to identify, for example, optimal numbers of students at different education levels and hence to address the question of how the government should allocate resources amongst education sectors (Hartl, 1983; Ritzen & Winkler, 1979). In contrast, the same approach can be used at the level of the individual to identify the optimal education decision over a person's lifetime (Pantelous & Kalogeropoulos, 2009; Southwick & Zionts, 1974).The difficulty with introducing complexity into such models is that the resulting problem can prove intractable; any simplification which can lead to a solution can however reap rewards in terms of a better allocation of resources. For example, viewing the resource allocation from school districts to individual schools as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Howard, 2002) can lead to allocations which are more aligned to other aspirations of the educational system (such as the ‘No Child Left Behind’ policy) than allocation methods currently in use (Dimitrov, Dimitrov, & Chukova, 2014). In this application, a school district comprises a set of schools each of which has a proficiency level (measured by student performance on standardized tests) and the school district aims to maximize aggregate proficiency across schools using its funding allocation model. Each school is modelled as a MDP with states which represent the school's proficiency level, actions which relate to the school's funding level, and rewards which emanate from the resources received as a consequence of the proficiency level. The transition probabilities for switching from one proficiency level to another are partly random and partly related to previous funding levels. As such, the probabilities are unknown and so a transition set (of possible values) is used instead. The resulting MDP problem is non-linear and non-convex, but a simplification leads to a tractable problem (Dimitrov et al., 2014). This type of model has the advantage that various possible objectives of the funding bodies, such as equity in distribution of educational proficiency across schools (BenDavid-Hadar & Ziderman, 2011), could be incorporated. This recent work provides an interesting approach to educational resource allocation, and further research into solving such complex problems would be welcome.In this section we have largely been concerned with planning using forecasts of student numbers, and with the allocation of resources, from the government to the different education sectors, from the sector to the institutions within it, and from the institutions to the departments of which it is comprised. We end with reference to studies which address related but slightly different problems, and which depart from (exclusive) use of traditional OR approaches to planning and resource allocation, such as Markov chains, OCT, and goal programming.In one study, a management support system is developed to deal with the thorny issue of the allocation of time between the four main activities of university faculty namely supervision, teaching, administration and research (Finlay & Gregory, 1994). The aim of the system is to move away from an ‘equal shares across tasks’ approach to one which combines information on individuals’ strengths and weaknesses with the department's requirements in order to produce an equal total workload (although not necessarily equal task time) across individuals. Whilst the system is an attempt to provide an objective allocation to achieve greater efficiency, the authors recognise the importance of the occasional use of subjective judgement. Given the importance of an individual's research activity in academic career progression, it is reassuring that the system appears, in practice, to permit changing emphasis from one year to another in terms of time allocated to tasks.Research performance has become a prominent tool in allocating funding to universities, and this point is recognised in a later study which examines the facilitation of change at organisation level (Nicholls, Cargill, & Dhir, 2004). A mixed-mode modelling methodology combines ‘hard’ OR techniques (for example, social judgement theory used in attitudinal benchmarking, and integer linear programming in identifying research targets) with ‘soft’ approaches (such as change management tools for shaping culture and behaviour). When applied in an Australian university, this methodology results in increased research activity and output (Nicholls et al., 2004). Given the increasing importance of research performance in the allocation of funding to higher education institutions, the relationship between budget allocation and performance is a context where operational researchers can make useful contributions.Planning and resource allocation models are largely concerned with effectiveness i.e. how can a system (best) achieve desired outcomes? In relating inputs to outputs, these models ignore the possibility that production processes may incorporate inefficiencies. A considerable body of OR and related literature is devoted to the measurement of efficiency in education production. Education provides a particularly interesting context for efficiency evaluation because its institutions are both not-for-profit, making conventional measures of performance (such as financial ratios) inappropriate (Berkner, 1966), and at least in part publicly funded, leading to public interest in obtaining value for money.While early work in the OR literature on performance measurement exists (see, for example, Jauch & Glueck, 1975), funding cuts in times of austerity have been a major stimulus for studies of education performance. The 1980s, for example, saw a burgeoning literature on university performance, where deterministic OLS methods were applied to derive value-added measures of teaching output (Johnes & Taylor, 1987a, 1987b, 1989a, 1989b, 1990), while research performance was measured using publications counts (Jauch & Glueck, 1975). The work on school efficiency, however, eschewed the derivation of school rankings from OLS analyses of aggregate school data. Instead, methods, such as multilevel modelling (MLM) were used. MLM utilises pupil level data in order to isolate measures of school performance which are standardised for pupil achievement on entry to the system and other contextual variables (Aitken & Longford, 1986; Goldstein & Spiegelhalter, 1996; Goldstein & Thomas, 1996; Sammons, Nuttall, & Cuttance, 1993; Woodhouse & Goldstein, 1988).Education institutions, however, can be seen to be multi-product organizations. Institutions of higher education, for example, produce (in simple terms) teaching, research and third mission (the last reflecting universities’ engagement with society). Schools also produce multiple outputs in terms of education in various subject areas, diverse levels and different types (for example, vocational and academic). Measuring performance of a multi-product organization by separately examining production of each output gives rise to problems, one of which is the interpretation of information over several indicators. Multiple-criteria decision analysis is a field of OR which offers tools for application in this context.Information can be synthesised using, for example, principal components analysis (Johnes, 1996), the analytic hierarchy process (Holder, 1990, 1998; Tadisina, Troutt, & Bhasin, 1991), co-plot (Paucar-Caceres & Thorpe, 2005); or a multi-criteria evaluation, such as a portfolio model where weights are based on preferences (Jessop, 2010; Politis & Siskos, 2004). These approaches are not without their problems. Principal components analysis, for example, can result in unacceptable loss of information if the first two components used to represent the information do not account for a large percentage of information. The analytic hierarchy process has the potential problem of rank reversal which can occur with the introduction to (or the removal from) the data set of an institution. This violates the principle of rationality, generally considered desirable in any decision analysis technique, that rank order of observations A and B in a given data set should not be affected by the score of observation C (Holder, 1998). The co-plot approach, used in multi-criteria decision-making, seeks to display in two dimensions the location of observations on the basis of several attributes simultaneously.55For more information see Raveh (2000).It has serious limitations particularly if its underlying assumptions are not satisfied (Mar Molinero & Mingers, 2007). Finally a portfolio model requires knowledge of the preferences of those interested in the evaluation.Another problem with measuring performance using separate indicators relating to each output is that the approach ignores potential synergies in the production of education. Early work which explores jointness in the production of multiple education outputs employs canonical regression analysis (Chizmar & McCarney, 1984; Chizmar & Zak, 1984; Gyimah-Brempong & Gyapong, 1991). While the approach can offer insights into the production process, it does not provide measures of efficiency.66A method of deriving efficiency measures from canonical correlation functions is provided in Ruggiero (1998), although there are no applications of this approach to efficiency measurement in the education context.Data envelopment analysis (DEA) (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984; Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978, 1979) is a non-parametric frontier estimation technique which can handle a production situation with both multiple outputs and multiple inputs, and does not require a priori specification of a functional form. DEA therefore is an alternative tool in the context of multi-criteria decision analysis (Doyle & Green, 1993); it permits more satisfactory representations of production than the early OLS performance models and is superior to the canonical regression approach in that it provides estimates of efficiency.Education has been a popular area of application of DEA; indeed the developers of the method demonstrated its application in this context (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1981); and it is one of the top five areas of application of DEA (Liu, Lu, Lu, & Lin, 2013). DEA and related non-parametric methods continue to be used to derive measures of efficiency in all sectors of education, including: kindergartens and primary schools (Burney, Johnes, Al-Enezi & Al-Musallam, 2013; Mancebón & Mar Molinero, 2000); secondary schools (Bradley, Johnes, & Millington, 2001; Essid, Ouellette, & Vigeant, 2014; Haelermans & De Witte, 2012; Haelermans, De Witte, & Blank, 2012; Haelermans & Ruggiero, 2013; Mancebón, Calero, Choi, & Ximénez-de-Embún, 2012; Mancebón & Muñiz, 2008; Podinovski, Ismail, Bouzdine-Chameeva, & Zhang, 2014; Portela & Camanho, 2010; Portela, Camanho, & Borges, 2012; Ramanathan, 2001; Waldo, 2007); education administrative areas (Fukuyama & Weber, 2002; Grosskopf, Hayes, Taylor, & Weber, 1999, 2001; Grosskopf & Moutray, 2001; Ouellette & Vierstraete, 2010; Rassouli-Currier, 2007; Ray, 1991; Ruggiero, 1996, 1999b, 2000, 2007; Ruggiero, Duncombe, & Miner, 1995; Smith & Mayston, 1987; Thanassoulis & Dunstan, 1994); post-compulsory but pre-higher education (Bradley, Johnes, & Little, 2010; Johnes, Bradley, & Little, 2012); and universities (Bayraktar, Tatoglu, & Zaim, 2013; Beasley, 1990, 1995; De Witte, Rogge, Cherchye, & Van Puyenbroeck, 2013; Dehnokhalaji, Korhonen, Köksalan, Nasrabadi, & Wallenius, 2010; Duh, Chen, Lin, & Kuo, 2012; Fandel, 2007; Giménez & Martínez, 2006; Mar Molinero, 1996; Thanassoulis, Kortelainen, Johnes, & Johnes, 2011). DEA has been used to assess efficiency of individual academic departments or programmes within an institution (Casu, Shaw, & Thanassoulis, 2005; Colbert, Levary, & Shaner, 2000; Kao & Hung, 2008; Kao & Liu, 2000; Moreno & Tadepalli, 2002; Ray & Jeon, 2008), central administration or services across universities (Casu & Thanassoulis, 2006; Simon, Simon, & Arias, 2011), and to make efficiency comparisons across countries of different education systems (Giménez, Prior, & Thieme, 2007), although care should be taken in interpreting the results of the last given that DEA requires all production units to be comparable and to share a common production environment.Some particularly novel applications of DEA to education might be noted. First, DEA has been used to evaluate the performance of individuals (rather than organisations), such as pupils in a school (Thanassoulis, 1999). Application of DEA to individuals within an organization can be extended, however, to produce measures of efficiency of the organization itself, such as a school or university (Cherchye, De Witte, Ooghe, & Nicaise, 2010; Johnes, 2006b; Portela & Thanassoulis, 2001; Thanassoulis & Portela, 2002). Like MLM, this approach allows the effects of individual effort and institutional influence to be disentangled, in this case using a type of meta-frontier approach.77A related study relaxes the underlying DEA assumption of convexity of the production frontier, allows for uncertainty in the data, and applies the non-parametric free-disposal hull approach to pupil-level data to produce estimates of school efficiency (De Witte, Thanassoulis, Simpson, Battisti, & Charlesworth-May, 2010). The results of this approach are compared with the results of applying multi-level modelling. The approaches are found to be complementary in the information they provide to managers.A second example applies DEA in the context of schools which are ‘differentially effective’ with pupils of different ability. The hypothesis is that schools may have different success (or be differentially effective) in raising the attainment of pupils with low compared to high ability. DEA is developed to identify whether or not such differential effectiveness exists, and to identify peers for any institution looking to alter the direction of their differential effectiveness (Thanassoulis, 1996a, 1996b). The method can be used to identify exemplar schools for those institutions which want to alter the bias of their differential effectiveness.Third, the possibility of time lags between inputs into and outputs from the production process (such as observed with research activity and dissemination of research findings) are explored in a dynamic model of university production (Emrouznejad & Thanassoulis, 2005). Fourth, a network DEA (Kao, 2014) is applied in the context of universities each of which is seen as a system in which departments are producing in parallel (Rayeni & Saljooghi, 2010). The decomposition of the university production process into its component parts and application of network DEA is further explored by Johnes (2013). Lastly, DEA is used as a decision-support device to synthesize information produced for different stakeholders into a useable format for each interested party. Examples in the context of applicants to higher education and to university planning are provided, respectively, in Sarrico, Hogan, Dyson, and Athanassopulos (1997) and Sarrico and Dyson (2000).As a deterministic non-parametric approach, DEA has the drawback that there are no conventional tests of significance or methods for drawing inference, and efficiency estimates can be affected by sample size. Particular care should therefore be taken in choosing the inputs and outputs of any DEA model, and the specification should be consistent with the production process being evaluated (Cook, Tone, & Zhu, 2014). In addition, bootstrapping can be applied to produce bias-corrected estimates of efficiency (see, for example, Essid, Ouellette, & Vigeant, 2010 in the context of schools), and hypothesis tests have been developed to assess the significance of specific inputs and/or outputs (see, for example, Johnes, 2006a in the context of universities). Second stage analyses of the determinants of the DEA efficiency scores abound in the education context; the more recent examples apply bootstrapping procedures to the second stage (Cordero-Ferrera, Pedraja-Chaparro, & Santín-González, 2010), and to both the first and second stages (Alexander, Haug, & Jaforullah, 2010).A parallel development in frontier estimation methodology can be found in the econometrics literature (Lovell, 1995) which saw the introduction of stochastic frontier analysis (SFA) (Aigner, Lovell, & Schmidt, 1977; Battese & Corra, 1977; Meeusen & van den Broeck, 1977). SFA is a parametric frontier estimation method, which, as its name implies, allows for stochastic errors in the data. Following a development by Jondrow, Lovell, Materov, and Schmidt (1982) SFA allows the estimation of technical efficiency for each unit of observation. The derivation of efficiency scores combined with estimation of parameters (and hence the potential calculation of economies of scale and scope) means that SFA is particularly popular with education economists. Thus, while numerous applications of SFA to education can be found in the economics and education economics literature (Abbott & Doucouliagos, 2009; Johnes, 2014; Johnes, Johnes, & Thanassoulis, 2008; Johnes & Schwarzenberger, 2011; Kirjavainen, 2012; McMillan & Chan, 2006; Stevens, 2005; Zoghbi, Rocha, & Mattos, 2013) applications are more rare in the OR and management science literature. One explanation is the view that DEA, with its facility to provide benchmarks, is important to managerial decision-making, and hence of relevance to OR. SFA, on the other hand, is used in more policy-oriented applications and hence is perhaps of greater relevance to (education) economists (Lewin & Lovell, 1990; Lovell, 1995). This is to underestimate the versatility of the techniques, however; each approach can offer both policy and managerial insights (see, for example, Thanassoulis et al., 2011), and both are surely of equal interest to operational researchers and economists. The scarcity of SFA applications to education in the OR literature is therefore puzzling.88The accuracy of the SFA decomposition of the total error into inefficiency and a random component has been questioned, and SFA appears to perform similarly to parametric deterministic models when applied to cross section data (Ondrich & Ruggiero, 2001; Ruggiero, 1999a). This might partially explain the reluctance of operational researchers to adopt SFA in education applications.Applications of OR to routing and scheduling problems in the education context are numerous. Examples include the routing and scheduling of buses, the scheduling of courses and examinations, the assignment of pupils to classes and the allocation of students to work groups. The main areas of application are discussed in turn.The transportation of pupils to school99The school bus routing problem is a universal one and examples in this section refer to the USA, and countries in Western and Eastern Europe as well as the Far East.is both a routing problem and, since there are time constraints in terms of school start and finish times, a scheduling problem. Whilst the objective of most routing and scheduling problems is to minimize the cost of providing the service (where costs in this context include vehicle depreciation, fuel and drivers), the school bus routing and scheduling problem must take into account other considerations. These considerations, which are of differing levels of concern to different stakeholders, include: the time spent by pupils en route to and from school; time spent waiting at bus stops; overcrowding on buses; and problems for school staff caused by early arrival at and late departure from schools. These problems are invariably set up in an optimization framework. Small-scale problems can be solved using, for example, integer programming methods (Bektaş & Elmastaş, 2007; Ward, 1964); more often, though, the complexity of these multi-objective leads to use of heuristics in finding a solution (Bodin & Berman, 1979; Corberán, Fernández, Laguna, & Martí, 2002; Gochenour, Fisher, & Byrd, 1980; Li & Fu, 2002; Schultz, 1979; Spada, Bierlaire, & Liebling, 2005). Similar approaches can be applied to the transportation of pupils with special educational needs for whom the gains in terms of reducing the duration of journeys can be particularly beneficial (Russell & Morrel, 1986; Sutcliffe & Boardman, 1990).A similar vehicle routing and scheduling problem is encountered in the delivery of school meals.1010This is a context which is likely to be encountered in only a few countries. In England, however, where free school meals for infants were introduced in September 2014, this issue is likely to be of increasing importance.Constraints include: the earliest time for collecting the meal from the kitchens where the meals are cooked; the earliest and latest time of delivery (to be in line with the school timetable) at the dining centre; the period the meal is in transit; the vehicle capacity; and constraints relating to the vehicle drivers. There is evidence that a heuristic approach to solving these complex and highly constrained problems can be simple to use and reduce costs (Atkinson, 1990).Integer programming techniques have been applied in a related problem area: the optimal allocation of contracts. Instances include the allocation of contracts to providers of school meals (Epstein, Henríquez, Catalán, Weintraub, & Martinez, 2002; Epstein et al., 2004) and to bus companies for the transportation of school pupils (Letchford, 1996). These examples of optimal assignment represent a category of problem which has received extensive attention in the OR literature.There are many situations where ‘elements’ from a population must be assigned to groups, rooms, institutions or time slots. This is an area in which OR tools can be applied with considerable success.The necessity of assigning students to groups is an issue frequently encountered in the day-to-day running of schools and universities. Typically these types of problems involve creating subsets from a population such that the differences between elements within each subset are maximally diverse (Fan, Chen, Ma, & Zeng, 2011). This maximally diverse grouping is a set-partitioning problem (O'Brien & Mingers, 1997). Applications include the assignment of students to classes – for example, forms in schools, seminar groups in universities, or project work groups at any education level – and the allocation of students to university accommodation.The assignment of students to maximally diverse work groups is of increasing importance particularly in business schools where the focus is to encourage team skills in a diverse setting (Gallego, Laguna, Martí, & Duarte, 2013; Weitz & Lakshminarayanan, 1998). In one study, integer programming identifies a set of teams which are academically similar, but where the composition of each team is both functionally diverse and demographically balanced – for example, there is no solitary female and no single international student (Cutshall, Gavirneni, & Schultz, 2007). The programming approach produces teams which both meet the desired criteria and lead to fewer complaints (from students and instructors) compared to previously-used methods. In another example where dissertation students are allocated to seminar streams, goal programming produces groups which meet the preferences of both the students and the seminar organisers (Miyaji, Ohno, & Mine, 1987); when compared with manual assignment to seminars, goal programming results in a more favourable value of the objective function.1111In addition to creating student groups, the goal programming approach has also been successfully used to help construct university committees for dealing with promotions where various rules must be applied in the construction (Ceylan, Saatçioǧlu, & Sepil, 1994), and to assign university faculty to their teaching taking into account preferences for modules and times (Al-Yakoob & Sherali, 2006; Ozdemir & Gasimov, 2004; Schniederjans & Kim, 1987).In creating an assessment and assigning students to groups to undertake that assessment it is not necessarily the students’ (or even the organisers’) ex ante preferences which are important. Rather the assignment of students should be undertaken to create student groups with skill sets that fulfil the requirements of the project (Muller, 1989), including achieving the module learning outcomes.The student assignment problem is sufficiently complex that an integer programming model is not practical because it cannot deliver a solution in an acceptable time limit (Dhar, ranganathan, & Denning, 1990; Weitz & Jelassi, 1992). It is therefore common practice to resort to a heuristic approach1212The efficiency of a number of heuristics is tested and compared in the context of creating student groups (Weitz & Lakshminarayanan, 1998).which will identify a solution in an acceptable time frame; the solution will not be an optimal one but can be guaranteed to be of a certain minimum level of quality. Examples include: creating diverse coursework groups in a university (Reeves & Hickman, 1992; Weitz & Jelassi, 1992); allocating students to their university accommodation (O'Brien & Mingers, 1997); and forming large but balanced tutor groups in a comprehensive school (Baker & Benn, 2001). Advances in heuristics have allowed increasing use of continuous as well as binary characteristics (on which to base the allocation), and the creation of unequal groups. For example, in the case of school tutor groups, the heuristic approach allows groups to be created which are balanced in terms of gender, ability, ethnicity, previous school background and special educational needs. The need for unequal groups is particularly relevant in the context of university accommodation where the size of group is dependent on capacity of shared kitchen which might vary by residence block.Similar programming and heuristics methods can be applied to the allocation of pupils to schools. Much of the early literature is concerned with producing an allocation which minimizes total students’ miles (or time) travelled subject to school and class size constraints, and ethnic composition targets (Belford & Ratliff, 1972; Bovet, 1982; Clarke & Surkis, 1967; McKeown & Workman, 1976; Schoepfle & Church, 1989). The list of desirable targets can become so complex that goal programming might be a more appropriate tool: in addition to pupil travel time and racial balance, schools may need to consider capacity utilization as well as ability and gender balance amongst the pupils (Lee & Moore, 1977; Sutcliffe, Boardman, & Cheshire, 1984). Goal programming can lead to fewer variables and constraints than linear programming, and can incorporate multiple objectives simultaneously (Knutson, Marquis, Ricchiute, & Saunders, 1980).Some studies highlight the link between allocating pupils to schools and higher level school planning (considered in Section 2). Programming methods and decision support systems developed for allocating pupils to schools can indicate those schools which require capacity to be expanded (through additional building), when new schools are required, and the general location of new schools within a district (Gac, Martínez, & Weintraub, 2009). In the context of declining numbers, they can also identify which schools should close (Ferland & Guénette, 1990; Holloway, Wehrung, Zeitlin, & Nelson, 1975; Jennergren, 1980; McKeown & Workman, 1976).1313The role of operational researchers in contributing to decisions and processes surrounding school closure is examined in considerable detail in Mar Molinero (1988, 1993).Educational timetabling encompasses many variants including the timetabling of courses (together with students, teaching staff and rooms) and examinations (with students and venues). Examination and course scheduling give rise to similar problems, although there are some differences between the two (Carter, 1986; de Werra, 1985; Qu & Burke, 2009).1414A related scheduling problem in the education context includes academic conference scheduling. The distinctions between this problem and the examinations and courses timetabling problems are explored in Sampson (2004) and an application can be found in Eglese and Rand (1987).For example, several examinations can take place in one room, or one examination could be split across several venues; a class for a course, on the other hand, must take place in a single room (Burke & Petrovic, 2002). The increasing flexibility offered to students in terms of number and choices of modules raises the importance of course and examination timetabling in schools and universities: an effective examination or course timetabling decision support system can therefore create huge benefits and time savings. The literature devoted to educational timetabling (examination and course) is vast and spans disciplines. The focus here is on studies reported in OR journals. Surveys of examination timetabling can be found in Carter (1986); Carter, Laporte, and Lee (1996); and Qu, Burke, McCollum, Merlot, and Lee (2009).Timetabling can be accomplished using one of seven possible approaches: sequential methods; clustering-based methods; constraint-based methods; meta-heuristic methods; hyper-heuristics; case-based reasoning approaches; and multi-criteria approaches (Abdullah, Ahmadi, Burke, Dror, & McCollum, 2007; Burke & Petrovic, 2002; Carter, 1986).Sequential methods represent timetabling as a graph-colouring problem.1515The link between graph colouring and timetabling is attributed to Welsh and Powell (1967). Overviews can be found in de Werra (1985), Carter (1986), and de Werra (1997).This somewhat simplistic approach is unlikely to represent the examination scheduling problem satisfactorily. In addition to the need to avoid examination conflicts for students, schedulers also face such hard constraints as: a limited time period over which examinations are taken; size of examination venues; resource supplies determined by examination requirements including, for example, computer facilities; sequential scheduling for certain examinations. There may well also be soft constraints such as: spreading examinations for individual students; scheduling examinations of different lengths in the same location.1616See Qu et al. (2009) for a comprehensive list of hard and soft constraints which have been used in the literature.In scheduling courses, hard constraints might be that two classes cannot meet in the same room at the same time, and that no class can be spread across more than one room (Carter & Tovey, 1992). Soft constraints, particularly in a school setting, might relate to the length of time spent in movement between classes (Hinchliffe, 1973); in a university context students and lecturers might be required to have at least (or at most) a given number of days with contact hours (Burke, Mareček, Parkes, & Rudová, 2012). It is imperative that examinations and courses are scheduled such that the hard constraints are met, while it is desirable that the schedule also adheres to the soft constraints. An additional requirement might be that any violations of the soft constraints should be distributed evenly amongst the stakeholders to produce a ‘fair’ timetable (Mühlenthaler & Wanka, 2014).In a sense the scheduling problem is one of achieving feasibility (or a satisficing problem) rather than one of optimization since there is no obvious objective function to be optimized (Johnson, 1993).1717In fact, there are a few studies which address timetabling problems using integer or linear programming to optimize an objective function (Birbas, Daskalaki, & Housos, 1997; Dimopoulou & Miliotis, 2004; Gosselin & Truchon, 1986). But the programming framework can lead to problems of such complexity that solution is by a column generation approach (Papoutsis, Valouxis, & Housos, 2003; Santos, Uchoa, Ochi, & Maculan, 2012; White, 1975).The sequential approach therefore assigns events (examinations or lessons) one by one, starting with those considered the most difficult to schedule, attempting to avoid violating the hard constraints at each stage. Various heuristics have been developed to solve the scheduling problem (Petrovic, Yang, & Dror, 2007), and there are many examples of their application to course and examination scheduling (Balakrishnan, 1991; Burke, Mareček, Parkes, & Rudová, 2010; Burke & Newall, 2004; Carter & Johnson, 2001; Hertz, 1998; Romero, 1982).Sequential methods are easy to use and computationally inexpensive; but the quality of their solutions can be mixed, and they really need to be used with additional methods to improve their performance in practice (Mumford, 2010; Petrovic et al., 2007). Examples of timetabling which combine graph colouring with meta-heuristics (see below) include: Dowsland (1990); Dowsland and Thompson (2005); and Burke, Pham, Qu, and Yellen (2012).Clustering-based (or decomposition) methods break the large timetabling problem into smaller sub-problems (Qu et al., 2009) which can be solved relatively easily. Events are split into sub-groups which satisfy the hard constraints; sub-groups are then assigned to ‘slots’ to satisfy the soft constraints (Burke & Petrovic, 2002).1818Examples of applications to examination scheduling include Lofti and Cerveny (1991); Balakrishnan, Lucena, and Wong (1992); Carter, Laporte, and Chinneck (1994); Carter et al. (1996); and Carter and Johnson (2001).The disadvantage is that the sub-groups are formed and fixed at the start which may result in an unsatisfactory timetable.Constraint-based methods comprise two main approaches: constraint logic programming and constraint satisfaction problem techniques (Mumford, 2010; Qu et al., 2009). Examinations are modelled as a set of discrete variables which can take a finite set of values (such as times and rooms). A set of (hard) constraints is also specified and constraint programming is applied to search for an optimal solution (Brailsford, Potts, & Smith, 1999). An application to course timetabling can be found in Deris, Omatu, Ohta, and Samat (1997). These methods are generally computationally demanding, and, like sequential methods, are most successful when used in combination with other approaches.Meta-heuristic approaches are useful for finding solutions to complex optimization problems. Examples of meta-heuristics used in timetabling include: simulated annealing, genetic and memetic algorithms (including variations such as harmony search algorithm), greedy randomized adaptive search procedure (GRASP), threshold accepting, great deluge algorithm and tabu search (Lara-Velázquez, López-Bracho, Ramírex-Rodríguez, & Yáñez, 2011; Petrovic et al., 2007). These techniques can take account of large numbers of both hard and soft constraints, so they generally provide more satisfactory solutions than other methods, although performance can vary from one problem to another1919A meta-heuristic is often developed in the context of a particular problem (or particular class of problem) and its performance outside of this context can therefore be variable.(Petrovic et al., 2007); and this leads to the downside which is that meta-heuristics can be too problem-specific to be adapted cheaply to other problems (Burke, Kendall, et al., 2003; Burke, Kendall, & Soubeiga, 2003). In any case, the operators of timetabling software such as school and university administrators are unlikely to have the expertise to adapt any meta-heuristic approach to their own specific problem (Pais & Amaral, 2012). Lewis (2007) and Pillay (2014b) provide useful surveys of methods in this category, and there are numerous examples of applications in both the course2020Applications of meta-heuristics to course timetabling include: Barham and Westwood (1978); Tripathy (1980); Abramson (1991); Hertz (1991); Costa (1994); Alvarez-Valdes, Martin, and Tamarit (1996); Wright (1996); Abramson, Krishnamoorthy, and Dang (1999); Dimopoulou and Miliotis (2001); Mirrazavi, Mardle, and Tamiz (2003); Aladag, Hocaoglu, and Basaran (2009); Beligiannis, Moschopoulos, and Likothanassis (2009); De Causmaecker, Demeester, and Vanden Berghe (2009); Moura and Scaraficci (2010); Zhang, Liu, M'Hallah, and Leung (2010); Al-Betar and Khader (2012); Burke, Mareček, et al. (2012); Geiger (2012); Pais and Amaral (2012); da Fonseca, Santos, Toffolo, Brito, and Souza (2014); Lewis and Thompson (2015).and examinations2121Applications of meta-heuristics to examinations timetabling include: Johnson (1990); Thompson and Dowsland (1998); Dimopoulou and Miliotis (2001); White, Xie, and Zonjic (2004); Abdullah et al. (2007); Burke, Eckersley, McCollum, Petrovic, and Qu (2010); Özcan, Misir, Ochoa, and Burke (2010); Turabieh and Abdullah (2011); Al-Betar, Khader, and Doush (2014).timetabling contexts.Multi-criteria approaches visualise the examination timetabling problem as having a range of optimisation criteria rather than a single one. In a single criterion approach, the weighted costs of violations of different (soft) constraints are used to measure the quality of possible solutions. In practice, different constraints are of varying importance to different parties, but sums of costs fail to reflect this. The multi-criteria approach overcomes this problem by treating each constraint as a criterion to which a specific level of importance is assigned. Thus this approach provides insights into the timetabling problem and offers a degree of flexibility which is not provided by other methods (Burke & Petrovic, 2002). Applications to courses and examinations timetabling include: Wood and Whitaker (1998); Burke, Bykov, and Petrovic (2000); Huédé, Grabisch, Labreuche, and Savéant (2006); Beyrouthy et al. (2009).Case-based reasoning (CBR) uses past experience to solve new problems (Petrovic et al., 2007). All previously solved examples (timetables in this case) are saved in the computer memory and a new problem is solved by using solutions to similar past problems. CBR therefore generates a new solution to a new problem using an old case which is most similar to the new context. The new problem and new solution are then retained in the computer memory for future use. CBR methods have been shown to outperform graph heuristic methods (in terms of costs of constraint violations), but their success depends on the number and complexity of cases stored (Burke & Petrovic, 2002). Applications of CBR can be found in both the course and examinations timetabling context (Burke, MacCarthy, Petrovic, & Qu, 2006; Petrovic et al., 2007).Hyper-heuristics have their roots in the field of artificial intelligence. They are search methods for choosing, combining or adapting simpler heuristics (or components of heuristics) to address complex problems and have been growing in popularity in the context of examination and lesson timetabling (Pillay, 2012; Qu & Burke, 2009; Qu et al., 2009) where continuous educational reform and numerous constraints unique to each problem make for highly intricate cases. By operating on a search space of heuristics rather than a search space of solutions, hyper-heuristics have the potential to find the appropriate algorithm (rather than solution) for a specific problem (Burke et al., 2013) and so have much more general applicability than meta-heuristics (Petrovic et al., 2007). The interested reader should consult Pillay (2014a) for a comprehensive survey of the hyper-heuristics literature in the context of educational timetabling. The remainder of this section focuses on the OR literature.Hyper-heuristics offer considerable potential for application in the context of timetabling and so we briefly consider some different categories. Burke, Hyde, et al. (2010) propose a classification of hyper-heuristics along two dimensions as illustrated in Fig. 1. One dimension defines the source of feedback during learning, while the other describes the nature of the heuristic search space. The source of feedback depends on whether hyper-heuristics are non-learning (they do not learn from feedback from the search process) or learning. Non-learning hyper-heuristics are likely to be the least useful in the timetabling context. Learning hyper-heuristics can be online, where the learning happens while the heuristic is solving an instance of the problem, or offline, in which case the learning is from a set of trials and leads to an approach which will generalise to unseen problems. Evidence suggests that algorithms with online learning outperform those which learn offline (Soria-Alcaraz et al., 2014).The second and orthogonal dimension is the nature of the search space and can be divided into (i) heuristic selection: automated methodologies for choosing existing heuristics, and (ii) heuristic generation: automated methodologies for generating new heuristics from components of existing heuristics. Whilst the ‘methodologies’ are often heuristics, they need not be; indeed an approach such as CBR (discussed previously) has been effectively used in this way in the timetabling context (see Burke, Petrovic, & Qu, 2006 for an example in the context of university course and examination timetabling).The search space dimension can be further divided into a second level which distinguishes between the classes of lower level heuristics used in the hyper-heuristic framework. These can be described as construction or perturbation heuristics.2222We therefore have four types of hyper-heuristics along this dimension: selection construction; selection perturbation; generation construction; and generation perturbation.Construction heuristics, as their name implies, construct or build up to a solution from an empty solution set. Thus the hyper-heuristic framework is supplied with a set of construction heuristics and the goal is to select and apply the heuristic which is most appropriate at each decision point.The graph-colouring problem lends itself to solution by selection construction hyper-heuristics; indeed, the effectiveness of such hyper-heuristics has been demonstrated in the context of both examination and course timetabling (Burke, McCollum, Meisels, Petrovic, & Qu, 2007; Qu & Burke, 2009). A detailed examination of the characteristics of the heuristic search space of selection construction hyper-heuristics demonstrates why these are effective in solving educational timetabling problems: essentially the landscape of the heuristic search space is globally convex indicating that an optimal solution is not isolated but surrounded by many local minima (Ochoa, Qu, & Burke, 2009). Generation construction hyper-heuristics have also been shown to perform satisfactorily in terms of quality of solution and speed and ease of operation in the educational timetabling setting (Burke & Newall, 2004; Pillay & Banzhaf, 2009).In contrast to construction heuristics, perturbation heuristics start with a complete solution and try iteratively to improve on that solution. In this case the hyper-heuristic framework is supplied with a set of neighbourhood structures or simple local searchers. These are iteratively selected and applied to the current solution until a predetermined stopping condition is reached (see, for example, Burke, Kendall, & Soubeiga, 2003). The effectiveness of selection perturbation hyper-heuristics in the context of examination and course timetabling has been examined in a number of studies (Burke, Kendall, Mısır, & Özcan, 2012; Burke, Qu, & Soghier, 2014; Kheiri, Özcan, & Parkes, 2014; Moscato & Cotta, 2003; Soria-Alcaraz et al., 2014). Research into generation perturbation hyper-heuristics as applied to education timetabling problems is difficult to find in the OR literature and this is a gap which could usefully be filled in future work.Timetabling is an issue faced by education institutions around the world, and yet there is still a gap between the theory of timetabling and practical applications by education administrators. This is partly because the education systems are continuously undergoing reform (and so the requirements of practical applications are constantly changing), and also because each empirical problem has a different and complex set of constraints. Hyper-heuristics aim to provide a general approach which can be applied to any problem, but as yet they are not in common use in practice. Data-sharing might speed up the transition from research into hyper-heuristics into their practical use. For example, using as a base the different timetabling systems faced in five countries – Australia, England, Finland, Greece and the Netherlands – Post et al. (2012) develop and share an Extensible Markup Language (XML) format of the general timetabling problem. The facilitation of such data exchange between researchers and practitioners in the field could lead to a narrowing of the gap currently observed between the theory and practice of timetabling (McCollum & Burke, 2014; McCollum, McMullan, & Parkes, 2012).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
