@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Outsource planning through option contracts with demand and cost uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An outsourcing model considering both demand and cost uncertainty is investigated.Supply orders are analyzed according to wholesale price and option contracts.Closed form formulas are presented to determine optimal exercised options.Equations in which optimal initial and option orders hold are explored.The investigated model is applicable for seasonal and innovative products.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Outsource planning,Option contract,Demand/Cost uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research considers a supply chain consisting of one supplier and one manufacturer that produces a kind of product, e.g. innovative products, with a long supply lead-time, a short selling season and a stochastic demand. Complete production of the final product requires both an initial and a final processing operation. The manufacturer performs the initial processing operation with a deterministic cost. The final processing operation may be either performed by the manufacturer or assigned to an outside firm through a bid process. At the time of the supply contract, the final processing cost (FPC) is estimated as a stochastic variable. The uncertainty on FPC is removed before the selling season starts. The present study is an attempt to determine how the manufacturer should place the supply orders within the framework of wholesale price, put, call and bidirectional options. Option contracts provide the manufacturer with the flexibility to adjust his initial orders by exercising purchased options after the FPC is realized. We find optimal exercised orders with each option contract, in addition to equations in which the optimal initial and option orders hold. According to our analysis, if the realized FPC is higher (lower) than a specific level, the manufacturer should decrease (increase) his initial orders. We obtain analytically these specific levels under all types of option contracts. The numerical analysis and managerial insights shed light on the value of option contracts considering different parameter settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are several practical motivations for investigating outsource planning under information uncertainty such as demand or cost uncertainty. Long supply lead times generally occur with industries that are involved in the production of innovative products such as apparel, toys, consumer electronics, personal computers, and seasonal products (Liu, Chen, Li, & Zhai, 2014; Wang, Chu, Wangc, & Kumakiri, 2012). In such industries, outsourcing decisions, like supply orders, should be made well in advance of the selling season with stochastic demands. This is while at the time of placing supply orders, especially when the technology is new or when a new manufacturer enters into the market, it is difficult to evaluate the technology, development, and processing costs or even the selling price. Thus, there is some uncertainty with some of the information, such as demand or processing costs in the next stages, that affects outsourcing. Predicting such information is extremely difficult, if not impossible, making outsourcing decisions even more complicated to the extent that serious consideration and in-depth analysis will be required.Another practical motivation for investigating outsourcing in cases of uncertainty comes from manufacturing firms that discharge part of their processing operations to an outside firm due to lack of production capacity or expertise. Usually, the outside firm is selected through a bidding process, in which potential bidders submit their bid proposals. One of the most important features of proposals from the viewpoint of the client manufacturing firm is the cost of processing operations by the successful contractor. This cost which accounts for part of the expenses borne by the manufacturing firm toward a final product remains unknown until the bidding process is finalized and the winning contractor is selected. On the other hand, the client manufacturing firm usually has to decide on how the raw materials are to be supplied before the bidding documents are prepared. The winning contractors’ cost proposal may be so high that the business becomes non-profitable for the client manufacturing firm. Thus, the processing costs proposed by the potential contractor is a type of uncertain information that has a direct bearing on the manufacturer's profit and, thereby, on decisions about outsourcing. Real world cases for such situations come from companies that make use of procurement auctions, such as SUN Microsystems, Hewlett–Packard (HP), IBM, Samsung, and Lucent (Hohner et al., 2003; Morales & Steinberg, 2014).An appropriate ordering policy for outsourcing in cases where there is an information uncertainty is to use option contracts. These contracts usually have two stages: an initial order is placed to be readjusted at a second stage. According to this type of contract, at the time of placing a supply order, a firm can purchase options in addition to initial orders in order to obtain the flexibility of adjusting its orders later. Depending on the type of option contract (i.e., put, call, or bidirectional), the firm with updated information decides about the options to be exercised. A put (call) option contract provides the firm with the flexibility to decrease (increase) its initial order while a bidirectional one provides the flexibility to either decrease or increase the initial order. Zhao, Ma, Xie, and Cheng, (2013) emphasized that bidirectional options are the preferable and the more complete form of option contracts. Such contracts have been extensively used in various industries such as fashion apparel, toys, and electronics (Barnes-Schuster, Bassok, & Anupindi, 2002; Eppen & Iyer, 1997; Zhao, Wang, Cheng, Yang, & Huang, 2010).In this study, regarding the practical cases mentioned, we considered a two echelon supply chain consisting of one supplier and one manufacturer. The manufacturer performs a preprocessing and a final processing operation on the outsourced materials. The final processing operation may be performed by an outside firm as well. The cost of the preprocessing operation is deterministic while the FPC is uncertain at the time of the supply contract. The uncertainty with FPC is removed after some time, usually before the selling season starts. Once the selling season has started, the stochastic market demand for the manufacturer's products emerges. Thus, the manufacturer faces the two uncertainties of market demand and FPC at the time of outsourcing. Flexible supply contracts with options have been proposed to such firms with long lead-times, short selling seasons, and high demand uncertainties (Wang et al., 2012). The contracts are beneficial to both parties. In order to effectively respond to lean production and retailing, suppliers need to rely on flexible production (Abernathy, Dunlop, Hammond, & Weil, 2000). Thus, in this research, we focus on option contracts.Our study has two main contributions. First, we develop an outsourcing model for the manufacturer to see how he should place supply orders in cases where both FPC and customer's demand are uncertain. Along this line, we develop different types of option contracts to reduce the impact of cost uncertainty, while demand uncertainty is incorporated into the model as a regular newsvendor problem. In addition, the model thus developed has the ability to be used for the case of price uncertainty instead of FPC uncertainty. Second, we determine optimal supply order quantities for the manufacturer under all option contracts and shed light on the value of option contracts considering different parameter settings in our illustrative numerical analysis.Further, we investigate the manufacturer's decisions in two stages under call, put and bidirectional options. In the first stage, the manufacturer has to make decisions on the initial and option orders so as to maximize his expected profit. In the second stage, when the manufacturer realizes the exact value of FPC, he should decide how much of the options available to him should be exercised. After exercising the options, the manufacturer performs a preprocessing operation on the outsourced materials and prepares them for the selling season. We explore analytically closed form formulas for the optimal options exercised. According to our analysis, if the realized FPC is higher (lower) than a specific level, the manufacturer should decrease (increase) his initial orders. We will obtain analytically these specific levels under all option contracts. Also, equations are obtained in which optimal initial and option orders hold. Managerial insight into the value of option contracts are highlighted by a numerical analysis.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the studies relevant to our research are reviewed. In Section 3, the problem and its assumptions are described. Section 4 investigates the supply orders according to wholesale price and different types of option contracts. Section 5 includes the numerical analysis and managerial insights. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
