@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid algorithms for the vehicle routing problem with clustered backhauls and 3D loading constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper deals with a new integrated routing and loading problem (3L-VRPCB).3L-VRPCB integrates vehicle routing with clustered backhauls and packing of 3D items.Two metaheuristics are proposed based on neighborhood search and tree search.Both metaheuristics are tested by means of 95 new 3L-VRPCB benchmark instances.Better metaheuristic shows also good results for well-known instances of 3L-CVRP.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Vehicle routing with clustered backhauls,Large neighborhood search,Variable neighborhood search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we extend the vehicle routing problem with clustered backhauls (VRPCB) to an integrated routing and three-dimensional loading problem, called VRPCB with 3D loading constraints (3L-VRPCB). In the VRPCB each customer is either a linehaul or a backhaul customer and in each route all linehaul customers must be visited before any backhaul customer. In the 3L-VRPCB, each customer demand is given as a set of 3D rectangular items (boxes) and the vehicle capacity is replaced by a 3D loading space. Moreover, some packing constraints, e.g. concerning stacking of boxes, are also integrated. A set of routes of minimum total length has to be determined such that each customer is visited once. For each route two packing plans have to be provided that stow all boxes of all visited linehaul and backhaul customers, respectively, taking into account the additional packing constraints. We propose two hybrid algorithms for solving the 3L-VRPCB, each of them consisting of a routing and a packing procedure. The routing procedures follow different metaheuristic strategies (large vs. variable neighborhood search) and in both algorithms a tree search heuristic is responsible for packing boxes. Extensive computational experiments were carried out using 95 3L-VRPCB benchmark instances that were derived from well-known VRPCB instances. Good results are also achieved for the capacitated vehicle routing problem with 3D loading constraints as a special case of the 3L-VRPCB.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Integrated vehicle routing and loading problems arise in transportation logistics if companies are interested in optimizing both the routing of vehicles and the corresponding loading of goods. In 2006, Gendreau et al. first formulated and solved an integrated routing and loading problem, namely the capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP) with three-dimensional (3D) loading constraints (abbreviated as 3L-CVRP). In contrast to the classical CVRP, customer demands are represented as sets of parallelepipeds (called boxes) and the scalar capacity of a vehicle is replaced by a 3D rectangular loading space. Moreover, several packing constraints often occurring in real-world settings, e.g. concerning the stacking of goods, are taken into account. Meanwhile, other solution methods have been proposed for the 3L-CVRP as well as for the related routing and loading problem with time windows (see Section 2). However, not all basic routing problems (cf. Toth & Vigo, 2002) have been combined with a 3D loading problem so far.One of them is the vehicle routing problem with backhauls (VRPB) that includes two types of customers, namely linehaul customers that receive goods from a central depot and backhaul customers that send goods back to the depot. We focus on the VRPB variant with clustered backhauls (cf. Parragh, Doerner, & Hartl, 2008). Each customer is either a linehaul customer or a backhaul customer. One has to determine a set of routes for a given number of homogeneous vehicles such that each customer demand is satisfied and the total traveled distance is minimized. The routes have to satisfy the following constraints:(1)Each customer is visited exactly one time.Each route starts and ends at the central depot.Each route contains at least one linehaul customer.In each route all linehaul customers are visited before the backhaul customers (if any).The capacity of the vehicles has to be taken into account, i.e., neither the sum of the (scalar) demands of the linehaul customers nor the sum of the demands of the backhaul customers can exceed the vehicle capacity.Each vehicle performs just one trip, i.e. the number of routes is given by the number of vehicles.In this paper, we extend the vehicle routing problem with clustered backhauls (VRPCB) to an integrated routing and loading problem, called VRPCB with 3D loading constraints (3L-VRPCB). Applications of the VRPCB can be found, e.g. in the distribution of groceries and in the handling of returnable bottles (cf. Ropke & Pisinger, 2006b). Extending the VRPCB to an integrated routing and loading problem leads to a more realistic modeling for practical routing scenarios with backhauls.Our approach is similar to Gendreau, Iori, Laporte, and Martello (2006); in particular the VRPCB is combined with the same packing constraints as the CVRP. We then propose two hybrid algorithms for the 3L-VRPCB each consisting of two separate procedures for routing and packing. For the first hybrid algorithm the routing procedure by Ropke and Pisinger (2006a) for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows (PDPTW) has been adopted that is based on the Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) metaheuristic. For the second hybrid algorithm a Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) routing procedure has been developed. Both hybrid algorithms integrate the 3D packing procedure by Bortfeldt (2012) that performs an incomplete tree search (TRS).Extensive computational experiments have been conducted by means of 95 new 3L-VRPCB benchmark instances that were derived from the well-known VRPCB instances by Goetschalckx and Jacobs-Blecha (1989) and by Toth and Vigo (1997), respectively.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the relevant literature is discussed. The 3L-VRPCB is formulated in Section 3. The proposed hybrid algo rithms are described in Section 4. Section 5 is dedicated to the computational experiments. First, new benchmark instances for the 3L-VRPCB are introduced and the hybrid algorithms are calibrated. Then the numerical results are presented and analyzed. In Section 6, some conclusions are drawn and future research directions are proposed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
