@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operations–finance interface models: A literature review and framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A “closed-loop view” of operations-finance interfaces is introduced.We present a risk management framework to integrate analytical operations–finance interface models.Ten dimensions are examined to specify integration conditions between operations and finance.Categorizations of operational hedging and financial flexibility are proposed.We link the topics on relationship analysis and approach choice of integrated risk management.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Operations–finance interface,Supply chain management,Operational hedging,Financial flexibility,Risk management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Operations management aims to match the supply with demand of material flows, whereas corporate finance seeks to match the supply with demand of monetary flows. These two supply–demand matching processes are connected by real investment and revenue management in a “closed-loop” of resources. We propose a risk management framework for multidimensional integration of operations–finance interface models. Ten aspects are examined to specify conditions under which firms should integrate operations and finance. We present categorizations of operational hedging and financial flexibility. By linking relationship analysis (complements or substitutes) and approach choice (centralization or decentralization) of integrated risk management, we find that: (i) Zero interaction effects between operations and finance lead to decentralization. (ii) Operations and finance should be centralized even if they are partial substitutes.Operations and finance are two sides of the same coin. Operations management sets the backbone of financial performance, and corporate finance supports real investment in operations. Explorations of the relationship between operations and finance began with the Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem, which states the separation property between operations and finance in perfect capital markets. According to this theorem, financial hedging can enhance firm value only by reducing (i) taxes, (ii) contracting costs, or by (iii) affecting real investments in operations (Smith and Stulz, 1985). Moreover, there might be value creation by (iv) financial hedging of operational risk (Gaur and Seshadri, 2005).In this paper, we introduce a closed-loop view (see Fig. 1) to highlight operations–finance interfaces in a cycle of material, financial, and information flows. These three types of resource flows can be called the Three Bs: Boxes, bucks, and bytes. Operations management matches supply with demand of material flows to optimize profit (Cachon and Terwiesch, 2013). Meanwhile, corporate finance enables a better alignment between supply and demand of monetary flows to fund value-enhancing investments (Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein, 1994). In addition, managing information flows can improve the supply–demand matching of material and financial flows. The two supply–demand matching processes are connected by real investment and revenue management as a “closed-loop”. Real investment in operations (e.g., infrastructure, human resources, technology, R&D, procurement, marketing, sales and services) can transform capital into material to meet customer demand and thererby enhance a firm’s strategic positioning; revenue management converts product demand into cash flow to achieve operational effectiveness (Porter, 1985; 1996). In practice, various sources of uncertainty may lead to supply–demand mismatches in this closed-loop. In order to generate a “virtuous” operations–finance cycle (marked in Fig. 1 by counterclockwise arrow), firms can adopt both operational hedging and financial flexibility to match supply with demand. In other words, to gain a sustainable competitive advantage in core competencies, firms integrate operations and finance in risk management and thereby boost the “metabolism” of the closed-loop.Operational flexibility typically adapts the type, timing, and quantity of the material flows in an activity network contingent on realizations of uncertainty. Operational hedging is defined as “real (compound) options that are exercised in response to demand, price and exchange rate contingencies faced by firms in a global supply chain context” (Huchzermeier, 1991), where real options consist of the ability to “defer, expand, contract, abandon, or otherwise alter a project at different stages during its useful operating life” (Trigeorgis, 1993). Another definition of operational hedging is “mitigating risk by counterbalancing actions in the processing network that do not involve financial instruments...may include various types of processing flexibility” (van Mieghem, 2003). In this paper, we use the terms operational hedging and operational flexibility interchangeably.In contrast, financial flexibility is defined as “the ability of a firm to access and restructure its financing at a low cost” (Gamba and Triantis, 2008). Financial flexibility can transfer monetary flows across time, markets, and organizations from voluntary to binding positions through various financial instruments. A financial instrument is “a contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity and a financial liability or equity instrument of another entity” (IFRS, 2012). Financial flexibility also incorporates recapitalization to match supply with demand of monetary flows and financial hedging of cash flow volatility, where financial hedging is “hedging that uses counterbalancing positions in financial derivative instruments” (van Mieghem, 2003) and a financial derivative is “an instrument whose value depends on, or is derived from, the value of another asset” (Hull, 2012).The closed-loop view of operations–finance interfaces can be interpreted from two perspectives. On the one hand, resources flow across operational and financial units in an enterprise; on the other hand, resources flow across operational and financial partners in a supply chain. The former view leads to enterprise risk management (ERM), or “the ongoing proactive process of adopting a holistic approach across the enterprise to all the uncertainty which may affect either positively or negatively the achievement of its key purposes and objectives, leading to action to achieve greater business robustness and flexibility, efficient risk taking and an appropriate risk-reward balance” (ICE/FIA, 2009). In contrast, the latter view results in supply chain risk management (SCRM), i.e., “the management of supply chain risks through coordination or collaboration among the supply chain partners so as to ensure profitability and continuity” (Tang, 2006). In this paper, we define integrated risk management as “the joint analysis, synthesis, and optimization of operational and financial risk management across functional units in an enterprise and across supply chain partners”. Here, integration refers to (i) the joint identification/analysis of operational and financial risks; (ii) the synthesis of operations management and corporate finance (cf. Meulbroek, 2002); and (iii) the unification of value-based management (flexibility/growth) and risk management (hedging/mitigation).Traditionally, integrated risk management is the domain of a firm’s CEO and CFO (Buehler, Freeman, and Humle, 2008). However, a recent SCM World survey (Lee, O’Marah, and John, 2012) reports that chief supply chain officer (CSCO) positions have been created and have become an integral part of corporate risk management; which can lead to a C-level trilateral interaction (see Fig. 1) for integrated operations–finance optimization to enhance the firm’s competitive advantage.Over the last 20 years, a growing body of literature has focused on operations–finance interfaces. This research proposes conditions under which firms should integrate both functions within an enterprise and across a supply chain—which leads to ERM and SCRM, respectively—to create higher value; it also proposes ways to jointly optimize operational hedging and financial flexibility under intricate risk exposures (cf. Birge, Kouvelis, and Seppi, 2007).Despite the emerging research on the interfaces of operations, finance, and risk management, relatively little attention has been devoted to review this stream of literature or to develop a framework for integrated risk management. Kouvelis, Dong, Boyabatli, and Li (2012a) propose an action-based framework for supply chain risk management and discuss directions for future research on integrated operations–finance risk management without reviewing the literature. The authors identify that “a future challenge is to develop a robust classification of operational hedging strategies with their structural properties relevant for a multitude of operational settings.” van Mieghem (2012) provides an overview of risk management and operational hedging techniques. The author also briefly discusses the integrated financial and operational hedging by numerical examples. Bandaly, Satir, Kahyaoglu, and Shanker (2012) present a supply chain risk management framework and typology, where operational hedging strategies are classified in avoidance, prevention, and mitigation approaches. However, a rigorous literature review on operations–finance interfaces is missing in the above research. Our paper contributes by reviewing operations–finance interface models and proposing an integrated risk management framework including classification of operational hedging strategies.Closest to our research is a literature review by Bandaly, Satir, Kahyaoglu, and Shanker (2013), which classifies (respectively) operational, financial, and integrated approaches of analytical and empirical research in supply chain risk management. Our review differs from theirs in three key aspects. First, we concentrate on the integrated approach and review analytical operations–finance interface models more extensively. In other words, we focus on a larger set of analytical models with integrated approach. Second, we introduce a closed-loop view of resources to highlight the interactions between operations and finance. Third, we cover the important topic on centralized versus decentralized approach to integrated risk management, and link this with the relationship analysis (complements or substitutes) between operations and finance. An overview of related literature and new contributions is shown in Table 1.In sum, this paper attempts to fill these gaps in literature by addressing the following research questions:(i)When should firms adopt integrated operations–finance risk management?How to classify operational hedging and financial flexibility strategies?What is the link between decision criteria for relationship analysis (complements/substitutes) and approach choice (centralization/decentralization)?The goals of our paper are five-fold. First, we introduce a “closed-loop” view of resources by a cycle of material, financial, and information flows. Second, we present a risk management framework for multidimensional integration of operations–finance interface models.11Provided the vast literature on operations–finance interfaces, we restrict our attention to representative analytical models on integrated risk management in top-tier journals to provide an overview.Third, 10 aspects are examined to specify the conditions under which firms should integrate operations and finance. Fourth, we propose categorizations of operational hedging and financial flexibility. Fifth, we link relationship analysis (complements or substitutes) and approach choice (centralization or decentralization) to show that: (i) Zero interaction effects between operations and finance lead to decentralization. (ii) Operations and finance should be centralized even if they are partial substitutes.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we propose an integrated risk management framework. Based on this framework, Sections 3–6 classify operations–finance interface models following a four-step process: Identify operational and financial risks, specify integration conditions, select operational hedging and financial flexibility, and integrated optimization. We conclude in Section 7 by discussing possible directions for future research.In order to ensure the accessibility of this review for both academic researchers and industry practitioners, we present a tailored framework for integrated risk management based on the generic approach of ISO 31000 (ISO, 2008) in Fig. 2to classify operations–finance interface models.Input to integrated risk management includes clear definitions of risk management objectives, where various performance measures—for example, organic sales growth, adjusted earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) margin, and adjusted earnings per share (EPS) growth (Rorsted and Knobel, 2012)—can be employed. Toward that end, risk data is collected and risk information is continuously updated with respect to the enterprise and supply chain context. Integrated risk management follows seven steps: (1) Identify risks and their interdependence, (2) specify integration conditions, (3) select operational hedging and financial flexibility, and (4) integrated optimization with relationship analysis (complements/substitutes) and approach choice (centralization/decentralization). We shall present detailed elaborations of steps (1)–(4) in Sections 3–6 to systematically review operations–finance interface models.Next, (5) implementation aims to cascade integrated risk management framework in firms’ strategies, tactics, and operations. (6) Monitoring and review specifies and measures responsibilities and performance metrics for integrated risk management at the corporate, business unit, and functional levels. (7) Continuous improvement takes a top-down and bottom-up iterative approach to ensure the consistency and effectiveness of risk management steps through verification, modification, and validation (marked in Fig. 2 by three types of arrows). Verification adjusts the realized risk management process to assure consistency with pre-specified objectives; modification enhances a previous risk management step with respect to feedback from the subsequent one; and validation ensures the effectiveness of risk management steps in response to input updates. The above three procedures connect the seven steps of integrated risk management as a “waterfall” model with continuous improvement. The target output of integrated risk management incorporates the firm’s enhanced competitive advantage in its core competencies, coordination between operations and finance, as well as established risk management benchmarks.Risk identification aims to screen, categorize, and document various sources of uncertainty. In this paper, we concentrate on two major types of risk: Operational risk and financial risk (see Table 2). Operational risk refers to uncertain time, quantity, and price in supply, processing, and demand management. Financial risk is “the possibility that the actual outcome is likely to diverge from the expected value” (Sharpe, 1985). Based on literature survey, we classify operational risk in three categories using a process view (i.e., supply, processing, and demand risks) and financial risk in two categories: Endogenous financial risk includes credit and liquidity risks, which are uncertainties in corporate financing due to market imperfections. Exogenous financial risk refers to the uncertainties arising from volatile prices in financial market. This categorization also amplifies the interdependence between operational and financial risks, as we shall elaborate next.Interdependence among operational and financial risks incentivizes firms to adopt integrated risk management. Operations–finance interface models have identified three types of interdependence (marked in Table 2 by superscripts i, ii, and iii, respectively): (i) Financial constraints on operations, (ii) correlation between operational and financial risks, and (iii) alternative risk mitigation. The first two types are embedded in the two conversion processes between material and financial flows in the closed-loop (see Fig. 1): Real investment and revenue management. Whereas the third type lies in operational mitigation of financial risk and financial hedging of operational risk.Financial constraints on operations refers to the bottlenecks in real investment due to market imperfections, i.e., budget constraints and costs associated with taxes, financial distress, bankruptcy, and capital. To avoid suboptimal operations (e.g., underinvestment), financial hedging and liquidity management addresses these restrictions and thereby maximizes firm value. For instance, capital constraints on newsvendor procurement can be alleviated by bank loans that achieve channel coordination (Dada and Hu, 2008). Financial distress and bankruptcy risk can be jointly mitigated by liquidity management and operational hedging (Gamba and Triantis, 2014). External loan financing and production technology decisions can be jointly optimized under budget constraints and a fixed bankruptcy cost (Boyabatli and Toktay, 2011).Correlation between operational and financial risks leads to a stronger link between operations and finance in revenue management. For example, the correlation between demand uncertainty and an economic or financial variable can result in joint operational and financial hedging (Mello, Parsons, and Triantis, 1995). The magnitude of correlation between demand and exchange rates can determine the optimal capacity and financial hedging decisions (Chen, Li, and Wang, 2014). The correlated demand uncertainty with asset prices enables financial hedging of inventory risk, where the level of correlation affects the reduction in profit variance due to hedging (Gaur and Seshadri, 2005). Another type of correlation can be detected between operational price risk and economic or financial variables. Price risk can be operational or financial because it may influence either type of costs. Operational price risk refers to uncertain input and output prices that influence operational costs, whereas financial price risk is the price uncertainty of assets and derivatives in financial markets. For instance, the dependence of input price on financial market movements leads to joint procurement and financial hedging (Caldentey and Haugh, 2009).Alternative risk mitigation consists of operational hedging of financial risk and financial hedging of operational risk. First, financial risk such as exchange rate uncertainty can be hedged operationally via real options and financially by currency derivatives (Ding, Dong, and Kouvelis, 2007). Second, operational risk that is commonly verifiable can be mitigated financially by insurance, which argues for joint insurance and operations management. For example, disruption risk can be managed by incorporating contingent supply, inventory, and business interruption insurance (Dong and Tomlin, 2012). Third, price uncertainty that is both operational and financial motivates integrated risk management, e.g., commodity price risk can be managed by long- and short-term contracting and by financial hedging via commodity derivatives (Kouvelis, Li, and Ding, 2012b).Given the identified risks and their interdependence, one natural question arises: Under which conditions (i.e., prerequisites and outcomes) should firms integrate operations and finance? Owing to the heterogeneity between operational hedging and financial flexibility, operations–finance interface models have examined 10 dimensions to specify integration conditions: (1) Source of uncertainty, (2) timing, (3) availability, (4) value, (5) risk, (6) cost, (7) organizational structure, (8) supply chain structure, (9) information structure, and (10) capital structure. For ease of exposition, we classify the above 10 dimensions into three categories: Feasibility (1–3), trade-offs (4–6), and structure (7–10); see Table 3.To start with, firms integrate operational and financial strategies when both are feasible with respect to source of uncertainty, timing, and availability. Source of uncertainty determines the specific choices of operational hedging and financial flexibility, and the type of interdependence between operational and financial risks (see Section 3) can also affect the feasibility of a strategy–instrument portfolio. Operational strategy is more effective in mitigating operational or competitive risks, whereas financial instruments can provide a better hedge against financial and transactional risks. For instance, the presence of uncertain demand and exchange rates can lead to integrated production flexibility and financial hedging (Chowdhry and Howe, 1999). Market risk can be fully hedged even in a partially complete financial market; however, demand uncertainty is private risk that can be hedged only by inventory management, not by financial instruments (Chen, Sim, Simchi-Levi, and Sun, 2007). Similar results are derived by comparing the relative effectiveness of operational and financial hedging in mitigating demand and currency risks (Ding et al., 2007).The timing alignment of operational and financial decisions can also affect the feasibility of integrated risk management. Operational flexibility takes time to develop, whereas shorter maturities allow financial hedging to be implemented in a more timely manner. Thus, a financial instrument can serve as a buffer before implementing the operational strategies under risk exposure (Hommel, 2003). Integrated risk management typically requires that the planning horizons of operations and finance be aligned; this can be accomplished by dynamic financial hedging in each period within long-term operational planning (Zhu and Kapuscinski, 2011). The type of interdependence between operational and financial risks (see Table 2) can influence the relative timing of operational and financial decisions: (i) Financial constraints on operations in real investment can result in an ex ante or simultaneous financing via cash or supply chain instruments (see Table 5), such as bank loan, trade credit, and factoring (Yang and Birge, 2010). (ii) Correlation of operational and financial risks in revenue management typically requires ex post or simultaneous financial hedging (Ding et al., 2007). (iii) Alternative risk mitigation can result in financial decisions that are ex ante in the case of business interruption insurance (Dong and Tomlin, 2012).Moreover, availability of an operational/financial strategy alters the feasible set of integrated risk management. For instance, operational hedging depends on real investments in technology choices: Product flexibility requires initial investment in dedicated or flexible production technologies (Boyabatli and Toktay, 2011). Note that financial hedging may be restricted in that, for example, currency derivatives are available only for major currencies (Huchzermeier and Cohen, 1996). Moreover, debt financing may be subject to loan limits, such as those inherent in asset-based lending (Alan and Gaur, 2012).Firms optimize operational hedging and financial flexibility by trading off value, risk, and cost. The expected value (denoted in Table 3 as E[V]) of an operational strategy is typically positive because real options can limit downside risks while exploring upside potential (Triantis, 2005). The value-enhancing effects of financial hedging depend largely on market assumptions and hedging objectives. In an efficient (arbitrage-free) market, the expected value of financial hedging is zero; this is known as a “self-financing” trading strategy. Under market imperfections (e.g., budget constraints and the costs associated with taxes, financial distress, bankruptcy, and external debt), the expected value of financial hedging can be positive if there are cost-reduction effects. In addition, the objective of financial hedging is value maximizing when the aim is to avoid “lower-tail outcomes” while preserving upside potential (Stulz, 1996).Risk-averse firms optimize operational and financial strategies with respect to their risk mitigation effects. Global supply chain network options may exploit the cash flow volatility (Huchzermeier and Cohen, 1996); while allocation option can decrease the unit profit variance in global production (Ding et al., 2007). The variance effects of production flexibility reflect the extent of correlation of output price and exchange rate; thus, positive (negative) correlation leads to decreased (increased) variance (Mello et al., 1995). The variance reduction effects of financial hedging depend on the firm’s objective. In an efficient market, financial hedging can be used to minimize volatility. In the presence of market imperfections, the objective of hedging can be either to maximize value or to minimize variance (Gamba and Triantis, 2014).In addition, cost of a risk management strategy varies as a function of availability, time, and volatility. Operational flexibility can be more costly because it requires an initial investment. For example, production flexibility depends on investments in multicountry facilities, and multisourcing flexibility depends on switching costs and development of the supplier base. In contrast, financial hedging is less costly because of lower or insignificant transaction costs. One must bear in mind that the costs of operational and financial hedging can evolve over time. Depending on the type of options and the type of hedging, the cost of real options may decrease over time (e.g., the switching costs can be spread across additional periods), whereas the cost of financial hedging may increase as the time horizon extends (Huchzermeier and Cohen, 1996). Finally, greater volatility may result in more cost-effective operational flexibility and increase the cost of financial hedging; the reason is that the cost of production capacity is less sensitive to volatility than is the cost of financial derivatives (Triantis, 2005).The third category in Table 3 illustrates the mutual adjustments between integrated risk management and various structures: organizational, supply chain, information, and capital. On the one hand, the integrated operations–finance risk management can be tailored to these specific structures; on the other hand, firms can adapt a given structure to ensure the effectiveness of integrated risk management. Organizational structure in an enterprise plays an important role in mitigating risk, because the various risk exposures must be addressed by cross-functional centralization, collaboration, and coordination (the Three Cs) in ERM. Besides balancing the interactions between operations and finance, integration also leads to synergistic benefits—for example, economies of scale can arise from a firm’s (cross-functional) overall hedging positions to avoid costly non-cooperative strategies (Kleindorfer and Saad, 2005). However, costs may stem from the coordination among local or functional units with regard to legal and operational restrictions (Glaum, 2005). Therefore, a firm’s optimal structure depends on a trade-off between the benefits of centralization and the costs of coordination.Supply chain structure affects firms’ competitive and collaborative positions, and thereby determines optimal integrated risk management. Firms need not mimic the risk mitigation strategies of their rivals. If a competitor’s weakness (due, e.g., to insufficient hedging) reduces the likelihood of industry overcapacity, then the benefits of investing in foreign countries may increase; this, in turn, incentivizes the firm to hedge more via currency derivatives (Froot et al., 1994). The Three Cs across supply chain partners are also required for successful SCRM. For instance, a decentralized supply chain with optimal financing and contracting under capital constraints can be coordinated via trade credit and bank financing (Kouvelis and Zhao, 2012). Supply chain structure determines a firm’s optimal payments to upstream and downstream partners (Gupta and Dutta, 2011). At the same time, firms can adjust supply chain structure to meet market shifts and modify supply network to strategies, products, and technologies (Lee, 2004). Supply chain adaptations with focus on quality control and risk management lead to robust and resilient supply chains, respectively (Christopher and Rutherford, 2004). Firms can improve supply chain resilience (Sheffi and Rice, 2005) by adopting operational flexibility strategies (see Table 4).Information structure in the supply chain, financial markets and an enterprise can alter the optimality of risk management strategies as well. Information asymmetry among operational and financial partners in supply chain naturally affects the coordinated mitigation of risk. Information sharing may reduce the bullwhip effects and thus help to match supply with demand of material flows (Lee, Padmanabhan, and Whang, 1997). Promoting information flow with suppliers and customers enhances supply chain agility and alignment (Lee, 2004). In a financial supply chain, information asymmetry effects can be ameliorated by the design of financing mechanisms. For instance, asset-based lending can be adopted to reduce information distortion along the financial chain (Alan and Gaur, 2012). We remark that a financial market’s information structure can shape the optimality of joint operational and financial hedging. Complete versus partial information in financial markets yields different solutions to joint newsvendor procurement and financial hedging (Caldentey and Haugh, 2006). The enterprise information structure (with respect to managers and shareholders) is a key concern of capital structure theories; that concern has spawned such notions as “separation property”, “static trade-off”, and “pecking order” (see Section 6.2).Furthermore, capital structure determines the choice of operational and financial strategies in the face of shareholder equity concerns. For instance, the liability structure of a multinational firm shapes the interaction between production flexibility and financial hedging under agency costs of debt and bankruptcy risk. Greater flexibility reduces the number of hedging contracts needed for a given debt level but increases that number if the leverage ratio is fixed (Mello et al., 1995). Since risk management can be viewed as a substitute for equity capital, it increases the firm’s debt capacity under financial distress (Stulz, 1996). A firm’s product flexibility can affect its optimal capital structure and thereby mitigate underinvestment, shareholder–debtholder agency conflict, and default risk (Chod and Zhou, 2014). The choice of capital structure is affected by whether the objective is to maximize firm value or equity value—as is the optimality of operations, hedging, and liquidity management (Gamba and Triantis, 2014).Once the integration conditions are specified and fulfilled, firms can proceed to select their portfolios of operational and financial strategies. Given the sheer variety of risk management strategies, we categorize operational hedging and financial flexibility to facilitate this portfolio selection.Adopting a process view, we classify operational hedging strategies into six categories (see Table 4): (1) Supply flexibility incorporates multisourcing, contingent supply, backup supply, supplier improvement, and inventory mitigation to manage supply uncertainty. (2) Processing flexibility includes production flexibility, product flexibility, modularization, and launch flexibility to match supply and demand of material flows. (3) Demand flexibility uses demand shifting, allocation options, after-sales services, and entry/exit options to mitigate demand risk. (4) Network flexibility accounts for how supply chain network options, network configuration, coordination options, integration options, and reverse logistics are used to optimize supply chain networks. (5) Timing flexibility, which includes both advance flexibility and postponement flexibility, focuses on the time dimension of supply chain processes. Finally, our concept of (6) flexibility mix integrates the preceding five flexibilities within a category or across categories.Distinguishing by valuation mechanisms, we present three categories of financial flexibility instruments (see Table 5): (1) A cash instrument is one whose value is determined directly by markets; these instruments may include bonds, loans, stocks, liquidity management, foreign currency reserves, and insurance. (2) A supply chain instrument is an agreement among operational and/or financial partners for transferring financial flows in a supply chain; it can take the form of a supplier subsidy, trade credit, factoring, reverse factoring, invoice discounting, or currency risk sharing. (3) A derivative instrument derives its price from the value of some other financial instrument or variables (e.g., futures, forwards, call and put options, swaps). Derivative markets exist for various underlying assets, including currency and interest rates, equity, credit, stocks, commodities, and even the weather.Based on the selection of operational strategies and financial instruments, firms jointly optimize their portfolios of real and financial assets. Operations–finance interface models have focused on two important topics: (i) Are operational hedging and financial flexibility complements or substitutes? (ii) When it is optimal to centralize or decentralize operational and financial decisions? Next we review these two topics.For ease of discussion, we define four types of relationship between operations and finance based on literature survey. A generic value function, V, denotes a firm’s optimization objective. The value of integrated operations–finance risk management isV(O,F)=V(O)+V(F)+V(IE). Here the adopted operational hedging,O∈O(i.e., feasible set of operational strategies) and financial flexibility,F∈F(i.e., feasible set of financial instruments). V(IE) refers to the interaction effects between operations and finance: (i) IfV(O,F)>V(O)+V(F),i.e., V(IE) > 0, operational hedging and financial flexibility are complements. (ii) IfV(O,F)=V(O)+V(F),i.e.,V(IE)=0,operational strategy and financial instrument are separate. Moreover, whenV(O,F)<V(O)+V(F),i.e., V(IE) < 0, operational hedging and financial flexibility are substitutes. Two cases are present in this setting: (iii) If V(O, F) > max {V(O), V(F)}, operational strategy and financial instrument are partial substitutes; (iv) if V(O, F) ≤ max {V(O), V(F)}, operational hedging and financial flexibility are perfect substitutes. In case (iii), the value of integration is less than the sum of two mechanisms, yet integration can still add value to the firm because its value is strictly larger than the value of any single strategy. In case (iv), either operational hedging or financial flexibility can achieve the first-best solution in the firm’s objective, i.e., if the value increment of integration (defined asΔV=V(O,F)−max{V(O),V(F)}) is negative or zero, operational strategy and financial instrument are redundant and mutually exclusive.The literature on global supply chain management has focused on the relationship of operational flexibility and financial hedging. Production flexibility by shifting production in different countries can be adopted as a “value driver”, while currency hedging via financial derivatives can tailor the variance (Hommel, 2003; Ding et al., 2007). Although production flexibility and currency hedging are typically found to be complementary, they may exhibit substitution effects if operational hedging increases expected profit and reduces variance (Mello et al., 1995, Ding et al., 2007). Provided the integration of both mechanisms can lead to a positive value increment in the firm’s objective, they are partial substitutes and should be adopted simultaneously and optimized jointly (Chen et al., 2014). Whereas both production and financial hedging are effective in managing currency risk, operational hedging is typically more effective in mitigating demand risk. It has been shown that financial hedging is more efficient when the firm is strongly averse to risk than otherwise (Chen et al., 2014; Zhu and Kapuscinski, 2011). Furthermore, a firm’s liability structure (e.g., debt level) can be part of what determines the optimal joint operational and financial hedging under market imperfections (Mello et al., 1995).Relationships among various operational and financial strategies can be analyzed by examining the marginal value increment of an additional strategy, though conclusions will differ according to model assumptions and variable changes. For instance, operational flexibility and financial hedging via weather derivatives can be jointly adopted to manage weather-dependent demand risk. Product flexibility and financial hedging are complements or substitutes depending on whether there is (respectively) a positive or negative correlation between demand and weather variable; postponement flexibility and financial hedging are substitutes (Chod, Rudi, and van Mieghem, 2010). Insurance and operational strategies (inventory and emergency sourcing) can be complements or substitutes, depending on whether their net-premium interaction dominates penalty-reduction in managing disruption risk (Dong and Tomlin, 2012). Supplier subsidies and inventory can be substitutes with back orders; capacity ordering and subsidies are substitutes under proportional random yield; and the relationship between order quantities and subsidies depends on how convex the manufacturer’s cost function is with upfront capacity costs (Babich, 2010).Moreover, market imperfections can affect the optimality and relative effectiveness of operational hedging and financial flexibility. Operational strategies and financial instruments are typically found to be complementary, yet they may behave as partial substitutes when being jointly optimized. Ensuring monetary supply via operational flexibility, financial hedging, and liquidity management can enhance firm value through real investments and reduce the costs of market imperfections. The optimality of joint financing and real investment depends on the risk exposure of real investments and revenues, market competition, and the hedging strategies of competitors (Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein, 1993), as well as on the interplay of operational diversification, capacity pooling, and loan financing (Boyabatli and Toktay, 2011). Liquidity management is critical to integrated risk management motivated by market imperfections (Gamba and Triantis, 2014). Table 6presents an overview of analytical explorations in relationship analysis.In addition to relationship analysis between operations and finance, firms face the choice of centralized versus decentralized approach to integrated risk management. Operations–finance interface models have invoked three theories of capital structure22For extensive reviews of capital structure research, please see Harris and Raviv (1991), Myers (2003), and Graham and Leary (2011).—separation property, static trade-off, and pecking order—for this approach choice.Modigliani and Miller (1958) argue that a firm’s capital structure and financial decisions are independent of the optimal investment and operational decisions under perfect capital markets. This is referred to as the separation property of operations and finance, which should hold in the absence of information asymmetry and incentive misalignments between shareholders and managers. Subsequent research has incorporated various market frictions and information structures, which has resulted in two competing theories of capital structure: Static trade-off theory and pecking order theory. In static trade-off theory proposed by Modigliani and Miller (1963), a firm optimizes its liability structure by trading off the benefits and costs of external debt under complete information. The benefits of external debt include, for instance, the tax shield and fewer free cash flow problems; the costs of debt include the costs associated with, inter alia, financial distress, bankruptcy risk, and agency problems. In contrast, Myers and Majluf (1984) and Myers (1984) propose a pecking order theory that incorporates manager–shareholder information asymmetry and in which firms prefer internal to external financing because of transaction and adverse selection costs. Even though managers are supposedly better informed than shareholders, the former are assumed to act in the best interests of the latter. Given these assumptions, a firm sources its capital by the following pecking order: from cash flow (internal equity), straight debt, convertible debt (with equity option), to external equity.The separation property between operations and finance, static trade-off theory, and pecking order theory have been applied to choose a centralized versus decentralized approach to integrated risk management. To start with, recall that separation property refers to the case where operational and financial strategies are adopted simultaneously but optimized separately (decentralization) with zero interaction effects (see Section 6.1). The separation of operations and finance is typically derived under strong modeling assumptions (e.g., perfect capital market). Besides, this property does not imply that the optimality of operational and financial decisions is irrelevant; in fact, optimizing operational and financial decisions separately can create significant value. For instance, a given operational strategy can lead to a determinate firm value independently of financial hedging. Meanwhile, currency hedging affects the feasible set of production strategies under bankruptcy risk and agency costs of debt (Mello et al., 1995). Optimal inventory can be independent of a firm’s wealth, market position, and financial hedging in a multiperiod inventory model featuring a partially complete financial market (Smith and Nau, 1995), whose incompleteness stems from private demand risk (Chen et al., 2007). Optimal capacity reservation and supplier subsidy decisions can be made separately under conditions of independent supply and demand shocks, no inventory, random capacity, and zero upfront costs (Babich, 2010). Under perfect (competitive) capital market assumptions, capital constrained firms can decouple its operational and bank financing decisions (Boyabatli and Toktay, 2011, Kouvelis and Zhao, 2012).Moreover, joint production and financing decisions can be optimized simultaneously as a static trade-off between tax benefits of debt and financial distress costs under demand uncertainty and market imperfections (Xu and Birge, 2004). The trade-off between investing in an external market and a newsvendor business with asset-based lending shapes the business owner’s capital structure under tax codes, bankruptcy costs, and information asymmetry (Alan and Gaur, 2012).Finally, the pecking order theory as applied in integrated risk management suggests that financial instruments and operational strategies are partial substitutes with different execution priorities due to various costs. For example: if production diversification and flexibility incur additional costs, then financial instruments will be preferred over operational strategies (Hommel, 2003). When financing expansion of pre-IPO production capacity under a budget constraint, the firm can first consume internal assets as the cheapest capital and then turn to bank loans (Babich and Sobel, 2004). In the presence of cash holding costs, loan limits, and external financing costs; real investment may be financed by a pecking order among internal funds, credit lines, and external equity (Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2009). To finance inventory in a budget-constrained supply chain, a retailer first chooses internal capital, then employs the cheapest trade credit, and finally diversifies external financing between trade credit and bank loan (Yang and Birge, 2010). The manufacturer can choose the less expensive financing option (bank loan versus trade credit) in a supply chain under random yield, fixed supplier costs, financial constraints, and information asymmetry (Babich, Aydin, Brunet, Keppo, and Saigal, 2012). Moreover, the pecking order theory holds when it is optimal for a manufacturer to borrow the smallest amount from bank that satisfies the liquidity constraint (Li, Shubik, and Sobel, 2013). Table 7summarizes the applications of capital structure theory in optimizing integrated risk management.By connecting the relationship analysis (Section 6.1) and approach choice (Section 6.2) of integrated risk management, we find that the interaction effects and value increment jointly determine the relationship, compatibility, and approach of integrated operations and finance.Table 8depicts the link between relationship analysis and approach choice in operations–finance interface models through three causal relations: (i) The interaction effects between operational hedging and financial flexibility shape their relationship, (ii) the value increment in the firm’s objective determines their compatibility, and (iii) the interaction effects and value increment can jointly set the optimal approach to integrated risk management. Intuitively, one may expect that operational hedging and financial flexibility should be optimized in a centralized (decentralized) manner if they are complements (substitutes). However, this one-to-one correspondence does not always hold for integrated risk management. We find two counterintuitive results in Table 8: (i) If the interaction effects are zero (separation), operational strategies and financial instruments should be adopted simultaneously yet optimized separately (decentralization). (ii) Operational hedging and financial flexibility should be optimized in a centralized manner even if they are partial substitutes.The managerial insights from Table 8 are as follows: When operational hedging and financial flexibility are complements or partial substitutes, they should be optimized by centralization, collaboration, and coordination of operational and financial departments. In Case I (respectively, Case III), the Three Cs between operations and finance should focus on maximizing (respectively, minimizing) their interaction effects. When operational hedging and financial flexibility are separate or perfect substitutes, they should be optimized independently. Case II leads to respective optimizations of operations and finance. In Case IV, a firm’s risk management should incorporate either operational strategies or financial instruments.After joint optimization of operations and finance, efficiency and effectiveness of integrated risk management can be evaluated by performance measures such as organic sales growth, adjusted EBIT and EPS (Rorsted and Knobel, 2012). Supply chain partners may trade off financial and operational measures. For instance, increases in working capital can decrease total operational cost, increase total financial cost, and lower return on working capital investment in a two-stage supply chain (Protopappa-Sieke and Seifert, 2010). Successful risk management practices can be established as performance benchmarks for future implementations. Sustained value creation from integrated operations–finance optimization leads to competitive advantage in firms’ core competencies (see Fig. 2).This paper introduces a “closed-loop” view of resources by a cycle of material, financial, and information flows. We present a risk management framework for multidimensional integration of operations–finance interface models. Ten aspects are examined to specify conditions under which firms should integrate operations and finance. Categorizations of operational hedging and financial flexibility are proposed. We link relationship analysis and approach choice of integrated risk management to show that: (i) Zero interaction effects between operations and finance lead to decentralization. (ii) Operations and finance should be centralized even if they are partial substitutes. Hence, coordination and collaboration between operations and finance should focus on maximizing (respectively, minimizing) their interaction effects when they are complements (respectively, partial substitutes).There are many remaining research areas that deserve attention in future. To begin with, new varieties and combinations of operational hedging and financial flexibility based on industry characteristics can be explored analytically. Given the diversity of risk management strategies in practice, integrating operations and finance while analyzing their relationship can be an avenue with untapped potential of fruitful explorations.Moreover, further empirical research on operations–finance interface can be conducted to test the relative effectiveness of risk management strategies. For example, Allayannis, Ihrig, and Weston (2001) and Kim, Mathur, and Nam (2006) examine the relationship between operational and financial hedging by testing their value respectively. Best practices of cross-functional, cross-supply chain risk management programs can be traced, and the portfolio of operational strategies and financial instruments can be enriched. For instance, Blome and Schoenherr (2011) emphasize the link between ERM and SCRM by case studies of 8 European firms.Besides, the research on risk measures and utility theory has given little attention on coherent risk measures and utility functions to incorporate operational and financial risks. Since different risk-averse utility functions may lead to different results for a same problem (Choi, Ruszczyski, and Zhao, 2011), comparative statistics can be provided for various risk measures and utility functions in the context of operations–finance interfaces.In addition, operations–finance interface models can be extended by incorporating the triple bottom line (3BL) of sustainability, via which optimal strategies are found at the intersection of social, environmental, and economic performance (Kleindorfer, Singhal, and van Wassenhove, 2005). For example, a firm can consider the ecological and social impact of its products and services besides economic goals by “integrated reporting” of finance, operations, and sustainability (IIRC, 2011).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
