@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dominance-based rough set approach for group decisions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The approach is designed to handle multiple decision makers in a way that leads to one compromise solution.The preferences of decision makers are extracted using a learning set-based approach.The judgments of decision makers are combined via a mixed input–output aggregation strategy.The weights of decision makers are objectively computed based on the input data.The assignment of decision objects to decision classes is based on the use of the majority principle and veto effect.The majority principle and veto effect notions are implemented through the concepts of concordance and discordance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multicriteria classification,Ordinal classification,Rough approximation,Dominance-based rough set approach,Group decision-making,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this paper is to propose an approach to support group multicriteria classification. The approach is composed of three phases. The first phase exploits the knowledge provided by each decision maker to individually approximate the decision classes using rough approximation. The second phase seeks to combine the outputs of individual approximation phase into a collective decision table by using an appropriate aggregation procedure. The third phase uses the collective decision table in order to infer a set of collective decision rules, which synthesize the judgements and perspectives of the different decision makers and to permit the classification of all decision objects. The proposed approach relies on the Dominance-based Rough Set Approach (DRSA), which is used at two different levels. First, the DRSA is used during the first phase to approximate the input data relative to each decision maker. Second, the DRSA is used during the third phase to approximate the collective decision table and generate the collective decision rules. This paper presents the theoretical foundation of the proposed approach, three case studies using real-world data and a comparative study of recent similar proposals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The multicriteria classification is a fundamental problem of multicriteria decision-making (Ishizaka & Nemery, 2013a). The multicriteria classification can be stated as follows: given a set of objects described by a set of criteria (attributes with preference-ordered domains), assign these objects to some pre-defined decision classes or categories, such that each object is assigned to exactly one class. In comparison to other classification methods and techniques (for instance in statistical, data mining, pattern recognition and machine learning), the multicriteria classification has two main characteristics (Doumpos & Zopounidis, 2011; Waegeman, De Baets, & Boullart, 2009): (i) the decision classes are defined in an ordinal way; and (ii) the decision objects are evaluated over a set of criteria meaning that the decision model should have some form of monotonic relationship with respect to the criteria. Due to the first point, the multicriteria classification is often referred to ordinal classification or sorting in the literature. In the rest of the paper, the three terms will be used interchangeably.A large number of real-world case studies of multicriteria classification problems in different domains are reported in the literature (e.g., Kadzinski & Slowiński, 2013; Zopounidis & Doumpos, 2002). In practice, these decision problems often imply several decision makers having conflicting objectives and judgements. However, most multicriteria classification methods assume a single decision maker or a homogenous group of decision makers that acts as a single decision maker. Fortunately, several new methods and decision support systems for group multicriteria classification problems are now available in the literature, including Cai, Liao, and Wang (2012); Chen, Kilgour, and Hipel (2012); Damart, Dias, and Mousseau (2007); Greco, Kadzinski, Mousseau, and Slowiński (2012); Ishizaka and Labib (2011); Ishizaka and Nemery (2013b); Jabeur and Martel (2007); Labib, Read, Gladstone-Millar, Tonge, and Smith (2014); Liu, Liao, and Yang (2015); Lolli, Ishizaka, Gamberini, Rimini, and Messori (2015). However, most of existing proposals fail to resolve several group decision making problems shortcomings. Indeed, most of them use either input or output based aggregation strategy. These extreme strategies have some problems as discussed in Chakhar and Saad (2014). In addition, a large number of previous proposals assume that all decision makers have the same “power” and when “weights” are used, they often reflect the hierarchal levels of the decision makers. Another important issue that has not been correctly addressed in the existing works concerns the aggregation rules used to combine individual data and knowledge. In fact, the most used solutions to deal with this issue are either to combine these information informally based on discussion between the decision makers or, at best, using a weighted-sum as an aggregation rule that may lead to compensation problems. An additional problem concerns the definition of preference parameters as required by most of multicriteria methods. This is a very difficult exercise in practice which requires an important cognitive effort to the decision makers. Additionally, the elicitation of parameters is more complicated in a group decision context since involved decision makers may not agree on the values of the parameters. Finally, there is a lack of efficient tools to support sensitivity analysis in group decision.The objective of this paper is to propose an approach to support group decision in multicriteria classification. The proposed approach contains three phases: (i) individual approximation, (ii) aggregation, and (iii) inference of collective decision rules. The individual approximation phase exploits the knowledge provided by each decision maker to approximate individually the collection of upward and downward unions of decision classes using the dominating and dominated sets. The aggregation phase seeks to combine the outputs of individual approximation phase into a collective decision table by using an appropriate aggregation procedure. The inference phase uses the collective decision table in order to infer a set of IF-THEN collective decision rules in order to synthesize the judgements and perspectives of the different decision makers and to permit the classification of all decision objects. The proposed approach relies on the Dominance-based Rough Set Approach (DRSA) (Greco, Matarazzo, & Slowiński, 1999; 2001a; Slowiński, Greco, & Matarazzo, 2002), which is used at two different levels. First, the DRSA is used during the first phase to approximate the input data relative to each decision maker. Second, the DRSA is used during the third phase to approximate the collective decision table and generate the collective decision rules. The approach is illustrated in detail through one main case study relative to credit worthiness of 28 European countries and to two other case studies related to heat islands exposition in the Québec Metropolitan Community in Canada and the management of post-accident nuclear risk in the Southern France region. The paper also includes a detailed discussion and justification of the different concepts used in the aggregation procedure.The approach proposed in this paper has several distinguishing characteristics. First, it adopts a mixed input-output aggregation strategy to combine the judgments and perspectives of involved decision makers. The mixed strategy allows taking advantages of both input and output aggregation strategies as explained in Chakhar and Saad (2014). Second, the “power” of the decision makers that measure the contribution of each one in the assignment of decision objects to decision classes is computed based on the input data. As stressed in Chakhar and Saad (2014), the use of input data to deduce the “power” of the decision makers seems generally to be more objective than the other weighting techniques. Third, the assignment of decision objects to decision classes is based on the use of the majority principle and veto effect. These notions are implemented through the concepts of concordance and discordance, which originated from Social Choice theory and are now well established in multicriteria analysis. Fourth, it uses a subset of data to extract and generalize the preferences of the decision makers. This idea has been proven to be very useful in practice (see, e.g., Guay, Joerin, Chakhar, Villeneuve, & Lavoie, 2011; Mercat-Rommens, Chakhar, Chojnacki, & Mousseau, 2015). Fifth, the approach is enhanced with several tools in order to permit the comparison of the final results obtained using different input parameters. This will substantially improve the effectiveness of the decision making process and the successful implementation of the final solution (see, e.g., Ishizaka & Labib, 2011).The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 presents the background. Section 4 introduces the approach. Section 5 details the aggregation procedure. Section 6 illustrates the approach through a case study. Section 7 applies the approach to two additional cases studies. Section 8 provides rules to compare different final results. Section 9 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
