@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joint optimal determination of process mean, production quantity, pricing, and market segmentation with demand leakage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Developed novel mathematical models for process targeting problem.Integrated framework for process mean, pricing, production and market segmentation.Considered the demand leakage effect into market segmentation.Develop harmony search meta-heuristics to solve the problem.Numerical experimentation to highlight the proposed integrated framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Process mean,Pricing,Market segmentation,Demand leakage,Harmony search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The selection of an optimal process mean is an important problem in production planning and quality control research. Most of the previous studies in the field have analyzed the problem for a fixed exogenous price. However, in many realistic situations, besides product quality, product pricing is a paramount factor that determines the purchase behavior in the market. In the experts’ opinion an integrated framework that incorporates pricing as a decision tool could significantly improve a firm’s profitability. Most of the manufacturing firms yield products with distinguishable characteristics and therefore it is desirable to sell these products on the market at differentiated prices. Whereas the market segmentation achieved using differentiated prices is often imperfect, a firm may experience demand leakages. Thus, an optimal price decision must incorporate demand leakage effects for the firm to benefit from its differentiated pricing strategy. In this paper, these issues are addressed by proposing an optimal framework for joint determination of process mean, pricing, production quantity and market segmentation using differentiated pricing. This research discusses a production process that manufactures multi-class (grade) products based on their quality attribute. The products are sold in primary and secondary market at differentiated prices while experiencing demand leakages. The nonconforming items are reworked at an additional cost. Mathematical models are developed to address the problem under both price-dependent deterministic and stochastic demand situations. We propose a harmony search meta-heuristic for solving the models. A numerical experimentation is presented to study the significance of the proposed integrated decision framework.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we interface the contemporary Revenue Management (RM) tools for pricing with the process mean selection problem for a manufacturing firm and the consumer behavior for market segmentation. The process mean problem is among the topics of economics of quality control that has received much attention from researchers and industrial practitioners in the last 60 years. The problem, also known as targeting problem, mainly addresses the optimum selection of process mean which affects the expected profit/cost per item in production processes such as canning/filling, metal plating, fiber production, glass and steel industries (Duffuaa & El-Gaaly, 2013a,b; Park, Kwon, Hong, & Lee, 2011; Hariga & Al-Fawzan, 2005; Shao, Fowler, & Runger, 2000). A manufacturer often follows in the production process the specification limits of a quality performance measure which may comprise weight, volume, concentration, thickness, length, etc. A product is therefore graded as conforming product if the quality performance measure is within the specification limits. Otherwise, the product is classified as nonconforming and may be sold at a reduced price, or reprocessed or scrapped (Darwish, Abdulmalek, & Alkhedher, 2013; Roan, Gong, & Tang, 2000). Darwish et al. (2013) have reported one common industrial practice in manufacturing sector examined by USA federal agency, to set a higher mean of the production process in order to meet a given specification limit. This practice indeed leads to a ‘giveaway’ cost (see Roan et al., 2000 for more details). Alternatively, if a tight production process mean is selected, then the manufacturing process may result a large proportion of nonconforming items, rework costs, increased scrapped volume, etc. Thus, an optimum selection of the process mean is highly desirable to improve the profitability of a manufacturer.Since Springer (1951) initiated the field of process targeting with cost minimization in a canning process, the problem evolved to integrate various decisions control. Bisgaard, Hunter, and Pallesen (1984) integrated pricing decisions in the targeting problem, proposing that the nonconforming products to be sold at a price proportional to the amount of material consumed by each nonconforming product. Golhar (1987) considered the problem of optimum process mean in a canning process where the cans filled above a specification limit are sold at a fixed price, while the under-filled cans are emptied and refilled at a reprocessing cost. Sampling inspection planning instead of full inspection was incorporated into the problem in Boucher and Jafari (1991). Optimal process mean with rectifying inspection was studied in Al-Sultan and Al-Fawzan (1997) for the targeting problem in a filling process with time dependent process mean. Shao et al. (2000) developed strategies for determining the optimal process mean of industrial processes when rejected goods can be held and sold to other customers in the same market at a later time. Bowling, Khasawneh, Kaewkuekool, and Cho (2004)’s work explored the targeting problem in the context of multi-stage serial production process. Darwish (2009) developed an integrated and hierarchical model of optimal process targeting in a single-vendor single-buyer supply chain. Based on a quality loss function, Chen and Kao (2009) determined the optimal process mean and screening limits. A reverse programming routine that identifies the relationship between the process mean and the settings within an experimental factor space was founded by Goethals and Cho (2011), and Goethals and Cho (2012). As identified here, the researchers have formulated different process targeting models for optimizing the firms’ profitability in terms of product uniformity or cost reduction, by approaching products’ characteristics in various production processes with multiple stages or inputs of production. The research field of process targeting evolved in many other directions, however, a detailed review of the specific literature is not in the scope of this paper.Besides setting an optimal process mean, a manufacturer’s objective is to maximize its profitability. The profitability of a firm depends on many factors and, as rightly described in Chen, Yan, and Yao (2004), pricing is a paramount factor that affects significantly the purchase behavior. In the field of Revenue Management (RM), commonly defined as the science of profitability, price differentiation is among the most successful tactics for improving profitability of a firm (Phillips, 2005; Talluri & Ryzin, 2004). Price differentiation is applied by many businesses, for example, in the online stores vs. retail stores, where products may be offered by a firm at discounted prices for online sales without the option of touch and feel, whereas retail stores sales are higher priced and the customers can interact with the products or the sales staff. Another common example is the airline ticket sales, when the price differentiation is practiced by offering early sales with deeply discounted prices for advanced purchases of tickets with restrictions in changes or cancelations. This type of sale targets especially the leisure (economy) class passengers, whereas for late arriving business class passengers with higher willingness to pay, the airlines reserve some cabin capacity. Price differentiation results in market segmentation which, in most of the related studies, is assumed to be perfect, and therefore demand cannibalization (demand leakage) is rather ignored in the models. While the evidence of increase profitability is proved under perfect segmentation, in most practical situations demand leakages are inevitable (Zhang, Bell, Cai, & Chen, 2010). The essentiality of fencing improvement has been recently addressed to mitigate the customers’ spillover from one market segment to another in Zhang et al. (2010). The authors assumed predetermined market share (maximum perceived demand) for each market segment, with demand leakage from full price to discounted price market segment, depending on the difference of prices from the two market segments. Zhang and Bell (2012) presented an overview of price fencing in RM’s practice and its taxonomy. In a contrast to this, Phillips (2005) proposed a price differentiation with customer’s cannibalization to determine the optimal price and to segment a single market using differentiated pricing, for a price-dependent deterministic demand. The fundamental variant used in Phillips (2005) and in Zhang et al. (2010) is the notion of differentiation price. By using a differentiation price as in Phillips (2005), the market share can also be controlled unlike in Zhang et al. (2010). This important approach of differentiation price from Phillips (2005) is re-visited later in Raza (2015a,b). The author generalized the modeling framework by considering an optimal market segmentation with demand leakage effect and in addition to Phillips (2005), the studies considered the price-dependent stochastic demands with known distribution, as well as with unknown distribution when the distribution-free approach (see Raza, 2014 for details) was applied. Anderson and Xie (2014) integrated pricing and market segmentation decisions using opaque selling mechanisms. Xiaa, Chen, Jayaraman, and Munson (2015) studied competition and market segmentation in a call center service supply chain.Integrating the targeting problem with production (inventory) decisions attracted for years the attention of many researchers. Gong, Roan, and Tang (1988) developed an integrated targeting-inventory model with constant process mean during the production cycle. This model was later generalized by Al-Fawzan and Hariga (2002) considering a time-dependent process mean. Roan et al. (2000) integrated the issues of production lot size and raw material procurement policy with the targeting problem. Hariga and Al-Fawzan (2005) determined simultaneously the optimal production lot size and the process mean for container-filling processes in multiple markets. Lee, Kwon, Hong, and Kim (2007) considered a targeting-inventory problem for a production process where multiple products are processed. The targeting problem was integrated with single-vendor single-buyer problem in Darwish (2004), assuming an equal size shipment policy and salvage value for scrapping nonconforming items. Chen and Lai (2007) formulated a model that finds the optimal process mean, specification limits and manufacturing quantity under rectifying inspection plan. Chen and Khoo (2009) addressed the targeting-inventory problem for serial production systems under quality loss and rectifying inspection plan. Darwish (2009) extended his earlier work and developed an integrated hierarchical targeting-inventory model for a two-layer supply chain. Park et al. (2011) established a profit model that determined the optimal common process mean and screening limits in a production process with multiple products. Recently, Darwish et al. (2013) developed a model that determines the optimal process mean for a stochastic inventory model under service level constraint. To the authors’ knowledge, the issue of optimal price setting and market segmentation using a differentiated pricing with demand leakage in the context of process mean (targeting) problem has not been addressed. This paper is expected to contribute towards this research avenue by developing novel mathematical models for joint optimal determination of process mean, pricing, production quantities and market segmentation using a differentiation price. Two distinct models are developed considering the price-dependent deterministic demand and then the price-dependent stochastic demand. A Harmony Search (HS) meta-heuristic is applied to the optimization problem. We present a numerical experimentation with both models where we study the model related parameters onto the profitability of a firm and its optimal joint decision on control parameters.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the problem is defined of a manufacturing firm that pursuits a joint optimal determination of process mean, production quantity, pricing and market segmentation, under price-dependent deterministic demand situation first, and later considering the price-dependent stochastic demand. In Section 3, a harmony search based meta-heuristic is proposed to solve the two models. Section 4 studies the models using a numerical experimentation obtained by applying the harmony search algorithm with data from related literature. Lastly, in Section 5 the conclusions of the results are discussed and the directions for future research are proposed.In this section, we propose an integrated model of Revenue Management (RM) problem and process target problem for a monopolist manufacturing firm who is selling two products depending upon a quality characteristic, x, in a single selling period. The product quality characteristic, x, is acquired using a manufacturing process and is normally distributed with probability distribution function, ϕ(x), and cumulative probability distribution function, Φ(x). Fig. 1 illustrates the problem of target mean for a normally distributed process with multi-classes of products, and Table 1 lists the notations used in this paper. Likewise several related studies (see Hariga and Al-Fawzan, 2005, Lee et al. (2007), and Duffuaa and El-Gaaly (2013a,b) for details), it is assumed that the normally distributed process has an unknown mean, μ, and a standard deviation, σ. The products manufactured are distinguished by the quality characteristic, x, based on which are classified into three classes. If the quality characteristic, x, is such that x ≥ l1, then the product is classified as class (grade) 1 product and it is sold in a primary market at price p1 per unit. Else, if the product quality characteristic follows l2 ≤ x < l1, the product is considered of class (grade) 2 and is sold in a secondary market at a discounted price p2 per unit. However, the products with quality characteristic, x < l2 are reworked at a rework cost, r, per unit. It assumed that, p1 ≥ p2, and the firm’s expected cost per unit for a product from market segment, i, is ci,∀i={1,2},which is dependent on the quality characteristic, x. The inspection process that classifies the products into three grades is assumed perfect and with negligible cost. This paper extends the research works on the process targeting problem with predetermined fixed prices by incorporating pricing and market segmentation decisions with demand leakage effects. We propose a price-demand relationship model and we consider two types of demand situation commonly used in the literature: (i) price-dependent deterministic demand; and (ii) price-dependent stochastic demand.We start by developing the model for a firm’s profitability when it experiences price-dependent deterministic demand. We assume there are two market segments, the full (primary) market, and discounted (secondary) market. We refer the primary market as the market segment 1 which is designated for customers who are willing to pay the full price, p1, and prefer class 1 products. Whereas, the (secondary) market segment 2 is reserved for customers willing to pay the discounted price, p2, for a product class 2. It assumed that, p1 ≥ p2, and the firm’s expected cost per unit for a product from market segment, i, is ci,∀i={1,2},which depends on the quality characteristic, x. In market segment i, the price-dependent deterministic demand is assumed linear, which is widely used in the literature because of its simplicity and sufficiency to catch important managerial implications (see Al-Sultan, 1994; Chiang and Monahan, 2005; Choi, 1996; Zhang et al., 2010 for details). Thus, the price-dependent deterministic demandui(pi)=[αi−βipi]+is experienced by the firm in market segment i, and for brevity,ui=ui(pi),∀i={1,2}. The price-dependent deterministic demand, ui, follows the Increasing Price Elasticity (IPE) property in non-strict sense, thus∂ηi∂pi≥0,whereηi=−pi∂ui∂piyi, from where∂ui∂pi≤0. Further, it is assumed that the firm offers its products in two market segments which may have distinct sensitivity to price variation. Nevertheless, the customers from market segment 1 have more willingness to pay and therefore, the firm is expected to have more price sensitivity in market segment 2, such that, β1 ≤ β2. In the price-dependent deterministic demand functions, ui, the maximum deterministic demand that a firm can experience in market segment i, is αi. This study extends the work of Phillips (2005) where the market segmentation strategy using a differentiation pricing is proposed, for a manufacturing firm experiencing price-dependent demand with leakage from full price market segment to discounted market segment. Some related studies on differentiated pricing similar with Phillips (2005) are Zhang and Bell (2007) and Zhang et al. (2010), which also considered the demand leakage effects. However, the major difference between these papers and Phillips (2005)’s work is the use of notation which we refer to as differentiation price. This differentiation price is the price which mainly segments the market so that a price higher than this price is regarded as full price, whereas, a price lower than this differentiation price is considered as discounted price. Manipulating the differentiation price, in addition to prices in each market segment, enables the firm a greater control of creating additional (or reducing) market share (also referred to as maximum allowable demand) from one market segment to another, depending upon other related parameters of the model. In contrast to this approach, Zhang and Bell (2007) and Zhang et al. (2010) assumed predetermined market shares,αi,∀i={1,2}that are fixed and there is no usage of differentiation price notation to optimally determine the market shares. Next, while segmenting the market using a price differentiation strategy,υ,such thatp1≥υ,andυ≥p2,a firm must observe, p1 ≥ p2. Thus, from the price differentiation strategy,υ,the maximum deterministic demand that can be experienced in discounted price market segment 2 would beα2=υβ2. Fig. 2presents a hypothetical model for market segmentation for a firm. Unlike some recent related studies from Phillips (2005) and Raza (2015b) , the model presented here is a generalized representation where two distinct market segments exist such that the market shares of these market segments are α1 ≤ α2, and the price sensitivities are β1 ≤ β2. Noticeably, whenα1=α2,andβ1=β2,then the model is simplified to the ones presented in Phillips (2005) and Raza (2015b). This mainly represents that a firm is segmenting its single market cumulative demand, i.e.,α−βp, into two segments using a differentiation price,υ. When a firm selects a differentiation price,υ,such thatp1≥υ≥p2≥0,then the maximum demand that can be experienced in market segment 2 would beβ2υ. It is obvious to observe here that, whenυ≥0,and p1 ≥ p2, the maximum price in market segment 1 would bep¯1=α1β1. Given a differentiation priceυ,the maximum price in market segment 2 would beυ,which also yieldsp¯1≥υ≥0. Referring again to Fig. 2, we observe here that in the case of perfect segmentation, which means no demand leakage from full price market segment into discounted price market segment, if a firm offers a price, p1, the expected profit would be represented by an area within the perimeter “mnfh”. Naturally, the profit from discounted market segment is the area within the perimeter “abdefh”, if the firm sets the discounted price, p2. It is important to mention here that this profit representation shown in Fig. 2 may change significantly depending upon the selection of problem related parameters, decision controls, p1, p2, and the differentiation price,υ.Following Phillips (2005) and Raza (2015a,b), we assume that the fences (segments) achieved using the differentiation price are imperfect and there is a θ proportion of customers’ demand, which belongs to the full price market segment and cannibalize (leak) to the discounted price market segment. In this paper, θ is assumed constant and independent of the prices p1 and p2, but, later it will be identified in the model that any change in demand incurred due to price differentiation would impact the amount of demand that would leak from full price market segment to discounted price segment. Next, in this paper, we follow a price differentiation and demand leakage model, suggested recently in Raza (2015b). The adjusted demand for each product class would be:(1)y1=(1−θ)u1(2)y2=θu1+u2In Eq. (3), given that a firm manufactures products with a random quality characteristic, x, such that, x ≥ l1, the firm will gain profit,(p1−c(x))y1−by1(x−l1)from selling these products in a primary market as class 1 products. Likewise, the products with quality characteristics l2 ≤ x < l1 will be sold in a secondary market as class 2 at price p2, resulting the profit(p2−c(x))y2. Whereas the products with quality characteristic x < l2 would undergo a rework and the expected rework cost (or profit) isE(Π)−rw−wc(x). The quality characteristic, x, is a random variable and therefore, depending upon this quality characteristic, the firm’s manufacture would be three product classes and the total profit, Π, would be the sum of the individual expected profits from each product class (Al-Fawzan & Hariga, 2002; Duffuaa & El-Gaaly, 2013a,b). Moreover, the profit for each product class is perceived from the newsvendor problem with price-dependent deterministic demand (see Petruzzi and Dada, 1999; Yao, Chen, and Yan, 2006, Raza, 2014; and Raza, 2015a for details), given a random quality characteristic, x. Also, since the demand is price-dependent deterministic, a firm’s decision would be to produceyi,∀i={1,2},that can be easily determined once the prices,pi,∀i={1,2}are known (see Arrow, Harris, and Marschak, 1951; Zhang et al., 2010, Raza, 2014, and Raza, 2015a for details). Indeed, by integrating pricing and market segmentation decisions, the problem’s complexity is increased, as the price-dependent deterministic demand and leakage information is also needed. Finally, the firm’s total profit, Π, is a random variable established below, which has μ, p1, p2 andυas decision controls.(3)Π={(p1−c(x))y1−by1(x−l1)x≥l1;(p2−c(x))y2,l2≤x<l1;E(Π)−rw−wc(x),x<l2.The total expected profit, E(Π) would be:(4)E(Π)=∫l1∞((p1−c(x))y1−by1(x−l1))ϕ(x)dx+∫l2l1(p2−c(x))y2ϕ(x)dx+∫−∞l2(E(Π)−rw−wc(x))ϕ(x)dxwhere in Eq. (4), the first term represents the expected profit obtained from selling class 1 products, the second term is the expected profit from selling products class 2 and the last term is the expected profit (or expected cost) from the reworked products. In the following, we simplify the expected profit function E(Π), established in Eq. (4). In Eq. (5), we use the following notations:1−φ(δ1)=∫l1∞ϕ(x)dx,φ(δ1)−φ(δ2)=∫l2l1ϕ(x)dx,φ(δ2)=∫−∞l2ϕ(x)dx,c1=∫l1∞c(x)dx,c2=∫l2l1c(x)dx,c3=∫−∞l2c(x)dx,andg=∫l1∞(x−l1)ϕ(x)dx,and we simplify the profit function as below:(5)E(Π)=p1y1∫l1∞ϕ(x)dx−y1∫l1∞c(x)ϕ(x)dx−by1×∫l1∞(x−l1)ϕ(x)dx+p2y2∫l2l1ϕ(x)dx−y2×∫l2l1c(x)ϕ(x)dx+(E(Π)−rw)∫−∞l2ϕ(x)dx−w×∫−∞l2c(x)ϕ(x)dxWe assume that the direct unit production cost for the finished product is a linear function of the quality characteristic, x. Previous studies that have followed this framework are Bisgaard et al. (1984), Shao et al. (2000), Hariga and Al-Fawzan (2005) . Given a quality characteristic, x, the production cost per unit isc(x)=a+bx,where a is the fixed production cost and b is the cost of obtaining a specific quality characteristic for one unit of finished product. Therefore, the expected unit production cost of class 1 products is given by c1 as follows:(6)c1=∫l1∞c(x)ϕ(x)dx=∫l1∞(a+bx)ϕ(x)dx=(a+bμ)(1−φ(δ1))+σb∅(δ1)where in Eq. (6),∅(δ1)=12πe−12δ12.In order to determine the giveaway cost of excess quality for class 1 products, we first determine the expected additional quality characteristic, g, that is given away when a process mean is set to μ. Following the recent related studies on process mean (target) determination in Duffuaa and El-Gaaly (2013a,b), we can write:(7)g=∫l1∞(x−l1)ϕ(x)dx=E(x|x≥l1)(1−φ(δ1))=(μ+σ∅(δ1)1−φ(δ1))(1−φ(δ1))=μ(1−φ(δ1))+σ∅(δ1)Notice here that Eq. (7) gives the expected quality characteristic of giveaway. Since b is the cost per unit quality of characteristic (Hariga & Al-Fawzan, 2005), the expected giveaway cost per unit item of class 1 would be bg.Next, the expected production cost for grade 2 item,c2=∫l2l1c(x)ϕ(x)dxis determined similarly as follows:(8)c2=∫l2l1c(x)ϕ(x)dx=∫l2l1(a+bx)ϕ(x)dx=(a+bμ)(φ(δ1)−φ(δ2))+σb(∅(δ2)−∅(δ1))where in Eq. (8),φ(δ1)−φ(δ2)=∫l2l1ϕ(x)dx,∅(δ1)=12πe−12δ12,∅(δ2)=12πe−12δ22,δ1=l1−μσandδ2=l2−μσ.Lastly, the expected production cost of a non-conforming item,c3=∫−∞l2c(x)dxis determined in the following:(9)c3=∫−∞l2(a+bx)ϕ(x)dx=(a+bμ)φ(δ2)−σb∅(δ2)Given the firm’s capacity, C, if the process mean is set to μ, the total expected number of nonconforming items would be,w=C∫−∞l2ϕ(x)dx=Cφ(δ2).Using the costs’ expressions derived earlier, the simplified expected profit function, E(Π), would be:(10)E(Π)=p1y1(1−φ(δ1))−c1y1−bgy1+p2y2(φ(δ1)−φ(δ2))−c2y2+(E(Π)−rφ(δ2)C)φ(δ2)−c3φ(δ2)CFinally, after rearranging the terms in the profit function, would yield:E(Π)=11−φ(δ2){p1y1(1−φ(δ1))−c1y1−bgy1+p2y2(φ(δ1)−φ(δ2))−c2y2−(rφ(δ2)+c3)φ(δ2)C}Thus, the firm’s optimization problem for the price-dependent deterministic demand in both market segments is formulated as follows:(11)DP:E(Π)(12)subjectto:p1−υ≥0(13)υ−p2≥0(14)(1−φ(δ1))C−y1≥0(15)(φ(δ1)−φ(δ2))C−y2≥0(16)(1−φ(δ2))C−∑i=12yi≥0(17)μ−l1≥0In Eq. (11), the total expected profit E(Π), as established in Eq. (10), is a multiple decision variables function and these variables include μ, p1, p2 andυ. In the deterministic constrained nonlinear optimization problem, DP, Eqs. (12) and (13) are the price differentiation constraints. These constraints imply that the price p1, for product class 1, must not fall below the price differentiation policy,υ. Also, the price p2, for the product class 2, must not exceed the price differentiation,υ. The constraints in Eqs (14)–(16) are the capacity limitations. Eq. (14) implies that the price-dependent deterministic demand, y1, must not exceed the expected number of class 1 items,(1−φ(δ1))C. Likewise, the constraint in Eq. (15) states a similar limitation for class 2 products so that the price-dependent deterministic demand y2 must not exceed the allocated capacity,(φ(δ1)−φ(δ2))C. Similarly, the constraint in Eq. (16) limits the total production of the firms to its capacity C. Since the products with quality characteristic x < l2 are regarded as nonconforming products, it is quite intuitive to realize that the firm must set the process mean as, μ ≥ l1, to ensure the conformity of the products. In most practical situations the process mean must be set such thatl2≤μ≤μ¯,whereμ¯is the maximum permissible process mean, oftenμ¯≥l1(Duffuaa & El-Gaaly, 2013a,b). As discussed earlier for E(Π) in DP, once prices,pi,∀i={1,2}are determined, we can compute the production quantities,yi,∀i={1,2}.In this section, the model developed earlier for price-dependent deterministic demands is extended to a situation when a firm experiences price-dependent stochastic demand Di, for products classi,∀i={1,2}. The price-dependent stochastic demand Dihas components from the price-dependent deterministic demand yiand from the stochastic price independent demand ξi. The price independent stochastic demand, ξi, has a probability distribution function fiand a cumulative probability distribution function Fi, both continuous, twice differentiable, inverse-able and following an increasing failure rate (Petruzzi & Dada, 1999). These characteristics are often found in some commonly used distributions like Uniform, Normal or Lognormal (Petruzzi & Dada, 1999; Yao et al., 2006). Moreover, ξiis assumed to be bounded in[ξ̲i,ξ¯i]and the expectation of ξiisμξi,with standard deviationσξi. In addition to this, it costs the firm a holding cost hito stock an item of class i that is unsold, and similarly, a shortage penalty kiper unit for any unmet demand of product class i. To incorporate demand randomness ξi, two modeling approaches, the additive and the multiplicative are often utilized. Recent discussions on these modeling approaches can be found in Petruzzi and Dada (1999) and Yao et al. (2006). In this paper, the additive modeling approach is used, and thus the price-dependent stochastic demand, Di, for market segment i is:(18)Di=yi+ξi,∀i={1,2}Petruzzi and Dada (1999) suggested that for an additive approach, a more convenient demand model is the linear function, which has been already adopted in this research for the reasons highlighted earlier in this paper. The total profit, Π, of the firm in this scenario is expressed in Eq. (19).(19)Π={p1min{q1,D1}−h1[q1−D1]+−k1[D1−q1]+−c(x)q1−bq1(x−l1)x≥l1;p2min{q2,D2}−h2[q2−D2]+−k2[D2−q2]+−c(x)q2,l2≤x<l1;E(Π)−rw−wc(x),x<l2.Similar to Eq. (3), in Eq. (19) the total profit for the firm is formulated, when the firm experiences price-dependent stochastic demand in each market segment. The formulation relies on the newsvendor problem modeling with pricing and shortage and holding costs in each of the two market segment (Raza, 2014). The first term of Eq. (19) is the expected profit from grade 1 products, the second term is the expected profit from grade 2 products and the last term is the expected profit (often a loss) from non-conforming products after rework. Following some earlier studies (see Chen et al., 2004; Yao et al., 2006), we can use the below relationships to simplify the profit function built in Eq. (19):(20)min{qi,Di}=qi−Eξi[qi−Di]+,∀i={1,2}(21)Eξi[Di−qi]+=yi−qi+Eξi[qi−Di]+,∀i={1,2}The expressionEξi[qi−Di]+can be next deduced using integration by parts such that:(22)Eξi[qi−Di]+=∫ξ̲iqi−yi(qi−(yi+ξi))fi(ξi)dξi=∫ξ̲iqi−yi(qi−yi−ξi)fi(ξi)dξi=∫ξ̲iqi−yiFi(ξi)dξiUsing the simplification from Eq. (22), the total profit function would be:(23)Π={(p1+k1−c(x))q1−k1y1−(p1+k1+h1)×∫ξ̲1q1−y1F1(ξ1)dξ1−bq1(x−l1),x≥l1;(p2+k2−c(x))q2−k2y2−(p2+k2+h2)×∫ξ̲2q2−y2F2(ξ2)dξ2,l2≤x<l1;E(Π)−rw−wc(x),x<l2.From Eq. (23) we obtain the mathematical expression for the total expected profit, E(Π)(24)E(Π)=∫l1∞((p1+k1−c(x))q1−k1y1−(p1+k1+h1)×∫ξ̲1q1−y1F1(ξ1)dξ1−bq1(x−l1))ϕ(x)dx+∫l2l1((p2+k2−c(x))q2−k2y2−(p2+k2+h2)×∫ξ̲2q2−y2F2(ξ2)dξ2)ϕ(x)dx+∫−∞l2(E(Π)−rw−wc(x))ϕ(x)dxAfter rearranging the terms of Eq. (24), the firms’ profit can be written as:(25)E(Π)=((p1+k1)q1−k1y1−(p1+k1+h1)∫ξ̲1q1−y1F1(ξ1)dξ1)×∫l1∞ϕ(x)dx−q1∫l1∞c(x)ϕ(x)dx−bq1∫l1∞(x−l1)ϕ(x)dx+((p2+k2)q2−k2y2−(p2+k2+h2)∫ξ̲2q2−y2F2(ξ2)dξ2)∫l2l1ϕ(x)dx−q2∫l2l1c(x)ϕ(x)dx+(E(Π)−rw)×∫−∞l2ϕ(x)dx−w∫−∞l2c(x)ϕ(x)Using again the simplification procedure outlined in the price-dependent deterministic demand case presented earlier in Section 2.1, we substitute the costs expressions in Eq. (25) and we obtain following simplified formulation for profit, E(Π).(26)E(Π)=11−φ(δ2){((p1+k1)q1−k1y1−(p1+k1+h1)×∫ξ̲1q1−y1F1(ξ1)dξ1)(1−φ(δ1))−c1q1−bgq1+((p2+k2)q2−k2y2−(p2+k2+h2)×∫ξ̲2q2−y2F2(ξ2)dξ2)(φ(δ1)−φ(δ2))−c2q2−(rφ(δ2)+c3)φ(δ2)C}where in Eq. (26), we have1−φ(δ1)=∫l1∞ϕ(x)dx,φ(δ1)−φ(δ2)=∫l2l1ϕ(x)dx,φ(δ1)=∫−∞l2ϕ(x)dx. Also,c1=∫l1∞c(x)ϕ(x)dx,g=∫l1∞(x−l1)ϕ(x)dx,c2=∫l2l1c(x)ϕ(x)dx,andc3=∫−∞l2c(x)ϕ(x)dx,are determined from Eqs. (6), (7), (8) and (9), respectively. The firm’s stochastic problem (SP) which mainly considers the price-dependent stochastic demand situation, is formulated as follows:(27)SP:E(Π)(28)subjectto:p1−υ≥0(29)υ−p2≥0(30)(1−φ(δ1))C−q1≥0(31)(φ(δ1)−φ(δ2))C−q2≥0(32)(1−φ(δ2))C−∑i=12qi≥0(33)μ−l1≥0In SP, the objective function E(Π) has several decision variables, and these variables include process mean, μ, pricespi,∀i={1,2},production quantitiesqi,∀i={1,2},and differentiation price,υ. The constraints in Eqs. (28)–(33) are similar to DP’s constraints, however, the production quantitiesqi,∀i={1,2}are replacing,yi,∀i={1,2},due to the stochastic price-dependent demand in SP. In the stochastic demand situation, the firm would hold safety stock,qi−yi,∀i={1,2}and depending on the problem related parameters, the safety stock can be positive or negative (see Arrow et al., 1951 and Petruzzi and Dada, 1999 for details).As notified in Darwish et al. (2013), the process mean (targeting) problems are often very complex, being difficult or even infeasible to solve them with the existing numerical optimization methods. With no exception, the problems considered here, DP and SP, are complex constrained nonlinear optimization problem. Thus, the meta-heuristics based direct search methods are a better choice for solving both problems. The major advantage of the meta-heuristics would be that they can find near optimal solution without gradient information. It is important to notice here that, due to the problem nature, using a gradient based method such as Karush Kuhn Tucker (KKT) (see Bertsekas, 1999) can be computationally very inefficient. Moreover, the derivative analysis does not lead to important insights about the problems’ high number of parameters and decision variables. Other gradient or Hessian-based optimization methods applied on such complex problems are usually time consuming and may offer results which are sensitive to the starting point selection in the searching procedure, or which need complex derivative calculus of a large memory space. Since there is no proof on the uni-modality (convexity) of the profit functions, there is a possibility that the problems may have many local optima while KKT does not guarantee convergence to a global optimal solution Bertsekas (1999), and finding the global optimal solution could be a prohibitive task. A traditional optimization approach using KKT optimality conditions is also expected to fall short of any analytical insights as it would require solving several nonlinear equations numerically only with strong possibility of no closed-form solution. On the other hand, both practitioners and academic researchers have recognized that meta-heuristics are an efficient approach of hard optimization problems and they have contributed considerable to its development.The research field of meta-heuristics is growing rapidly and many efficient alternatives have been designed so far to find near-optimal solutions for hard optimization problems. Due to their diverse features, is difficult to make a precise classification of the existing meta-heuristics, however, some classification criteria adopted by researchers are search type based on single solution vs. population (Boussaïd, Lepagnot, & Siarry, 2013), neighborhood structures or memory usage (Dorigo & Stützle, 2004), source of inspiration (nature or non-nature inspired) end others. Among the popular meta-heuristics techniques are genetic algorithm (GA), scatter search (SS), tabu search (TS), simulated annealing (SA), ant colony optimization (ACO), harmony search (HS). The common evolutionary computation (EC) techniques from GA and SS use mainly the principle of evolution based on survival-of-the-fittest and replicate some natural phenomena like genetic inheritance. GA is a very popular EC technique based on the natural selection and the mechanisms of population genetics. Its theory was first proposed in Holland (1975) and assumes three main operators of reproduction, crossover, and mutation, where reproduction is the process of survival-of-the-fittest selection, crossover is a partial swapping between two parent strings to produce two offspring strings and mutation is the occasional random inversion of bit values that generates non-recursive offspring. The main characteristic of the GA is that it maintains and evaluates a set of solutions, providing an efficient exploration of the search space. SS differs from other EC techniques by providing unifying principles for joining solutions based on generalized path constructions in Euclidean space and by providing a search strategy rather than randomisation (Glover, Laguna, & Marti, 2003). Major contributions to SS were done in Laguna (2002). The use of adaptive memory incorporated in SS relates it with the later TS meta-heuristic formalized in Glover (1986). TS is based on a single neighborhood structure and simulates the natural phenomenon of human memory where the search memorizes a number of previously visited states or solutions along with a number of states that might be considered unwanted. The candidate solutions are stored in a tabu list. The definition of tabu criterion, tabu list size, and information stored in the tabu list are often regarded very critical towards the performance of tabu search algorithm. The SA is a memoryless single-point search algorithm based on Monte Carlo iterative method and it was proposed as an optimization framework for multivariate and combinatorial problems. Drawn from the analogy with annealing in solids, the algorithm applies to very large and complex systems, and was defined for the first time in Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, and Vecchi (1983) as an optimization technique. Another nature-inspired meta-heuristic is ACO, introduced by Dorigo (1992) inspired by the foraging behavior of ant colonies in search for food and in practice, it uses the learning principle to identify the good combinations of solution components by sampling the search space in every iteration. As described in Dorigo and Stützle (2004), ACO follows the collective trail-laying and trail-following behavior whereby, communications between individuals and environment rely on the use of chemicals deposited by the ants, called pheromones, for marking paths on the ground while walking from food sources to the nest. The cooperative iteration leads the ant colony towards the shortest path which confers successful applicability of ACO in discrete optimization problems.HS is a relatively new population-based meta-heuristic inspired by musical improvisation process to seek a pleasant harmony, conceptualized by Geem, Kim, and Loganathan (2001) on the analogy that searching for the perfect harmony in music is similar with searching for the optimality in an optimization process. A performing music seeks the best harmony generated by an instrument, which is determined by an aesthetic estimation of the musician that plays the instrument. Similarly, an optimization algorithm seeks the global optimum which represents the values of the objective function. The aesthetic quality of the harmony is determined by a set of the sounds played on different joined instruments, as the objective function value is determined by the values of its variables set. The musicians search for a better harmony by improvising the aesthetic valuation through practice, as the optimization algorithm search for a better value of the objective function by improving its values in an iterative process. Therefore, the algorithm’s parameters can be identified from the following analogies: each practice performed by the musician represent one iteration of the HS algorithm; the musicians represent the problem’s decisions variables; the sound pitches of each musician are the values of each decision variable; the esthetic standard of the harmony is the objective function of the problem; and the global optimum represents the perfect harmony. The parameters of HS, as will be described later, allows for a better control of diversification and intensification than other meta-heuristics, in the search for an optimal solution. GA may have some drawbacks founded in convergence towards local optima rather than the global optimum, lack of good local search ability or low convergence speed. In this regard, Huang and Lin (2013) used HS as a fine tuning of the GA’s crossover mechanism to improve the original GA algorithm for solving the combined heat and power economic dispatch problem. While TS technique explores the search space beyond the local optimality to return the near-optimal solution, HS can be applied to determine the global optimal solution near the surrounding area of such near optimal solution (Mashinchi, Orgun, Mashinchi, & Pedrycz, 2011). One improvement of the slow convergence speed of SA was recently approached in (Askarzadeh, 2013) by integrating the adaptive search method of HS and chaotic search, in discrete SA algorithm for finding the optimum design of photovoltaic/wind hybrid system. Lee and Geem (2005) provide various examples of engineering optimization with HS algorithm and demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of this meta-heuristic. A more recent portfolio of HS applicability in both continuous and discrete optimization problems can be found in Manjarres et al. (2013).In practice, the possible choices a musician may have when improvises one pitch are: (i) playing any pitch exactly from memory; (ii) playing something similar — a neighbor pitch of one pitch from the memory; or (iii) playing a random pitch from the possible range of sounds. Likewise, when each decision variable chooses one value in the HS algorithm, it could have followed any one of the three rules: (i) choosing anyone value from the harmony memory (HM) which is defined as memory consideration; (ii) choosing an adjacent value of the one value from HM, referred here as pitch adjustments, and (iii) generating a totally random value from the possible value range, regarded as randomization. These rules are formalized in the HS algorithm as two other control parameters: (i) Harmony Memory Considering Rate (HMCR); and (ii) Pitch Adjusting Rate (PAR). In Fig. 3is outlined the optimization procedure of HS meta-heuristic algorithm which mainly contains following steps:•Step 1: Initialize the optimization problem and algorithm parametersStep 2: Initialize HMStep 3: Improvise a New Harmony (NH) from HMStep 4: Update the HMStep 5: Repeat Steps 3 and 4 until the termination criterion is satisfiedFirst, we consider an unconstrained optimization problem specified below:(34)Maximize:f(x)(35)subjectto:x∈Xwhere, f(x) is the objective function and x is the set of decision variables such that,xi∈Xi,∀i={1,2,…,N}. Xiis the set of possible values bounded of the decision variables xisuch thatx̲i≤xi≤x¯i,∀i={1,2,…,N}. N is the total number of decision variables. In DP, the objective functionf(x)=E(Π)is established in Eq. (10) and the decision variables set isx={μ,p1,p2,υ}. For SP, we havef(x)=E(Π)established in Eq. (26), andx={μ,p1,p2,q1,q2,υ}. The bounds on the control variables arel1≤μ≤l1+6σ,and for the controls p1, p2 andυthe upper bound isα1β1,and lower bound at zero. In addition to this, for SP, the upper bound onqi,∀i={1,2}is capacity, C, and lower bound at zero.The HS algorithm parameters required to solve the optimization problem are Harmony Memory Size (HMS), HMCR, PAR, and the termination criterion i.e., the maximum number of permissible searches. The purpose of HMCR and PAR is to improve the HM (Lee & Geem, 2005) which will be discussed in Step 3.In this step, the HM outlined in matrix below, is created.(36)HM=[x(1)x(2)⋯x(HMS)]Eq. (36) is filled randomly while following the bounding criterion on each decision variable, xi, and meeting the feasibility requirements. Once HM is filled, the solutions x(i) are sorted for the case maximization objective, in the descending order by their objective function value, f(x(i)).In this step, an NH solutionx′={x1′,x2′,…,xN′}is generated based on HMCR parameter. For instance, a decision variablexi′,can be either chosen among the existing values in HM,{xi(1),xi(2),…,xi(HMS)}or, a New Harmony,xi′is generated such thatxi′∈Xiand also satisfies the feasibility criterion. This selection process can be outlined as follows:(37)xi′←{xi′∈{xi(1),xi(2),…,xi(HMS)}withprobabilityHMCRxi′∈Xiwithprobability,1-HMCROncexi′is determined, then it is checked for feasibility. In case of infeasibility, a New Harmony is improvised by repeating this step until feasibility is satisfied. The HMCR is the probability of choosing one value from the historic values stored in HM and (1- HMCR) is the probability of randomly choosing one feasible values not limited to values stored in HM. For instance, in this implementation we have assumed HMCR = 0.85. This implies that HS algorithm will choose a feasible value from HM with 85% probability. Whereas, HS can also be generated totally new, outside HM with 15% probability. It is not recommended to have HMCR = 1. This criterion is used in pursuit of improving the HS process by considering values outside HM. This feature resembles mutation rate in GA.Every component of the NH vector,x′={x1′,x2′,…,xN′}is considered to determine whether it should be pitch adjusted. PAR parameter is used in this process to determine a decision variable,xi′as follows:(38)Pitchadjustmentdecisiononxi′←{Yes,withprobabilityPARNo,withprobabilitiy,1-PARThe pitch adjustment process is only executed once a value in NH is chosen from the HM with a probability, PAR. We have selected PAR = 0.35 in this implementation of HS. Naturally, 1- PAR is the probability of having no pitch adjustment on a variablexi′in NH. In case the pitch adjusting decision for a variable,xi′in NH is Yes, then the variablexi′is adjusted as follows:(39)xi′←xi′+ψwhere ψ is the bandwidth with for a continuous decision variable used for adjustment. ψ is selected randomly such thatψ∈U[ψ̲,ψ¯]. As earlier suggested in Lee and Geem (2005),ψ̲=−1,andψ¯=1which has been adopted in this implementation of HS as well. A detailed illustration of the NH continuous search strategy based on the HS meta-heuristic algorithm can be found in Lee and Geem (2005). The HMCR and PAR parameters introduced in the harmony search help the algorithm to find globally and locally improved solutions, respectively.In Step 4, if the NH vector is better than the worst harmony in HM in terms of the objective function value, the New Harmony is included in the HM and the existing worst harmony is excluded from the HM. The HM is then sorted by the objective function value.In Step 5, the computations are terminated when the termination criterion is satisfied. If not, Steps 3 and 4 are repeated. In Table 2, we have selected the best observed values for the parameters for HS meta-heuristic after conducting a series of numerical experimentation with these parameters.In this section, a numerical study is presented for DP and SP. In DP, a firm experiences price-dependent deterministic demand and in SP, the demand experienced is price-dependent stochastic. The purpose of the numerical illustration is to examine the impact of demand leakage onto a firm’s strategy for an integrated optimal control of price differentiation, pricing, capacity allocation and process mean decisions. This research problem can be regarded as an interface between production system and pricing theory from economics. We have selected the problem related parameters from published related research in both pricing and process targeting. In Table 3 we present the data selected for the parameters of the integrated problem of RM and process targeting. The pseudocode of the HS flowchart from Fig. 3 was implemented in MATLAB Release 2013a and tested on Intel Core i7-3520M processor 2.9 GHz and 8GB RAM, with Windows 7, 64-bit operating system.In the deterministic case it is obvious to notice thatσξi=0,∀i={1,2},and therefore, demand information is perfectly known to a firm. In Table 4is reported the impact of demand leakage (θ) and process variability (σ) onto the firm’s profitability. An increase of both parameters, demand leakage, θ, and process variability, σ, tends to diminish the optimal expected profit, E(Π*) of the firm. Thus, for a process variabilityσ=2,an increase in demand leakage from 0 percent to 15 percent causes a reduction around 15.2 percent of the optimal profit gains from $2522.035 to $2139.07. As the process variability, σ, increases, the firm’s profit will have a more diminishing trend. Thus, when the process variability is high, in this exampleσ=5,the optimal expected profit of $1419.52 is diminished at 15 percent demand leakage with almost 23.5 percent to $1065.90. Furthermore, an increase in demand leakage, θ, causes a firm to lower the process target mean, μ, as with a high demand leakage level, the expected demand for product class 2 is likely to increase. It can be noticed from Table 4 that, whenσ=2and there is no demand leakage, the optimal process target mean is 13.62, which decreases to 13.25 when demand leakage increases to 15 percent. Similarly, at high process variabilityσ=5,with no demand leakage, the optimal process target mean is 16.63 which is also reduced to 15.94 when the firm experiences a demand leakage of 15 percent. Noticeably here that a firm’s optimal strategy is directed towards minimizing the price differencep1−p2as the demand leakage factor, θ, increases in response to high proportion of the demand leakage from product class 1 to the product class 2. Fig. 4illustrates the impact of the exogenous factors of demand leakage and process variability onto the firm’s profit under deterministic demand assumption.In the stochastic demand situation the price-dependent deterministic demand parameters values are set as in the previous subsection and, as we have assumed, for each product class the stochastic demand mean isμξi=0,∀i={1,2}. For simplicityσξiare assumed equal for each product class segment, thus,σξ=σξi,∀i={1,2},and for brevity purposes only two values of process variability are used in the numerical experimentation, such that,σξ={3,5}. Consistent with Mostard, Koster, and Teunter (2005), the stochastic factor of demand is assumedξi∈[−3σξ,3σξ]. In a complex problem like this one, the numerical experimentation is conducted with uniform and normal distributions only. Tables 5and 6report the numerical experimentation results when a firm faces stochastic price-dependent demand distributed uniformly and normally, respectively. Also, we assumed the holding per unit of excess inventory and the shortage cost per unit of unmet inventory such that,hi=ki=1,∀i={1,2}. We can remark here that depending on the market demand situation, a firm may hold a positive (or negative) safety stock which is actually a differential of capacity allocation for a product class and price-dependent deterministic demand, at a given price for that product class. In both uniform and normal distribution scenarios, the findings on the process variability influence, σ, onto the firm’s profit and the production process mean are similar to deterministic demand situation. Therefore, the firm’s profit will follow a descending trend as long as process standard deviation is intensifying. This is intuitive since a high value of standard deviation will scatter the quality characteristic of the products from the target mean and will generate more non-conforming products in production output, thus, the profit decrease as more non-conforming products are produced. Also, the optimum process mean setting is higher if the process standard deviation increases which is obvious since a high process variability indicate a high probability of violating the specification limits resulting more products of class 2 and 3. These results are consistent with the findings from process targeting literature (Duffuaa & El-Gaaly, 2013a,b; Hariga & Al-Fawzan, 2005). Similarly, the demand leakage, θ, has a diminishing influence onto the firm’s profit, as its value increase, contributing beside the process variability, σ, at the profitability’s descending trend. For instance, at any given demand variability, σξ, an increase in demand leakage, θ, drives the firm to increase more of its capacity for class 2 products. Naturally, the firm increases prices in both product classes, while reducing the price differential,p1*−p2*,to mitigate the demand leakage effect. For example, in the uniform demand distribution case, whenσξ=3,at a process variability ofσ=2,the firm will increase its capacity for class 2 products with 42.4% when demand leakage increase from 0 percent to 15 percent and the price differentialp1*−p2*drops from 17 units to less than 1, causing a profit decrease of 14.2 percent. Likewise, the example for normal distribution demand gives the same response of the firm’s decisions on prices and quantities allocation which will generate a decrease on the optimal profit slightly less than in the case of uniform demand distribution. Interesting to notice here is that, unlike in the deterministic case, demand leakage becomes less influential onto the optimal process mean due to the cumulative stochastic effect from both market demand and process variability. Thus, the firm is lowering the process target mean, μ, as demand leakage, θ, increases, only if the process variability, σ, and demand variability, σξ, are low. In the example with uniform distribution, whenσ=2and demand variabilityσξ=3,the firm is lowering the process mean, μ, with 1.6 percent, as demand leakage increase to 5 percent. For the sameσξ=3,if the process variability increases beyond 2, then the firm will increase the process mean while demand leakage intensifies. While studying the effect of demand variability, σξ, as its level increases the firm tends to increase the process target, i.e., the mean quality characteristics, and obviously the firm’s profitability diminishes as well. Similar to the numerical study with deterministic demand, Tables 5 and 6 reports a numerical experimentation study under stochastic demand with uniform and normal distribution, respectively. The comparative overall results from the two table shows that a firm experiences better profitability when demand is observed with normal distribution. This finding is due to the structure of normal distribution, while the rest of the problem related parameters are the same. The reported CPU time differs considerably from one case to another, due to the different structures of the uniform and normal distributions and the MATLAB implementation of demands’ probability distribution functions.In this section, a comparative analysis is presented where the impact of optimal segmentation is studied numerically for price-dependent deterministic demand situation. Earlier, Phillips (2005) presented a similar comparative analysis of how does an optimal price differentiation strategy can improve profitability to a firm in contrast to an arbitrary price differentiation strategy. Fig. 5presents a comparison of the fixed price differentiation strategies,υ={30,40,50}and the optimal price differentiation,υ*. Typically, when the price differentiation is fixed, for instance atυ=30,then the firm will optimize the prices, p1, and p2, along with the capacity allocation decisions, q1, q2, and w for class 1 products, class 2 products and reworked items, respectively. From Fig. 5 it can be clearly observed that a firm can achieve superior profitability while segmenting the market using the proposed optimal price differentiation strategy,υ*. The numerical experimentation results reported in Fig. 5 are generated for a low process variabilityσ=2. A similar analysis with a high process variability,σ=5,is reported in Fig. 6. Form Fig. 6 it is more evidently remarked that the optimal price differentiation is more attractive when profitability is a performance measure and process variability is high. The figure provides a graphical support to the fact that, an increase of process variability is influential towards the performance of the proposed integrated framework, undoubtedly, the leakage also is found to be influential. The findings on optimal price differentiation strategy influence onto the firm’s profitability when it experience stochastic demand behavior are obviously similar to the deterministic scenario, thus, we resume to expose the results for only one demand situation.In this paper, we proposed mathematical models for an optimal joint determination of process mean, pricing, production quantity and market segmentation for a manufacturing firm. The market segmentation is achieved using a differentiation price, however, it is assumed imperfect and therefore the demand leakage is experienced. We proposed two models, the first model considered the price-dependent deterministic demand and the later model considered the price-dependent stochastic demand. The models developed are solved using a meta-heuristic and we have implemented a harmony search algorithm. A numerical illustration is presented to explore the effects of the model related parameters on the joint optimal decisions of the firm. This research has highlighted following findings:1.When a firm adopts an integrated optimal strategy of process targeting, pricing and price differentiation decisions, it yields significantly superior profits compared to the situation when the firm selects an arbitrary price differentiation to segment the market. From the numerical study, this finding is consistently observed in both deterministic and stochastic demand situations.As the process variability increases, the firm response in a deterministic demand scenario, is to increase the process mean to maintain the desired productivity of the conforming items for each product class.As response to an increase in demand leakage, the firm raises the prices in both market segments, however, it also skims the price differential between the two product classes to mitigate the demand leakage.Although this is the first study that suggests a mathematical model to outline an integrated optimization approach of pricing and process targeting problem with the demand leakage effect, yet, there are many avenues still unexplored. At present, the proposed model assumes that the distinct market segments are determined and maintained without any fencing cost incurred. As rightly identified in Zhang et al. (2010), a fencing cost may be observed by the firm, once it enforces a control mechanism to minimize the demand leakage between market segments. Also, there is only a single process considered in this study, whose mean needs to be determined by the firm along with other decision controls to optimize its profit. Nevertheless, in many real life situations it is not uncommon that the products are manufactured through a number of processes. Furthermore, this study uses additive model for price-dependent stochastic demand with linear deterministic price-dependent demand curve, which is the most widely used in the literature (Raza, 2015b; Zhang et al., 2010). However, depending upon the modeling framework of stochastic price-dependent demand and the type of deterministic price-dependent demand curve, the model can be substantially different in performance (Smith, Martinez-Flores, & Cardenas-Barron, 2007). Nevertheless, a detailed comparative analysis of modeling frameworks and price-dependent deterministic demand curve for this problem is not presented in this paper.The future work directions may include the use of the proposed integrated approach to a firm that manufactures products in more than one production process, therefore, an extension of this study could be to consider optimal means for a combination of processes. The present analysis has considered the firm in monopoly only, but an interesting avenue would be to consider a game theoretic approach to the problem of the firm in a duopoly or oligopoly. We have formalized our problem based on the risk-neutral newsvendor problem under a given demand distribution, however, the risk-averse newsvendor with pricing and quantity decisions can take an new interesting joint approach with the targeting problem when a risk-averse decision criteria as expected utility (EU) maximization, mean-variance (MV) analysis, or conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) minimization (see Katariya, Cetinkaya, and Tekin, 2014 for more details) is considered into the problem. In this study, we have presented a meta-heuristic using harmony search, indeed a comparative analysis of the proposed meta-heuristic is needed to benchmark its performance. To this need, an interesting research direction would be to consider developing tighter bounds on the expected revenue functions for the models developed here. One such possibility would be develop a lower bound on the expected total revenue using distribution-free approach (see Raza, 2014, and Raza, 2015b for details). This performance of harmony search may also be tested by comparing it with other meta-heuristics which were discussed earlier in this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
