@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quality and entry deterrence

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the use of quality by a monopolist facing a potential entry threat.If entry occurs, firms compete on quality and price.The incumbent may over-invest to deter or under-invest to accommodate.Quality cost, entry cost, and market characteristics drive the incumbent’s strategy.Our quality definition extends beyond the traditional quality/service dynamics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quality,Game theory,Competition,Entry,Platforms and content,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We analyze the role of quality, which we define as an attribute of a product that increases consumers’ willingness to buy, as a competitive tool in a quality-price setting. We consider an incumbent’s entry-deterrence strategies using quality as a deterrent when faced by a potential entrant. We investigate settings motivating the incumbent to blockade the entrant (i.e., prevent entry without extra effort), deter the entrant (i.e., prevent entry with extra effort), or accommodate the entrant (i.e., allow the entry to take place). We identify conditions under which the incumbent may actually over-invest in quality to deter entrance. More interestingly, we also identify conditions under which the incumbent may decrease his quality investment to make it easier for the entrant to penetrate the market. Our model sheds light on entry scenarios of particular platform product markets such as the entry of Xbox to the video game console market.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Quality can be broadly defined as any product attribute that increases end-user satisfaction and hence willingness to buy, such as reliability, service, or variety. Thus quality has emerged as a vital strategy in recent years and redefined the dynamics of competition. For example, since entering the US market, Toyota gained significant market share and overtook General Motors in sales to become the top automaker in the US, in large part due to Toyota’s reputation for reliability. However, when Toyota’s acceleration problems led to more than nine million recalls worldwide, the damage on the carmaker’s reputation and its impact on sales were significant; Toyota’s 2010 US sales declined while the competitors enjoyed a 13% gain (Bunkley, 2011). The role of quality is not limited to manufacturing; quality plays an important role in the service industry as well – this time under the rubric of “service.” Aggressive investments in customer satisfaction enabled Amazon.com to emerge as the market leader in e-commerce in early 2000s; the company offered superior service with its enhanced supply chain and distribution network (which enabled Amazon.com to offer free and fast shipping in 2002), customer review system, and recommendation engine (Casadesus-Masanell & Thaker, 2012).Recently, similar dynamics to that of traditional quality/service problems have emerged in other settings. For example, in 2009, AT&T acquired 875,000 new customers in a single quarter, around 75% of which chose AT&T due to the company’s iPhone exclusivity agreement with Apple (Hansell, 2009). Although this exclusivity agreement required high subsidization, with expectations of 2.5 million new iPhone customers a year demanding expensive data plans, AT&T enjoyed growth in revenue and wireless operating margin (Hansell, 2009). AT&T’s iPhone exclusivity investment shares similar characteristics with a quality investment; it facilitated a demand spike and change in operating costs/savings.Our definition of quality applies to some platform product1Products such as video game consoles, credit cards, operating systems, social networking software, and TV networks are called “platform products”; they bring end consumers and content developers together.1markets as well. For example, for a platform like a video game console, the availability and variety of compatible games with that console is a critical factor (Fackler, 2007; Powers, 2003; Wildstrom, 2005). After all, “games drive console sales” (Fujimura, 2013). Thus, to boost console sales, manufacturers manipulate game availability (i.e., variety) by developing their own games in-house and/or setting up license agreements with independent game developers/publishers (Hoyt, Lee, & Holloway, 2006). By these agreements, manufacturers also collect royalties from game sales (Coughlan, 2004). Development of a single game typically takes 18months and it could cost in excess of $10M (Black, 2001; Greene & Edwards, 2004). Hence, much like quality of a product, variety is a long-term investment. In terms of revenue, variety acts similar to quality: per each console sold, the manufacturer receives the console revenue and royalties from games. In fact, “Nintendo […] derives almost all its revenue from games” (Fujimura, 2013). Similar dynamics also apply to the emerging smart TV market where TV manufacturers escalate their efforts to increase available content and uncover new avenues of revenue generation from content consumption (Elliott, 2011; Hyong-ki, 2012; Turbow, 2010).An intriguing question is whether quality (defined in broad terms by Kaya & Özer (2009) as “product attributes which consumers prefer more to less”) can also be used as an effective and credible entry-deterrence strategy. We study the role of quality in entry deterrence by considering a potential entry scenario to a monopoly market and we characterize the incumbent’s entry-deterrence strategies involving his quality investment. If entry occurs, the two firms compete by setting prices. We derive the conditions motivating the incumbent to blockade the entrant (i.e., prevent entry without over-investing in quality), deter the entrant (i.e., over-invest in quality to prevent entry), or accommodate the entrant (i.e., allow the entry to take place). We compare the use of manipulating quality with other strategies such as vertical differentiation, manipulating capacity (Dixit, 1980) or advertising (Schmalensee, 1983) in terms of over- and under-investments for deterrence and/or accommodation.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We briefly discuss the relevant literature in Section 2, and discuss the model details in Section 3. In Section 4, we study our entry model and characterize conditions under which the incumbent blockades, deters, or accommodates the entrant. Finally, in Section 5, we discuss how our model extends to some platform product markets such as video game console markets and we conclude the paper. To improve the readability of the paper, all proofs are presented in Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
