@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
From partial derivatives of DEA frontiers to marginal products, marginal rates of substitution, and returns to scale

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper raises the problem of measuring partial derivatives of transformation functions in DEA models.The derivatives of the DEA frontier imply a displacement on the frontier and a shift of the frontier.We reconcile the theoretical partial derivatives and the empirical DEA version of these derivatives.We show the invariance of the marginal rate of substitution to the partial derivatives definition.We show the invariance of the returns to scale to the partial derivatives definition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Marginal products,Transformation function,First derivatives,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The characterization of a technology, from an economic point of view, often uses the first derivatives of either the transformation or the production function. In a parametric setting, these quantities are readily available as they can be easily deduced from the first derivatives of the specified function. In the standard framework of data envelopment analysis (DEA) models these quantities are not so easily obtained. The difficulty resides in the fact that marginal changes of inputs and outputs might affect the position of the frontier itself while the calculation of first derivatives for economic purposes assumes that the frontier is held constant. We develop here a procedure to recover first derivatives of transformation functions in DEA models and we show how we can evacuate the problem of the (marginal) shift of the frontier. We show how the knowledge of the first derivatives of the frontier estimated by DEA can be used to deduce and compute marginal products, marginal rates of substitution, and returns to scale for each decision making unit (DMU) in the sample.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA) is mostly used to provide a representation of the technology by enveloping the observations belonging to the production set. For instance, one of the most frequent utilizations of frontiers estimated by DEA is the computation of efficiency scores. That is, an efficiency score measures the distance between the observed inputs/outputs combination and the estimated frontier. Focusing on efficiency measurement hides the fact that the frontier itself is a source of important information about the technology and about the relationship between the production process and the economic environment. For example, we know that increasing returns to scale and competitive markets are not compatible. To assess this situation we need to measure returns to scale, which are features of the frontier. Thus, the knowledge of the frontier of a production process contains valuable information about technological characteristics and the implied consequences on the functioning of the economy. Recovering those characteristics in a meaningful way is a challenge we face.The tools used to define the technological characteristics of a production process are the derivatives of either the production function or the transformation function. In the efficiency literature, the production and transformation functions are replaced by the estimated frontier of the production set. For example, the marginal product of labor in a multiple inputs, single output production process described by a differentiable production function is given by the partial derivative of the production function with respect to labor. In this framework, the substitution between inputs, for example between capital and labor, is defined as the marginal rate of substitution, and is measured as the ratio of the marginal products of labor and capital. An exact measure of the returns to scale is obtained using a weighted sum of marginal products. This shows that marginal product measurement is essential and its correct measurement is of paramount importance in applied economics and management. Since marginal products can always be defined as partial derivatives of a production set, it means that a consistent characterization of the technology cannot be done without a good measure of the partial derivatives of the frontier of this production set.There are many ways to estimate a frontier, the most popular being DEA and Stochastic Frontier (SFA). In spite of the fact that both methods use a production function or a transformation function to represent the frontier of the production possibility set, each has virtues and drawbacks. When a parametric method is used and the function is differentiable, first derivatives of the functional form are used to compute marginal products, returns to scale, and marginal rates of substitution. For example, suppose that a production function is used,y=g(x1,…,xn), then the marginal product of input xiis given by the partial derivative of this function with respect to the given input, i.e.,MPi=gi(x1,…,xn)=∂g(x1,…,xn)/∂xi. That is, in a parametric model (including SFA), when the technology is represented by a differentiable production or transformation function, the first derivatives provide a straightforward and unambiguous characterization of the technology. Unfortunately, simplicity comes at a cost. In such a framework, it is necessary to impose a priori a specific functional form to the technology and a specific stochastic environment.DEA being a nonparametric approach, it has the advantage of not requiring the specification of a functional form or a stochastic environment to estimate the frontier, making it an attractive alternative to SFA or any parametric approach. However, the nonparametric nature of the DEA estimates introduces a potential ambiguity on the measurement of the frontier's partial derivatives. Thus, the marginal products and all measures deduced from the partial derivatives would be affected. The source of this ambiguity resides in the fact that a change in a variable used to estimate the frontier might induce both, a movement along the frontier and a shift of the frontier itself. Beyond Cooper, Park, and Pastor-Ciurana (2000), this topic did not attract a lot of attention in the literature, which is unfortunate because the ambiguity can be misleading if not addressed correctly. To help remove this ambiguity we present an interpretation of the DEA model that allows us to retrieve the first derivatives of the transformation function in a way that is compatible with the standard interpretation of a movement along the frontier (Section 2). The procedure rests on establishing a correspondence between the true technology and the DEA structure used to estimate the technology. In turn, this methodology allows us to compute marginal products, marginal rates of substitution, and returns to scale, using these measures of the partial derivatives (Section 3). All in all, this approach represents a solution to a standard problem for technology measurement in DEA models. This methodology is illustrated through a numerical example, and we compare it to the two-step approach by Cooper et al. (2000) (Section 4).In this section we present the main result of the paper on the calculation of the partial derivative of the production frontier estimated by DEA with respect to marginal changes in the data.The technology of the firm is described by a transformation function. We assume that a firm produces m outputs,y=(y1,…,ym), using n variable inputs,x=(x1,…,xn), with a technology given by a twice differentiable transformation function, f(y, x) ≤ 0. For points on the frontier (i.e., y and x such thatf(y,x)=0) we usually have ∂f(y, x)/∂yj≥ 0 forj=1,…,mand ∂f(y, x)/∂xi≤ 0 fori=1,…,n. These partial derivatives are clearly computed for a given transformation function, f. In other words, the gradient of the function f corresponds exclusively to movements along the frontier since the frontier itself is given. It also means that the calculation of marginal products as the ratio of first derivatives of the transformation function is done under the assumption that the variation of the function when we change either xior yjor both is strictly a movement along the frontier. That is, the mere existence of the frontier imposes that it is not shifted by input or output changes. It simply means that the true frontier exists independently of the data on inputs and outputs.This is not the case for the DEA frontier, however. By construction, all facets rest on a number of sample points, points that end up eventually in the reference sets of other observations in the sample. The frontier is made of sample points and their convex combinations, so that all observations are related, one way or another, to the sample points used to construct the frontier. In view of this argument about the DEA frontier, it means that a small input or output change may induce a change in the value assumed by the function describing the frontier from two sources: The marginal effect (or partial derivative) and a shift of the function itself (i.e., a shift of the frontier). Consequently, because we have an estimate of the frontier that depends on the data, a change in the data used to estimate the frontier introduces two effects and one of them, the potential shift of the frontier, may obscure the calculation of the partial derivatives required for the relevant characterization of the technology. Then, to measure the partial derivatives we have to isolate and subtract the change attributed to the frontier shift from the overall differential effect. Said otherwise, our objective is to disentangle the movement along the frontier from the frontier shifts when an input or an output is changed in order to obtain estimates offyj=∂f(y,x)/∂yjandfxi=∂f(y,x)/∂xiwhen the production technology is estimated by DEA. This requires that we examine the linkage between the true technology and the DEA technology (i.e., the technology estimated by DEA).To do so, suppose for the moment that the true technology is known and consider estimating the efficiency of a given decision making unit (DMU) using an input-oriented model. For the rest of the paper, we denote by h the evaluated DMU. Let yhand xhbe the output and input vectors of unit h, respectively. Then, the technical efficiency of unit h, denoted θh, is obtained by solving the following problem (Caves, Christensen, & Diewert, 1982):(1)minθh{θh:f(yh,θhxh)≤0}The equivalence between the standard definition of the distance function and Farrell's efficiency is stated asminθh{θh:f(yh,θhxh)≤0}=1/maxβh{βh:f(yh,xh/βh)≤0}. The first problem is Farrell's efficiency and the second Shephard's distance function. Note that Eq. (1) follows directly from the duality between the production possibility set and the transformation function. The Lagrangian corresponding to problem (1) is:(2)LhTE=θh+φhf(yh,θhxh),where φhis the Lagrange multiplier and θhis Farrell's (1957) input-oriented technical efficiency measure. Now, recall that DEA approximates this problem with a piecewise-linear structure. That is, the production possibility set is constructed as a convex hull of the data. In order to establish a connection between the “true” problem and the approximation defined below, we introduce a first-order Taylor approximation of LTEaround a point on the frontier, say (y0, x0), to obtain:(3)LhTE≈θh+φhf(y0,x0)+φh∑j=1mfyj(y0,x0)(yjh−yj0)+φh∑i=1nfxi(y0,x0)(θhxih−xi0).It is important to keep in mind that Eq. (3) is an approximation of the problem for the true f.11Note that in Eq. (3) we have written the input differential as(θhxih−x0)and not(θhxih−θhx0). This is so because the Taylor approximation is taken around the point (y0, x0), which is already on the frontier. The presence of θ in the first term,θhxih, is justified by the fact that since we are interested by marginal effect taking place along the frontier, the observed and inefficient point must be projected onto the frontier.This linear approximation of the technology is in the neighborhood of a point on the frontier, (y0, x0), so that the partial derivatives are well defined. In other words, the linearized Lagrangian describes a supporting hyperplane for the true technology. Note that all these results have their equivalent counterpart using the output-oriented model, i.e.,maxθ0{θ0:f(θ0y,x)≤0}, and all results can easily be extended.We now turn to the estimation of the true technology using DEA.22Based on works by Efron and Tibshirani (1993) and Simar and Wilson (1998), it has been proposed to compute statistical properties of non-parametric estimator of efficiency and technology measurements using bootstrap methods. These technics apply here, but they are not the central point of our argument, we use estimation in the sense of implementing DEA methods to a sample of DMUs.To do so, suppose that some form of free disposal (for both outputs and inputs) is satisfied and that the production set is convex. The input-oriented problem given by Eq. (1) for firm h can be approximated by:(4)minθh{θh:∑d=1Dλdhyjd≥yjh,∀j=1,…,m;∑d=1Dλdhxid≤θhxih,∀i=1,…,n;∑d=1Dλdh=1,λdh≥0,∀d=1,…,D}where D denotes the total number of DMUs. Eq. (4) is the envelopment form of the DEA model. In this optimization problem, the first and second terms are the free disposal constraints for the outputs and the inputs, respectively. The third term is the convexity constraint of the units, i.e.,∑d=1Dλdh=1. (For sake of simplicity, hereafter this constraint will be called the convexity constraint.) It creates the smallest convex hull enveloping of data, which is usually known as the BCC model (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984). Theλdhs are weights used to create a DMU, real or virtual, as a convex combination of all the DMUs in the sample. This constructed DMU serves as a reference for the assessed DMU. When the assessed DMU, h, is efficient it is always possible to choose the λs such thatλhh=1andλdh=0, for all d ≠ h. If one chooses not to impose the convexity constraint, the technology is forced into a cone. This choice leads to the well-known CCR model (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978). Note that, since the corresponding technology generated by the CCR model is a cone, the marginal and the average products are equal.The Lagrangian corresponding to the problem in Eq. (4) is:(5)LDEA=θh+∑j=1mνyjh[yjh−∑d=1Dλdhyjd]+∑i=1nνxih[∑d=1Dλdhxid−θhxih]+ν0h[1−∑d=1Dλdh].whereνyjhare the dual variables (the Lagrange multiplier) on the output free disposal constraints,νxihare the dual variables on the input free disposal constraints, andν0his the dual variable on the convexity constraint. The latter variable is related to returns to scale, something that will be discussed in Section 3. Eq. (5) is the DEA equivalent of LTE(Eq. (2) or its linearized version Eq. (3)). Note that this Lagrangian is not used in practice and is presented here to help us connect the terms and the quantities of interest in Eqs. (4) and (5). The solution to Eq. (5) produces two quantities, an estimated efficiency score and a transformation function,f^DEA(y,x), that corresponds to the envelope of the data.Now, since Eqs. (3) and (5) are two representations of the same problem, there must be a correspondence between the terms in the linearized version of LTE(i.e., Eq. (3)) and the terms in LDEA(i.e., Eq. (5)).From Eqs. (3) and (5), we have:(6)φhf(y0,x0)+φh∑j=1mfyj(y0,x0)(yjh−yj0)+φh∑i=1nfxi(y0,x0)(θhxih−xi0)≈∑j=1mνyjh[yjh−∑d=1Dλdhyjd]+∑i=1nνxih[∑d=1Dλdhxid−θhxih]+ν0h[1−∑d=1Dλdh].Thus some terms in Eq. (6) would correspond to the partial derivatives of the transformation function evaluated at the estimated point, as it is spelled out in the linearized version of the true Lagrangian. Because we have used a first order Taylor approximation, this is clearly a local measure. So our results hold in the neighborhood of (y0, x0).The empirical version of the transformation function introduces a supplementary complication, however. Since the function is constructed using all points in the sample, the frontier itself is made of a combination of sample points.33The implementation of the DEA method rests on some regularity conditions to ensure the consistency of the estimator for well-behaved dataset. It has been shown that the DEA estimator is a consistent estimator of the transformation function, but it requires large dataset. For more details the reader is referred to Kneip et al. (1998). The important point here is that as the sample size increases, the estimated technology gets closer to the true one and consequently both, the estimated and true technologies, exhibit the same characteristics.Thus, a perturbation of a point on the frontier would induce two effects: A movement along the frontier and a shift of the frontier itself. We wish to extract the movement along the frontier from the overall effect in order to obtain estimates of the partial derivatives of the estimated transformation function. The reason for the ambiguity is that the frontier supporting the transformation function is constructed using all the observations, leading to a piecewise linear polyhedron. Clearly, all facets are differentiable (except, of course, at their intersections), but the construction of the facets themselves depends potentially on the entire dataset used to estimate the frontier. This is so because, unlike parametric frontier, there is no “functional form” in DEA models that can be taken as given.To formalize the problem in the multi-output case, the transformation function approximated by the DEA model can be written as fDEA(y, x, δ(X, Y)) ≤ 0 where δ(X, Y) is the data set and(X,Y)={(xd,yd)}d=1D.44Note that δ(X, Y) is not an indicator of the position of the production frontier as in Solow (1957) but a set operator defined on the dataset. It just reflects the fact that the transformation function estimated by DEA, as it can be seen in Eqs. (4)–(6), depends on the entire dataset.Here again, the term δ(X, Y) reckons with the fact that by construction the DEA frontier is potentially affected by a shift factor, because the frontier itself depends on all observations in the dataset, as mentioned above. The vector of first-order derivatives of the DEA representation is:(7)[fxDEA+fδDEAδXfyDEA+fδDEAδY].Clearly, this expression does not immediately correspond to the marginal product of input i. However, a simple argument permits an interpretation of the derivative in the usual way, allowing us to obtain meaningful measures of the technology using the first derivative of the constructed frontier.The function fDEA(y, x, δ(X, Y)) is not directly observed in practice, as it is impossible to single out the shift factor in the explicit writing of the DEA program. The estimated frontier appears as an implicit form of the estimated DEA-transformation function, denotedf^DEA(y,x). Thus, the shift factor is only implicitly included in the estimated frontier and our purpose here is to identify it. The correspondence between the DEA transformation function and the estimated implicit form means that we must havef^DEA(y,x)=fDEA(y,x,δ(X,Y)). We must also have:(8)[f^xDEAf^yDEA]=[fxDEA+fδDEAδXfyDEA+fδDEAδY].In Eqs. (7) and (8), some of the terms are associated to a shift of the frontier and others to movement along the frontier. The quantities that are relevant for most economic problems are the partial derivatives of the transformation function (i.e., the movement along the frontier). Consequently, we seek the conditions under which we havefx≈fxDEAandfy≈fyDEAand we also wish to identify the elements off^xDEAandf^yDEAcorresponding to the partial derivatives of the transformation function approximated byfxDEAandfyDEA. In other words, the partial derivatives of the transformation function estimated by DEA include approximation for the partial derivatives and for the shift of the function. We wish to identify the latter in order to eliminate it to keep only the movement along the frontier.For a decision-making unit evaluated by the DEA method, the partial derivatives of the DEA frontier written under its implicit form, i.e.f^DEA, using Eq. (6), are given by:55Without loss of generality, the transformation function can be normalized such that the Lagrange multiplier is equal to 1 at the optimum. This multiplier plays no role thereafter.(9)[f^xDEAf^yDEA]=[λhhνxh−θhνxhνyh−λhhνyh]hgiven.Now, by construction, the frontier is made of a convex combination of sample points (units) and the weights are given by theλdhsare such that they sum to one,∑d=1Dλdh=1. Since the assessed DMU, h, is efficient, it satisfies∑d=1Dλdhxd=xh=λhhxh. Consequently,λhhis part of the frontier and is related to the term δ(X, Y), so using Eqs. (8) and (9), it is easy to deduce that:(10)[fδDEAδXfδDEAδY]=[λhhνxh−λhhνyh].This equation implies there must be a proportionality factor relating the terms on both sides of this equation. That is,fδDEA=αλhh,δX=νxh/α, andδY=−νyh/α, where α is this common proportionality factor. But then, from our Taylor approximation of the Lagrangian in Eq. (4) and the term equivalences between the linear approximation of the Lagrangian and the DEA Lagrangian given by Eq. (6), we haveθhfx≈−θhνxhandfy=νyh, so that:(11)[fxfy]≈[fxDEAfyDEA]=[−νxhνyh]hgiven.This shows that the partial derivatives of the transformation function can be approximated by the dual variables used to form the production frontier (or its projection on the frontier when the unit is inefficient).66To compute the frontier, we use a radial input oriented model without explicitly specifying the slacks. As noted by a referee, it would be wise to include them and to interpret cautiously the results when these slacks are not zero. For these units, the procedure would return an interval for the partial derivatives that includes a bound equal to either zero or infinity. This just shows that we are calculating partial derivatives for units for which we do not have enough information to return an interval or an exact value bounded away from either zero or infinity. The problem in these cases is with the lack of data, not the method per se.We have also reached our objective and shown that there exists a standard interpretation of the partial derivatives where marginal input or output changes do not shift the frontier. The following section shows how to use this result to construct the standard technology measures.The partial derivatives are interesting by themselves, but they become invaluable when characterizing the technology. The key ingredient for the characterization of the technology is the marginal product. In the case of a single output, it is simply the partial derivative of the production function. In multi-output settings, it is slightly different but the principle remains the same. We present here how to use the results of the previous section to deduce the marginal products in multi-output production processes. Then, these marginal products are used to estimate the degree of substitutability between inputs through the marginal rate of substitution or to determine the optimal scale of production using returns to scale. These two problems will be addressed in turn. As we saw in the previous section however, the calculation of the partial derivatives of the transformation function estimated by DEA is made of two components and we have to take into account the shift of the frontier. As it turns out, this problem is immaterial when we conduct the calculation of the technology measures.Marginal products are the main components of a large number of technology measurements, including marginal rates of technical substitution between two inputs, marginal rates of transformation between two outputs, and returns to scale. Consequently, the first step is to correctly define this concept.To compute the marginal products, we start withf(y,x)=0and take the total differential with respect to yjand xiand then use it to obtain:(12)MPh(yjh,xih)=ΔyjhΔxih|f=0=−fxifyj,∀(i,j).Since the calculation is forf(y,x)=0, it must be clear that the variations in Eq. (12) are along the frontier of the production possibility set and that it does not hold for input-output mix inside the set (inefficient units). If we were to consider units inside the production possibility set, these variations would be virtually impossible to interpret as the change in output following a change in input can be attributed to marginal product as well as efficiency catch up and there is no way to identify the source explicitly.Now, using Eq. (11), the marginal product can be calculated from the estimated DEA frontier as a ratio of dual weights:77The sign “≈” must be understood as “approximated by the DEA formula”. This convention is adopted throughout the rest of the paper.(13)MPh(yjh,xih)≈νxihνyjh,∀(i,j).It is important to note that the marginal product is computed at the projection point for inefficient units. For inefficient units, it might be possible for the marginal product to belong to a range of values as the sample point might be located on an edge or a vertex and when the slacks are not zero, this range is an interval that might include either zero or infinity.Now, let us consider returns to scale (RTS) measurement. To find RTS, we have to measure the required change in outputs to keep the transformation function equal to zero when inputs are increased proportionally. This means measuring quantities with respect to a given frontier. Formally, we let the inputs be expanded proportionally along a ray by a constant factor, μ, and then we find the factor, γ,by which we multiply the outputs so thatf(γy,μx)=0. A local measure is given by a ratio of the following differentials:(14)RTSh=dlnγdlnμ|γ=μ=1=dγdμ|γ=μ=1=−∑i=1nfxixi∑j=1mfyjyj.To compute returns to scale we need the partial derivatives of the transformation function. Using the definition of the partial derivatives we have outlined above, i.e.fxiDEAandfyjDEA, and evaluating the derivatives at the projection point on the frontier (yh, θhxh), we get:(15)RTSh≈−∑i=1nfxiDEAθhxi∑j=1mfyjDEAyj=θh∑i=1nνxihxih∑i=1mνyjhyjh=θhθh−ν0h=[1−ν0hθh]−1.Eq. (15) is deduced by using Eq. (11) and the dual problem associated to the DEA program given by Eq. (4). That is:(16)max(νyh,νxh,ν0h){∑j=1mνyjhyjh+ν0h:∑i=1nνxihxih=1;−∑j=1mνyjhyjd+∑i=1nνxihxid−ν0d≥0,∀d=1,…,D}.The first constraint of the dual problem givesθh∑i=1nνxihxih=θh; this can be substituted in the numerator of Eq. (15). Then, using the previous result and the second constraint of the dual problem, the equality∑j=1mνyjhyjh=θh−ν0his satisfied by both, efficient units and the projection of inefficient DMUs on the production frontier. For a detailed explanation, the reader is referred to Førsund and Hjalmarsson (2004) and Ouellette, Quesnel, and Vigeant (2012). Note that for an efficient unit, i.e., θh=1, returns to scale are justRTSh=[1−ν0h]−1. This is the standard measure found in the literature and it does not question the nature of the partial derivatives used in the process. The interpretation of Eq. (15) is as follows. Whenν0his negative, the value of RTShis less than one as it can be seen from the second to last term and returns to scale are decreasing, while,ν0his positive, RTShis larger than one and so returns to scale are increasing. This is exactly as in Banker et al. (1984).One of the main contributions of the paper is to show that the measure of RTS is not affected by the potential shift of the frontier. As we saw in Section 2, there is an alternate definition of the partial derivatives given by Eq. (9). We can use this equation, deduced from the estimated transformation functionf^DEA(y,x), to compute the returns to scale. This gives a new measure of returns to scale:(17)RTSh≈−∑i=1nf^xiDEAθhxih∑j=1mf^yjDEAyjh=∑i=1n(θh−λh)νxihxih∑j=1m(1−λh)νyjhyjh.This would appear to be at odd with the formulation based on fDEA. It turns out that it is not the case. In fact, the first interpretation is the correct one and this latter formulation of returns to scale is just an artifact and can be reduced to the standard definition using simple arguments.Suppose first that the assessed unit is inefficient, i.e., θh< 1. Then, it follows that the point (xh, yh) does not belong to the frontier and consequentlyλhh=0. Thus, the RTS formula reduces to:(18)RTSh≈−∑i=1nf^xiDEAθhxih∑j=1nf^yjDEAyjh=θh∑i=1nνxihxih∑j=1mνyjhyjh=θhθh−ν0h=[1−ν0hθh]−1,which is the standard formula for returns to scale.Now, suppose that the unit assessed is efficient, then θ = 1, and the formula for RTS is given by:(19)RTSh≈∑i=1n(1−λh)νxihxih∑j=1m(1−λh)νyjhyjh.Now, without loss of generality,λhhcan be set equal to one. But then Eq. (19) is undefined, because forλhh=1it reduces to 0/0. By application of L'Hôpital's rule, we have that:(20)RTSh≈−∑i=1nf^xiDEAθhxih∑j=1nf^yjDEAyjh=limλh→1−∑i=1nνxihxih−∑j=1mνyjhyjh=[1−ν0hθh]−1But again, this is the standard formula for returns to scale.There exist two concepts of marginal rates of substitution. One measures the substitution between inputs and the other between outputs. The marginal rate of technical substitution (MRTS) between inputs xiand xjis defined as the slope of the isoquant. That slope is equal to the ratio of marginal products of two inputs given the outputs are held constant:(21)MRTSxixk(yj)=ΔxkΔxi|f=0=−MPh(yjh,xih)MPh(yjh,xkh)=−fxifxk≈−νxihνxkh,∀(i,j,k).We observe that, as in the case of marginal products, the MRTS is the ratio of dual weights. An interesting feature of this result is that the DEA approximation of MRTS is independent of the reference output, yj.The marginal rate of transformation can be calculated similarly:(22)MRTyjyl=ΔylΔyj|f=0=−fyjfyl≈−νyjhνylh,∀(j,l).Now, suppose that one adopts the definition of the partial derivatives based on the estimated function,f^DEA(y,x), to calculate the marginal rate of substitution. Using Eq. (9), we define the marginal rate of substitution for the DEA estimator of the transformation function as follows:(23)MRTSxixk(yj)≈−f^xiDEAf^xkDEA=−(λhνxih−θhνxih)(λhνxkh−θhνxkh)=−νxih(λh−θh)νxkh(λh−θh),∀(i,k).The same logic can be applied to measure the marginal rate of transformation to obtain:(24)MRTyjyl≈−f^yjDEAf^ylDEA=−(νyjh−λhνyjh)(νylh−λhνylh)=−νyjh(1−λh)νylh(1−λh),∀(j,l).Eqs. (23) and (24) seem to conflict with the results given expressed in Eqs. (21) and (22). However, note that, except forλhh=1and θh=1, the(λh−θh)and(1−λhh)terms cancel out and we get the original formulae. Whenλhh=1and θh=1, it is slightly different because these expressions are undefined as they reduce to 0/0. However, by application of L'Hôpital's rule, we obtain:(25)MRTSxixk≈−νxihνxkh,∀(i,k)and(26)MRTyjyl≈−νyjhνylh,∀(j,l).These measures of MRTS and MRT are exactly those found in the first place. So, the definitions of MRTS and MRT are invariant to the definition of the partial derivatives used. It shows that the substitution between inputs is something that has to happen on the frontier and that the frontier has to be invariant for this concept to be meaningful. Clearly, this reasoning can be extended to any combination of inputs and outputs, and the measure will be independent of the definition of the derivative one uses.The comparison of the two methods used to calculate the marginal rates of substitution confirms our initial intuition that the measurement of the marginal productivities must be made on the frontier and that the shift of the frontier must not be a factor in the measurement of these quantities.This section presents a simple example to illustrate the procedure we have proposed to estimate the partial derivatives. This procedure is also compared to the one proposed by Cooper et al. (2000) (hereafter CPP) to compute marginal products.Table 1contains the data for four DMUs, all producing one output (Y) with one input (X). The envelope of the data is a piecewise linear technology which serves as the reference (or benchmark) technology.88Assuming that the efficient points are efficient under the true technology, the true unknown twice differentiable production function goes through the efficient points (2, 1), (3, 4), (4.5, 5) and (6, 6). In Fig. 2, we have represented the best linear approximation of the technology going through these points. This linear technology is what we call the reference technology. Since the true differentiable technology envelopes the piecewise reference linear technology, the slope of the true technology at the efficient points is bounded by the slope of contiguous facets. Furthermore, by the mean value theorem, there exists a point where the true slope is equal to the slope of the facet.The last column of the table contains the marginal product for this reference technology. We use this reference technology to assess the methods to compute the marginal product. All units are efficient except DMU C. Its projection on the frontier is the point (4.5, 5) and the associated efficiency score is θ=0.9. Clearly, given this reference technology, the marginal products are simply given by the slope of the frontier at the projection point and these can easily be computed. Note that when the frontier is not differentiable, as it is the case for units B and D because they are located on vertices of the frontier (or equivalently at the intersection of facets), the marginal product is not uniquely defined. This is a piecewise linear technology, so the range of values the marginal products can assume is bounded by the slope of the facets located on each side of the vertex. Therefore, for the two units located on vertices, the marginal product is given by an interval defined by the slopes of the facets on each side of the unit. Note also that the marginal product in C is not defined, so we report the marginal product at the projection point. This technology is represented on Fig. 1.Using the method developed above, we can compute the marginal products of the DMUs for the example data. To do so, we need to compute the dual weights, νxassociated to the input, νyassociated to the output, and the efficiency score, θ, using the primal program given by equations (4). The first three columns of Table 2contain the estimated values of these parameters, while the last column contains the estimated marginal product. The computations and solutions of the linear programs are available from the author upon request. As it can be seen, these results coincide with the true marginal products displayed in Table 1. This is not so surprising, since the true technology is piecewise linear.As it is illustrated in our example, this method is straightforward and allows us to compute the marginal product in a simple one-step procedure, as the only required ingredients to do so are multipliers.As noted above, there are circumstances where our method may return an infinite value for the marginal product. This will happen when the slacks are not zero. To illustrate that point, reconsider our example and introduce the input–output combination E=(2, ½). In spite of the fact thatθ=1, this point is inefficient as it is dominated in the direction of the output (explaining the presence of a non-zero slack on the output). Note also that in the input direction there is no slack (as it must be the case in a one-input one-output input oriented model). Therefore, we getνy=0andMPx=νx/νy=νx/0=∞.Now, there is another case that is of interest and that cannot be captured with this simple one input – one output example. When the number of inputs is larger than one, it is possible to observe cases whereθ=1but withνxi=0for some input xi. This would happen when an inefficient unit is projected on a vertical or horizontal section of an isoquant in a two-input production technology or for input combinations located on these vertical or horizontal sections. This is the classical case for a non-zero input slack. This leads directly to a marginal productivity of zero.From our point of view, this is an intrinsic limitation of the distance function approximated by DEA. The existence of non-zero slacks can be interpreted as insufficient information to better characterize the frontier, thus leading toνy=0orνx=0or equivalently to non-zero slacks.99For a complete discussion of slacks, the reader is referred to Coelli et al. (2005).The vertical and horizontal half lines of the production set are just the best we can do considering the information we have on DMUs.As an alternative to our one-step method, CPP propose a two-step procedure. To calculate the marginal products they first use a standard additive model to identify the frontier and the efficient units, then they use a second additive model in which the observed bundles are replaced by the technically efficient ones and the objective is to maximize a value function corresponding to the profit of the DMUs associated to the slacks valued at a vector of input-output prices. The interesting point here is that the slack variables in the second step measure input and output changes along the frontier for any DMUs that is located on a facet that has contact with the hyperplane defined by the price vector. CPP argue correctly that these slacks can be used to measure marginal products and marginal rates of substitution.CPP's method and ours can be viewed as two alternatives. We feel however, that our method is slightly more general. It is possible that the slack variable method of CPP returns inaccurate values for the marginal product in some circumstances. That would be the case when the assessed unit is far from the step-two efficient allocation. In this case, it would be possible to find one or more intermediate (efficient) input-output combinations between the observed input-output combination and the efficient allocation. Consequently, using the slack variables, it might happen that the segment connecting the two allocations would not be on the frontier and well into the production set. Then, the calculated slope does not correspond to a marginal product, or more generally to a partial derivative.We now use the data in our example to calculate the marginal products following CPP's method. The first stage projects all points on the frontier. Adjustments are made only for inefficient DMUs and obviously these quantity changes, if any, cannot be associated to partial derivatives. Marginal products are measured in the second step. Postulating a price vector, one can compute the allocatively efficient solution for each DMU using the projections obtained in the first step as if they were the observed input-output combinations. The path from the technically efficiency combination to the allocatively efficient combination describes a movement along the frontier. This movement along the frontier is measured using the slack variables (input excesses, s−, and output shortfalls, s+).As mentioned above these slacks can return inaccurate results if not manipulated with care, however. Let us show an example of this possibility. The only inefficient unit in our example is C and a possible projection on the frontier is the point (4.5, 5). In the second step, CPP propose to maximize the value of the displacement from the technically efficient point to any other technically efficient. This “optimal” point is determined by the relative price of the output with respect to the input. Suppose that the input and output prices are such that the slope of the isoprofit is lower than 2/3, then the solution would be the input–output combination (6, 6) for each DMU in the sample. These results are displayed in Table 3and they are represented on Fig. 2. The slacks of Table 3 are those computed at the second stage of the procedure.For almost all units the results using our method and CPP method are the same. However, note that applying CPP's method to DMU A (point (2, 1)) gives inconsistent results. The second optimization implies a movement along the frontier from (2, 1) to (6, 6). In that case, the input excess is equal to 4 and the output shortfall is 5. This gives a partial derivative equal to 5/4 (the slope of the segment AD) while this should be equal to something between 3 (the slope of the segment AB) and ∞ (the slope of the vertical vertices passing through A).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
