@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hierarchical Markov decision process modeling feeding and marketing decisions of growing pigs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model feeding and marketing decisions of growing pigs simultaneously.The decision process is formulated using a hierarchical Markov decision process.We use a Bayesian approach to update the system state under repeated measurements.We show the functionality of the model for three pens with different growth rates.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in agriculture,Stochastic programming,Hierarchical Markov decision process,Herd management,Bayesian updating,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Feeding is the most important cost in the production of growing pigs and has a direct impact on the marketing decisions, growth and the final quality of the meat. In this paper, we address the sequential decision problem of when to change the feed-mix within a finisher pig pen and when to pick pigs for marketing. We formulate a hierarchical Markov decision process with three levels representing the decision process. The model considers decisions related to feeding and marketing and finds the optimal decision given the current state of the pen. The state of the system is based on information from on-line repeated measurements of pig weights and feeding and is updated using a Bayesian approach. Numerical examples are given to illustrate the features of the proposed optimization model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In production systems of growing pigs, feeding is the most important operation and has a direct influence on the cost and the quality of the meat. Another important operation is the timing of marketing. It refers to a sequence of culling decisions until the production unit is empty. As a result the profit of the production unit is highly dependent on the feeding cost and on good timing of marketing, i.e. decisions about feeding and marketing have a direct impact on profit.In a production system of growing/finishing pigs (Danish standards), the animals may be considered at different levels: herd, section, pen, or animal. The herd is a group of sections, a section includes some pens, and a finisher pen involves some animals (usually 15–20). New piglets are transferred to a weaner unit approx. four weeks after birth, and they stay for approx. eight weeks until they weigh approx. 30  kilograms. The pigs are then moved to a finisher pen where they grow until marketing (9–12 weeks). In the finisher pen, the farmer should determine which pigs should be selected for slaughter (individual marketing). The reward of marketing a pig depends on the unit meat price of the carcass weight and the leanness of the pig. The meat price is highest if the carcass weight of the pig lies in a specific interval. Next, after a sequence of individual marketings, the farmer must decide when to terminate (empty) the rest of the pen. Terminating a pen means that the remaining pigs in the pen are sent to the slaughterhouse (in one delivery) and after cleaning the pen, another group of piglets (each weighing approx. 30 kilograms) is inserted into the pen and the production cycle is repeated. That is, the farmer must time the marketing decisions while simultaneously considering the carcass weight in relation to the best interval, the leanness, and the length of the production cycle. For an extended overview over pig production of growing pigs, see Pourmoayed and Nielsen (2014a).The growth and leanness of the pigs will be highly dependent on the feed given. Phase feeding is a common method used in the production of the growing pigs. In the finisher pen the growing period typically includes 3 or 4 phases and each phase involves a predefined feed-mix which is a mixture of different ingredients (barley, soy, maize, etc.). A relevant decision is when to change the current feed-mix (transition to a new phase) and what type of feed-mix to use in the next phase.Since the choice of feed-mix affects the pigs’ growth, a specific feeding strategy has an impact on the marketing strategy. That is, the economic optimization of feeding and marketing decisions is interrelated and requires a simultaneous analysis. Consequently, a sequential decision model is needed that considers both feeding and marketing decisions. To the best of our knowledge, there are only a few studies that take into account these decisions simultaneously (Niemi, 2006; Sirisatien, Wood, Dong, & Morel, 2009). However, these studies consider the problem at animal level and do not take into account the inhomogeneity of animals in growth and feed intake. The aim of this paper is to close this gap and consider the problem at pen level instead.In this paper we formulate a hierarchical Markov decision process which takes into account decisions related to feeding and marketing of growing pigs at pen level. We assume that the production is cyclic, i.e. when the pen is emptied, not only a regular state transition takes place, but rather the process (the current batch of pigs) is restarted.The model considers time series of pig weights and feeding obtained from online monitoring, e.g. from a set of sensors in the pen. A Bayesian approach is used to update the state of the system such that it contains the relevant information based on the previous measurements. More precisely, two state space models for Bayesian forecasting (West & Harrison, 1997) are used to update the estimates of live weights and feed intake on a weekly basis.The structure of the paper is as follows. First, Section 2 gives a short literature review. Second, a detailed description of the optimization model is given in Section 3. Next, Section 4 presents the statistical models which are embedded into the model. In Section 5, numerical examples are considered to show the functionality of the proposed optimization model. Finally, conclusions and directions for further research are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
