@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Historical evolution and benefit–cost explanation of periodical fluctuation in coal mine safety supervision: An evolutionary game analysis framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Periodical fluctuation in coal mine safety supervision is explained by evolutionary game.Determining factors of supervising fluctuation are initial state and strategies’ payoffs.Highly efficient government safety governance is necessary in developing countries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in societal problem analysis,Evolutionary game,Government safety supervision,Periodical fluctuation,Coal mine accidents,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The periodical fluctuation phenomenon appears in coal mine and other fields of government safety supervision. The paper provides a theoretical explanation by building an evolutionary game model between coal mine industry and governmental supervision institutions. Moreover, the paper provides a numerical example to demonstrate how the initial state and the costs (or gains) influence the fluctuation amplitude and the equilibrium position. We find that the initial state and the payoffs of different strategies are the two main determinants of periodical fluctuation phenomenon. The successful experience of coal mine safety supervision in China shows the importance of highly efficient government safety governance in developing countries.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
China is one of the biggest countries both in coal production and coal consumption. In the same time, it is also a country with a large number of coal mine accidents. The production safety problem is one of the hot topics most frequently discussed in the National People's Congress and Chinese People's Political Consultative Congress in recent years. According to one China Daily report, there were 1201 coal mine accidents killing 1973 people in 2011 in China. The mortality rate of per million ton coal production is 0.564 (Shi, 2012), which is the best record of coal mine safety production in the Chinese history. However, in the other major coal-producing countries in the world, for example, the United States, France, India, and South Africa, the occupational fatalities among coal miners have been significantly reduced through continuous efforts. At the beginning of the 21st century, the mortality rate producing one million tons of coal in the world ranged between 0.05 and 0.46. Moreover, in some developed countries, such as Canada, Germany, Britain, and Norway, the target of zero death coal mining has been achieved. The United States is the world's second largest coal-producing country. After the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) began to operate under the new Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977, safety in America's coal mining industry made significant progress, where only 20 miners died in coal mine accidents and the mortality rate producing one million tons of coal was only 0.025 in 2012.In most of the developed countries, because coal mine tragedies leading to safety problems have been resolved satisfactorily, it is no longer a hot academic research topic. On the one hand, some literature reviewed the influences of coal mining injury in the United States (Komljenovic, Groves, & Kecojevic, 2008; Margolis, 2010), transnational comparative analysis (Chen, Feng, Long, & Qi, 2013), statistical analysis or some specific applications of coal mine safety technologies (Alpern & Lidbetter, 2013). On the other hand, in recent years, researchers are paying more attention to the other types of more challenging safety problems, such as earthquakes (Liu, Xu, Li, Zhang, & Wang, 2011), epidemics (Mamani, Chick, & Simchi-Levi, 2013), hurricanes (Zhuang & Bier, 2007), fire (Smith & Trenholme, 2009) and other natural disasters (He, Xu, Yang, & Liao, 2014), traffic accidents (Jalali & Noroozi, 2009), nuclear accidents (Wang, Chen, & Xu, 2013), medical assistance (Dobson, Hasija, & Pinker, 2011) and other engineering accidents (Bagchi & Paul, 2014); terrorism (Bakshi & Gans, 2010;Kaplan, Kress, & Szechtman, 2010), collective actions (Liu, 2010), and other social crises. Among them, game theory is one of the most frequently used methods, which can be used to investigate government rescues, crowd evacuations, material distribution and other decision-making problems during the disaster cycle of mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery.Due to the repeated effort of reorganization, basically the coal mine accidents in China have been curbed in the 2000s. However, the situation of safe production of the coal mine industry still faces a “grim” situation, and the problem of coal mine safety raised both the theoretical and practical interests in academic research. Being a powerful research tool of coal mine security supervision, game theory is widely used in analyzing the interactions among the central government supervision department, local government, coal mine operators and the miners (Hu & Liu, 2008; Li, Wang, & Liu, 2013). The basic assumption in those literatures is perfect information. However, in reality the actual asymmetric information often results in the rent seeking of local government officials in the process of establishing and reinforcing the safety regulations. Considering the asymmetric information between regulators and coal mine operators, Xiao and Zhao (2009) built a principle-agent model of coal mine safety regulations in China, and then analyzed the collusion behavior of the local government. Incomplete information games, and in particular information economics, focus on the efficiency loss problem derived from asymmetric information and the information disclosure problems. However, whether complete information or incomplete information games, the basic behavior hypothesis is still perfect rationality. When the safety supervision problem is analyzed in the paradigm of perfectly rational games, some important issues about time and institution could not be explained clearly, for example, the evolution of the regulatory system, the historical path dependence of a developing country, the stockholders’ learning ability from coal mine disasters, and so on. Evolutionary games derived from the field of population biology in the 1980s provide a new analytical paradigm for the evolution of time-tested institutions (Anastasopoulos, 2012;Cai & Kock, 2009; Dutta, Sarmah, & Goyal, 2010; Xiao & Chen, 2009). The factor of time, which is more often referred to as the historical initial state and the corresponding “path dependence” phenomenon, and the institute that can be taken as exogenous given game rule or endogenous game equilibrium, are much more emphasized in the evolutionary game theory than in the traditional game theory (Friedman, 1998).The periodical fluctuation of coal mine supervision is an interesting phenomenon in China, which has aroused the attention of many scholars. Xiao, Chen, and Qi (2011) examined the asymmetric effects of safety regulation fluctuations on coal production with a non-linear Smooth Transition Regression (STR) model based on the data of coal fatalities from 2001 to 2010. Nie, Jiang, and Wang (2013) tested how political cycles affect coal mine fatality based on a fixed effects panel data model that includes 2000–2010 monthly data of coal fatalities of 18 provinces in China. Although the periodical fluctuation of coal mine safety regulation has been verified by several empirical studies, there still lacks of an appropriate mathematical model to investigate the specific mechanism among the interactive decision-making of coal mine enterprises, government safety regulation, and the historical path dependence. Therefore there is a need to explain the periodical fluctuation of coal mine supervision theoretically. The paper provides a theoretical framework together with a numerical example to explain the phenomenon by establishing an evolutionary game model between the supervision institutions and coal mine operators. The relationship of the model with other existing models in the literature can be seen in Fig. 1.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we empirically analyze the periodical fluctuation of coal mine safety supervision in China. Section 3 proposes an evolutionary game model to explain the periodical fluctuation of coal mine safety supervision, where the analytical solution and numerical solution of stable equilibrium are obtained, respectively. Section 4 discusses two important determining factors in the periodical fluctuation of coal mine supervision, which are the historical initial state and benefit–cost of different strategies. Finally, Section 5 concludes with policy implications and suggestions.Being a major coal mine accident country, the Chinese government took severe measures continuously to shut down and reorganize a large number of small coal mines. As a result, the rising trend of coal mine accidents was curbed effectively during the years in the 2000s. However, the situation of coal production safety in China still faces complex situations due to the following reasons. First, as Wang (2006) pointed out that there have been certain unique features in the history of coal production in China. During the 1980s and the 1990s, the central government adopted a policy to promote coal production by all possible ways. When suddenly tens of thousands of legal or illegal small coal mines mushroomed all over China, the government then found that it was extremely difficult to regulate them, because the number and rate of fatalities of small coal mines were seven times higher than larger state coal mines. Second, regarding the quality of coal miners, the presence of a large number of untrained seasonal or migrant workers, the prevailing contract system, and unstable employment, have all contributed to safety problems in both the state mines and the small mines mostly owned by the private sectors. Third, when an excess supply of coal drives down the coal price in the mid-1990s, the state coal mines which already suffered heavy losses were desperate to reduce their costs by whatever means. As a result, one of the possible choices was to reduce safety investment. In small private-owned mines, there is an even stronger temptation for the owners to ignore safety measures. Finally, local government regulators at the county and township levels were supposed to be responsible for the coal mine safety inspection, but in fact, they often acted as if they were the operators of the coal mines in their jurisdictions. Therefore, those illegal and poorly equipped coal mines were able to avoid being inspected largely because the local authorities provided only lip services to safety issues and did not really follow strictly the safety instructions from the central government in Beijing.After three decades of economic growth that has considerably improved people's quality of life, there is a growing awareness of the high accident risks in workplace, the widespread nature of occupational health hazards, and the high economic costs of accidents and illnesses. The Chinese government, responding to the coal mine tragedies, has taken several steps to curb the coal mine fatalities since the beginning of the 2000s. First, the State Administration of Work Safety (SAWS) strengthened its supervision of coal mine safety. Since the establishment of the State Administration of Coal Mine Safety (SACMS) in 2000, the ACMS and its branches now can act independently as third-party regulators from outside of local government and coal mines. Second, all levels of coal mine safety supervision agencies fought two battles since the second half of 2005: one is the rationalization and closure of small mines, and the other is the coal mine gas control (Zhao, 2006). Through the adjustment of the coal industrial structure, that is to say, the rationalization and closure of small mines, it can improve the production safety level of coal mining enterprises fundamentally, although some of the exact policies are being questioned by several economists (e.g., Bai, Wang, & Zhong, 2011). By the end of 2007, a total of 11,155 small mines were closed to eliminate 250 million tons of outdated production facilities, which were equivalent to about 45 percent of the small coal mines (Liu, 2008). China established 14 large-scale coal production bases, which account for 88 percent of the total coal output by the end of 2011 (Shi, 2012). These measures generated remarkable results, where coal mining deaths fell by 20 percent in 2006 and 2007, and remained at a relatively low level thereafter. It is shown in Fig. 2 that there is a structural change at the end of 2005, because the Chinese government has taken a series of severe measures to shut down and reorganize the small mines since the end of 2005.11The regime switch which is dated around December 2005 can be tested based on the Chow test to detect whether a structural change took place in the time series model of coal fatalities in China. According to the regression results, we find that there is not only a structural change at December 2005, but the rising trend of coal mine deaths also turned around.For a long time, under the one-size-fits-all governance model of coal mine safety supervision in China, it is a dilemma that “if we let it be, there will be a mess; and if we control it, there will be less production activities”. So inadequate and excessive safety regulations in Chinese coal production often appear alternately. It resulted in two types of periodical fluctuation of safety supervision. One is the periodical supervision fluctuation driven by extraordinarily big coal mine accidents from 2002 to 2005 during which period under the pressure of the rapid growth of energy demand, a number of extraordinarily big coal mine accidents occurred with each killing more than 100 miners, for example, the Jixi “6.20” accident, “10.20” Daping accident in Zhengzhou, “11.28” Chenjiashan accident in Tongchuan, “2.14” Sunjiawan accident in Fuxin, and the “3.19” Xishui accident in Shuozhou, and so on. Under the government performance appraisal system of “One ticket veto system for the safety production”, every accident causes the strict collective punishment measure that suspends production for rectification for all the coal mines in the jurisdictions (Xiao et al., 2011). It resulted in the dramatic fluctuations of coal fatalities during the 2002–2005 period (Fig. 2). The other is the periodical supervision fluctuation driven by the political factors (Nie et al., 2013). The political cycle is formed by the major local government meetings of legislative bodies hold every year in all provinces that is named the local annual “Two Sessions”. During the local ‘‘Two Sessions’’ (January or February), the number of coal mine accidents is significantly lower, because the government has a strong incentive to maintain social stability and safety production by “temporarily suspending” the production of small coal mines during the meetings while focusing on economic growth in other areas (Fig. 3).Along with the continuous improvement of coal production safety working systems and mechanisms, the coal production and safety supervision in China have followed several basic principles: (1) a responsibility system at different levels and supervision by local government; (2) the central government provides supervision, local government performs actual governance, and enterprises are responsible for their operations (SAWS, 2011). Being the central government coal mine safety authority, SACMS is responsible for coal mine safety supervision and inspection with a policy of “Key supervision, special supervision and regular supervision”. In the same time, SACMS is also responsible for the inspection and giving guidance to the local government safety regulators. In contrast, the local government safety regulators are responsible for the daily supervision of coal mine safety. Even if the collusion between local governmental officials and coal mine operators once existed widely in China (Hu & Liu, 2008), now this phenomenon becomes very rare compared with the early 2000s due to the following reasons. First, all of the 26 coal-producing provinces throughout the country established the respective coal mine safety supervision institutions which are under the direct management of SACMS by the end of 2005 (http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2005-11/23/content_107050.htm). Second, local governments strictly implemented the relevant provisions of “One ticket veto system for the safety production”. Third, the central government issued orders that government officials are prohibited to invest in coal mines, and they must get rid of their existing shares by September 22, 2005 (Zhao, 2005). Finally, through extensive shutting down of small coal mines, the business-government collusion occurred in their jurisdictions was broken. Thus, when we analyze the game problem of coal mine safety supervision, the supervision institutions of coal mine safety include both the SACMS at the central government level and the local government supervision institutions, where the collusion between local government and coal mine operators will not be taken into account in the paper. According to the coal mine safety supervision principles of government regulation and enterprise responsibility system, players of safety supervision include supervision institution (A) that are responsible for coal mine safety supervision and inspection, and coal mine enterprises (C) that are responsible for safety investment and training.The stage game of coal mine safety supervision is given in Table 1. The strategy space of the coal mine including safety investment (I) or no input (NI) is defined as SC= {I, NI}, and the strategy space of the supervision institution including weak (W) or strong supervision (S) is defined as SA= {W, S}. According to the relevant national regulations, all the coal mines must build and improve the coal mine “Six Safety Systems” – monitoring system, underground personnel positioning system, urgent danger prevention system, compressed-air self-help system, water rescue system, and communication system – by the end of June, 2013 (SAWS, SACMS, 2010). Suppose the coal mine safety investment cost is defined as a, and the strong supervision cost of supervision institution is C. Under the conditions that the coal mine invests in the “Six Safety Systems”, or supervision institution implements strong regulatory measures, the coal mine is in the safe production state. The gain of supervision institution derived from safety production is L, which includes improving the administration reputation and image, protecting miners’ life and health, praise or reward by superiors, and so on. Under the condition that the coal mine fails to conduct safety investment as required by law, meanwhile the governmental officials implement poor inspections, the coal mine gets excess returns H by illegal exploitation. At the same time, coal mine accidents can easily happen and generate a lose R for the supervision institution. However, under strong supervision, the coal mine without safety investment has to accept a punishment F, for example, penalty, confiscation of the illegal incomes, rectification, or being shut down. On the contrary, a strong supervision that leads to coal mine safety measures meeting all required standards will bring an extra gain b to the coal mine, for example, the government reward, the corporate reputation, and the miners’ job security and stability. It is clear that L + R + F > C, otherwise the supervision institution should give up regulation because of the high inspection cost. Under the strong supervision, the coal mine should choose safety investment to avoid punishment, that is b − a > −F. It is difficult to evaluate the above payoffs of the supervision institution and the coal mine. Based on the theoretical analysis, we further consider a numerical example of “11.10” Sizhuang Coal Mine Accident as the baseline scenario, which can be seen in Section 3.3, and then take the sensitive analysis for other reference scenarios in Section 4.Now we analyze the unique mixed strategy equilibrium in the above stage game. The payoff matrixes of the supervision institution and the coal mine are defined as A and B, respectively, which are given below:(1)A=(L−RL−CL−C+F),B=(−aH−a+b−F)The players are drawn randomly in pairs from two populations and receive expected payoffs in Table 1.22The more detailed presentation about evolutionary game can be seen in Friedman (1998).For the supervision institution's utility, xhrepresents the probability when it takes the pure strategy h ∈ SA, and ykrepresents the current proportion of the population of the coal mine taken the pure strategy k ∈ SC. Obviously, xh, yk≥ 0,∑h∈SAxh=1,∑k∈SCyk=1. Let the mixed strategy for the supervision institution and the coal mine be represented by vectors x and y, respectively. So the expected payoffs of the supervision institution and the coal mine are denoted as the following, respectively:(2)uA(x,y)=xT·Ay=(x11−x1)(L−RL−CL−C+F)(y11−y1)=x1[Ly1−R(1−y1)]+(1−x1)[(L−C)y1+(L−C+F)(1−y1)](3)uC(x,y)=yT·BTx=(y11−y1)(−a−a+bH−F)(x11−x1)=y1[−ax1+(−a+b)(1−x1)]+(1−y1)×[Hx1−F(1−x1)]The supervision institution and the coal mine choose x1 and y1 to maximize Eqs. (2) and (3), respectively. Therefore the first order conditions are:(4)∂uA∂x1=Ly1+(−R)(1−y1)−(L−C)y1−(L−C+F)(1−y1)=0(5)∂uC∂y1=−ax1+(−a+b)(1−x1)−x1H+F(1−x1)=0Solving the set of Eqs. (4) and (5) for x1 and y1, respectively, the following mixed strategy equilibrium(x1*,y1*)is derived:(6)(x1*,y1*)=(−a+b+FH+b+F,L−C+F+RL+F+R)From this equilibrium solution the following conclusions are drawn. First, the probability for the supervision institution to select S increases with safety investment cost a and excess returns derived from illegal exploitation H, and decreases with the coal mine's safety investment gains b and penalty for illegal exploitation F. Recall that a is the coal mine's safety investment cost, where the higher input cost should decrease the coal mine's enthusiasm of safety invest. Second, the probability for the coal mine to select I increases with the safety production gain of supervisor L, accident loss of supervisor R, and penalty for illegal exploitation F, and decreases with the strong supervision cost C.When the coal mine fails to conduct safety investment as required by law, meanwhile the regulator implements poor inspection, this will lead to the failure of government coal mine safety supervision. The probability for this event to take place is(7)PFA=x1(1−y1)In equilibrium, substitute Eq. (6) into Eq. (7), we have:(8)PFA*=x1*(1−y1*)=(−a+b+FH+b+F)(CL+F+R)It is easy to obtain the following conclusions: (1) the probability of failed supervision increases with the strong supervision cost C and the coal mine's safety investment gains b, because the higher coal mine safety investment gains should encourage safety investment that causes the weak supervision; (2) the probability of failed supervision decreases with the safety production gain of supervisor L, accident loss of supervisor R, coal mine's excess returns derived from illegal exploitation H, and its safety investment cost a. Because the higher cost weakens the safety investment incentives of the coal mine, it forces the supervisor to strengthen supervision. More specific effects of benefit–cost of different strategies on the coal mine safety production shall be discussed in Section 4.The replicator dynamics specify how population shares associated with different pure strategies evolve over time (Taylor & Jonker, 1978). Let us consider a large but finite population of agents all programmed to play pure strategy h ∈ SA, where SAis the set of strategies. At any instant t, let Nh(t) be the number of agents programmed to play pure strategy h. The total population of agents is given byN(t)=∑h∈SANh(t). Let xh(t) = Nh(t)/N(t) be the fraction of agents using pure strategy h at time t. Then, the expected payoff using pure strategy h given that the population is in state x is u(h, x). The average payoff of the population x, or the payoff of an agent drawn randomly from the population, isu(x,x)=∑h∈SAxh(t)·u(h,x).Suppose that the payoffs are proportional to the reproduction rate of each individual, and that a strategy profile is inherited. This leads to the following dynamics for the population shares xh:(9)dxhdt=xh·[u(h,x)−u(x,x)]where dxh/dt is the time derivative of xh. Eq. (9) states that the proportion of individuals using strategy h increases (decreases) if its payoff is bigger (smaller) than the average payoff of the population.The standard two-population replicator dynamics model of the coal mine safety supervision game can be written as follows:(10)dxhdt=[ehAy−xTAy]xh=[∑k∈SCahkyk−∑j∈SA∑k∈SCxjajkyk]xh(11)dykdt=[ekBTx−yTBTx]yk=[∑h∈SAbhkxh−∑j∈SC∑h∈SAyjbhjxh]ykwhere xh, yk≥ 0, h ∈ SA, k ∈ SC,∑h∈SAxh=1,∑k∈SCyk=1.Substituting Eq. (1) into Eqs. (10) and (11), the system of differential equations (10) and (11) is transformed into:(12)dx1dt=x1(1−x1)[C−L−F−R+(L+F+R)y1](13)dy1dt=y1(1−y1)[F+b−a−(F+b+H)x1]Here we apply a dynamic equilibrium concept of Evolutionary Equilibrium (Friedman, 1998), where the stability of the fixed points in the above differential equations is investigated using Lyapunov's First Method. The set of fixed points in the differential equations are (x0, y0) = {(1, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1), (0, 0), (x1*,y1*)}. The stability of the nonlinear system at (x0, y0) is studied by linearization approximation. We then analyze the Jacobi matrix and its corresponding eigenvalues, λi(i = 1, 2):(14)Φ=[∂x˙1/∂x1∂x˙1/∂y1∂y˙1/∂x1∂y˙1/∂y1],at(x1,y1)=(x0,y0)For the fixed point (x0, y0) = (0, 1), Φ is evaluated as(15)Φ=[C00−(F+b−a)]The eigenvalues of the Jacobi matrix Φ are λ1 = C and λ2 = −F − b + a. So the fixed point (0, 1) is unstable since the eigenvalue λ1 is positive. Similarly, the fixed points of (1, 0), (1, 1) and (0, 0) are also unstable. The computational details are omitted to save space.For the fixed point(x1*,y1*)=(−a+b+FH+b+F,L−C+F+RL+F+R), Φ is evaluated as(16)Φ=[0c1c20]wherec1=(F+b−a)(H+a)(L+F+R)(F+b+H)2>0,c2=−C(L−C+F+R)(F+b+H)(L+F+R)2<0.So the eigenvalues of Jacobi matrix Φ in Eq. (16) are complex numbers with zero real parts:(17)λ1,2=±i|c1c2|=±iC(F+b−a)(H+a)(L−C+F+R)(F+b+H)(L+F+R)The system of differential equations is stable limit cycle but not asymptotically stable. The trajectories for replicator dynamics models (12) and (13) at the mixed equilibrium point are(18)x1=x1*+x1(0)·cosωt−y1(0)·sinωt(19)y1=y1*+x1(0)·sinωt+y1(0)·cosωtwhereω=|c1c2|, and the initial state of evolutionary functions (18) and (19) at t = 0 is(20)x10=x1(0)+x1*,y10=y1(0)+y1*The above trajectories can be written as(21)x1=x1*+A·cos(ωt+ϕ)(22)y1=y1*+A·sin(ωt+ϕ)where the amplitude isA=x1(0)2+y1(0)2, and(23)ϕ={arctan(y1(0)/x1(0))ify1(0)/x1(0)>0π+arctan(y1(0)/x1(0))ify1(0)/x1(0)≤0So the trajectories of the strategies followed by the supervision institution and the coal mine are closed orbit curves, while if it is near the equilibrium point(x1*,y1*)the trajectories are circle orbit:(24)(x1−x1*)2+(y1−y1*)2=A2Comparing the periodical solution in Eq. (24) with the mixed equilibrium solution in Eq. (8), x1 and y1 are the periodic fluctuations around the equilibrium point(x1*,y1*)in Eq. (24). Therefore it magnifies the possibility of failed supervision. Because the system variables x1 and y1 have phase delay in Eqs. (21) and (22), the maximum probability of failed supervision is difficult to be calculated accurately. Now we consider a special case of the upper limit, where both the proportions of weak supervision x1 and no safety investment (1 − y1) are simultaneously achieving the maximum. The higher limit of probability of failed supervision in the case of periodic solution is given as follows:(25)PFAh=(x1*+A)(1−y1*+A)According to Eq. (25), there are two main factors determined the probability of failed supervision: the equilibrium point (x1*, y1*) and the amplitude A. The equilibrium point(x1*,y1*)is determined by the corresponding parameters in Eq. (6), while the amplitude A (or the radius) of the limit cycle is determined by the historical initial state of the coal production in China.In the morning of November 10, 2011, a serious coal mine accident occurred in the Sizhuang Coal Mine in southwest China's Yunnan province. The fatal accident killed 43 people and caused CNY 39.7 million (6.3 million US dollars) in direct economic losses, according to a report released by the State Council's investigation team. The extraordinarily serious accident caused the third wave crest from the right of coal fatalities in November 2011 (see Fig. 2). As a small, illegal coal mine, the Sizhuang Coal Mine has never effectively implemented the preventive measures of coal and gas outbursts. Therefore in November 28, 2010, the related supervision institution ordered the coal mine to suspend production for rectification. However, the coal mine continued to illegally produce 60,000 tons of raw coal and obtained near 20 million yuan of sales income till the accident happened. According to the report (Xinhua, 2012a), 19 people have been transferred to judicial organizations, and the Sizhuang Coal Mine must pay 5 million yuan in fines and be shut down.As a typical case of coal mine accident, the results of a numerical analysis about the “11.10” Sizhuang Coal Mine Accident is presented to illustrate the behavior of the players’ strategies near the equilibrium point. Several parameter values in Table 1 are assigned. The punishment is F = 15 million yuan, which includes 5 million yuan in penalty and the losses of closure. The coal mine's excess returns are H = 20 million yuan and the accident's direct economic losses are R = 40 million yuan. If the safety precautions meet all the required standards, the coal mine can avoid penalties, that is to say, the coal mine's gain is b = 5 million yuan. Given that the construction costs of refuge chamber is 5 million yuan or so (Xu, 2011), the total cost of safety investment including other safety facilities is assumed to be a = 10 million yuan. Suppose the supervision and inspection costs are equal to the safety investment cost, that is C = 10 million yuan, and the safety production gains of supervisor are L = 15 million yuan. The sensitivity analysis of the parameter values will be further discussed in Section 4.With the adoption of a series powerful supervision measures, both the coal mine safety production and the supervision have aroused widespread attention since 2006. As the baseline scenario in Fig. 4, the initial values of coal mine safety production are assumed to be x10 = 0.3 and y10 = 0.957, which means that nearly all of the coal mines employ the standard safety investment when facing the strongest supervisions. When we perform the sensitive analysis of benefit–cost in Section 4.2, the baseline scenario of the initial state x10 = 0.3 and y10 = 0.957 should be considered as the given condition. The coal mine safety supervision system (x1, y1) oscillates around the center (0.25, 0.857), where the amplitude is A = 0.1118, and the frequency is ω = 0.8018. For the reference scenario x10 = 0.2 and y10 = 0.85, the trajectory near to the equilibrium point (0.25, 0.857) is the standard limit cycle. However, for the baseline scenario that is apart fromthe center, the trajectory presents the irregular circle.Given the parameter values, the probability of failed supervision in the mixed equilibrium state can be calculated as PFA* = 0.0357, and the upper limit of failed supervision probability isPFAh=(x1*+A)(1−y1*+A)=0.0922. According to the Chinese work safety administration, there are 1201 mining accidents among a total of 12,526 coal mines in 2011 (Shi, 2012). Thus the actual probability of mining accidents is 0.0958, which is near to the upper limit of failed supervision probability. The periodical fluctuation of the failed supervision possibility can be seen in Fig. 5. We can find that the upper limit of probability of failed supervision is slightly higher than the peak value, because of phase delay of two system variables x1 and y1.According to Eq. (25), there are two factors affecting the upper limit of probability of failed supervision: one is the amplitude related to the initial state of coal mine safety production, and the other is the equilibrium position related to the relative benefit–cost that should be discussed in the next section.Before 2005, the coal mine accidents in China were still quite high, where there are 3341 mining accidents among a total of 25,000 coal mines in 2005 (http://www.chinasafety.gov.cn/zhuantipindao/2006-02/15/content_154082.htm). Thus, the actual probability of mining accidents is about 0.134. Based on the upper limit of failed supervision probabilityPFAh=(x1*+A)(1−y1*+A)=0.134, the fluctuating amplitude should be A = 0.173. Thus, we suppose that the initial values of coal mine safety production in 2005 are x10 = 0.42 and y10 = 0.86, which means that nearly half of the regulators took the strategy of weak supervision, even if most of coal mines still have safety investment. One reason of the weak safety supervision may be the collusion between local government officials and coal mine operators, and another reason may be that there are too many small and illegal coal mines to be supervised effectively. In the left picture of Fig. 6, the amplitude becomes larger because of the weak supervision in the initial state x10 = 0.42 and y10 = 0.86.Since the end of 2005, the extensive operation suspension of small and illegal coal mines broke out all over the country. A total of 13,000 small coal mines have been shut down by 2013, which accounted for the half of the total number of coal mines in 2005. According to the National Safety Production Committee, 604 mining accidents happened in 2013 (http://www.aqsc.cn/101806/101889/312382.html). The actual probability of mining accidents decreased to 0.05. Given the upper limit of failed supervision probabilityPFAh=(x1*+A)(1−y1*+A)=0.05, the fluctuating amplitude is A = 0.0335. Assume that the initial values of coal mine safety production in 2013 are x10 = 0.265 and y10 = 0.86, which means that only a quarter of the regulators or so are in weak supervision, and most of coal mines have safety investment. In this case the coal mine safety is significantly improved. In the right picture of Fig. 6, the amplitude becomes smaller under the strong supervision in the initial state x10 = 0.265 and y10 = 0.86.Under different initial states of coal mine safety production, there are great differences in the amplitude of supervision periodical fluctuation. Fig. 6 reflects the process of past changes in the Chinese coal mine safety supervision or coal mine accidents rate entering the 2000s, which can be verified by the data of coal mine fatalities in Fig. 2.However, there is a little difference between the theoretical results in Fig. 6 and the statistical data in Fig. 2. The equilibrium position of the probability of failed supervision in Fig. 6 is fixed withPFA*=0.0357, but the actual position should reduce from the higher level in 2005 into the lower level in 2013. The regression functions with structural change of monthly coal fatalities in Fig. 2 intuitively show the change of the equilibrium position in different periods. What are the other factors, except the initial state of coal mine safety production that can also affect supervision periodical fluctuation? In the following section, we should discuss this problem.According to Eq. (8), all the payoffs of different strategies, including the supervisor's payoffs C, L, R, and the coal mine's payoffs a, b, H, F, can affect the equilibrium position of failed supervision probabilityPFA*. Moreover, those benefit–costs also affect the fluctuation trajectory of coal mine safety system (x1, y1) and the probability of failed supervision PFA, according to Eqs. (8), (21) and (22). For the supervision institutions, it is difficult to control their own payoffs. For example, the cost of strong supervision is decided by the reform process of Chinese administration, which is called “systems engineering” involving multiple stakeholders. The supervisor's gains derived from safety production and the loss caused by mine accident depend on social assessment, administration accountability system, and other uncontrollable external factors. So we only discuss the coal mine benefit–cost derived from the different safety investment strategies in the initial state x10 = 0.3 and y10 = 0.957.(1) Coal mine safety investment cost aConsidering the expensive construction cost of the “Six Safety Systems”, small coal mines are more likely to accept the lower construction cost of coal mine safety investment. The lower safety standards stimulated small coal mines’ enthusiasm to invest. In turn, it reduces the supervising motivation. The successful rescue case of the San Jose gold and copper mine in northern Chile, where all the 33 miners were rescued in October 15, 2010, motivated China to give priority to build refuge chambers. Because the geological conditions of some small coal mines are not suitable to build new refuge chambers, they can reconstruct some of the existing old mining tunnels to be refuge chambers. The construction cost of a refuge chamber is 3 million yuan. In addition, the supporting facilities require an extra expenditure of 2 million yuan for emergency rescue vehicle and other associated ground equipment including pipes and cables (Xu, 2011). Therefore the basic construction cost of coal mine safety investment can be reduced to 5 million yuan.Suppose the smaller cost of coal mine safety investment is a = 5 million yuan and the other payoffs remain unchanged. The new equilibrium proportion of weak supervision increases tox1*=0.375, and the new wave frequency increases to ω = 0.896. So the equilibrium position of the probability of failed supervision increases toPFA*=0.0536. A comparison between the before and after changes of trajectory and the probability of failed supervision is shown in Fig. 7.The right panel (b) in Fig. 7 provides an important policy connotation. If government supervisor lowers the coal mine safety investment standards, then there will be higher qualification rate of coal mine safety measures, and governmental supervision institution begins to relax safety regulation. However, this will instead cause higher probability of failed supervision and coal mine accident rate.(2) Coal mine's extra gains from safety investment bIf the coal mine safety measures satisfy all the required standards, the coal mine should obtain the extra gains b, which includes government reward, corporate reputation, miner's job security and stability, and so on. Except social reputation and miner behaviors, the incentive policies that supervisor can implement is only government reward. However, under the benefit-driven motive, government supervisor is more inclined to consider law enforcement and fines, but not reward. In Shanxi province, a major province for coal-production, the policy of “New Standard of Coal Mine Safety Quality” has been operated, where the coal mine that satisfies safety standards should get rewards of 0.5–1 million yuan (Xinhua, 2012b). If the coal mine's extra gains, as a positive incentive, derived from safety investment decrease, government supervision institution has to strengthen the negative incentive, i.e., the strong supervision.Given that the reduced extra gains from coal mine safety investment is b = 1 million yuan and the other payoffs remain unchanged, the new equilibrium proportion of weak supervision decreases tox1*=0.167, and the new wave frequency of trajectory reduces to ω = 0.655. So the equilibrium position of the probability of failed supervision decreases topFA*=0.0238. A comparison of the results before and after the change is shown in Fig. 8.In the right panel (b) in Fig. 8, there is a slight irregular shape at the valleys of lower extra gains b = 0.1, i.e., the blue dotted line. The reason is the partial phase cancellation between the proportion of weak supervision x1 and no safety investment (1 − y1). Although smaller government reward contributes to the reduction of the risk of failed supervision in theory, this measure has little room of policy effectiveness. The relationship between government supervisor and coal mine operator is not always noncooperative as in the cat-and-mouse game model in Table 1. They also have a common interest in the problem of coal mine safety production that can be described as a cooperative game model. In this case, as a positive incentive, it contributed to improve safety investment that government provides the higher safety reward for the qualified coal mine.(3) Coal mine's extra returns by illegal exploitation HUnder the condition of weak supervision or collusion with local governmental officials, some small coal mines that fail to conduct safety investment can get extra returns by illegal exploitation. However, since 2005, all the coal-producing provinces established local supervision institutions under the direct management of SACMS. In the same time, a large number of small and illegal coal mines have been shut down. The profit margin of the illegal exploitation becomes much smaller. It results in supervisor relaxing supervision and inspection.Suppose that the reduced extra returns by the illegal exploitation is H = 10 million yuan and the other payoffs remain unchanged, the new equilibrium proportion of weak supervision increases tox1*=0.333, and the new wave frequency of trajectory reduces to ω = 0.756. So the equilibrium position of the probability of failed supervision increases topFA*=0.0476. A comparison of changed trajectory and probability of failed supervision is shown in Fig. 9.Because of the coal mine's lower extra returns by the illegal exploitation, the supervision motivation tends to decrease. So the probability of failed supervision becomes larger. To avoid this problem, the supervisor can appropriately overestimate the coal mine's illegal returns. For example, the expenditure of environmental protection, labor security, and other social responsibilities are considered.(4) Penalty for no safety investment FAccording to the “Special Provisions of the State Council on the Prevention of Work Safety Accidents of Coal Mines” issued in 2005, for those coal mines that are illegal, ordered to shut down, or with production suspended for consolidation but resumed production without authorization, the supervisor should impose confiscation of illegal gains with the fine of one to five times the amount of the illegal income. The director of SAWS also declared that evil-minded coal mine owners must be penalized so that they lose everything (Liu, 2005). The severe penalty forces coal mine owners to increase safety investment. On the other hand, supervision institution of local government generates extra income from penalty, which may cause compulsive punishment and punishment dependence. In this case, supervision institution and illegal coal mine constitutes the "conspiracy" relations, where supervision institution allows illegal coal mines to continue production after paying penalties.In the case of Sizhuang Coal Mine Accident, suppose that the penalty increases to be two times of the illegal returns, that is F = 40 million yuan, and the other payoffs remain unchanged, the new equilibrium proportions of both weak supervision and safety investment increase to bex1*=0.538,y1*=0.895, and the equilibrium position of the probability of failed supervision increases to bepFA*=0.0565. The changed trajectory and probability of failed supervision are shown in Fig. 10. Although the severe penalty F = 40 indeed improves the proportion of safety investment in the left panel (a) in Fig. 10, the punitive measures after the accidents are not particularly helpful to avoid accident in the right panel (b) in Fig. 10. Moreover it exacerbates the penalty dependence derived from the unqualified safety investment. So the effectiveness of the single punitive measure, that locks the barn door after the horse is stolen, is not very useful.In the case that both the benefit–costs of different strategies and the initial state (x10, y10) are changing simultaneously, it can be analyzed in the same way. Thus, the detailed numerical analysis is omitted. Obviously, considering the simultaneous change of both the benefit–cost of strategies and the initial state in the evolutionary game model based on Eqs. (12) and (13), the theoretical outcomes would provide a better explanation for the periodical fluctuation of coal mine safety supervision in China. In general, while the government institutions continuously strengthen the safety supervision, the rate of coal mine accidents in China fell significantly since the end of 2005. However, it is still affected by the political cycle of the annual “Two Sessions”. Therefore some periodical fluctuation still exists, though to a smaller level.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The periodical fluctuations of the coal mine safety supervision in China has been the concern of many scholars who tried to provide various explanations, for example, the fluctuation driven by major and extremely large mining accidents (Xiao et al., 2011), or by the political cycle of the “Two Sessions” (Nie et al., 2013). Those explanations are verified by the quantitative analysis based on the statistical data in recent years. However, how to build an appropriate mathematical model to explain the periodical fluctuation of coal mine safety supervision remains a challenge in theory. There are two possible perspectives to discuss the phenomenon. One is the viewpoint of historical evolution, and the other is the horizontal viewpoint of the benefit–cost analysis of different strategies. The paper theoretically examines the periodical fluctuation of coal mine safety supervision in China by building an evolutionary game model. Moreover, from the viewpoints of historical initial state and benefit–cost analysis of different strategies, the paper discusses the case of determining factors in the periodical fluctuation by numerical analysis of Sizhuang Coal Mine Accident.The significance of this paper is to provide a successful case of coal mine safety supervision that shows the importance of highly efficient government governance in developing countries. The fact is that “if we let it be, there will be a mess; and if we control it, there will be no production”. The periodical fluctuation of governmental supervision does not just happen in the coal mine production safety issue. The same problem exists in other industries in China as well, for example, the food and drug safety supervision, the supervision of the accounting fraud of listed company, even the new administration supervision of corruption, rural-urban periodical flow of migrant laborers under city administrations, and so on. The successful experiences of Chinese government reform, especially the outstanding achievement in the field of coal mine safety supervision, suggest the deficiencies in traditional economic management theory that government should play a passive role. Further, the paper builds an analytical framework, including historical evolution and horizontal benefit–cost analysis of different strategies, to discuss the system evolution of governmental supervision. Whether the analytical framework and conclusion can be duplicated in other developing countries still needs more analysis of historical cultural heritage and government supervision efficiency.