@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of bi-criteria conflict on matching-elicited preferences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We focus on multicriteria preference elicitation by matching.Each matching is associated with a normatively equivalent reverse matching.We study the effect of trade-off size, on the asymmetry in a bi-matching.We derive implications for the practice of preference elicitation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multicriteria decision,Behavioural decision analysis,Preference elicitation,Multicriteria conflict,Matching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We focus on multicriteria preference elicitation by matching. In this widely employed task, the decision maker (DM) is presented with two multicriteria options, a and b, and must assess the performance value on one criterion for b, left blank, so that she is indifferent between the two options. A reverse matching, which is normatively equivalent, can be created by integrating the answer to the description of b and letting the DM adjust a performance value on the previously totally specified option a. Such a procedure is called a bi-matching. Consistency requires that isopreferences resulting from the forward and backward matchings be identical, but they empirically differ in a systematic direction. In a matching task, multicriteria conflict refers to the magnitude of the advantage or disadvantage to be compensated. We investigate the effect of the multicriteria conflict, or trade-off size, on the difference of judgement between forward and backward matchings. We observed that the difference of judgement is increased both by multicriteria conflict and by asking deteriorating rather than improving judgements at both steps of the bi-matching. We derive some implications for the practice of preference elicitation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supporting a decision maker (DM) involved in decision processes often requires using preference models, which incorporate the value systems and judgements of the DM. Hence the concept of preference is crucial in decision making, and accounts for the way the DM evaluates and compares alternatives. The field of preference modelling has grown steadily over the past fifty years and numerous models have been proposed, such as utility-based models (Keeney and Raiffa, 1976) or outranking-based models (Roy, 1996). Preference models define rationality from a normative point of view, that is, norms to which the decision maker should conform.Implementing preference models to support a DM involved in decision processes requires incorporating her judgements in the model. This calls for acquiring preferences through an interaction with the DM, and integrating these preferences in the model: this is called preference elicitation. Numerous preference elicitation methodologies, most of which are interactive methods (Steuer, 1986), have been proposed in the literature (Bana e Costa and Vansnick, 1994; Edwards and Barron, 1994; Jacquet-Lagrèze and Siskos, 1982). They allow the analyst to capture the DM’s point of view and integrate it into a specific preference model. These preference models can be based on utility, but also on outranking relations (Mousseau and Slowinski, 1998) or decision rules (Greco, Matarazzo, and Slowinski, 2001). It is clear that the preference elicitation process is crucial for the preference model to represent faithfully the opinion of the DM, and lead to recommendations that can be viewed as reasonable and helpful by the DM.However, preference elicitation methodologies implicitly hypothesize rationality principles to which the DM does not always conform. This can lead to elicited preference models that do not faithfully represent the DM’s judgements. It is therefore important to understand decision behaviour fully through empirical studies in order to avoid misinterpretation of the DM preference statements and to avoid decision biases. For instance, preference elicitation methods usually assume “procedure invariance which requires strategically equivalent methods of elicitation to yield the same preference order” (Tversky, Slovic, and Kahneman, 1990).Violations of this procedure invariance principle have been observed when using matching vs. pairwise comparison tasks (e.g., Fischer, Carmon, Ariely, and Zauberman, 1999; Fischer and Hawkins, 1993; Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic, 1988; Willemsen and Keren, 2002). In pairwise comparisons, the DM compares two alternatives and says whether she prefers one to the other or is indifferent between them. In matching tasks, two alternatives are presented to the DM, one with assigned evaluations on all criteria and the other missing a value for one criterion. She is then asked to provide the missing value that makes the two alternatives indifferent. Experiments have shown that preferences elicited by matching and choice systematically differ since the more prominent dimension “looms larger in choice than in matching” (Tversky et al., 1988).A positive feature of matching compared to other procedures is that it provides rich information on trade-offs from a limited number of questions (see Carmon and Simonson, 1998, for a discussion on this topic). For compensatory and attribute-based strategies, matching appears to be a natural elicitation procedure (e.g., Payne, Bettman, and Luce, 1998) and is widely used for decision-making under certainty or uncertainty (see for instance, Keeney and Raiffa, 1976 for utility assessment methods under uncertainty and Bana e Costa and Vansnick, 1994; Edwards and Barron, 1994 for utility assessment without uncertainty). Hence, matching is considered a suitable tool for preference elicitation because it offers a good compromise between the effort required from the DM and the obtained preference information.Nevertheless, it is important to analyse empirically how DMs actually respond to matching questions, and whether their answers conform to rationality principles required by the preference models. For instance, suppose a DM assesses a matching between two alternatives a and b, providing a value on one criterion for alternative b (forward matching); a reverse task (backward matching), which is normatively equivalent, can be created by integrating the answer into the description of b and letting the DM adjust a performance value on the previously totally specified option a. This ordered pair of two matchings is called a bi-matching and the answers to this bi-matching should be consistent, i.e., isopreferences resulting from the forward and backward matching should be identical, or should not vary significantly. Previous experimental studies (Delquié, 1997; Willemsen and Keren, 2002; 2003) showed that DMs significantly deviate from such consistency in a bi-matching. In this paper, we extend these previous results and study the effect of the multicriteria conflict, or trade-off size, on the asymmetry (difference) of judgement between forward and backward matching questions.In pairwise comparisons, multicriteria conflict arises when each alternative outperforms the other one on some criterion, which imposes a trade-off. Comparing two alternatives can be difficult if their respective advantages are of high magnitude (Deparis, Mousseau, Öztürk, Pallier, and Huron, 2012). In a matching task, the multicriteria conflict is related to how much the performances of the two options differ on the non-adjusted criterion. We propose an experimental setting to investigate the following questions: Is the observed difference in adjustment increased by the multicriteria conflict in a bi-matching task? Do the observed effects depend on the direction of the matching (evaluating an advantage or a disadvantage in the matching). As some elicitation procedures use matching questions with pairs of alternatives involving a strong conflict between criteria (e.g., Bana e Costa and Vansnick, 1994; Edwards and Barron, 1994; Keeney and Raiffa, 1976), we analyse the consequences of using such alternatives in matching questions when eliciting the preferences of a DM.The paper is organized as follows. The next section is devoted to a description of the matching procedure. In Section 3, we formulate hypotheses about the effect of multicriteria conflict on the DM’s answers. The experimental design is described in Section 4; the results are presented in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6. In the last section, we draw conclusions and propose further research avenues.Consider two alternatives a and b. We assume the decision problem only involves two criteria, called Criterion 1 and Criterion 2, that take real values (e.g. a salary in Euros). We write aito refer to the evaluation of alternative a on Criterion i. We indifferently write a or (a1, a2) to refer to alternative a in the following. When an evaluation is unspecified on any criterion, it is noted ?. For instance, (b1, ?) refers to an alternative b, whose evaluation on Criterion 2 is not yet defined. In a bi-criterion setting, a matching between two alternatives a = (a1, a2) and b = (b1, ?), where the DM must specify a performance for b on Criterion 2, can be denoted as: (a1, a2) I (b1, ?), where I stands for “indifferent to”. Matching can also be defined in the general case of n criteria by considering two alternatives differing on two of the criteria and equivalent in all the others, or considering two alternatives differing on more than two criteria. We restrict ourselves to the bicriteria case in this paper, because it allows to focus on the simplest, irreducible form of a trade-off. For the remainder of Section 2, we assume that preference increases with the value on both criteria. All the results hold when preference decreases with marginal value, as is the case in the experiment presented in Section 4.In the above example, a is called the stimulus alternative, b the adjusted alternative. The criterion for which an evaluation is missing is called the adjusted criterion (Criterion 2 in the above example). Non dominance between the two alternatives implies that some values should not be possible for b2: for instance, if a1 > b1, the DM will choose b2 greater than a2.Matching questions can be distinguished according to the direction of matching. As an example, let us consider the following elicitation: Consider a decision between jobs that vary according to the annual salary (expressed in Euros) and the number of vacation days per year. Suppose you currently hold a job with 20 days vacation, and a 30,000 Euros salary. In the following question, an unfavourable matching is asked: A new position is available with 25 days vacation, but an inferior salary. What loss in salary would make that new job equally satisfying to your current job? A favourable matching can alternatively be asked: A new position is available with only 15 days vacation, but a better salary. Which salary compensation would make that new job equally satisfying to your current job?The direction of matching is defined as such (see Fig. 1):•Favourable matching: The DM estimates an advantage with respect to the adjusted criterion. When a1 > b1 (as in Fig. 1a), adjusting on Criterion 2 comes down to evaluate the proper advantage of b over a on Criterion 2 (b2 > a2), in order to compensate for the inferior evaluation on Criterion 1.Unfavourable matching: The DM estimates a disadvantage with respect to the adjusted criterion. When a1 < b1, (as in Fig. 1b) adjusting on Criterion 2 comes down to evaluate the proper disadvantage of b compared to a on Criterion 2 (b2 < a2), in order to compensate for the superior evaluation on Criterion 1.Another important characteristic of a matching question is related to the intensity of the multicriteria conflict involved. We define the conflict of the matching (a1, a2) I (b1, ?) as the difference of evaluation between the two matched alternatives on the non adjusted criterion, i.e. |a1 − b1|. Note that, in order to compare the conflict associated to two matching questions, the adjusted criterion should be the same for the two questions.As we explained in the Introduction, a bi-matching is composed by a sequence of two consecutive matchings that we call forward matching and backward matching.In the following paragraph, a performance value on a criterion is underlined when it was elicited from the DM, and an alternative is underlined when any of its performance was elicited from the DM. Table 1presents an example of bi-matching where A = (a1, a2) is the stimulus alternative in the forward matching,B=(b1,b2) is the adjusted alternative in the forward matching but the stimulus alternative in the backward matching,A=(a1,a2) is the adjusted alternative in the backward matching. Notice that a bi-matching can involve any of the four possible combinations of favourable and unfavourable matchings: unfavourable followed by favourable, unfavourable at both steps, etc. In the remainder of the paper, we only consider bi-matchings that are either unfavourable or favourable at both steps. For simplicity, we use “unfavourable bi-matching” to refer to a combination of two unfavourable matchings , and “favourable bi-matching” for a combination of two favourable matchings.Consider the bi-matching illustrated on Fig. 2a, where the criteria are to be maximized. Procedural invariance (Tversky and Kahneman, 1986) states that normatively equivalent elicitation procedure should reveal the same preference, therefore one should elicit the same trade-off with the two matchings. Hence, the value elicited during the backward matching (a1′) should be the same as the stimulus value displayed during the forward matching (a1). It is interesting to analyse, for different combinations of matchings, the value of|a1′−a1|which is expected to be null according to the normative theory, or at least close to zero on average if we consider some noise.Let us consider situations where|a1′−a1|≠0. In the favourable bi-matching described in Fig. 2a,a1′∈[b1,a1[. Similarly, in the unfavourable bi-matching described in Fig. 2b,a1′∈]a1,b1]. In both situations, a′ deviates from a, on the adjusted criterion, toward b. We call this situation an underadjustment. Conversely, on the adjusted criterion, A′ could deviate from a away from b (e.g., in that case, we would havea1′>a1on Fig. 2a). We call this situation an overadjustment. In order to measure both the intensity of the asymmetry and its direction (underadjustment or overadjustment), we defineδ=a1−a1′for a favourable bi-matching, andδ=a1′−a1for an unfavourable bi-matching. With this definition, δ > 0 when there is underadjustment and δ < 0 when there is overadjustment. Different types of bi-matching exist according to the direction of each matching (favourable-favourable, favourable-unfavourable, unfavourable-favourable, unfavourable-unfavourable) and according to the adjusted criterion. Fig. 2 depicts favourable and unfavourable bi-matchings when δ is evaluated on Criterion 1. Note that if the direction is kept constant for both matchings of a bi-matching, then the adjusted criterion must necessarily change between the two matchings.The elicitation of indifference curves has been studied for several decades and there exists a large literature (e.g., Slovic, 1975), but the bi-matching procedure was first introduced by Hershey and Schoemaker (1985) in order to analyse the procedural invariance in the context of decision under risk. They compared two ways of eliciting utility functions: the DM must either specify the certainty equivalent of a lottery or specify the probability of gain for an equivalent lottery. Delquié adapted this notion to the context of certain multicriteria decision making (see Delquié, 1993; 1997).A number of studies show that the trade-off elicited during a matching procedure with two criteria depends on the adjusted criteria (Fischer and Hawkins, 1993; Slovic, Griffin, and Tversky, 1990). Using experiments on lotteries and also with certain alternatives, Delquié observed underadjustment during the backward matching, as compared to the forward matching. The estimated value is between the benchmark value and the target as in Fig. 2.It is interesting to note that the effects observed during the bi-matching procedure are more sophisticated than the effects observed when two different elicitation procedures are used. In bi-matching the same procedure is used at both steps, and only the adjusted criterion or the direction is modified.By rearranging the results obtained by Delquié (1993) depending on the direction of each matching, Willemsen and Keren (2003) showed that a significant asymmetry is more frequently observed during an unfavourable bi-matching than a favourable bi-matching.As mentioned in Section 2.3, previous experiments on the bi-matching procedure have shown the influence of direction on the answers to bi-matching. Our experiment aims to improve these results by adding the analysis of the impact of multicriteria conflict on preferences elicited using a bi-matching task. We also want to study the interaction of conflict with the direction. Our hypotheses are as follows:Hypothesis 3.1In a bi-matching task, the observed difference in adjustment increases with the multicriteria conflict.During the forward matching, the DM is asked to match b (adjusted alternative) with a (stimulus) by specifying the evaluation of b on the adjusted criterion. During the backward matching, she is asked to match a′ with b, by specifying the evaluation of a′ on the adjusted criterion. The difference in adjustment refers to the difference in evaluation between a and a′ on the criterion adjusted during the backward matching (i.e., δ on Fig. 2).Our hypothesis states that increasing the difference in evaluation between a and b (on the specified criterion) during the forward matching increases the difference in adjustment. In other words, a larger conflict in a bi-matching task reduces the consistency between the answers to each matching.Hypothesis 3.2The difference in adjustment observed during an unfavourable bi-matching is higher than during a favourable bi-matching. Moreover, this effect of the direction of matching increases with multicriteria conflict.A Willemsen and Keren (2003) observed that the difference in adjustment was significantly higher in an unfavourable bi-matching task than during a favourable bi-matching task. We analyse our results in order to see if their observation remains valid in our context. In addition, we refine the hypothesis, stating that the effect of direction increases with conflict.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we examined the effect of multicriteria conflict on the expression of preferences through the matching procedure. Multicriteria conflict refers to the differences of evaluation, along criteria, between two non mutually-dominating alternatives. In the context of matching in a bicriteria decision, it is defined as the difference in evaluation between the matched alternatives on the non-adjusted criterion. Using bi-matchings, where the answer to a first matching is used as a stimulus in a second reverse matching, we observed that expressed preferences become inconsistent when multicriteria conflict is increased. An asymmetry arises in a systematic direction between answers to the forward and backward matching: the compensation rate is more favourable to the adjusted criterion. Direction of the matching also affects the asymmetry of answers: deteriorating bi-matchings lead to a higher difference between compensation rates than improving bi-matchings. The effect of direction is increased by multicriteria conflict, resulting in differences of evaluation that can reach half of the scale between the benchmark (stimulus of the first matching) and the answer to the reverse matching.One of the implicit assumptions behind elicitation through matching is that isopreference curves faithfully describe the multicriteria preferences of the DM. Yet our experimental results show that what DMs express through matching judgements is not as clearly defined as isopreference curves. We observed systematic underadjustments when matching apartments on commuting time compared to matching on rent. The size of the underadjustment was increased both by multicriteria conflict and by asking degrading rather than improving judgements. The asymmetry of the object we observed through matching contradicts one of the basic features of isopreferences. Our results question the interpretation of the preferences elicited through matching questions in terms of isopreference curves, as previously shown in Deparis et al. (2012) in the case of pairwise-comparison elicited preferences. Further research is needed to better understand the nature of preferences obtained through matching.