@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evolution of social networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review recent models on the evolution of social networks.Random graph models are introduced as Markov jump processes.Game theoretic approaches to network formation are discussed.Co-evolutionary processes of networks and play are introduced to cointegrate game theoretic and random graph models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolution of networks,Game theory,Stochastic processes,Random graphs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Modeling the evolution of networks is central to our understanding of large communication systems, and more general, modern economic and social systems. The research on social and economic networks is truly interdisciplinary and the number of proposed models is huge. In this survey we discuss a small selection of modeling approaches, covering classical random graph models, and game-theoretic models to analyze the evolution of social networks. Based on these two basic modeling paradigms, we introduce co-evolutionary models of networks and play as a potential synthesis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The importance of network structure in social and economic systems is by now very well understood. In sociology and applied statistics the study of social ties among actors is a classical field, known as social network analysis (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). More recently a large scientific community, including game theorists, economists, as well as computer scientists and physicists, recognized the importance of network structure. In particular, the dynamic evolution of networks became an important question of research. Of course all these subjects put different emphasis on what is considered to be a “good” model of network formation. Traditionally, economists are used to interpreting observed network structure as equilibrium outcomes. Naturally, game theory is the predominant tool used in this literature. Computer scientists, on the other hand, prefer to think of network formation in terms of dynamic algorithms. Finally, physicists tend to think of networks as an outgrowth of complex system analysis, where the main interest is to understand and characterize the statistical regularities of large stochastic networks. Given this interdisciplinary character of the subject, the number of publications is enormous, and it is impossible to provide a concise survey covering the plethora of models developed in each of the above mentioned disciplines. For this reason, we have decided to focus in this survey on two, in our opinion, particular promising approaches to model the evolution of social and economic networks. We concentrate on dynamic models of network formation, using elements from random graph theory and game theory. These two approaches matured over the years, and some recent efforts have been made to combine them. This article summarizes a small body of these two streams of literature; it is our aim to convince the reader that random graph dynamics and (evolutionary) game theory have many elements in common, and we hope that this survey provides some ideas for future research on this young and interdisciplinary topic. However, before jumping into the details, let us give a short overview of topics which this survey covers, a pointer to the further relevant literature, and an acknowledgment of the literature which we shamefully exclude.Section 2 starts with a short discussion of random graph models. These models are the basis for the statistical analysis of networks and have had a large impact on theoretical models of network evolution. Random graph models have a long tradition in social network analysis, and are the foundation of the recent literature on network evolution in computer science, mathematics and physics. Following the terminology of Chung et al. (2006), we focus on “off-line” models. Hence, we consider network formation models in which the number of nodes (the size of the population) is a given parameter.1“On-line” models are models in which the population is growing over time. This important class of models contains the very popular preferential attachment models (Barabási & Albert, 1999), which we are not touching in this survey. Excellent (technical) summaries of these models can be found in Newman (2003b) and, more rigorously, in Chung et al. (2006) and Durrett (2007).1The most general random graph model introduced in this survey belongs to the family of inhomogeneous random graph models (Bollobás, Janson, & Riordan, 2007). This class of random graphs is rather rich. It contains well-known stochastic block-models (Karrer & Newman, 2011), variants of the important exponential random graph (Snijders, Pattison, Robins, & Handcock, 2006), and the classical Bernoulli random graph model as special cases. Since these models are very well documented in the literature, we are satisfied with a short summary of their main properties. The main purpose of this section is to introduce concepts, and to familiarize the reader with our notation. Nevertheless, we consider random graph models as the building block to synthesize random graph models with dynamic game theoretic ideas, and therefore we think it is useful to introduce them already at the beginning.Section 3 presents an alternative approach of modeling networks, mainly developed by economic theorists. It uses game theoretical concepts to interpret network structures as equilibrium phenomena of strategically acting players who create and destroy links according to their own incentives. Our discussion is centered around two particularly important concepts: The semi-cooperative solution concept of pairwise-stability (Jackson & Wolinsky, 1996), and various modifications of Nash equilibrium. These concepts are static equilibrium notions, and the natural question which comes to one’s mind is whether there are natural dynamic models supporting predictions based on such equilibrium concepts. This question leads us to consider an evolutionary approach to network formation. These models are used as an introduction to a particular interesting class of dynamic network formation models, called co-evolutionary processes of networks and play in Staudigl (2010). Section 4 is devoted to illustrate these types of models, which is our modest attempt to synthesize the strategic approach of network formation with a random graph approach. Section 5 summarizes the main points contained in this article and discusses some ideas for potential future research.Given the enormous number of network formation models, it was necessary to be selective in writing this survey. Hence, there are many important network models which we were not able to cover. Some notable omissions are the following; we restrict the discussion to network models where the size of the graph is fixed (“off-line” models). Networks with variable number of nodes (“on-line” models) are of course important, but they require different mathematical tools to be analyzed successfully. In particular, we believe that a different game theoretic approach would be needed to study such models.2For instance, a basic strategic decision in a network model with variable number of players is when and whether a single player should enter or leave the network. See Dutta, Ghosal, and Ray (2005) for a model in this direction. In evolutionary game theory, the standard model assumes a constant population size. However, it seems to be likely that allowing for population growth introduces for new phenomena absent from the stationary world. See Sandholm and Pauzner (1998) for an interesting study in this direction. A recent model of economic network formation in a non-stationary environment is Jackson and Rogers (2007).2Readers interested in the mechanics of growing networks should consult the book by Dorogovtsev and Mendes (2003), and the survey article by Albert and Barabási (2002). Another class of networks which we will not consider are weighted graphs. These models are very important for applications, and the physics community provides many interesting approaches to model such networks (see e.g. Barthélemy, Barrat, Pastor-Satorras, & Vespignani (2005) and Kumpula, Onnela, Saramäki, Kaski, & Kertész (2007), and the references therein). There are also some game–theoretic models on the formation of weighted networks, see e.g. Bloch and Dutta (2009). These are just preliminary studies, and we have the feeling that much more work on these kinds of networks will be needed before they should be included in a survey. Finally, we would like to point out that our main focus will be on evolutionary models of undirected networks. This does not mean that we think directed networks are less important. In fact, many real-world networks, such as traffic networks or the world-wide-web, are more naturally interpreted as directed graphs. However most of the game-theoretic concepts emphasize bilateral externalities, and thus admit a cleaner interpretation when links are undirected. Nevertheless, we provide some discussion of directed networks. In particular, the random graph models of Section 2 can be used to model the evolution of directed, as well as undirected networks, after straightforward modifications.Most of the models which found no space in this article have been surveyed elsewhere. We just provide some cross references to the literature, and urge the reader to consult the references therein. Recent textbooks containing in-depth discussions on dynamic network formation are Chung et al. (2006) and Durrett (2007). These books focus on the mathematical aspects, and only mention rudimentary applications. With a slight bias towards economics applications, we recommend the beautiful books by Goyal (2007), Vega-Redondo (2007), Jackson (2008), and Easley and Kleinberg (2010). Additionally to textbook treatments, the reader may want to consult one of the numerous survey articles available. We just mention Jackson (2003), Newman (2003b), Jackson (2005), Van den Nouweland (2005), Goyal (2005), Goldenberg, Zheng, Fienberg, and Airoldi (2009). At the heart of our discussion is the evolution of networks, and we use the language of stochastic processes and/or game theory to formalize our ideas. Additionally we try to highlight the potential connections between these two seemingly separate modeling strategies. We hope that this integrated perspective on the evolution of networks makes this survey a good contribution to the literature and will inspire some people to work on this fascinating topic.A statistical analysis of networks is usually based on elements of random graph theory. Random graph models are very flexible mathematical representations of interdependency relations. Indeed, the motivation for such classical models as the Markov graph model of Frank and Strauss (1986) was to develop a tractable representation of complicated interdependencies in empirical data. Random graph models in general provide a flexible framework to construct statistical ensembles of networks (i.e. probability spaces), which are parsimonious enough to get pointed predictions, and rich enough to be able to reproduce as many stylized facts the researcher is aiming to model. In this section our discussion is centered around a rather general class of a random graph process, which will be used as one pillar in our development of co-evolutionary processes of networks and play, starting in Section 4.In this survey we use the terms “networks” and “graphs” interchangeably. A graph is a pair G=([N],E), where [N]≔{1,2,…,N} is the set of vertices (or nodes), and E≡E(G)⊂[N]×[N] is the set of edges (or links). This notation applies to directed as well as undirected networks. If G is a directed graph, then (i,j)∈E means that there is a directed edge from i to j. If G is undirected, then (i,j)∈E(G) if and only if (j,i)∈E(G). In such a symmetric setting it will be convenient to use the shortened notation ij for the link connecting node j and i. We denote the collection of graphs on N vertices byG[N]. Elements of this set can either be directed or undirected networks, depending on the context.A random graph is a probability space(G[N],2G[N],P). The probability measureP:2G[N]→[0,1]assigns to each graph a weight, which should reflect the likelihood that a certain graph G is drawn from the setG[N], when performing a statistical experiment with distribution P. Thus, the underlying reference measure P it is chosen by the modeler. A historically very important random graph model is the Erdös–Rényi graph (or Bernoulli graph).3Erdös and Rényi (1959, 1960) introduced the slightly different model in which the number of vertices and edges are given parameters. The Bernoulli graph model is due to Gilbert (1959).3The Bernoulli random graph is built on the assumption that edges are formed independently with constant probability p∈[0,1]. Thus, letG[N]be the set of undirected graphs constructable on N vertices. Then the random graph model(G[N],2G[N],P)is determined by the probability measure(1)P({G})≔∏i=1N∏j>ipAij(G)(1-p)1-Aij(G),where Aij(G)=1 if and only if (i,j)∈E(G), and 0 otherwise. A(G)=[Aij(G); 1⩽i, j⩽N] is the adjacency matrix of the graph G.4It is clear that if G is undirected, then A(G) is symmetric. For directed graphs this symmetry may not hold.4The advantage of the Bernoulli graph model is its simplicity. In fact, the complete random graph is described by two parameters: the population size (N), and the edge-success probability (p). This model is the benchmark of random graph theory and is by now very well understood. A detailed analysis can be found in Bollobás (2008). It comes with little surprise that such a simple model is rarely a good description of a real-world network. In particular, the lack of correlation across links is a well-known deficit of the Bernoulli graph. However, it still constitutes an important benchmark (Newman et al., 2003a). Compared to random graphs, real world networks are often observed to have similarly small average path length (an effect coined small worlds phenomenon, or six degrees of separation),5A classical reference is the famous letter experiment of Milgram (1967). Other studies include Dodds, Muhamad, and Watts (2003) and Goyal, Van Der Leij, and Moraga-González (2006).5higher clustering (friends of friends are more likely to be friends),6See e.g. Watts and Strogatz (1998), Watts (1999) and Newman (2003b, 2004).6exhibit homophily (connections between nodes of similar kind are more likely),7See McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook (2001) and Golub (2012), among others.7and often exhibit a power law degree distribution (more nodes with very high and very low degree compared to Bernoulli graphs, Newman, 2003b). For a more detailed discussion we refer the reader to Vega-Redondo (2007) and Jackson (2008).A different example for a commonly used random graph measure is the exponential random graph (ERG). This class of random graph models builds on the Markov graph models of Frank and Strauss (1986), and is also known as p∗-models (Robins, Pattison, Kalish, & Lusher, 2007). This class of models is very rich, and its main strength are its tractability and ability to reproduce networks with arbitrary degree distributions, and clustering. Let us give a simple example for an exponential random graph model. For more information we refer to the excellent paper by Snijders et al. (2006), where a state-of-the-art survey can be found.8Despite its huge importance, the ERG model has technical problems. See Chatterjee and Diaconis (2011).8A simple version of the exponential random graph model is given by the exponential family(2)Pβ({G})≔exp∑i=1kβiTi(G)-ψ(β),whereβ→=(β1,…,βk)is a vector of real parameters, Ti(G) are functions on the space of graphs, i=1,…,k for somek∈N, and ψ(β) is the normalizing constant (the “partition function”). The functions Tiare usually taken to be simple statistics of the graph, such as the degree sequence of the graph, or the number of edges. Depending on the sign of the parameter βi, the value of the function Ti(G) determines the probability that the graph G is drawn from the whole space of graphs when using the measure Pβ. Similar exponential families for graph measures will appear in Section 4 of this survey. As a final word on this family of models, let us show that in fact the ERG contains the Bernoulli graph. To wit, letG[N]be our space of undirected networks, and take T1(G)≔∣E(G)∣ the number of edges, and β1=β, βi=0 for i⩾2. Setting p≔eβ/(1+eβ), one immediately sees thatPβ({G})=1exp(ψ(β))expβ∑i,j>iAij(G)=∏i=1N∏j>ipAij(G)(1-p)1-Aij(G).A classical approach in social network theory is to view the evolution of a network as a stochastic process (see Wasserman (1980) for an early contribution). Snijders (2001) constructs a dynamic ERG which can be analytically solved, and numerically simulated via MCMC-methods. In the following we will describe a fairly general dynamic network formation model in terms of continuous-time Markov jump processes.In a dynamic model of network formation we would like to capture two things: First, the network should be volatile; i.e. links are deleted and formed over time. Second, the likelihood that a link is formed or destroyed, should depend on the attributes of the vertices in the graph. The following network formation algorithm captures both of these requirements. We are given some probability space(Ω,F,P). The sample space Ω might be larger than the set of graphs.9This will be necessary in order to model the co-evolution of networks and play in Section 4.9We call a Markov jump process{γ(t)}t∈R+a random graph process if each γ(t) is aG[N]-valued random variable, measurable with respect to some given filtration{Ft}t⩾0containing the filtration generated by the random variables {γ(t)}t⩾0. We model the dynamic evolution of the network via the following steps:Link creation: With a constant rate λ⩾0 the network is allowed to expand. LetW:G[N]→R+N×Nbe a bounded matrix-valued function, whose components wij(G) define the intensities of link formation between vertex i and j. The function W will be called the attachment mechanism of the process.Link destruction: Let ξ⩾0 denote the constant rate of link destruction. LetV:G[N]→R+N×Nbe a bounded matrix-valued function, whose components vij(G) define the intensities of link destruction between vertex i and j. The function V is called the volatility mechanism of the process.In some models of network formation the rate of link destruction ξ has been interpreted as environmental volatility (Ehrhardt, Marsili, & Vega-Redondo, 2006; Marsili, Vega-Redondo, & Slanina, 2004). This is also the motivation behind our definition of a volatility mechanism. In principle the intensities of link creation and destruction can be asymmetric, i.e. we do not require in the construction that wij(G)=wji(G), or vij(G)≡vji(G), respectively. Hence, in principle the network formation process can be used to model the formation of directed as well as undirected networks. This simple model of an evolving network, will be the building block of our construction of a co-evolutionary model of networks and play in Section 4.LetG[N]be the set of all undirected graphs. Suppose that the intensities of link creation and link destruction are given by the functions(3)wij(G)=(1-Aij(G))κij,andvij(G)=Aij(G)δij.The scalars κij, δijare positive and symmetric, meaning that κij≡κjiand δij≡δjifor all i,j∈[N]. Additionally we assume that λ=ξ=1. This essentially says that the processes of link creation and link destruction run on the same time scale. Then the following general picture emerges.Theorem 2.1Staudigl (2013)Consider the random graph process{γ(t)}t∈R+with attachment and volatility mechanism W and V given by the functions specified in Eq.(3). Then the graph process is ergodic with unique invariant measure(4)P({G})=∏i=1N∏j>i(pij)Aij(G)(1-pij)1-Aij(G),wherepij=κijκij+δijis the edge-success probability of vertex i and j.The random graph measure (4) describes the probability space of an inhomogeneous random graph. The wonderful work of Bollobás et al. (2007) studies this model in quite some detail.10See also Söderberg (2002) and Park and Newman (2004) for earlier treatments of this model.10It contains the Erdös–Rényi model as a special case by setting κij≡κ and δij≡δ. Moreover, it generalizes certain networks based on clustering nodes according to some notion of “similarity”, as explained in the next subsection.In general, networks are complex objects and therefore difficult to analyze. However, it is often the case that vertices in a network can be classified to belong to certain groups. Indeed, a prevalent fact in social networks is the phenomenon of homophily, meaning that vertices of similar characteristics are more likely to be connected with each other. Therefore, Fienberg, Meyer, and Wasserman (1985) introduced blockmodels, where nodes are categorized to belong to certain subgroups. Each subgroup may have its own law of network formation. Recently, this type of networks has also been used in economic theory (Golub, 2012), where it has been called a multi-type random network.Suppose that the set of vertices can be partitioned into finitely many types k∈{1,…,m}. The number of nodes of type k is nk, where 0⩽nk⩽N. The vectorn→=(n1,…,nm)defines the partition of the population of nodes into its types. The number nk∈{0,1,…,N} can be either deterministically given, or represent the realization of a random variable. Assume that the intensities of link formation and link destruction are wij(G)=(1−Aij(G))κrl, vij(G)=Aij(G)δrl, whenever vertex i is a member of group r, and vertex j is a member of group l for 1⩽r, l⩽m. The model then reduces to a special case of the inhomogeneous random graph. The edge-success probabilities between members of group r and group l are given byprl=κrlκrl+δrl. This grouping, of course, reduces the complexity of the random graph model tremendously. Compared to the inhomogeneous random graph, the multi-type random graph is completely specified by the partitioning of the vertices, and the group-specific edge-success probabilities.Our proposed strategy to model dynamic network formation is rather parsimonious. The stochastic process is entirely specified by the attachment and the volatility mechanism. Particularly interesting examples are the inhomogeneous random graph model, containing the multi-type random network. All these models rely on a special choice of the intensities of link creation and link destruction. These rates can in principle be fitted from data. Thus, the statistical models are useful to describe how networks form and evolve from an observer’s point of view. They are not able to explain why networks form and evolve, without adding a complementary theory of network formation. Thus, to complete the study of network formation, we have to go to the micro level and understand the forces that drive the nodes to connect to each other. Economic and game theoretic reasoning provides the natural language for this task, and Section 3 summarizes this field to some extend. Using these game theoretic concepts, Section 4 presents some models which combine elements from random graph theory and game theory.In social and economic network a link is often interpreted as a form of revealed preference: Two players are connected with each other, because it is in their self-interest to have the link. With other words, individuals are connected with each other because a payoff or utility is derived from these connections. Frequently the linking decisions of a single individual affects the utilities of other members of the society. To understand networked systems in situations with interdependent preferences, game theory has been developed. Using game theoretic reasoning, networks are interpreted as equilibrium outcomes implemented by rational players. This modeling approach is potentially useful as it allows us to rationalize predicted or observed network structure in terms of socioeconomic behavior. A purely statistical approach to network formation cannot provide us with such a “micro-foundation” of observed networks. Moreover, the game theoretic approach allows the researcher to understand the mechanisms underlying the formation of the network. As a simple example, consider a situation where a statistician observes a networked system with a center-sponsored star architecture, such as the one depicted in Fig. 1(i).11In this figure, the star is presented as an undirected network. When considering directed networks, there are several stars: we will call a star network a center-sponsored star if all links are directed from the center to the periphery players. Likewise, in a periphery sponsored star, links are directed from the peripheral players to the center.11Having collected these data, a game theoretic model can now (potentially) be used to postulate preferences (i.e. utility functions), rationalizing this observed interaction structure.12See Echenique, Lee, Shum, and Yenmez (2013) for a very recent paper in this direction.12A utility-based approach to network formation is rather straightforward. For each player, there is a utility functionui:G[N]→R. An n-tuple of functions u=(u1,…,uN) represents the preferences of the society over network architectures. Let us start with some concrete examples.Research in sociology has emphasized the role of centrality in social networks.13See, e.g. Freeman (1979) or Bonacich (1987) for an intriguing discussion of centrality measures.13Centrality measures are based on an assessment of the graph distance between two nodes. The following examples uses a version of this distance measure, called decay centrality, to construct a model of strategic network formation. Consider a given graph G=(V,E). Let dij(G) denote the geodesic distance between vertex i and j, i.e. the length of the shortest path connecting i and j. If node i cannot be connected to j, then set dij(G)=∞. A measure of closeness should then be decreasing in distances. Thus, let δ∈(0,1) be a given parameter. The decay centrality between vertex i and j is then defined asCLij(G)≔δdij(G). It has a natural interpretation in terms of a probabilistic communication model. Let δ∈(0,1) be the probability that communication between adjacent nodes is successful. Then, if the signal transfer is independent, the probability that the signal reaches vertex j from vertex i with dij(G)=k is on the order of δk. Jackson and Wolinsky (1996) introduce a model were a player’s utility is increasing in closeness centrality, but there is a cost to be paid for each maintained link. Specifically, let wijbe the intrinsic value of a communication of player i with player j, and cij>0 be a cost which player i has to pay when a direct connection with j is maintained. The utility function for player i∈[N] is given by(5)uiCo(G)=∑j≠iwijδdij(G)-∑j∈Ni(G)cijwhere Ni(G)≔{j∈N:ij∈G} is the set of i′s neighbors. This is a version of the connections model due to Jackson and Wolinsky (1996).Bonacich (1987) introduced a parametric family of centrality measures in order to formulate the intuitive idea that the centrality of a single node in a network should depend on the centrality of its direct neighbors. This self-referential definition of centrality leads to an eigenvector-based measure, which can be derived from basic utility-maximization ideas, as shown by Ballester, Calvó-Armengol, and Zenou (2006). Let A be the adjacency matrix of a given network. The powers of this matrix give us information of the connectivity structure of the network.14Indeed,A1→is a N×1 matrix whose entries are just the degree of the individual nodes. The vectorA21→counts the number of walks of length 2 starting from the individual nodes, and so on.14Let β>0 be a given parameter, chosen in such a way that the following matrix power series exists15The necessary condition for this to be the case is that 0<β<λ1(A)−1, where λ1(A) is the eigenvalue of A having largest modulus.15:B(β,A)=∑n=0∞Anβn=[I-βA]-1. The centrality index proposed by Bonacich (1987) is defined as(6)b(α,β,A)=B(β,A)α,where α⊤=(α1,…,αN) is a given vector of individual characteristics of the vertices.16The original Bonacich centrality index is defined asγ[I-βA]-1A1→. Formula (6) is a true generalization by settingα=γA1→.16Ballester et al. (2006) show that this centrality measure is actually a Nash equilibrium of an interesting class of non-cooperative games. There are N agents who are involved in a team production problem. Each player chooses a non-negative quantity xi⩾0, interpreted as efforts invested in the team production. High efforts are costly, and the level of effort invested by the other players affects the utility of player i. To capture these effects, we assume that the payoff of player i from an effort profile x=(x1,…,xN) is given byui(x1,…,xN)=αixi-12xi2+βxi∑j=1NAijxj. The players choose their efforts independently, and in a utility maximizing way. It can be shown that this game has a unique Nash equilibrium x∗ given by x∗=b(α,β,A). Hence, the equilibrium effort invested by player i depends only on his centrality in the network with adjacency matrix A. Given the network G, and parameter vector(α,β)∈RN+1, so that (6) is well defined, we can then compute the equilibrium payoff of player i as(7)uiBC(G)=12bi(α,β,A(G))2This utility function expresses now preferences over a set of possible network architectures underlying the team production problem.The above example made the interesting point that equilibrium structure of non-cooperative games can be closely linked to the underlying interaction structure of the agents. Another example where this structure is clearly visible is the model due to Goyal and Joshi (2003). In this model the nodes in the graph are firms which produce a homogeneous product and compete in quantities on a single market. Additionally firms can agree to form bilateral R&D collaborations which lower their marginal cost of producing the output. Let us assume that marginal costs of production are given by ψi(G)=γ0−γ1ηi(G), with parametersγ0,γ1∈R+such thatγ1<γ0N-1and ηi(G)≔∣Ni∣ denoting the firm i’s degree. The output of firm i is denoted by xi, and the market is completely described by a commonly known inverse demand function P(X)=max[0,α−X], where X⩾0 is the total output of the industry, and α⩾1 is the size of the market. The profit function of firm i is then given byui(x1,…,xN)=xiP(xi+∑j≠ixj)-ψi(G). For a given network of R& D collaborations, it can be shown that the quantity choice game has a unique Nash equilibrium in which each firm producesxi∗(G)=α-X∗-ψi, withX∗=NαN+1-1N+1∑jψj. The resulting equilibrium profit of firm i is(8)uiR&D(G)≔(α-γ0)+Nγ1ηi(G)-γ1∑j≠iηj(G)N+12Again we see that the equilibrium industry performance can be assessed by knowing the collaboration structure of the firms.One of the most important equilibrium notations in the strategic approach to network formation is the concept of pairwise stability. This concept considers the differential impact an added link has on the utility of the involved parties. Thus, let us define player i’s utility differential of a set of links l⊆E(G) deleted from the network G as(9)mui(G,l)≔ui(G)-ui(G⊖l).where G⊖l denotes the network obtained by deleting the set of links l⊆E(G) from network G. Similarly, G⊕l denotes the network obtained by adding the set of links l⊆E(Gc)⧹E(G) to G. In the following definition Gcdenotes the complete undirected network.Definition 3.1Jackson and Wolinsky (1996)A networkG∈G[N]is pairwise stable (PS) if(i)for all ij∈E(G):mui(G,ij)⩾0 and muj(G,ij)⩾0, andfor all ij∈E(Gc)⧹E(G):mui(G⊕ij,ij)>0⇒muj(G⊕ij,ij)<0.Thus, a network is pairwise stable, if (i) no player has an incentive to delete one of her links and (ii) there does not exists a pair of players who want to form a mutually beneficial link. Pairwise stability can be reformulated in terms of a simple test performed on the set of all possible links. Define(10)ADD(G)≔{ij∈E(Gc)⧹E(G)|mui(G⊕ij,ij)>0&muj(G⊕ij,ij)⩾0},the set of links that can be added to G, and similarly(11)DEL(G)≔ij∈E(G)|∃k∈{i,j}:muk(G,ij)<0,the set of links that can be deleted from G. Then G is a pairwise stable network if and only if ADD (G)=DEL (G)=∅.One potential limitation of Pairwise stability is that it only considers single link changes in each updating step. A natural refinement is thus to consider the formation of mutually beneficial links as well as the deletion of more than one link in one period. Such an extended stability concepts has been used in the literature as well, running under the name of Pairwise Nash Stability.17Pairwise Nash stability was first discussed in Jackson and Wolinsky (1996). It has been used (without formal definition) in Goyal and Joshi (2003), Belleflamme and Bloch (2004) and has been defined in, e.g. Gilles (2005), Bloch and Jackson (2006), and Calvó-Armengol and Ilkiliç (2009).17Let Ei(G)≔{ij∈E(G)∣j∈[N]} denote the set of player i’s links in G, and E−i(G)≔E(G)⧹Ei(G) denote the set of links in G in which player i is not involved. A network is pairwise Nash stable (PNS) if(i)ui(G)⩾ui(G⊖li)∀li⊂Ei(G), andmui(G⊕ij,ij)>0⇒muj(G⊕ij,ij)<0∀ij∈E(Gc)⧹E(G).Thus, a network that is pairwise Nash stable is also robust against the deletion of a set of links by any player, while pairwise stability only considers one link at a time.Beyond these commonly used stability notions, several refinements have been introduced in the literature. Some concepts, which we do not discuss in this survey, are the following:•strong and weak stability (Dutta & Mutuswami, 1997),bilateral stability (Goyal & Vega-Redondo, 2007),pairwise stability with transfers (Bloch & Jackson, 2007),strict pairwise stability (Chakrabarti & Gilles, 2007),unilateral stability (Buskens & van de Rijt, 2008)cognitive stability (Gallo, 2012), and(strict) Nash stability (supported by (strict) Nash equilibrium in a link formation game due to Myerson (1991)).The concept of pairwise stability is one of the most important equilibrium concepts used in modern network theory. In this section we address the question of existence of PS-networks using two different techniques. The first technique uses the potential function method (Monderer & Shapley, 1996; Nisan, Roughgarden, Tardos, & Vazirani, 2007). The second technique emphasizes the incentive structure directly. We start with the important concept of an improving path.Definition 3.2An improving path from network G to network G′ is a sequence of networks (G1,…,GK) such that G1=G, GK=G′, and for all 1⩽k<K, it holds that either(i)Gk+1=Gk⊖ij and ij∈DEL (Gk), orGk+1=Gk⊕ij and ij∈ADD (Gk).Hence, in an improving path each graph Gk+1 is obtained by either deleting a single link, contained in DEL (Gk), from the predecessor Gk, or adding a single link, contained in ADD (Gk), to the predecessor Gk. The algorithm is running as long as there exists a player who wants to delete a link, or there exists a pair of players who want to form a link connecting them. It is clear that if this algorithm converges, then the limit network must be pairwise stable. Therefore, the set of improving paths emanating from a PS network is empty. Based on this concept, Jackson and Watts (2001) define a cycle C as an improving path (G1,…,GK) such that G1=GK. They call a cycle C closed, if for all networks G∈C there does not exists an improving path leading out of it. Jackson and Watts (2001) show that for any profile of utility functions u, there exists at least one pairwise stable network or a closed cycle of networks. The idea to prove existence of a PS network is now to exclude the existence of cycles. A well-known sufficient condition ruling out cyclic behavior in non-cooperative games is the existence of a potential function (Monderer & Shapley, 1996). In a similar way, Jackson and Watts (2001) rule out the existence of improving cycles by imposing the existence of a function w which could be called a “potential function” as well.Proposition 3.3Jackson and Watts (2001)If there exists a functionw:G[N]→Rsuch that ij∈ADD (G) if and only if w(G⊕ij)>w(G) and ij∈DEL (G) if and only if w(G⊖ij)>w(G) for allG∈G[N], then there exist no cycles. If u exhibits no indifference then there exist no cycles only if such a function exists.The “no-indifference”-condition ensures that for two networks G, G′, separated by one link, the two players affected by that link have a strict preference ordering between the two networks. The function w acts as an ordinal potential function.18Existence of such a function is implied by the existence of an ordinal network potential. See also Chakrabarti and Gilles (2007) and Tardos et al. (2007).18Ordinal potentials must respect the incentive structure of the underlying utility functions, and thus not every game will have an ordinal potential. As an example, the connections model of Section 3.1.1 has an ordinal potential only for certain parameter values (see Jackson & Watts, 2001).As already indicated, the existence of an ordinal potential function is stronger than necessary to show existence of pairwise stable networks. Moreover, it is not easy to check whether a utility function delivers such a function.19For recent efforts to characterize the class of potential games see Sandholm (2010b) and Candogan, Menache, Ozdaglar, and Parrilo (2011).19Externality conditions on marginal utilities are, however, easy to check. Hellmann (2013) uses such externality conditions directly to prove an existence result of PS-networks. Say a profile of utility function exhibits ordinal convexity in own links ifmui(G⊕ij,ij)⩾0⇒mui(G⊕li⊕ij,ij)⩾0for allG∈G[N],li⊆Ei(Gc)⧹Ei(G)and for all ij∈Ei(Gc)⧹Ei(G⊕li).20For the various definitions of convexity of a network utility function the reader is referred to Goyal and Joshi (2006), Bloch and Jackson (2007), Calvó-Armengol and Ilkiliç (2009), Hellmann (2013). It is shown in Hellmann (2013) that all these definitions are equivalent. The weaker ordinal version is defined in Hellmann (2013).20In words, if in G the link ij is profitable for player i, then it remains profitable in the graph G′=G⊕liwhich is obtained from G by adding a set of links li. Say a utility function exhibits ordinal strategic complements (Goyal & Joshi, 2006; Hellmann, 2013) if, for allG∈G[N], for all l−i⊆E−i(Gc)⧹E−i(G), and for all ij∈Ei(Gc)⧹Ei(G) one hasmui(G⊕ij,ij)⩾0⇒mui(G⊕l-i⊕ij,ij)⩾0.In an environment in which players’ utility functions exhibit ordinal convexity in own links and the ordinal strategic complements property, Hellmann (2013) reports the following result.Proposition 3.4Hellmann (2013)If a profile of utility functions u=(u1,…,un) satisfies ordinal convexity in own links and the ordinal strategic complements property, then:(1) There does not exist a closed improving cycle.(2) There exists a PNS (and hence also a PS) network.Compared to Proposition 3.3 cyclic behavior is not ruled out completely by assuming ordinal convexity and the ordinal strategic complements property. Only the existence of closed cycles is excluded.Example 3.5An example, where the conditions of Proposition 3.4 are satisfied, is given by uBCdefined in Section 3.1.2, which may also include linking costs. Applying Proposition 3.4, there exists a PNS network. Moreover, because all players have the same utility function, one can easily conclude that if the empty network is not PNS then the complete network is uniquely PNS and if the complete network is not PNS then the empty network is uniquely PNS.When imposing negative externalities (i.e. ordinal concavity and ordinal strategic substitutes), existence of a PS network cannot be guaranteed, but several uniqueness conditions are satisfied. Hellmann (2013) shows that no pairwise stable network can contain or can be contained in another pairwise stable network. Furthermore conditions for existence of a globally unique stable network are given (for details see Hellmann, 2013).To derive structural properties of stable networks beyond existence and uniqueness, more assumptions have to be imposed on the players’ utility functions. A particular nice environment is described by the connections model (Jackson & Wolinsky, 1996). Let us focus on the special case, known as the symmetric connections model(12)uiCo(G)=∑j≠iδdij(G)-cηi(G).For this utility function Jackson and Wolinsky (1996) partially characterize the set of pairwise stable networks.21Although the issue of efficient networks and the tension between stable and efficient networks displays a recurrent theme in the literature, it is beyond the scope of this survey to review the results on efficiency. The reader may be referred e.g. to Jackson (2005); Buechel and Hellmann (2012) and textbooks by Goyal (2007) and Jackson (2008).21Proposition 3.7Jackson and Wolinsky (1996)Suppose the utility function is given by(12). Any pairwise stable network has at most one non-singleton component. For c<δ−δ2the complete network is uniquely pairwise stable, for δ−δ2<c<δ the star is among the stable networks and for c>δ the empty network is among the stable networks and no stable network can contain a player with only one link.The star network, as visualized in Fig. 1(i), is the network where one player (the center) has links to all other players (the periphery) and those players do not have any other links. Beside the star network, many more networks can be pairwise stable.For the general utility function (5), Jackson and Wolinsky (1996) do not report any stability results. Johnson and Gilles (2000) study a version of the connections models, allowing for heterogeneity in costs, but homogeneity in benefits. In their setting players are ordered by name from 1,…,N such that the cost of a link between i to j is linearly increasing in the number of players lij≔∣{k∈[N]:i<k⩽j}∣. Thus, in Eq. (5)cijis replaced by lij·c. For high costs c similar features of PS networks as in Proposition 3.7 can be observed. If instead costs are low (c<δ−δ2), then there always exist k−networks where players form links to all players j∈[N] such that lij⩽k and no other links are formed. Thus, in these k−networks links remain local implying that clustering is quite high, similar to the Small-World architectures displayed in Fig. 1(iii) (Watts, 1999; Watts & Strogatz, 1998).A different way of introducing cost heterogeneity is the island model by Jackson and Rogers (2005). There it is assumed that the player set [N] is partitioned into islands of equal size J such that cost of linking is small cij=c if i and j are from the same island, but are high c<C=cijif i and j belong to different islands. Moreover, benefits are only obtained for small distances, i.e. wij=1 if dij(G)⩽D and wij=0 else. The interesting case occurs when c<δ−δ2 and C<δ+(J−1)δ2. Then, in any PS network the islands are (internally) completely connected and there is a path between any two islands. Moreover, stable networks have low diameter (bounded above by D+1) and high clustering coefficients. Thus, this model matches some key statistics empirically observed in real word networks.Persitz (2010) allows for heterogeneous benefits wijin the connections model. In his model the players are characterized by either one of two types ti∈{a,b} such that benefits depend on the types: wij=w1 if ti=tj=a, wij=w2 if ti=a, tj=b, and wij=w3 if ti=tj=b such that w1>w2>w3. Thus all players prefer the connection to a type-a player over the connection to a type-b player. While the trivial networks (complete respectively empty) are stable for very low respectively high costs, stable networks for medium cost levels have the core periphery architecture where all a−players (the core) are completely connected (if (δ−δ2)w1>c) and the b−players (the periphery) have connections to the core. Whether b-players connect to each other or how many links to a−players they have, depends on the exact cost structure. Hence, stable networks in Persitz (2010) have low diameter and high clustering coefficients and therefore share some statistical features of stable networks in Jackson and Rogers (2005).In an incomplete information setting similar to McBride (2006) (see Section 3.5), Gallo (2012) also shows that stable networks exhibit low diameter (smaller than 5) and high clustering coefficient.22Gallo (2012) refines the concepts of pairwise stability to cognitive stability to account for the incomplete information setting.22In fact, Gallo (2012) studies a slightly more general utility function than eq. (5), called distance-based utility function. This class of utility functions were first introduced in Bloch and Jackson (2007) and also studied in Möhlmeier, Rusinowska, and Tanimura (2013). Thus, by generalizing the utility function from relatively simple settings, like the homogeneous connections model, to more sophisticated models, stability predictions may reflect more realistic characteristics like low diameter and high clustering.Most of the concepts introduced so far were formulated for undirected networks. There are many applications where directed networks seem to be more appropriate. Examples of directed networks include citation networks, hyperlinks connecting web-pages, flow of knowledge, or more general any communication network. When network formation can be done without mutual consent, it is natural to speak about one-sided link formation. In a very influential paper, Bala and Goyal (2000) introduce a game theoretic model of one-sided network formation. They distinguish between two basic cases:One-Way flow: Costs and benefits are only incurred by the initiator of a link.Two-Way flow: Costs are carried by the initiator of a link, while benefits are shared by both parties.A pure strategy for player i is a list si∈Si={0,1}N⧹{i}, with the interpretation that player i wants a link with j if and only if sij=1. Since no consent is required to link to a given player, strategies directly translate into a directed networkG∈G[N]such that (i,j)∈E(G) if and only if sij=1.23Recall thatG[N]is used as general representation of the set of possible networks; The direction of links is then clear from the context.23In the one-way flow model, each player i receives benefits from all players who are accessible to i. Define the set Ci(G)≔{j∈[N]∣∃j1…jk∈[N]: j1=j, jk=i, (jl,jl+1)∈E(G) ∀1⩽l⩽k−1}, and call μi(G)≔∣Ci(G)∣. In the one-way flow model of Bala and Goyal (2000) the utility of player i∈[N] is given by(13)uiOW(G)≔ϕ(μi(G),ηi-(G)),whereηi-(G)≔|{j∈[N]|(i,j)∈E(G)}|is the outdegree of player i, and ϕ(·,·) is strictly increasing in the first argument and strictly decreasing in the second argument.In the two-way flow model both linked players receive benefits, making it necessary to define the closure of a directed network G. This is the networkG‾, defined by the property that(i,j)∈E(G‾)if and only if (i,j)∈E(G) or (j,i)∈E(G). The set of players who are accessible to i in the two-way flow model,Ci(G‾), is then simply the component to which player i belongs. Utility in the two-way flow model is given by(14)uiTW(G)≔ϕ(μi(G‾),ηi-(G)),such that above assumptions on ϕ holds.Since in one-sided network formation consent to link is not required, the concept of Nash equilibrium is more appealing than in the undirected case. Formally, a Nash network is a network G such that no single player has an incentive to create, respectively delete, a subset of his links, given the links announced by all other players. Given this definition, some of the findings of Bala and Goyal (2000) are summarized by the following proposition.Proposition 3.8Bala and Goyal (2000)Nash networks are either minimally connected or empty in both the one-way flow model(13)and the two-way flow model(14). Among those, only the empty network and the wheel network are strict Nash networks for the one-way flow model, and only the empty network and the center sponsored star are strict Nash networks for the two-way flow model.24The notion of a minimal connected network depends on whether the network is directed or undirected. A center–sponsored star and a wheel network are depicted in Fig. 1 and (ii). See Bala and Goyal (2000) for precise definitions.24The Bala and Goyal (2000) model has been extended along various directions. In the framework of the one-way flow model (13), Galeotti (2006) allows for heterogeneous benefits and for heterogeneous cost of connecting. Galeotti, Goyal, and Kamphorst (2006) allow for heterogeneity in the two-way flow model (14). Both papers show that the basic equilibrium architectures obtained in Bala and Goyal (2000) are quite robust. Even with heterogeneous benefits and cost, Nash networks are either minimal or empty, and also strict Nash networks share the same basic architectures as the homogeneous case, but can consist of more than one non-singleton component such that the different components consists of the basic equilibrium structures.25In Galeotti et al. (2006), this holds when costs are player specific. However, when costs are allowed to be heterogeneous with respect to links (called partner specific costs), then different structures may emerge as strict Nash equilibria.25Introducing incomplete information, so that players can only observe those parts of the network within some distance x, McBride (2006) shows that for low enough values of x cycles may occur (i.e. equilibrium networks are not necessarily minimal anymore) and Nash networks may be disconnected in the two-way flow model.The fact that Nash networks are always minimal in the complete information setting is driven by the assumption that players benefit from all accessible players equally, no matter how long each path is. Bala and Goyal (2000) therefore introduce decay for both the one-way flow and two-way flow model in a similar fashion as the connections model (see Eq. (12)). For the latter case they define(15)uiTWd(G)=1+∑j∈Ci(G‾)⧹{i}δdij(G)-ηi-c,with c being some positive constant. As a result, Bala and Goyal (2000) get very similar architectures as Jackson and Wolinsky (1996) for the connections model. Strict Nash networks are for small costs (c<δ−δ2) the complete network, for medium costs (δ−δ2<c<δ) the star among others, and for high costs c>δ the empty network among others. Hojman and Szeidl (2008) extend this approach and assume payoff structureuiHS(G)=fa1d1+…+aDdD-ηi-cwhere dk≔∣{j∈[N]:dij=k}∣ such that f is increasing and concave. Under some additional assumptions, they show that the periphery sponsored star and an extended star are unique Nash networks.26The periphery sponsored star is such that there exists a player i∈[N] (the center) such that E(G)={(j,i)∣j∈[N], j≠i}, i.e. all links are directed from the peripheral players to the center. In an extended star there is also a central player who does not support any links. All peripheral players maintain a single link and from every peripheral player there is a directed path to the center.26Another extension is due to Feri and Meléndez-Jiménez (2013) where co-evolution of networks and play (also cf. Section 4.2) in the setup of the two-way flow model with decay (15) is studied. In this paper, the decay is link specific and endogenous since it depends on the actions taken by the (involved) players in a coordination game.In the context of the connections model (cf. Sections 3.1.1 and 3.4), a natural adjustment dynamics is described by the improving paths (Definition 3.2). Watts (2001) investigates the long-run properties of such a dynamic explicitly. For intermediate costs such that the star network is pairwise stable in the static model (i.e. ensuring that the star is always an absorbing state of the dynamic process), the likelihood that the process starting from the empty network converges to the star goes to 0 as the number of players N grows. The reason is that the myopic best-response dynamics is path dependent. Once two distinct pairs of players form a link (which is beneficial when starting from the empty network), the improving path will never lead to the star network.To avoid path dependency Jackson and Watts (2002a) introduce perturbations in the decisions of players in the spirit of evolutionary game theory (Kandori, Mailath, & Rob, 1993; Young, 1993). These perturbations are interpreted as mistakes the players may make when evaluating the profitability of link. Formally the timing of the process is as follows:1.At each point in timet∈Na networkGt∈G[N]is given and one link ij∈E(Gc) is selected according to a probability distribution with full support on E(Gc);The link ij is added if ij∈ADD (Gt); it is deleted if ij∈DEL (Gt), and it is not changed otherwise;With probability ∊>0 the decision is reversed.For every 0<∊<1 this process defines an irreducible Markov chain on the set of networksG[N]. It therefore has a unique invariant distribution μ∊, which describes the probability with which a given network can be observed. From which network the process starts does not influence this probability. The networksG∈G[N]such that lim∊→0μ∊(G)>0 are called stochastically stable. These are the networks observed most of the time, when the noise limit goes to 0. Naturally, only networks contained in recurrent classes of the Markov process with zero noise are candidates for stochastic stability. Hence, the concept of stochastic stability is an evolutionary selection mechanism among the stable networks (and closed cycles).Jackson and Watts (2002a) show that stochastically stable networks can be detected by “counting mistakes” involved in the transition from one recurrent class to another.27The arguments used in Jackson and Watts (2002a) are based on the classical Freidlin and Wentzell (1998) tree constructions to understand the long-run behavior of dynamical systems subject to random perturbations. These methods have found numerous application in game theory. See Young (1998), Sandholm (2010a), and Staudigl (2012).27However, the construction of these trees for every recurrence class, and the calculation of minimal number of mistakes can be quite complex. Therefore, Tercieux and Vannetelbosch (2006) present conditions for pairwise stable networks (or sets of networks) to be stochastically stable that are easy to check, called p-pairwise stability. A network G is said to be p-pairwise stable, if altering a fraction p of the N(N−1) possible links in network G implies that any improving path starting from the altered network leads back to G (in particular pairwise stable networks are at least 0-pairwise stable). It is shown that 1/2-pairwise stable networks (if existing) are uniquely stochastically stable.Dawid and Hellmann (2012) study the evolution of R&D collaborations in the model setting of Goyal and Joshi (2003) (see Section 3.1.3). It has been shown by Goyal and Joshi (2003) that any PNS network is of “dominant group architecture”; i.e. there is one completely connected group and all other players are isolated (the same is true for PS networks, see Dawid & Hellmann, 2012). The sizes of the dominant group are sensitive to the cost of link formation, but there is no unique prediction with respect to the networks which will be observed. When introducing the evolutionary process above it can be shown that the size of the dominant group in stochastically stable networks is generically unique and monotonically decreasing in cost of link formation. In the context of the evolution of R&D collaborations, these unique predictions give way to interesting comparative static analysis with respect to welfare, industry profits, and consumer surplus.In the context of directed networks Bala and Goyal (2000) present a myopic best response process in discrete time for the one-way flow model (13) and two-way flow model (14). They assume that at any time stept∈Neach player i∈[N] chooses a myopic best response to last periods’ network with probability 0<pi<1 while with probability 1−piexhibits inertia.28Note that compared to the best-response dynamics with two-sided link formation in Watts (2001) and Jackson and Watts (2002a), the revision process is now formulated on the individual player level, rather than on the set of edges.28For both models the myopic best response process always converges to the set of strict Nash networks (see Proposition 3.8).Feri (2007) adds random perturbations to this dynamics and restricts himself to the two-way flow model with decay (see (15)). Feri (2007) obtains an almost complete characterization of the stochastically stable networks. Trivially, for low respectively large costs, only the complete respectively empty network are stochastically stable. For intermediate costs, and large networks, all stars where each link is supported by only one player are among the stochastically stable networks while if costs are slightly higher, no other network is stochastically stable. These results stand in contrast to Watts (2001), who shows that for the connections model in bilateral network formation the likelihood of emergence of the star decreases in the number of players N for the pure best response dynamics.Having discussed models of pure network formation, we now extend our model to allow the players to control (at least partially) two dimensions of the model. These two dimensions consist of the links a player supports in a graph, and an action she may choose, which generates a certain payoff according to an underlying game in normal form. Already the basic examples of Section 3.1 can be used to motivate an analysis of such co-evolutionary processes. For instance, in the local complementarity game of Section 3.1.2, the effort choice of a player depends on its position in the networks. As new links are added or deleted, this will have an effect on the effort invested by a player, and vice versa. We now discuss a mathematical model in which such joint dynamics can be analyzed.Recall that a normal form game is a tuple 〈[N], (ui)i∈[N], (Ai)i∈[N]〉, where [N]={1,2,…,N} is the set of players, andui:×i∈[N]Ai→Ris the utility function of player i, assigning a utility index ui(a1,…,aN) to each action profile a≔(a1,…,aN)∈×i∈[N]Ai. In this general definition the interaction structure of the players is hidden in the utility function. In order to make this dependency structure more explicit, it is useful to separate these effects and define a preference relation directly on the product set of action profiles and interaction structures (i.e. networks). To do so, let us redefine the strategic interaction as a game with local interaction structure (Morris, 1997), which is a game in normal form, but the preference relation is directly defined over a product setAi=Si×G[N]. Such models have a quite long tradition (early contributions are Blume, 1993; Ellison, 1993).Starting from a given local interaction game, we now construct an explicit dynamic model, which includes a dynamic model of network formation as well as a dynamic model of action revision. The models we will discuss are based on the following hypothesis:(i)Agents are myopic in their linking and action decision (cf. Section 4.1).The dynamic process is stationary.Hypothesis (i) is a huge simplification and essentially boils down to the hypothesis that players base their decision’s today only on the current information they have. They do not attempt to forecast the impact of their behavior on the future evolution of the state and its consequence on their own payoff. Such an assumption is standard practice in evolutionary game theory (Weibull, 1995). Together with hypothesis (ii), it allows us to model a co-evolutionary process as a time-homogeneous Markov processes living on the product setX=S×G[N], where S=×i∈[N]Siis the set of action profiles. Hence, a co-evolutionary model with noise is a family of continuous-time Markov jump processes{X∊(t)}t∈R+∊∈(0,∊¯], defined on the finite state spaceX. The stochastic process X∊is indexed by the parameter ∊>0. This parameter often has the interpretation of a behavioral noise parameter (cf. Section 4.1).A realization {X∊(t)=x} defines an action profile σ(x)=(σi(x))i∈[N]∈S, and a networkγ(x)∈G[N]. In concrete examples it is often more convenient to encode the network via its adjacency matrix. With a slight abuse of notation we denote the adjacency matrix of the network γ(x) by A(x).The elementary updating steps of the Markov process are the following:Action adjustments: With constant rate 1 the action profile σ(x) is allowed to change. Conditional on this event, player i∈[N] is chosen uniformly at random to update his current action. If i gets a revision opportunity, he draws an action from a distributionbi∊(·|x)∈Δ(Si). The mappingbi∊:X→Δ(Si)is called the choice function of player i.Link creation: With constant rate λ⩾0 the process allows the network to expand. As in Section 2 we model this process by a matrix-valued functionW∊:X→RN×N, whose elements are bounded non-negative functionswij∊(x), interpreted as the intensity of link creation given the current statex∈X. For eachx∈Xand ∊>0 the matrix W∊(x) is symmetric, and called the attachment mechanism of the process.Link destruction: With constant rate ξ⩾0 a link becomes destroyed. The intensity with which the link between player i and j is destroyed is modeled by matrix-valued functionV∊:X→RN×N, whose elements are bounded non-negative functionsvij∊(x). For eachx∈Xand ∊>0 the matrix V∊(x) is symmetric, and called the volatility mechanism of the process.Co-evolutionary processes are general enough to cover most evolutionary models which have been studied in the literature. In particular, evolutionary learning models on fixed interaction structures are obtained by specializing the setting to λ=ξ=0. Second, it is instructive to see that X∊is indeed an extension of the random graph process of Section 2. The added feature is that the attachment and the volatility mechanism are now functions defined on the domainX.To give a characterization of the class of networks generated by co-evolutionary processes, we would like to rely on our knowledge about general random graph models. In particular we would like to use the general characterization Theorem 2.1. For a given profile s∈S, let us define the s-section of the state spaceXas the setXs≔{s}×G[N]. An s-conditional random graph process is a continuous-time Markov process {γ∊(t)}t⩾0 taking values in the setXs, with attachment mechanismsW∊|XsandV∊|Xs. On an s-section the intensities can only vary with the network. Our goal is to derive a probability law defined over the set of possible networks, conditional on the event that the players play according to the action profile s, which we denote by P(·—s).Assumption 4.1The co-evolutionary process X∊satisfies the following assumptions:(i)λ, ξ>0;If Aij(x)=0 and ∊>0, thenwij∊(x)>0. If Aij(x)=1 or i=j, thenwij∊(x)=0for all ∊;For all pairs of players i,j∈[N] and statesx∈Xwe havewij∊(x)=κij∊(σ(x))(1-Aij(x)), andvij∊(x)=δij∊(σ(x))Aij(x), whereκij∊andδij∊are positive functions.The set of assumptions is not minimal in order to be able to apply Theorem 2.1 to characterize the conditional random graph measure. Item (ii) is more restrictive than actually needed. The only requirement we need is that the generator of the conditional random graph process satisfies the necessary irreducibility assumptions in order to guarantee the existence of a unique invariant measure. However, item (iii) is necessary.Item (iii) of Assumption 4.1 is arguably the most restrictive one. It requires that the intensities of link creation and destruction are functions only of the given action profile. One can imagine examples where this assumption makes sense, but it is clear that many examples will not fit this description. Nevertheless we can give the following characterization of the conditional random graph measure, which is obtained from a straightforward application of Theorem 2.1.Proposition 4.2Consider a co-evolutionary process X∊as defined above whose attachment and volatility mechanism satisfiesAssumption 4.1. Conditional on an action profile s∈S, the conditioned random graph process {γ∊(t)}t⩾0has a unique invariant graph measure agreeing with the probability measure of an inhomogeneous random graphP∊({G}|s)=∏i=1N∏j>i(pij∊(s))Aij(G)(1-pij∊(s))1-Aij(G),wherepij∊(s)≔κij∊(s)κij∊(s)+δij∊(s)is the edge-success probability of vertex i and j.Let us now present some simple examples of co-evolutionary processes of networks and play. The first example is a version of a model due to Jackson and Watts (2002b). The second example is a version of Staudigl (2011, 2013).Jackson and Watts (2002b) combine the network formation model of Jackson and Wolinsky (1996) (see Section 3.2) with the dynamic network formation model due to Watts (2001), (see Section 4.1).29Jackson and Watts (2002b) describe a dynamic evolving in discrete periods. The continuous-time version of their model given here differs in no substantial details, because the stochastic law of motion is the one of a Markov jump process. The discrete time models can be seen as embedded jump chains of the continuous-time model. See, e.g. Stroock (2005) for a general reference, and Staudigl (2010) for an explicit construction.29The local interaction game is a symmetric 2×2 coordination game with action set S1=S2≡{1,2}. For each link formed by a player, a fixed marginal cost ϕ>0 has to be paid. The utility function of player i is given byui(s,G)=∑j≠iπ(si,sj)Aij(G)-ϕηi(G),whereπ(1,s)=aifs=1,bifs=2andπ(2,s)=cifs=1,difs=2.The tuple (a, b, c, d) are the payoff parameters of the underlying game, satisfying the ordering a>c, b>d, and min{c,d}>0.30This means that the action profiles (1,1) and (2,2) are (strict) Nash equilibria of the bilateral game.30Note that, for a fixed profile of actions, the marginal utility of the link ij for player i is given exactly by mui(G(x)⊕ij,ij)=π(σi(x), σj(x))−ϕ. The co-evolutionary process is set up as follows:Action adjustment: With rate 1 each player receives the opportunity to revise his action. Conditional on this event he selects action s with probabilitybi∊(s|x)=1-∊if{s}=argmaxs′∈{1,2}ui((s′,σ-i(x)),G(x)),1-∊ifσi(x)=sand{σi(x)}⊂argmaxs′∈{1,2}ui((s′,σ-i(x)),G(x)),∊otherwise.This choice function says that a player abandons his currently used action with relatively high probability 1−∊, if there exists a strictly better action. Otherwise he sticks to his action and switches only with the relatively small probability ∊.31This choice function uses a tie-breaking rule. Namely, if both actions are optimal for player i at x, then the choice function says that i continuous playing his current action.31Link creation: With rate λ>0 a link becomes created. Jackson and Watts (2002b) model network formation in the flavor of pairwise stability as discussed in Section 3. LetADD(x)={ij∈E(Gc)⧹E(G(x))|π(σi(x),σj(x))>ϕ,andπ(σj(x),σi(x))⩾ϕ}be the set of links that are mutually profitable. Similarly we defineDEL(x)={ij∈E(G(x))|π(σi(x),σj(x))<ϕ,orπ(σj(x),σi(x))<ϕ}.Jackson and Watts (2002b) assume that a previously non-existing link becomes active with probability 1−∊ if both players mutually agree. With the small probability ∊all links have a chance to be formed. The rate that a currently non-existing link ij will be added is∀(i,j)∉E(G(x)):wij∊(x)≔1-∊|ADD(x)|+∊|E(Gc⊖G(x))|ifij∈ADD(x),∊|E(Gc⊖G(x))|otherwise.Link destruction: With rate ξ>0 links become destroyed. Conditional on this event, pick one edge ij∈E(G(x)) uniformly at random and allow the incident players to re-evaluate the benefits arising from this connection. If ij is a link where at least one player is better off after its deletion it is assumed that with large probability 1−∊ it will be destroyed. With the small probability ∊ every active link can be destroyed. This leads to the following version of the volatility mechanism:∀(i,j)∈E(G(x)):vi,j∊(x)=1-∊|DEL(x)|+∊|E(G(x))|ifij∈DEL(x),∊|E(G(x))|otherwise.Clearly this model is a version of a co-evolutionary process. The attachment and volatility mechanism depends however in a non-trivial way on the current network and the action chosen by the players, so that we cannot apply Proposition 4.2 to this model. However, this model can still be quite well understood in the extreme case where ∊→0. Taking this limit, Jackson and Watts (2002b) show that the complete network will be observed most of the time (i.e. it is a stochastically stable state), and the players coordinate on a single strongly symmetric action profile. The interesting open question is which of the two symmetric equilibria will be played. Jackson and Watts (2002b) provide an exhaustive characterization of the long-run equilibria in this model.32In the proposition we require the number of players to be sufficiently large. This ensures that certain special cases are ruled out. See Jackson and Watts (2002b) for a complete statement of the Proposition.32Proposition 4.3Preposition 1, Jackson and Watts (2002b)Suppose that N is sufficiently large. The unique stochastically stable states of the co-evolutionary model with constant linking costs ϕ>0 consist of the complete network and the following pattern of play:(i)If a−ϕ>0 and d−ϕ>0 then either all players play action 1 or action 2.If b−ϕ>0 and c−ϕ>0 then all players play action 1.If b−ϕ<0 and/or d−ϕ<0, and a−ϕ>0 and d−ϕ>0, then either all play 1 or all players play 2.Related to the Jackson and Watts (2002b) model is the coordination game scenario investigated by Goyal and Vega-Redondo (2005). Their paper is based on the two-way flow model of Bala and Goyal (2000), but adds the additional layer of complexity by allowing agents to derive utility from a coordination game as in Jackson and Watts (2002b). In the spirit of the two-way flow model, the unit of a one-step transition is not the edge, but the single individual. Specifically, Goyal and Vega-Redondo (2005) envision a dynamic co-evolutionary process in which at each time step a single individual receives a revision opportunity (independent of the other players) in which she can simultaneously change her action played in the coordination and the set of links she would like to support in the network realized in the next period. Once a network is realized, the agents play the coordination game π with all their neighbors. Thus, ifG‾is the closure of the network G (cf. Section 3.5), player i’s total instantaneous payoff is∑j≠iπ(ai,aj)Aij(G‾). Each initiated link has some costs ϕ>0, which have to be paid only by the initiator. Hence, the utility function in the Goyal and Vega-Redondo (2005) model isui(s,G)=∑j≠iπ(ai,aj)Aij(G‾)-ϕηi-(G).Using this payoff specification, the main result of Goyal and Vega-Redondo (2005) is the following.Proposition 4.4Theorem 3.1, Goyal and Vega-Redondo (2005)Suppose the stage game π is a coordination game with data a+b<c+d, and a>d. There exists a valueϕ¯∈(b,d)such that forϕ<ϕ¯the unique stochastically stable configuration is the complete network in which all agents play action 2. Ifϕ∈(ϕ¯,a)all players play 1 and the network is complete for N sufficiently large.Contrasted with the Jackson and Watts (2002b) model we see that one-sided link formation leads to sharper predictions as the noise in the players decision function is small and the society is sufficiently large.In this example we consider a family of games in which the utility function uiconsists of two components. The first component is a common payoff term, interpreted as the externality a single players’ actions exert on the other players. The second component is an idiosyncratic payoff. As such it depends only on the player’s own choice. We assume that all players have the same action set, denoted by S. Making a slight change in notation, we write SNfor the set of action profiles. A typical element of this set is an N-tuples→≔(si)i∈[N]. The common payoff term from bilateral social interaction is modeled by a reward functionπ:S×S→R. In many applications it is conceivable that the common payoff terms displays a strong symmetry property of the formπ(s,s′)=π(s′,s)∀s,s′∈S,which we assume henceforth to hold. The idiosyncratic payoff component is modeled via a functionτi:S→R, where τiis an element of the set of functionsΘ={θ1,…,θm|θl:S→R}. We interpret this idiosyncratic component as the type of the player. Thus, a type of a player is a functionθr:S→R, assigning to each action s∈S an idiosyncratic utility θr(s). We assume that players learn their types before the co-evolutionary process starts. This assumption allows us to interpret the types of the players as parameters of the co-evolutionary process.33Models with similar payoff structure are frequently encountered in economic models with local interactions. See e.g. Brock and Durlauf (2001), and the references therein.33Given an action profiles→∈SNand a profile of types τ∈ΘN, the (ex-post) payoff of player i is assumed to beui(s,G,τi)=∑j≠iAij(G)π(si,sj)+τi(si).The co-evolutionary process is specified by the following data.Action adjustment: Agents use the logit-choice function to choose actions. This choice function is defined as(∀s∈S):bi∊(s|x,τi)=expui((s,σ-i(x)),G(x),τi)/∊∑s′∈Sexpui((s′,σ-i(x)),G(x),τi)/∊.The rate of the transitionx=(s→,G)→x′=((s,σ-i(x)),G(x))is thusbi∊(s|x,τi).Link creation: The attachment mechanism is given by a collection of functions{κ∊(s,s′)}(s,s′)∈S×S, defined asκ∊(s,s′)=2Nexp(π(s,s′)/∊)∀s,s′∈S.The rate of a transitionx=(s→,G)→x′=(s→,G⊕ij)is then given by λ(1−Aij(x))κ∊(σi(x),σj(x)).Link destruction: The volatility mechanism isvij∊(x)=δτi,τj∊,whereδk,l∊≡δl,k∊is the volatility rate of a link between a player of type k and a player of type l. The rate of the transitionx=(s→,G)→x′=(s→,G(x)⊖ij)is then given byξAij(x)δτi,τj∊.As shown in Staudigl (2013) this model can be completely analyzed using elementary arguments. The (strong) assumptions making the model tractable are the strong symmetry of the reward function π and the particular specification of the volatility and attachment mechanism. Working with these assumptions, the long-run properties of the stochastic dynamics can be completely understood.Theorem 4.5Staudigl (2011, 2013)The unique invariant distribution of the co-evolutionary process{XN∊,τ(t)}t⩾0is the Gibbs measure(16)μN∊,τ(x)=exp(∊-1HN∊(x,τ))∑x′∈Xexp(∊-1HN∊(x′,τ))=μ0,N∊,τ(x)exp∊-1ρ(x,τ)∑x′∈Xμ0,N∊,τ(x′)exp(∊-1ρ(x′,τ)),where, for allx=(s,G)∈X,HN∊(x,τ)≔ρ(x,τ)+∊logμ0,N∊,τ(x),μ0,N∊,τ(x)≔∏i=1N∏j>i2Nδτi,τj∊Aij(G),ρ(x,τ)≔12∑j≠iAij(G)π(σi(x),σj(x))+∑iτi(si).We can use the measureμN∊,τto derive a random graph measure over thes→-sectionXs→. The random graph process {γ∊,τ(t)}t⩾0 defined onG[N]for a fixed profile of actionss→∈SNcan be formally identified with a birth–death process with “birth rates” of the link ij given by 2 exp (π(si,sj)/∊), and “death-rates”δτi,τj∊. Calling the rate ratioφk,l∊(s,s′)=2∊exp(π(s,s′)/∊)δk,l∊,for s, s′∈S and 1⩽k, l⩽m, Staudigl (2013) goes on in proving the following result.Proposition 4.5Consider the random graph process described above. This process is ergodic with unique invariant graph measurePN∊,τ(G|s→)=∏i=1N∏j>ipij∊(s→,τ)Aij(G)1-pij∊(s→,τ)(1-Aij(G)),where the edge-success probabilities are defined as(17)pij∊(s→,τ)=φk,l∊(s,s′)φk,l∊(s,s′)+N∊ifsi=s,sj=s′,τi=θk,τj=θlfor all i, j∈[N].The proof of this Proposition is a simple application of Proposition 4.2. The interpretation of this result is as follows. For a fixed action profiles→and known type profile, the stationary probability distribution over graphs will be an inhomogeneous random graph (cf. Section 2.2.1), with edge-success probabilities defined as in eq. (17).34Staudigl (2013) goes on in characterizing the supports of the invariant measureμN∊,τas ∊→0 (the so-called stochastically stable states mentioned in Section 4.1), and also derives the large deviation rate function of this measure in the limit of large player sets, i.e. where N→∞.34In this survey we have tried to give a short overview on a particular class of models designed for the modeling of the dynamic evolution of networks. Random graph models are combined with game theory to formalize the co-evolution of networks and play. This modeling approach reflects the interdisciplinary character of research on dynamic networks (both theoretical and applied). The models touched in this survey can and should be considered as only preliminary steps towards a more general theory. In the following lines we give some suggestions for future research and their challenges.As mentioned in Section 1, we have avoided any discussion of weighted networks in this survey. The simple reason for this is that we feel that there is not a satisfactory theory out there in the moment. Much more efforts should be devoted to this very important class of networks, which are so prevalent in applications.In many practical situations a system controller would like to ensure that a certain network structure will be achieved via decentralized decision making of the players. In such a model a controller collects a map of the vertices’ preferences before evolution starts, and given these data, a tax/subsidy scheme is designed so that a certain network architecture will be the outcome (at least with high probability).35For motivation, reconsider the local complementarity model of Section 3.1.2. Assuming Nash equilibrium play in the game where players choose efforts, we can now use this derived preference relation over graphs (7) to investigate the equilibrium payoffs as functions of the interaction structure. This leads naturally to questions of mechanism design and network optimization, both of which are very important questions in economics and operations research.35It is an interesting question how such a model extends to a dynamic evolutionary setting. We envision a Bayesian interaction model as in Section 4.3.2 as a reasonable modeling approach for this endeavor. Related to this question, we think that it is important to invest more effort to understand the connection between structural features of the players’ utility functions and the structure of stable networks (see Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5), but there is room for improvement. General characterizations of stable networks are so far missing (e.g. necessary conditions for existence and uniqueness or general conditions for emergence of particular networks). An important contribution to foster our understanding of “incentive-driven” network formation models is to start with a class of network games (potential games would be a reasonable starting point) and investigate the question how equilibrium network topologies change when basic properties of the utility function change. This is not only an important theoretical question, but may also be important for statistical identification.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
