@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An approximate moving boundary method for American option pricing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We tackle the free boundary problem of pricing American options.We use a one factor approximation of the optimal exercise boundary.The approximation allows us to compute option prices quickly.Using an approximation results in an insignificant loss in accuracy.The approximation could be used to compute the price of a single option using the PDE.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic control,Optimal stopping,Free boundary PDEs,Approximate boundaries,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a method to solve the free-boundary problem that arises in the pricing of classical American options. Such free-boundary problems arise when one attempts to solve optimal-stopping problems set in continuous time. American option pricing is one of the most popular optimal-stopping problems considered in literature. The method presented in this paper primarily shows how one can leverage on a one factor approximation and the moving boundary approach to construct a solution mechanism. The result is an algorithm that has superior runtimes-accuracy balance to other computational methods that are available to solve the free-boundary problems. Exhaustive comparisons to other pricing methods are provided. We also discuss a variant of the proposed algorithm that allows for the computation of only one option price rather than the entire price function, when the requirement is such.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper presents a fast and accurate method to price an American put option written on one underlying asset. An American put option is a contract written on an underlying asset and gives the holder the right to sell the asset for a pre-specified price (strike) on or before a pre-specified date (maturity). An American call, on the other hand, provides the holder the right to buy the underlying asset. Unlike European options where the holder can exercise the option only on the maturity date, the possibility of early exercise makes the pricing of American options a problem in stochastic optimization. While a closed-form solution for the price of European options is derived in the seminal Black and Scholes (1973) paper, there exists no analogous result for American options.American option pricing belongs to a very common class of problems called Optimal-stopping problems. The American option pricing problem is very often used as the canonical optimal-stopping problem to construct and demonstrate new computational methods that can readily be adapted to other optimal-stopping problems. McKean (1965) and Merton (1973) show that the price of an American option satisfies a partial differential equation (PDE) with boundary conditions governed by a boundary that is not known a priori and needs to be computed as part of the solution itself. Such problems are called free-boundary problems. Due to the lack of closed-form solutions for the price, researchers and practitioners have had to rely on numerical and approximation schemes to price these options. These methods fall broadly into three categories, those which use numerical techniques, those which use analytical approximations of the price, and those which use Monte Carlo simulation.Some of the first methods developed to tackle the problem of pricing an American option use numerical techniques. Brennan and Schwartz (1977) use a finite difference scheme to transform the PDE into a system of linear equations. Solving this system recursively provides the option price for all times and underlying asset prices, or the price function. The Projected Successive Over-relaxation (PSOR) technique proposed by Cryer (1971) has also been used to price American options numerically. Dempster and Hutton (1999) use a finite difference approximation and derive a linear programming (LP) problem at each time step. Each of these LP problems is solved using the simplex method. The authors conclude that the simplex method is roughly comparable to the PSOR technique. A front-fixing method is proposed in Wu and Kwok (1997) and Nielsen, Skavhaug, and Tveito (2002) to compute option prices. The front-fixing method utilizes a change in variables to transform the free-boundary problem into a nonlinear problem on a fixed domain. Nielsen et al. (2002) also propose a penalty method to price American put options, where the unknown boundary is removed by adding a penalty term, again leading to a nonlinear problem posed on a fixed domain. More recently, Muthuraman (2008) uses a moving boundary approach to convert the free-boundary problem into a sequence of fixed-boundary problems which are easier to solve and can be solved using standard PDE-solvers. Using a guess of the exercise policy (the unknown boundary), one obtains a fixed-boundary problem. The price function obtained by solving this problem is used to update the exercise policy, and the process is repeated till convergence. These methods compute the price function for a particular option, after which the option price for a particular underlying asset price at a particular time to expiration is read off from this function. A variety of methods have been proposed to obtain option prices for a single underlying asset price at a single time to expiration. Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein (1979) develop the binomial-tree method which is widely in use today. Variants include the trinomial-tree method (Boyle (1986)). Some methods use the integral representations of the optimal exercise boundary and the price function developed independently in Carr, Jarrow, and Myneni (1992), Jacka (1991) and Kim (1990) to price the option. Broadie and Detemple (1996) derive upper and lower bounds for the price of an option using capped call options and the integral representation for call options. As the integral representation of the price function is dependent on the unknown optimal exercise boundary, these methods first have to determine the boundary recursively, and then price the option. Huang, Subrahmanyam, and Yu (1996) is an example of such a method. Others, such as Omberg (1987) and Chesney (1989), use exponential approximations to represent the boundary, and price the option using these boundaries, but with limited results. Ju (1998) considers a multi-piece exponential formula to represent the boundary and obtains a closed-form solution for the price of the option based on this representation. Approximating the boundary, however, requires the calculation of twelve parameters iteratively while pricing the option involves the calculation of complex integrals.The second category of methods use analytical approximations to represent the price of an option. MacMillan (1986) and Barone-Adesi and Whaley (1987) develop quadratic approximations for the option price. These methods are not convergent, and have trouble pricing long-maturity options accurately. To correct this problem, Ju and Zhong (1999) develop an approximation based on the method proposed in Barone-Adesi and Whaley (1987). While this improved method prices long-maturity options more accurately, it is still not convergent. Geske and Johnson (1984) view an American option as a sequence of Bermudan options and propose an approximation of the option price consisting of an infinite sequence of cumulative normal functions. Bunch and Johnson (1992) propose a modified two-point Geske–Johnson approach. Carr and Faguet (1996) view put options as the limit to a sequence of perpetual option values which are subject to default risk, and use this view to derive approximations for the price of an option. More recently, Zhu (2006) derives a semi-closed form solution for the price of the option as a Taylor series expansion consisting of infinite terms, but requiring thirty terms for an accurate option price.Monte Carlo simulation techniques have gained popularity as a result of their ability to price options written on several underlying assets considerably quicker than numerical methods. Boyle (1977) first proposed the use of simulation in option pricing, with Tilley (1993) developing the first computational scheme capable of implementing simulation techniques. Broadie and Glasserman (1997), Carriere (1996), Longstaff and Schwartz (2001), Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1999) and Ibáñez and Zapatero (2004) are other examples of option pricing methods using Monte Carlo simulation.In this paper, we construct a numerical scheme that quickly computes the price function for an American put option by determining an approximate optimal exercise boundary. As highlighted by others, such as Ju (1998) and Glasserman (2004), an extremely accurate estimate of the optimal exercise boundary is not necessary to obtain accurate option prices. The method proposed here is a variant of the moving boundary approach presented in Muthuraman (2008). The key difference here is that by leveraging on a one factor approximation, we are able to obtain an algorithm that has significantly better runtime-error balance. Moreover, the primary disadvantage of the moving boundary approach is that, when the requirement is such, it cannot be readily modified to efficiently compute only one option price without having to compute the entire price function. The variant proposed herein, however, while taking advantage of the efficiency of the moving approach, does allow for adaptation into an efficient algorithm for computing a single option price. In this paper, we will restrict our focus to only American put options since pricing call options is conceptually the same with identical equations (but for the boundary condition). Furthermore, the price of a call option written on the same underlying asset can be calculated using put-call parity relations (see, for e.g. McDonald & Schroder (1998)) once the price of the put option is determined. Most existing methods just provide the price of the option, with the optimal exercise boundary having to be calculated as a post-processing step. Knowledge of the boundary allows an investor to make optimal decisions without having to calculate the theoretical option price each time a decision has to be made. The investor has just to compare the current asset price with the boundary value at that time in order to act optimally. A method which provides both a price and the boundary quickly and efficiently is thus highly beneficial and desirable.The central idea in the paper is that when a parameterized approximation to the boundary exists, one can use the methodology proposed in the paper to create a very efficient pricing solution. Though we demonstrate this using the classical American option pricing setting, the benefit of such an approach increases significantly when dealing with multidimensional cases that arise in the presence of stochastic interest rates or multiple assets. Of course, one has to find a good parameterized approximation of the boundary and also ensure convergence. However as demonstrated here, even in the simplest one dimensional case the benefit of such an approach is significant.The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, the problem of pricing an American put option is laid out theoretically. Section 3 discusses in detail the numerical scheme highlighted above. We provide a test case in Section 5 to further illustrate the mechanism behind the method, together with exhaustive numerical results. In Section 6, we propose a modification of the method to calculate the option price for a single underlying asset price and time to expiration. Section 7 summarizes this work and provides directions for future research in this area.As in the Black–Scholes setting, we assume a perfect market (no transaction costs, market is complete and arbitrage-free) withdX(t)=(r-δ)X(t)dt+σX(t)dW(t)representing the dynamics of the price process of the underlying asset, wherer>0represents the risk-free rate of interest,δ⩾0represents the continuous dividend yield,σ>0represents the volatility of the underlying asset andW(t)is a standard one-dimensional Brownian motion.Though we would like to investigate the effect of non-zero dividends in the numerical section, especially because of the need to compare against benchmark cases, the inclusion of dividends is straightforward. Hence for notational simplicity, we ignore dividends in the rest of the paper, though we will included cases with dividends in our numerical comparisons against benchmark cases from other papers.Consider an American put option with maturity at time T written on this underlying asset. Note that in this case, T is finite, since a closed-form solution for the price exists when T is infinite (Kim, 1990). We will use the time to expiry τ(τ=T-t), rather than time t, as our state variable. The payoff function for this put option is defined as(K-x)+≡max{0,K-x}, where K is the strike price and x is the price at expiry. The price of the option at time to expiryτ∈[0,T]and asset pricex∈[0,∞)is denoted byv(τ,x). We letv={v(τ,x)|(τ,x)∈[0,T]×[0,∞)}represent the price function.The time at which one should exercise the option, and hence the price of the option, depend explicitly on the optimal exercise boundary, denoted byb={b(τ):τ∈[0,T]}. The optimal boundary b is smooth and non-decreasing over time (non-increasing over τ), withb(0)=K, andb(0)⩽Kfort<T. It divides the time and asset price space into two regions, an exercise (or stopping) regionS=[0,T]×[0,b], and a continuation regionC=[0,T]×(b,∞). Whilex∈C, the option should be held, being exercised the first time x entersS. For this reason, the problem of pricing an American option is also referred to as an optimal-stopping problem.As stated before, the problem of pricing an American option is a free-boundary problem, in that the optimal exercise boundary is unknown and needs to be determined for the option to be priced. Together, the price function v and the optimal exercise boundary b uniquely solve(1)Lv-rv-vτ=0,x∈C,(2)v(0,x)=(K-x)+,(3)v(τ,b(τ))=K-b(τ),(4)limx↑∞v=0,(5)limx↓bvx=-1,(6)v(τ,x)=K-x,x∈S,(7)max(Lv-rv-vτ,(K-x)+-v)=0,whereLv=12σ2x2vxx+rxvxis the infinitesimal generator andvx,vxx,vτrefer to partial derivatives. The use of variableτ=T-tgives us an initial value problem. Verification of the existence and uniqueness of v and b as solutions to the PDE, the existence of the partial derivatives, and the properties of b can be obtained from standard texts such as Karatzas and Shreve (1998).Fig. 1shows an illustration of some optimal exercise boundary, together with properties of the price function v. Note that since we use time to expiry on the x-axis rather than time, the boundary appears to be flipped, compared to free boundary illustrations that have time on the x-axis. From Fig. 1, it is clear that v must satisfymaxτ,x{Lv-rv-vτ,(K-x)+-v}=0. This condition is known as the Hamilton–Jacobi Bellman (HJB) equation. The continuation and exercise regions are also determined by which term in the HJB equation is tight.The Approximate Moving Boundaries (AMB) method proposed in this section solves a sequence of fixed-boundary problems derived from the free-boundary problem. With an initial guess of the boundary, the method computes the associated price function, and updates the boundary according to a boundary update condition. This process is continued till convergence of the boundaries. Due to the use of a parameterized version of the exercise boundary, the AMB method requires an update to be performed only once for every iteration, at time to expiryτ=T, allowing us to quickly obtain the price function v and the optimal exercise policy b for a given option. Thus, rather than solving for the value of the boundary at each time step, we need only compute parameter values for the chosen boundary representation. Obviously, a representation with fewer parameters would require fewer computations. To this end, we adopt the boundary representation proposed in Carr et al. (1992). This representation satisfies all properties of the optimal exercise boundary, and has the added convenience of requiring the calculation of only one parameter. In Carr et al. (1992), the representation is written as(8)b(τ)=Ke-ατ+b∞1-e-ατ,whereb∞refers to the exercise boundary for a perpetual put option (which we discuss in detail below) andα>0is the only parameter.Eq. (8) shows that only one value of the boundary is needed in order to compute α, and therefore describe the complete boundary. The boundary represented in Eq. (8) is essentially an exponentially decreasing curve that begins atKand approachesb∞asT→∞. The curvature of this boundary is completely controlled by α. The larger the value of alpha the larger the curvature, that is, the faster the decrease towardsb∞. For example, the time at which the exercise boundary is at the(K+b∞)/2point is given byt=1α2(log(2))2a function that is decreasing with respect to α. Now, an initial guess of the optimal exercise boundary is needed in order to proceed. We denote this guess boundary asb0. Due to our use of Eq. (8) to represent the boundary, we need not defineb0for all τ. We only need the value of this guess boundary for some time in[0,T]. Since we are interested in the price of the option att=0, it is convenient to defineb0(T), and computeα0. We could then compute the value of the boundary at all times. The only requirement placed onb0is that it is not greater b, the optimal exercise boundary. The use of such ab0guarantees us that the associated price functionv0violates Eq. (7) in some region aboveb0, or equivalently, we will havevx0(τ,b0(τ)+)<-1. This then allows us to perform a boundary update in this violation region. Since Eq. (8) is used to represent the boundary, we are automatically provided with a lower bound,b∞, the exercise boundary for a perpetual put option. This boundary is a guaranteed lower bound to b (Kim, 1990) and has a closed-form representation. We have(9)b∞=γγ+1K,withγ=2rσ2. As Eq. (9) shows,b∞is a constant, i.e., the boundary does not change with time. Now, asα→∞,b(τ)→b∞. For computational purposes however, settingα0to some large value suffices.With the initial boundaryb0, the free-boundary problem described in Eqs. (1)–(6) is converted into a fixed-boundary problem, with the exercise and continuation regions well-defined asS0=[0,T]×[0,b0]andC0=[0,T]×(b0,X^), for some largeX^at which Eq. (4) is applied. The fixed-boundary problem for some exercise boundarybnis written as(10)Lvn-rvn-vτn=0,x∈Cn,(11)vn(0,x)=(K-x)+,(12)vn(τ,bn(τ))=K-bn(τ),(13)limx↑X^vn(τ,x)=0,(14)vn(τ,x)=K-x,x∈Sn.Solving this fixed-boundary problem with a PDE solver provides us with the associated price functionv0which violates Eq. (7), sinceb0<b. Usingv0, we determine a new boundaryb1in the violation region such thatv1⩾v0, but more importantly, so that we do not overstep the optimal exercise boundary, i.e., we do not choose ab1>b. Picking ab1<ballows us to iterate further until convergence to b. Settingb1(T)=sup{x>b0(T)|vx0(T,y)<-1∀y∈[b0,x)}guarantees us thatv1⩾v0andb0<b1⩽b. Withb1(T)determined,α1is computed and the process is repeated again, until convergence. We define convergence to be whenmaxx{(K-x)+-vn(T,x)}⩽∊, for some small∊>0. Convergence could also be defined in terms of boundaries convergingmax{bn+1(T)-bn}⩽∊and price functions convergingmaxx{vn+1(T,x)-vn(T,x)}⩽∊. On convergence, we will have the optimal exercise boundary b and the true price function v.Fig. 2gives an overview of the Approximate Moving Boundaries method, highlighting just how simple the method is.The algorithm described in the previous section primarily approximates the optimal exercise boundary using a single parameter α. While this allows us to significantly increase the efficiency of the numerical scheme (as will be shown in the next section), we seek to characterize the approximation in this section. The proposed method essentially reduces the option pricing problem to that of choosing an exercise policy among a specific family of exercise polices. We first show that the sequence ofαn’s yielded by the algorithm is monotonically decreasing and corresponds to price improvement. Then we define the tightest lower and upper bounds to the optimal policy that belongs to this family of polices and show that the converged approximate policy is below the upper bound and above the lower bound.We define the tightest lower and upper bounds to the optimal exercise policy usingαuandαlas follows,(15)αu=maxα∈(0,∞)Ke-ατ+b∞1-e-ατ⩾c(τ)andαl=minα∈(0,∞)Ke-ατ+b∞1-e-ατ⩽c(τ).Letbuandbldenote the boundaries that correspond toαuandαl. From the above definitions we will have thatbl(τ)⩽c(τ)⩽bu(τ)andαu⩽αl. We demonstrate the convergence of our approximate boundary to within these bounds in this section.Theorem 1Letα0be a constant used to defineb0via Eq.(8)and letv0∈C1,2(C0)be the solution to Eqs.(10)–(14). Ifα0>αlthenvx0(T,b0(T)+)<-1.Recalling the definition ofαl, we have fromα0>αlthat the boundaryb0(T)<bl(T)⩽c(T). Wherebl=Ke-αlτ+b∞1-e-αlτ. Hence, at a point infinitesimally close to, but aboveb0, it is optimal to exercise the option, as dictated by the optimal policy c, while the policy dictated byb0suggests holding the option.We have from the boundary conditions forv0,(16)v0(T,b0(T))=(K-b0(T))+.Now considerv0just aboveb0(T). We will have, from the fact thatb0is subopotimal,(17)v0(T,b0(T)+)<v(T,b0(T)+)=(K-b0(T)+)+From Eqs. (16) and from continuity inC0, we havevx0(T,b0(T)+)<-1.□Ifαnis such that for the correspondingvnthat solves Eqs.(10)–(14),vxn(T,bn(T)+)<-1thenαn+1, as defined by,(18)bn+1(T)=supx∈x>bn(T)|vxn(T,y)<-1∀y∈[bn(T),x)andαn+1=1TlogK-b∞bn+1(T)-b∞is well-defined and is such thatαn+1<αn. Thevn+1that corresponds toαn+1is also such thatvn+1(T,x)⩾vn(T,x). Finally,vxn+1(T,bn+1(T)+)<-1.From the definition ofbn+1and the fact thatvxn(T,bn(T)+)<-1andlimx→∞vxn(T,x)=0, we have thatbn+1is well defined. Sincebn+1(T)>bn(T)andK>b∞we have,K-b∞bn+1(T)-b∞<K-b∞bn(T)-b∞1TlogK-b∞bn+1(T)-b∞<1TlogK-b∞bn(T)-b∞αn+1<αnNext, to show thatvn+1(T,x)⩾vn(T,x), consider three regions,x⩽bn(T),bn(T)<x⩽bn+1(T), andx>bn+1(T). We will show thatvn+1(T,x)⩾vn(T,x)holds in each region.First, in the regionx⩽bn(T), bothbn+1(T)andbn(T)dictate exercising and hence triviallyvn+1(T,x)=vn(T,x)=(K-x)+.Next, consider the regionbn(T)<x⩽bn+1(T). In this region, sincebn+1(T)dictates exercising,vn+1(T,x)=(K-x)+. Sincevn(T,bn(T))=(K-bn(T))+andvxn(T,bn(T)+)<-1by definition, we havevn(T,x)<(K-x)+=vn+1(T,x)in this region.Finally, consider the regionx>bn+1(T). Definev¯(T,x)=vn+1(T,x)-vn(T,x). By subtracting Eq. (10) forvnfrom Eq. (10) forvn+1, both of which have to hold in the regionx>bn+1(T), we have(19)Lv¯-rv¯-v¯τ=0,withLas defined above. We will also have thatv¯(T,bn+1(T))>0sincevn+1(T,bn+1(T))=(K-x)+andvn(T,bn+1(T))<(K-x)+.We seek to show thatv¯(T,x)⩾0. Sayv¯(T,x)<0for some x. Sincev¯(T,bn+1(T))>0and bothlimx→∞vn+1(T,x)=0andlimx→∞vn(T,x)=0, this would imply the existence of an interior negative local minimum at some(T,x). Rearranging Eq. (19) yields,(20)rv¯=12σ2xv¯xx+rxv¯x-v¯τ.At the minimum, from the necessary conditions for optimality, that is,v¯xx⩾0,v¯x=0andv¯τ⩽0, we have that the LHS is strictly negative while the RHS is non-negative, and hence a contradiction implying thatv¯(T,x)⩾0in the regionx>bn+1(T).Now it remains to show thatvxn+1(T,bn+1(T)+)<-1which is equivalent to showing thatv¯x(T,bn+1(T)+)<0. Sayv¯x(T,bn+1(T)+)⩾0. Sincev¯(T,bn+1(T))>0andlimx→∞v¯(T,x)=0this implies the existence of a positive local maximum at some(T,x). Considering again the rearranged Eq. (19) at the local maximum, we have from the conditions for optimality thatv¯xx⩽0,v¯x=0andv¯τ⩾0. These together imply a similar contradiction with the LHS of (19) being positive and the RHS being non-positive. Hencevxn+1(T,bn+1(T)+)<-1.□The sequence ofαn’s converges. If the converged value is represented byα∗thenα∗∈[αu,αl].The sequence ofαn’s by construction is monotone with a lower bound at 0. Being a bounded monotone sequence, the α’s have to converge, to sayα∗.We need to show thatα∗∈[αu,αl]. Say first thatα∗>αl. This implies thatb∗, the converged boundary, is such thatb∗<bl. By Theorem 1 we would have thatvx∗(T,b∗+)<-1, a contradiction to convergence since this would initiate another boundary update. Henceα∗⩽αl. Next, to see thatα∗⩾αu, that isb∗⩽bu, consider the sequence ofbn(T)’s. Eachbn(T)is also such thatvxn(T,bn(T)+)<-1, from Theorem (2). That is, eachbn(T)is below the optimalc(T). Hence the convergedb∗(T)⩽c(T). From the definition ofαu, this implies thatα∗⩾αu.□In this section, we first use an example to illustrate convergence of the AMB method to the optimal exercise boundary. We then compare the AMB method with the finite difference implementation of the Moving Boundary (MB) method proposed in Muthuraman (2008), the Brennan and Schwartz (1977) method, the PSOR technique proposed in Cryer (1971), the front-fixing method used in Wu and Kwok (1997) and Nielsen et al. (2002), and the penalty method proposed in Nielsen et al. (2002), as these methods solve the free-boundary problem to obtain the price function. We compare prices obtained by these methods against those obtained by a 10,000-step binomial tree, which we take to be ‘true’ values, as is commonly done in literature.We first illustrate convergence of the AMB method for an American put option with parametersK=100,T=1year,r=0.08,σ=0.25andδ=0. The exercise boundary for a perpetual put option corresponding to this parameter set isb∞=71.9101. To obtain this value forb0, we setα0=1000. Central differences are used for the spatial discretization of the resulting fixed-boundary problem, and backward differences are used for the temporal discretization, resulting in an implicit Euler scheme.Fig. 3shows the boundaries obtained using the AMB method for this particular parameter set. The AMB method required only 2 iterations to converge to b. Few iterations are required here because our initial guess of the boundary isb∞, which, as the figure shows, is close tob(T). The use of a good first guess therefore allows the method to converge quickly to the true boundary. Fig. 3 also plots the exercise boundary obtained using the finite difference version of the MB (MB-FD), withb∞as the initial guess. As the figure shows, while not exact, the boundaries are comparable to each other. The reason for the slight differences is due to our use of Eq. (8) represent the boundary in a parameterized form. As the following section will highlight though, representing the boundary with an equation still provides us with accurate option prices.Fig. 4plots(K-x)+-vn(T,x)for each iteration of the method. On convergence, we have(K-x)+-v1(T,x)⩽0for allx∈[0,X^], implying thatv1(T,x)⩾(K-x)+for all x, which is what we expect of the true price function v. Therefore, on convergence, Eq. (7) is satisfied.We compare the performance of the AMB method against the methods previously mentioned, in terms of runtimes and root mean squared errors (RMSE). All implementations were carried out in MATLAB on a 3.4GHz Pentium 4 PC with 1GB RAM.Table 1reports option prices obtained using each method for the parameter sets that are listed. In all cases, the strike price K is set to be 100. The prices obtained using the 10,000-step binomial tree are provided as well for comparison. In each row, the closest price to the 10,000-step binomial is highlighted.Fig. 5plots the runtimes against RMSEs for the various methods with varying grid sizes (ranging from125×25to1000×1000). The runtimes and RMSEs were averaged over 36 different parameter sets, some of which are listed in Table 1. For the PSOR technique, the relaxation parameter ω is set to 1.5, with the starting vector being the solution obtained for the previous time step. The penalty method uses the penalty term discussed in Nielsen et al. (2002). Firstly, it is clear that the AMB method outperforms the others in terms of computation time. The lower left position of the line representing the ABM does look like it is better both in terms of run-times and accuracy. However the right way to look at this is to say that for the same level of accuracy the ABM has lower runtimes and that for the same run-time the ABM has better accuracy. The difference in accuracy between MB-FD and the AMB method can be readily thought of as the additional error introduced by the use of the parametric approximation.The method proposed in Section 3 computes the true price function, i.e., option price as a function of underlying asset price and time to expiration. Computing the price function apart from explicitly yielding the optimal exercise boundary, also facilitates the computation of option ‘Greeks’. However when the requirement is such, the option price for a single underlying asset price and time to expiration can be computed more efficiently. In this section, we propose a modification to the AMB method that computes the option price for a single x and τ, by taking advantage of the integral representation proposed in Carr et al. (1992).Kim (1990), Jacka (1991) and Carr et al. (1992) independently derive an integral representation for the price of an American put option. This representation decomposes the option price into two parts, the price of a corresponding European put option and an early-exercise premium. The integral representation is given by(21)v(0,x)=vE(0,x)+∫0T[rKe-rtN(-d2(x,b(t),t))-δxe-δtN(-d1(x,b(t),t))]dt,whered1(y,z,t)=logyz+(r-δ+12σ2)tσt,andd2(y,z,t)=d1(y,z,t)-σt.In Eq. (21),v(0,x)refers to the option price for underlying asset price x at time 0, in contrast with earlier sections, wherev(0,x)referred to the option price for asset price x at expiry, andvE(0,x)refers to the European put option price at time 0 for asset price x, which can be computed using the Black–Scholes equation. With this representation, one need not compute the price function in order to perform a boundary update at time 0. Instead, given a guess boundary, we need only compute the option prices corresponding to that boundary for a vector of asset prices. For each asset price, the option price is obtained by numerically integrating Eq. (21). The boundary update procedure described in Section 3 can then be applied to the vector of option prices that have been computed, and the process can be repeated till convergence. With the boundary obtained on convergence, we can then price the option for the desired underlying asset price.A variety of numerical integration techniques exist to solve such problems, such as Gaussian quadrature and Simpson’s rule. The broad variety of numerical integration techniques in literature essentially covers the entire spectrum from the very fast-but less accurate to the slow but extremely accurate technique. The accuracy of the numerical integration technique used directly affects the accuracy of the resulting price.The Approximate Moving Boundaries (ABM) method developed in this paper solves the free-boundary problem arising in the pricing of American options. Such free-boundary problems arise when one attempts to solve optimal-stopping problems set in continuous time and American option pricing is one of the most popular optimal stopping problem considered in literature. Though the discussion in this paper has revolved around the pricing of American options, the method presented can readily be extended to any optimal stopping problem. It is important to note that problems set in higher dimensions stand to benefit significantly more in terms of gaining computational efficiency. The paper demonstrates that it is possible to construct very fast solution mechanisms that have significantly better runtime-error balances. Runtime-accuracy plots clearly establish the superiority of the proposed algorithm to other algorithms in literature that solve the free-boundary problem. Unlike the moving boundary method, the AMB method can also be readily modified to compute option prices for a single underlying asset price at a single time to expiration, removing the need to compute the entire price function when not required.The ABM can also be seen as a technique to compute option prices in a much more general context, provided an approximate representation of the exercise boundary is available. This has a huge implication in higher dimensional American option pricing. That is, if one can come up with a suitable representation of the exercise surface in higher dimensions, than the AMB essentially gets rid of the curse of dimensionality. This would be the obvious direction for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
