@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A soft-decision based two-layered scheduling approach for uncertain steelmaking-continuous casting process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the SCC scheduling problem as an MIP model with interval variables.We propose the soft decision concept for uncertain SCC environments.We present a two-layered solution framework to solve the model.Experiments show the superiority of the method under uncertain situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Steelmaking,Continuous casting,Uncertainty,Scheduling,Soft decision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Strong uncertainties is a key challenge for the application of scheduling algorithms in real-world production environments, since the optimized schedule at a time often turns to be deteriorated or even infeasible during its execution due to a large majority of unexpected events. This paper studies the uncertain scheduling problem arising from the steelmaking-continuous casting (SCC) process and develops a soft-decision based two-layered approach (SDA) to cope with the challenge. In our approach, traditional scheduling decisions, i.e. the beginning time and assigned machine for each job at each stage, are replaced with soft scheduling decisions in order to provide more flexibility towards unexpected events. Furthermore, all unexpected events are classified into two categories in terms of the impact degree on scheduling: critical events and non-critical events. In the two-layered solution framework, the upper layer is the offline optimization layer for handling critical events, in which a particle swarm optimization algorithm is proposed for generating soft scheduling decisions; while the lower layer is the online dispatching layer for handling non-critical events, where a dispatching heuristic is designed to decide in real time which charge and when to process after a machine becomes available, with the guidance of the soft schedule given by the upper layer. Computational experiments on randomly generated SCC scheduling instances and practical production data demonstrate that the proposed soft-decision based approach can obtain significantly better solutions compared to other methods under strongly uncertain SCC production environments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The real-life scheduling of SCC production is a complex industrial optimization problem, especially under strongly uncertain production environments. Unlike traditional approaches that use rigid-decision based methods to find an optimized timetable plan, this paper adopts a new concept of soft decision in order to discover and represent the underlying production scheduling strategies under strongly uncertain environments. Based on the analysis of production data, we take the cast workload and the priority sequence of casts as the formulation of the soft decision. Furthermore, we develop a two-layered optimization framework to optimize the soft decision and the online dispatching heuristic. The upper layer is the offline optimization layer, in which a particle swarm optimization algorithm is proposed to optimize the soft schedule. The lower layer is the online dispatching layer, where a dispatching heuristic is designed to decide in real time which charge and when to process after a machine gets available, based on the soft schedule given by the upper layer and the real-time production data. Computational experiments on randomly generated stochastic instances and the practical production data demonstrate the performance of the proposed soft-decision based algorithm.The idea of our approach is also instructive for solving other similar scheduling problems under uncertain environments, as dealing with a large number of unexpected disruptions is always a key issue in designing the corresponding scheduling algorithms. In these situations, we argue that, by converting the rigid decision variables into soft decision variables, the original problem can be reformulated into a new problem and the corresponding solution of the new problem is capable to provide more flexibility in uncertain environments. In other words, by reformulating the original problem into a soft-decision based problem, we try to obtain some scheduling strategies that remain changeless under uncertain environments.Future work includes the following two aspects. First, deploy the proposed algorithm at a large SCC production line to verify its effectiveness in solving real-life problems and extend the proposed method to solve other type of scheduling problems under uncertain environments, in which determining the form of soft decision based on problem features is the key step. Second, since the time to run the offline optimization algorithm is very important to the overall performance of our approach, it is interesting to further study the best opportunity to trigger the offline optimization algorithm.