@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The paradox effects of uncertainty and flexibility on investment in renewables under governmental support

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the influence of support schemes and flexibility on renewable investments.Investors are assumed to optimally choose the investment timing and the capacity.Given flexibility the optimal capacity does not depend on governmental support.Decreasing governmental support over time may lead to higher capacities installed.Likewise, higher uncertainty may lead to higher capacities installed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal investment timing,Optimal capacity size,Real options,OR in energy,OR in environment and climate change,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Given that companies have the flexibility to decide about size and timing of a renewable electricity investment, the existence of four paradox effects is proven: Only the type but not the amount of governmental support has an influence on the optimal capacity of a renewable electricity generating system. A decrease of governmental support over time may result in higher capacities of renewables installed on an industry level, at least on the short term. Likewise, higher uncertainty may encourage an expansion of these capacities. In contrast, technological progress may hamper the expansion of capacities. Finally, these four paradox effects are exemplified in a Germany-based case study regarding a photovoltaic project.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The production of renewable electricity - at least today - is still more expensive than the production of conventional electricity. For example, the production of electricity in a lignite-fired power plant on average created costs of 0.0455 Euros per kilowatt hour in Germany in 2013 while the production of electricity from onshore wind power created costs of 0.076 Euros per kilowatt hour (Fraunhofer ISE, 2013).11The cost difference between conventional electricity and electricity from solar power or bio mass is even higher.Hence, in the short term governmental support is needed to give private investors or companies the incentive to invest into renewable electricity generating projects which may lead to learning curve effects, so that renewable energy technologies can become competitive in the long-term (Kumbaroğlu, Madlener, & Demirel, 2008).Consequently, how to design an optimal support scheme for renewable electricity is a crucial question with great economic, environmental and social impact (Dinica, 2006). In particular, methods of multi-criteria decision-making will be needed as the governmental support of renewables does not only have an influence on the carbon emissions but also on the electricity price (and thereby on the economic competitiveness of a country), on the energy networks (Klessmann, Nabe, & Burges, 2008), on the landscape (Meyerhoff, Ohl, & Hartje, 2010) and on the speed of technological development (Davis & Owens, 2003). Furthermore, an optimal support scheme cannot be static but has to adapt to changes in the economic development as well as on technological progress to be able to meet its policy targets (Lee & Shih, 2010). For example, by decreasing the fixed feed-in tariff of renewable electricity over time the technological progress is taken into account in Germany (Klessmann et al., 2008).Obviously, to determine an optimal governmental support scheme the decision-maker in a first step needs to know the investor's reaction on governmental support. Following economic intuition it should be expected that higher governmental support leads to a higher incentive to invest in renewable electricity projects as it increases the expected net present value of the project. Consequently, it is usually taken for granted that investors in countries with higher governmental support of renewables ceteris paribus implement more as well as bigger renewable electricity projects (Jacobsson & Lauber, 2006). Furthermore, due to risk-aversion uncertainty is generally seen to be a major investment barrier (Meijer, Hekkert, & Koppenjan, 2007).However, only recently Linnerud, Andersson, and Fleten (2014) could empirically show that regarding renewable electricity investments under uncertainty only private investors decide according to the classical net present value rule while institutional investors act in accordance with the implications of the real option theory.22In the following we will use the term “net present value” exclusively with the meaning of a static NPV, where the investor has only the choice to invest immediately or never. The dynamic net present value, i.e. a situation where an investor has the flexibility to wait with the investment but uncertainties are not considered, is seen as a special case of the real option approach. In particular, it is equal to the real option perspective in absence of any uncertainty.In particular, real options theory predicts that under uncertainty the possibility to wait with an investment until some of the uncertainty has resolved contains a flexibility value and can be valued analogously to financial options (Dixit & Pindyck, 1994; Trigeorgis, 1999).So far, there exists already a small strand of literature which uses the real option framework to evaluate investment possibilities into renewable electricity projects under uncertainty.33A good review is given in Martínez Ceseña et al. (2013).In particular, investment possibilities in renewables are modeled, where the investor faces uncertainty - for example on the sales price of electricity- and can choose the optimal investment timing (Muñoz, Contreras, Caamaño, & Correia, 2011; Sarkis & Tamarkin, 2008). In Bøckman, Fleten, Juliussen, Langhammer, and Revdal (2008) investors can additionally choose the optimal investment size. The results show that it is optimal to invest as soon as the sales price of electricity meets a certain trigger value and that the optimal investment size is a function of the electricity price at the investment time.In contrast to the literature discussed so far Boomsma, Meade, and Fleten (2012) focus on the influence of governmental support on renewable electricity investments. In particular, they analyze the investment decision of a risk-neutral investor under three different support schemes: renewable energy certificates, feed-in tariffs and no governmental support. Their results show that the choice of a governmental support scheme has a crucial influence on the investment behavior. In particular, they find that feed-in tariffs lead to earlier investment while renewable electricity certificates lead to larger investments. In accordance with previous results they furthermore show that investors should wait with their investment until a certain trigger is met and that the optimal investment capacity is a function of the earnings of the renewable electricity generating system, of its investment costs, and of the amount of governmental support. However, in the case of feed-in tariffs it is shown that the optimal capacity does not depend on the fixed feed-in tariff as long as immediate investment is not optimal.In the following we will build on the model of Boomsma et al. (2012) but deviate in several points. First, we consider a price premium support scheme and governmental support on the investment costs instead of renewable electricity certificates. Second, we include the possibility of a reduction or an increase of governmental support over time but do not allow the government to switch from one support scheme to another. Third, we model the functional relationship of the investment level and the produced electricity as general as possible. Finally, we drop two assumptions of Boomsma et al. (2012) as we allow for a finite life-time of the renewable electricity generating system and for a correlation of the investment costs and earnings of the system.As a result we can generalize the findings of Boomsma et al. (2012). As long as immediate investment is not optimal the optimal capacity of the system does neither depend on the ratio of the cost level and the electricity price at time of investment nor on the amount of governmental support. This holds for all governmental support schemes taken into account, i.e. for feed-in tariffs, for a price premium, for no governmental support and for a subsidy on the investment costs as well as for any combination of these support schemes. Furthermore, we can show that in contrast to the predictions of the net present value rule a decrease of the governmental support over time can lead to a higher propensity to invest and thus to a higher cumulated investment on the short term. Likewise, the influence of uncertainty on investment is ambiguous, too, i.e. higher uncertainty may also lead to more investment activity.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we set up the net present value and the real option model of an investment opportunity in a renewable electricity generating project under uncertainty and governmental support. Furthermore, the implications of the paper are proofed and summarized in eight propositions. In Section 3 the results of the net present value approach and the real options approach are compared and the effect of an increase of several model parameters is discussed. A focus is placed on four effects that seem paradoxical at first glance. In Section 4 those paradox effects are exemplified with the help of a case study regarding a possible investment in a photovoltaic project in Germany. Section 5 concludes and gives suggestions for future research. Finally, a list of all variables and parameters used in this article is provided in the Appendix.We consider an investor who beginning in t0 has the possibility to invest in a renewable electricity generating project – for example a wind park or a solar power plant – with a finite life time of T > 0 time periods. He has the flexibility to choose the size x of its investment, i.e. the maximum capacity installed. Certainly, the project will not generate its maximum capacity year round. For example solar power systems produce almost no electricity at night and less electricity in the winter than in the summer. Let Q(x) ≥ 0 denote the expected amount of electricity produced per time period. Obviously,Q(0)=0and Q is strictly monotonic increasing in x. However, each additional unit, i.e. each additional wind turbine of a wind park or each additional photovoltaic cell, produces less electricity as the location of each additional unit of the investment project is getting worse, because under the assumption of optimality all better locations should already be used. Consequently, Q(x) is concave andlimx→∞Q′(x)=0. Furthermore, we assume Q to be continuously differentiable with respect to x.The necessary investment costs are a multiple of the requirement I(x) > 0 of inputs, i.e. land rent, labor costs, material costs, as well as planning costs (all measured in the cost level of t0), and the cost level c(t) > 0 of these inputs which varies stochastically over time. In particular, we assume that it follows the geometric Brownian motion(1)dc(t)=αcc(t)dt+σcc(t)dWc(t),c(t0)=1,withαc∈Ras the expected exponential growth rate of the cost level, σc≥ 0 as its volatility and dWc(t) as the increment of a standard Wiener process with mean zero and variance equal todt. Obviously, the requirement of inputs increases with the project size, i.e. with the maximum capacity installed. Hence, we have that I(x) is strictly monotonic increasing in x. Due to fix costs, i.e. I(0) > 0, and as each additional unit is getting cheaper, I(x) is concave. However, as the material costs per unit cannot become lower than the producer price, we have thatlimx→∞I(x)′>0. Further, we assume that I is continuously differentiable with respect to x and thatQ′(x)I′(x)andI′(x)Q(x)I(x)Q′(x)are monotonic in x.44We need this condition to ensure the existence of the inverse function ofQ′(x)I′(x)andI′(x)Q(x)I(x)Q′(x). Due tolimx→∞Q′(x)=0we get thatQ′(x)I′(x)is strictly monotonic decreasing in x and thatI′(x)Q(x)I(x)Q′(x)is strictly monotonic increasing in x.The earnings of the investment depend on the sales price p(t) of each energy unit produced, which also varies stochastically over time. Again, we assume that it follows the geometric Brownian motion(2)dp(t)=αpp(t)dt+σpp(t)dWp(t),p(t0)>0withαp∈Ras the expected exponential growth rate of the cost level, σp≥ 0 as its volatility and dWp(t) as the increment of a standard Wiener process with mean zero and variance equal todtthat is correlated to the cost level by the factorρ∈[−1,1], i.e.E[dWc(t)dWp(t)]=ρdt.55Here it is noteworthy to state, that we follow Boomsma et al. (2012) by assuming independence between the amount of electricity produced per time period and the sales price of electricity.In particular, the sales price may depend on market prices, governmental regulations or a combination of both. In the following we will discuss three different situations: First, under no governmental support the sales price is equal to the market price of electricity.66Although the electricity price is highly volatile on a short term basis and shows strong seasonalities (see e.g. Fleten and Kristoffersen, 2007; Kovacevic and Paraschiv, 2014) we can just focus on the long term fluctuation of the electricity price because the short term volatility of the electricity price as well as seasonal fluctuations level out on the long term. Hence, we can follow Boomsma et al. (2012) by assuming that the long-term mean electricity price follows a geometric-Brownian motion.In this case p(t0) is the market price of electricity in time t0, σpis the volatility of the market price of electricity and αpits exponential growth rate. Second, under a proportionately price premium support scheme, the government pays the producers of renewable electricity a multiple ψ > 1 of the electricity price. In this case p(t0) is ψ-times the market price of electricity in time t0, σpis the volatility of the market price of electricity and αpits exponential growth rate. Third, under a fixed feed-in-tariff support scheme the government pays the producers of renewable electricity a fixed pricep¯for each energy unit. In this casep(t0)=0andσp=0as under a fixed-feed in tariff system no uncertainty about the sales price exists. If the fixed-feed-in tariff is constant over time we have thatαp=0. If the fixed feed-in tariff is reducing over time we have that αp< 0. Furthermore, we allow the government to proportionally subsidize the investment costs. Let s ∈ [0, 1] denote the share of the subsidy on the total investment costs, then a time t ≥ 0 the necessary investment costs of the investor are equal to(1−s)I(x)c(t).Finally, we assume that the company is using a discount factor following the CAPM formula, i.e., that the sales price p of electricity and the cost level are correlated with the market by factorρpm,ρcm∈[−1,1], the market price of risk is λ ≥ 0 and the risk-free interest rate equals r ≥ 0.77See Merton (1973).Therefore, the difference between the expected return of the sales price of electricity and the drift rate of the GBM, the so called convenience yield, is given by(3)δp=r−αp+λρpmσp.Likewise, we get(4)δc=r−αc+λρcmσc.In the following we assume δp, δc> 0.If the company invests at a time τ ≥ t0 it's expected present value can be calculated as(5)V(p(τ),x)=E∫ττ+TQ(x)p(q)e−(r+λρpmσp)(q−τ)dq=Q(θ)p(τ)(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)r−αp+λρpmσp.Consequently, the net present value at time τ ≥ 0 equals(6)π(c(τ),p(τ),x)=Q(x)p(τ)(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)r−αp+λρpmσp−(1−s)I(x)c(τ).It is easy to see that∂π∂s>0,∂π∂ψ>0,∂π∂p¯>0,∂π∂T>0,∂π∂(p(τ)c(τ))>0and∂π∂σc=0. Considering the fact that(7)∂((1−e−zT)z)∂z≤0for all z ≥ 0, we can also conclude that∂π∂αp>0and∂π∂σp≤0. Following the Net Present Value decision rule the company therefore will invest in t0 if and only if π(c(t0), p(t0), x°) > 0, whereby x° is chosen optimally88Here it should be noted that such a maximum always exists but may lie on the lower boundary, i.e.x=0., i.e.(8)π(c(t0),p(t0),x∘)=maxx≥0{π(c(t0),p(t0),x)}.Obviously, as long as x° ≠ 0 the following condition has to hold:(9)Q′(x)I′(x)=(1−s)c(τ)p(τ)r−αp+λρpmσp(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)⇔x∘=(Q′I′)−1((1−s)c(τ)p(τ)r−αp+λρpmσp(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)).As the inverse function(Q′I′)−1(z)is monotonic decreasing in z we deduce from Eq. (9) that∂x∘∂s>0,∂x∘∂ψ>0,∂x∘∂p¯>0,∂x∘∂T>0,∂x∘∂(p(τ)c(τ))>0,∂x∘∂σc=0,∂x∘∂αp>0,and∂x∘∂σp≤0. Hence, we can state the following proposition:Proposition 1According to the net present value decision rule the optimal capacity x° of the system and the net present value of the project both•are the greater the higher the governmental support. In particular, the optimal system size increases if the government pays a larger part s of the investment costs. Likewise, the system size increases inp, i.e. with a higher price premium ψ or a higher fixed-feed-in tariffp¯.are the greater the longer the life-time T of the system.are the lower (or equal) the higher the uncertainty σp about the sales price of renewable electricity.are the greater the higher the growth rate αp of the sales price of electricity.are not influenced by the uncertainty σc about the cost level.are not influenced by the growth rate αc of the cost levelare the greater the higher the ratiop(τ)c(τ)of the sales price of electricity and the cost level.As the company does not have to decide, if to invest immediately or not to invest at all, but can wait with the decision, the possibility to invest in the renewable electricity producing system should be regarded as a real option and thus has an option value F(c(t), p(t), x) > 0. Following the dynamic programming approach (see Dixit & Pindyck, 1994) the option value has to meet the Bellman equation(10)E[dF]=rFdt,i.e. in every time interval the expected increase in the option value has to be equal to the earnings of a riskless portfolio of the same amount. Applying Ito's Lemma on Eqs. (1) and (2) we get that the option value F(c(t), p(t), x) is solution of the equation(11)12∂2F(c(t),p(t),x)∂c(t)2c(t)2σc2+∂F(c(t),p(t),x)∂c(t)c(t)(αc−λρpcσc)+12∂2F(c(t),p(t),x)∂p(t)2p(t)2σp2+∂F(c(t),p(t),x)∂p(t)×p(t)(αp−λρpmσp)+∂2F(c(t),p(t),x)∂c(t)∂p(t)ρσcσpc(t)p(t)=rF(c(t),p(t),x)subject to the four following boundary conditions:(12)limc→∞F(c,p,x*)=0,(13)F(c*,p*,x*)=π(c*,p*,x*),(14)∂F(c*,p*,x*)∂c=∂π(c*,p*,x*)∂c,(15)∂F(c*,p*,x*)∂p=∂π(c*,p*,x*)∂p,and(16)∂π(c,p,x*)∂x=p(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)(r−αp+λρpmσp)×Q′(x*)−c(1−s)I′(x*)=0.Hereby, the continuation condition (Eq. (13)) guarantees, that at the optimal time τ* of investment (the first time the ratio of the cost level p(t) and the electricity price c(t) is higher than the optimal investment threshold p*/c*) the option value is equal to the net present value of the investment opportunity. Likewise, the smooth-pasting conditions (Eqs. (14) and (15)) guarantees that this transition is smooth in c and p which is a necessary condition for the optimality of the investment threshold p*/c* (e.g. see Dixit & Pindyck, 1994). Furthermore, at the optimal investment timeτ*=inf{t≥t0|p(t)/c(t)≥p*/c*}the investor will optimally decide on the size x of its system. Hence, Eq. (16) has to hold.99As Q and I are continuously differentiable in x also π is continuously differentiable in x. Due toQ(0)=0and I(0) > 0 we have that π(c, p, 0) < 0. Hence the optimal capacity x* is greater than zero and, thus, the condition of Eq. (16) has to hold.In analogy to Dixit and Pindyck (1994, pp. 207–211) we get(17)p*c*=ββ−1I(x*)(1−s)(r−αp+λρpmσp)Q(x*)(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T),with(18)β=12−δc−δpσc2−2ρσpσc+σp2+(12−δc−δpσc2−2ρσpσc+σp2)2+2δcσc2−2ρσpσc+σp2>1.After transforming Eq. (16) to(19)p(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)c(1−s)(r−αp+λρpmσp)=I′(x*)Q′(x*).and inserting Eq. (17) we get the optimal project capacity(20)x*=(I′QQ′I)−1(ββ−1).Hence, we can state the following propositionProposition 2If the investor has the flexibility to wait with the investment and as long as immediate investment is not optimal, the optimal project capacity x* neither depends on the life-time T of the project nor on any form of governmental support nor on the ratiop(t0)c(t0).Along with these results we get the following proposition from Eq. (17):Proposition 3Higher governmental subsidies on the investment costs and a longer life-time of the project both lead to a lower investment thresholdp*c*. The ratiop(t0)c(t0)and, thus, also the amount of a fixed-feed-in-tariff or the amount of a price premium, have no influence on the investment threshold. Furthermore, higher governmental support, a longer life-time of the project and a higher ratiop(t0)c(t0)lead to a higher probability to invest in a given time t, i.e. to a higherP(τ*≤t+t0).From Eq. (20) we furthermore see that the optimal project capacity decreases in β. As∂β∂αc>0and∂β∂αp<0we can consequently state the following proposition:Proposition 4A higher growth rate αp of the sales price and a lower growth rate αc of the cost level lead to a higher optimal capacity x* of the system. A lower growth rate αc of the cost level furthermore leads to a higher investment threshold.Hereby, we can verify the second sentence with a similar argument with the help of Eq. (17).As c(t) and p(t) both follow geometric Brownian motions also their ratioy(t):=p(t)c(t)follows a geometric Brownian motion. In particular,(21)y(t)=p0exp((αp−12σp2)t+σpWp(t))c0exp((αc−12σc2)t+σcWc(t))=p0c0exp((αp−αc−ρσcσp+σc2)t−12(σc2+σp2)t+σc2−2ρσcσp+σp2Wy(t)),whereby dWy(t) is the increment of a standard Wiener process with mean zero and variancedt. Hence,(22)dy(t)=(αp−αc−ρσcσp+σc2)ydt+σc2−2ρσcσp+σp2ydWy(t)=:αyydt+σyydWy(t).According to Harrison (1985, pp. 11–14) the probability that investment takes place before a timet+t0can be calculated with the formula(23)P(τ*≤t+t0)=min{1,Φ(ln(y0y*)+(αy−12σy2)tσyt)+(y*y0)2αyσy2−1Φ(ln(y0y*)−(αy−12σy2)tσyt)},where Φ( · ) is the cumulative density function of the standard normal distribution. The expected installed capacity until a time t ≥ t0 then can be calculated as(24)E[X(t)]={x*P(τ*≤t)p*c*>p0c0x∘p*c*≤p0c0By combining the results of Propositions 2 and 3 we easily get the following proposition:Proposition 5Higher governmental support, a longer life-time of the project and a higher ratiop(t0)c(t0)lead to a higher expected installed capacity until a timet ≥ t0.However, as long as I(x) and Q(x) are not specified in more detail, it is neither possible to analytically determine the investment threshold c*/p* nor the optimal capacity x*. In the following we will specify the functions I(x) and Q(x) in the same way as Boomsma et al. (2012) which allows us to better compare the results. In particular, we assume that the requirement of inputs increases linearly with the system's maximum capacity x, i.e.(25)I(x)=A+Bx,whereby A > 0 accounts for the capacity-independent input-requirements and B > 0 accounts for the capacity-dependent input-requirements. Furthermore, we assume that the relationship between the system's capacity and the expected produced energy per time unit is given by(26)Q(x)=axb,whereby a > 0 and b ∈ (0, 1). Of course, I(x) and Q(x) satisfy the assumptions made above, which is easy to verify.Following Eqs. (17) and (20) we get the optimal capacity(27)x*=β(1−b)β−1ABband the investment threshold equals(28)p*c*=(βbA((1−b)β−1)B)1−bB(1−s)(r−αp+λρpmσp)ab(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)Finally, the option value equals(29)F(c(t),p(t))={π(c*,p*,x*)(p(t)c*c(t)p*)βp(t)c(t)≤p*/c*π(c(t),p(t),x∘(c(t),p(t))p(t)c(t)>p*/c*,with(30)x∘=(ab(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T)B(1−s)(r−αp+λρpmσp)p(t0)c(t0))11−b.In the following, we will perform a comparative-static analysis to determine the influence of the growth rates of the sales price of renewable electricity and of the cost level as well as of the uncertainty about the sales price and of the uncertainty about the cost level on investment. Unless stated otherwise, we will thereby assume the following parameter values:r:=0.05,λ:=0,αc:=0.02,σc:=0.1,ρcm:=0,αp:=0,σp:=0.2,ρpm:=0,ρ:=0.5,c0:=1,p0:=1,T:=15,a:=1,b:=0.5,A:=5,B:=10,s:=0,t0:=0.From Eq. (28) we can deduce that the influence of an increase in αpon the optimal investment threshold is twofold. On one hand an increase in αpincreases the factor(β((1−b)β−1))1−bon the other hand it decreases the factor(r−αp+λρpmσp)(1−e−(r−αp+λρpmσp)T). Hence, the sign of∂(p*c*)∂αpdepends on which of these two effect dominates the other. As can be seen in Fig. 1-a this may result in a U-shaped relationship between αpand p*/c*. Following Eq. (23) an increase in αpalso affects the probability of investment in a given time in two different ways. First, via an increase in αy, which leads to a higher probability that a certain threshold is reached by the process p(t)/c(t) in a given time and, second, via the just discussed ambiguous influence on the optimal investment threshold. For regions of αpwhere this two effects are working in other directions, the sign of∂P(τ*≤t+t0)∂αpagain depends on which of these two effects dominates the other. As we can see in Fig. 1-b this may lead to a non-monotonic relationship of αpandP(τ*≤t+t0). As Eq. (24) depicts, an increase in αpalso effects the expected installed capacity after a given time in two ways. FollowingProposition 4an increase in αpleads to a greater optimal capacity x* of the project. However, as just discussed an increase in αpmay reduce the probability that investment takes place in a given time. Fig. 1-c depicts that as a result the relationship of αpandE[X(t)]can become non-monotonic. Consequently, we can state the following proposition:Proposition 6Generally an increase in the growth rate αp of the sales price of renewable electricity has an ambiguous effect on the optimal investment threshold, on the probability of investment until a given time and on the expected installed capacity after a given time.Following Eq. (23) an increase in αcalso affects the probability of investment in a given time in two different ways. First, via an decrease in αy, which leads to a lower probability that a certain threshold is reached in a given time and, second, via a decrease of the optimal investment threshold (see Proposition 4). As these effects work in opposite directions, the sign of∂P(τ*≤t+t0)∂αcdepends on which of these two effects dominates the other. As can be seen in Figure 2-a the relation of αcandP(τ*≤t+t0)thus may become non-monotonic. Following Proposition 4 an increase in αcleads to a smaller optimal capacity x* of the project. However, together with the just discussed influence of αconP(τ*≤t+t0)we get from Eq. (24) that the overall effect of αcon the expected capacity installed after a given time may be non-monotonic. An example is given in Fig. 2-b. Thus, we can state the following proposition:Proposition 7Generally an increase in the growth rate αc of the cost level has an ambiguous effect on the probability of investment until a given time and on the expected installed capacity after a given time.As long asλ=0we get that∂β∂σy<0and hence from Eq. (27) that the optimal capacity of the project is increasing in σy. However, as ρ > 0 σyis obviously non-monotonic in σcand in σp, hence we observe a non-monotonic relation of σcand x* as well as of σp and x* (see Fig. 3-a). For the same reason (see also Eq. (28)) also the relation of σcand p*/c* as well as of σpand p*/c* is non-monotonic (see Fig. 3-b).Regarding the probability to invest in a given time, an increase in σynot only influences this probability via a change in the investment threshold but also by increasing the probability that a certain threshold will be reached by the process p(t)/c(t) in a given time. Consequently, we can observe a non-monotonic relation of σcand the probability to invest in a given time (see Fig. 4-a). As we have found a non-monotonic relation of σcand the optimal capacity of the project as well as of σcand the probability to invest into the project in a given time, it is not surprising that Fig. 4-b also depicts a non-monotonic relation of σcand the expected installed capacity after a given time.Likewise, we can find non-monotonic relations of σpand the probability to invest in a given time (see Fig. 5-a) as well as of σpand the expected installed capacity after a certain time (see Fig. 5-b). Consequently, we can state the following proposition:Proposition 8Generally an increase in the uncertainty σc about the cost level or in the uncertainty σp about the sales price of renewable electricity has an ambiguous effect on the optimal capacity of the system, on the optimal investment threshold, on the probability of investment until a given time and on the expected installed capacity after a given time.So far, we have quite technically analyzed the influence of various parameters on the projects capacity and on investment timing under both a Net Present Value decision rule as well as from a real options perspective. The findings of this analysis are summarized in Table 1and now shall be further discussed.In particular, the net present value rule and the real option approach both predict that a higher life-time of the renewable electricity generating system increases the investor's propensity to invest into a renewable electricity project and leads to a higher capacity installed. While according to the net present value rule the optimal capacity of a single project increases with the life-time of the project, the real options approach postulates that a higher life-time has no influence on the optimal capacity of a single project. Overall, however, both approaches generate the result that a product innovation which increases the expected life-time of newly build renewable electricity generating projects leads to a higher capacity of renewables installed on an industry level. In the following the influence of several other model variables is analyzed. A special focus is put on four paradox (at least from a net present value perspective) effects arising with the flexibility to wait with the investment.A rich literature stream exists discussing the pros and cons of the different governmental support systems. Although no general answer is found which system supports the evolution of renewables best, a consensus exists about the fact that the type of a country's respective governmental support scheme has a major influence on the investment activity in renewables (see e.g. Helm (2002); Mitchell, Bauknecht, and Connor (2006)). In contrast, according to some researchers the type of the support system at best plays a secondary role. Following Haas et al. (2004) the type of the support system indeed has an influence on the investors‘ decisions. However, the proper design of the support system is seen to be more important. Likewise, Dinica (2006) states that the investors’ behavior is not influenced by the type of the support system, but rather by its relation of risk and profitability. In the course of this, it was usually taken for granted that the higher the amount of governmental support, the bigger and the more renewable electricity projects will be implemented (see e.g. Jacobsson & Lauber, 2006). This view is supported by the net present value method. In particular, a higher amount of governmental support, i.e. either a higher feed-in tariff, a higher price premium or a higher subsidy on the investment cost, always results in greater capacities of single renewable electricity projects and a higher propensity to invest (see Eq. (9)). Here, it is important to point out that an increase in the fixed-feed-in-tariffp¯under a fixed-feed-in-tariff support scheme and an increase in the price premium ψ under a price premium support scheme both correspond to an increase in the ratiop(τ)c(τ)of the prevailing sales price of renewable electricity and the prevailing cost level.However, given flexibility of the investor to decide about the optimal timing of the renewable electricity investment it has been shown by Boomsma et al. (2012) that the amount of governmental has no influence on the optimal capacity of a single project. It is easy to see that, in contrast, the type of the governmental support system has an influence on this optimal capacity. In particular, depending on the type of the support system the parameter values of several model variables change. To name just but a few, this holds for the initial ratio c0/p0 of the sales price of electricity and the cost level, the drift rate αpof the sales price of electricity and the uncertainty σpabout this sales price. Hence, we can expand the paradox result of Boomsma et al. (2012): Only the type but not the amount of governmental support determines the capacity of a renewable electricity generating system. Nevertheless, a higher amount of governmental support encourages investment by lowering the optimal investment threshold. Consequently, the probability to invest into a single project until a given time and the expected capacity installed after a given time both increase with higher governmental support. Thus, no matter whether an increase in governmental support is caused by a higher fixed feed-in-tariff, by a higher price premium or by higher subsidies on the investment costs, it always leads to higher capacities of renewables on an industry level. Furthermore, regardless if from a net present value or real option lens, the type of governmental support has a crucial influence on the probability to invest into a single project until a given time and the expected capacity installed after a given time. As explained above, this is due to a variation in the value of several model parameters.Many existing governmental regulations follow the logic that a progression of the learning curve requires a targeted decline of government funding to avoid too rapid capacity expansion (Klessmann et al., 2008). For example, the extent of the monthly reduction of a feed-in tariff in Germany is determined by the increase of the respective capacity in recent months. In particular, the higher the increase of this capacity, the faster is the decrease of governmental support. This logic is also supported by the predictions of the net present value method. In particular, a shrinking over time of the fixed-feed in tariff or of the price premium, which both correspond to a decrease in the growth rate αpof the sales price of renewable electricity, acts like a reduction of the initial governmental support. The propensity to invest decreases and the optimal capacity of the system decreases as well.According to the real options theory a decrease of governmental support over time also leads to a lower capacity of a single system. However, the influence of a decrease of governmental support over time on the probability to invest in a certain project in a given time and on the expected capacity installed in a given time is ambiguous. Hence, the following paradox effect may be observed: Decreasing governmental support over time may lead to the installation of greater capacities of renewable electricity on an industry level, at least on the short term. In particular, the effect of a lower capacity of a single system in combination with the effect of a lower present value of future cash-flows due to the decrease in governmental support can be surpassed by an opposite effect. As governmental support decreases over time so does the value of waiting with the investment. This is most obvious in the absence of any uncertainty. If governmental support decreases over time, waiting with the investment results in lower earnings, increasing the incentive for immediate investment.Technological progress usually creates strong learning-curve effects, i.e. results in decreasing investment costs over time (see e.g. Kumbaroğlu et al. (2008)). Hence, a decrease over time of the growth rate αcin the model can legitimately be interpreted as technological progress. Following Haas et al. (2004) the objective of governments should be to trigger investment in new capacity of renewables. To achieve this goal the governments should stimulate technological progress and thereby trigger learning effects with respect to investment costs. Consequently, it is assumed that technological progress increases the capacity installed. Obviously, following the net present value rule technological progress has neither influence on the propensity to invest nor on the optimal capacity of the project because the investor cannot profit from the decreased cost level as he has no flexibility to wait with the investment.According to the real option theory faster technological progress (i.e. a lower αc) leads to a greater optimal capacity of a renewable electricity generating system. This intuitive result can be explained by a better relationship of earnings and investment costs at the time of the investment. However, the influence of technological progress on the probability to invest in a certain project in a given time and on the expected capacity installed in a given time is ambiguous. Consequently, the following paradox effect may be observed: Faster technological progress may hamper the installation of renewable electricity capacities on an industry level, at least on the short term.On one hand technological progress (or a decrease of the cost level over time) leads to a greater optimal capacity of a renewable electricity system. However, according to Eq. (17) it also leads to a higher investment threshold. In fact, technological progress increases the incentive to wait with the investment in the renewable electricity generating project because by doing so the investor can benefit of the decreased investment costs. However, a decrease of the cost level over time also increases the probability that a certain threshold is met in a given time. Consequently, the overall effect of technological progress on the probability that the renewable electricity investment occurs in a given time is ambiguous. Hence, the overall effect of technological progress on the expected capacity installed in a given time is ambiguous, too.Usually, uncertainty is seen to be an important investment barrier (Foxon et al., 2005; Jacobsson & Bergek, 2004; Meijer et al., 2007). For example, following Dinica (2006) the investment activity into renewable electricity projects is a direct result of the relation between profitability and uncertainty. Given the flexibility to time an investment, real option theory furthermore predicts that that higher uncertainty increases the value of waiting. Thus, it was usually taken for granted that higher uncertainty delays investment (see e.g. Mauer & Ott, 1995). Following the net present value approach uncertainty about the cost level has neither influence on the optimal capacity of a single system nor on the propensity to invest into the project. Uncertainty on the sales price of renewable electricity can only lead to lower optimal capacities installed and to less investment.In contrast, according to the real options theory the sign of the investment-uncertainty relationship is ambiguous. In particular, increasing uncertainty about the cost level as well as increasing uncertainty about the sales price of electricity both can lead to higher as well as lower optimal capacities of a single system, to a lower or higher probability that investment takes place until a given time and to a lower or higher expected capacity installed after a given time. Hence, the following paradox effect may be observed: Higher uncertainty may result in the installation of greater capacities of renewable electricity on an industry level, at least on the short term.There are many ways uncertainty influences the expected capacity installed after a given time. First, uncertainty has an influence on the optimal capacity of a single system via the option multipleββ−1(see Eq. (20)). Depending on the respective parameter constellation of σp, σcand ρ an increase in either of the uncertainties can result in a bigger as well as in a lower optimal capacity. Second, higher uncertainty σpabout the sales price of renewable electricity increases the convenience yield δp(see Eq. (3)) and, thus, results in a higher investment threshold (see Eq. (19)). Likewise, an increase in any of the two uncertainties via β has another - ambiguous - effect on the investment threshold. Obviously, the higher the investment threshold the lower the expected capacity installed after a given time. Finally, increasing uncertainty moreover has an influence on the probability that a certain investment threshold is met in a given time.To illustrate the paradox effects described in Section 3 we consider the possibility to invest in a rooftop photovoltaic system. The case study is based on the situation in Germany with t0 as January 2015. We consider a roof in Magdeburg, Saxony-Anhalt, consisting of two parts, one directly facing to south, the other one directly facing to north. Each part has a size of 7.5 meters times 10 meters, is not affected by any shadows and its angle to the ground is 30 degrees. Determined by the location, the south-facing part of the roof is expected to produce 996.25 kilowatt hour of renewable electricity per killowatt peak per year, while the north-facing part is expected to produce only 52 percent of the south-facing part, i.e. 518.05 kilowatt hour per killowatt peak.1111Average value of the years 2011–2014. Source: Solarenergie–Förderverein Deutschland e.V. (www.pv-ertraege.de, retrieved September 11th, 2015).Further, we assume that the photovoltaic system generates a peak of 0.085 kilowatt per square meter.1212According to Cerón et al. (2013) a photovoltaic system with 0.085 kilowatt peak per square meter would be ranked in in the lower middle of all photovoltaic systems on the market.Following the functional relationshipQ(x)=axbof Boomsma et al. (2012) and assuming that this functional relationship is satisfied for a photovoltaic system of 75 square meter (south-facing part only) as well as for a photovoltaic system of 150 square meter (both parts of the roof) results in the following parameter estimation:a=2074.4,b=0.604.1313In particular, the points (0 killowatt peak, 0 kilowatt hour), (6.375 kilowatt peak, 6351.09 killowatt hour) and (12.75 kilowatt peak, 9653.66 kilowatt hour) satisfy Q(x).In correspondence to the length of the funding period in Germany we expect a life time of the system ofT=20years. Regarding the necessary investment costsc(t)(A+Bx), we setc(t0)=1as a numeraire and in t0 expect fix-costs of 1000 Euro, for example for planning, scaffolding and connection wires and variable investment costs per killowatt peak of 1240 Euro, i.e.A=1000,B=1240.1414Source: photovoltaic-guide.de, retrieved September 15th, 2015.InJanuary 2015 the fixed feed-in tariff in Germany has been 0.1256 Euros per kilowatt hour. This feed-in tariff is decreasing over time. Since the last amendment of the respective German law (Erneuerbare–Energien–Gesetz) the decrease has been on average 3.6 percent per year. Please note, that in the following a bar always denotes that a quantity is based on the fixed feed-in tariff support system. Consequently, we setp¯=0.1256,α¯p=−0.036andσ¯p=0. As we want to compare the results under the current fixed feed-in tariff system with a price premium system as well as with the situation in absence of any governmental support, we also need the corresponding quantities based on the sales price p(t) of electricity on the exchange which we in the following will always denote without a bar. To determine the parameters of the following two geometric-Brownian motions, i.e. the sales price p(t) of electricity and the cost level c(t) maximum likelihood estimation is us. Fig. 6depicts the relevant data. In particular, the estimation is based on monthly data from January 2011 until December 2014. We getαp=−0.037,σp=0.072,αc=−0.057,σc=0.059andρ=−0.215. Fig. 6 also depicts the monthly closing prices of the German stock index (DAX) which is used to represent the market portfolio when determining the convenience yields. With an assumed riskless interest rate ofr=0.03we getδ¯p=0.066,δp=0.067andδc=0.087. Finally, we assumep(t0)=0.08.1515According to the Bundesverband Energie und Wasserwirtschaft, the average sales price of electricity in Germany in the year 2014 has roughly been 0.08 Euro per killowatt hour.Table 2 summarizes all the parameter data of the model provided by the case study.Following the NPV decision rule the decision-maker has to invest immediately. According to Eq. (30), in this case, the optimal capacity depends on the amount of any governmental support. Under the current German fixed-feed-in tariff system the investor would, thus, choose a capacity of onlyx∘=2.38. Hence, the photovoltaic system would only cover 28 square meter of the south facing part of the roof. In contrast, following the real options approach the decision-maker has the flexibility to optimally choose the investment time. Then, according to Proposition 2 the optimal capacity of the photovoltaic system does not depend on the amount of governmental support. However, the optimal capacity depends on the type of the governmental support system. In particular, following Eq. (27) the optimal capacity under the German fixed-feed-in tariff system isx¯*=4.58killowatt peak, while the optimal capacity under a price premium support scheme, as well as in absence of any governmental support, would bex*=9.26killowatt peak. Consequently, with 53.88 square meter the optimal system size under a fixed feed-in tariff system does not even cover the whole part of the roof facing to south, while under a price premium support scheme or in absence of any governmental support optimally 108.94 square meter of the roof are covered, i.e. the whole part facing to south and even almost half of the part facing to north. Likewise, the optimal investment threshold only depends on the type of governmental support but neither on the amount of the feed-in-tariff nor on the amount of the price premium. However, the optimal investment threshold linearly depends on the amount s of a proportional subsidy on the investment costs. Under the current German fixed feed-in tariff support system the optimal investment threshold isp*¯c*¯=0.163(1−s). Under a price premium support scheme or in absence of any governmental support it would bep*c*=0.217(1−s). The results of the case study are summarized in Table 3.Further interesting implications of the case study can be deduced from Fig. 7. In particular, the speed of a decrease in governmental support and the expected capacity installed within five years show a U-shaped relationship (see Fig. 7-a). If the feed-in-tariff is decreased by 4 percent a year, instead of currently 3.6 percent a year, the expected capacity installed within five years will increase by more than 50 percent. Likewise, the speed of technological progress has an ambiguous influence on the expected investment activity (see Fig. 7-b). If the necessary investment costs for the photovoltaic system decrease by 6.5 percent a year, instead of currently 5.7 percent a year, which corresponds to a faster technological progress, the expected capacity installed within five years will decrease by more than 50 percent. Finally, if the uncertainty1616Due to the German fixed feed-in tariff support scheme with uncertainty about the cost level only one source of uncertainty exists.decreases from currently 0.072 to 0.04 the expected capacity installed within five years will reduce by roughly 20 percent (see Fig. 7-c). Consequently, a decrease in uncertainty may result in a lower investment activity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
