@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Solving the dynamic capacitated location-routing problem with fuzzy demands by hybrid heuristic algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A dynamic capacitated location-routing problem with fuzzy demands is proposed.A fuzzy chance-constrained programming formulation is given for the problem.To solve the problem, a hybrid heuristic algorithm with four phases is proposed.The performance of the proposed method, is examined using GAMS 24.0.2.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Routing,Location,Location-routing problem,Fuzzy demand,Credibility theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the dynamic capacitated location-routing problem with fuzzy demands (DCLRP-FD) is considered. In the DCLRP-FD, facility location problem and vehicle routing problem are solved on a time horizon. Decisions concerning facility locations are permitted to be made only in the first time period of the planning horizon but, the routing decisions may be changed in each time period. Furthermore, the vehicles and depots have a predefined capacity to serve the customers with altering demands during the time horizon. It is assumed that the demands of customers are fuzzy variables. To model the DCLRP-FD, a fuzzy chance-constrained programming is designed based upon the fuzzy credibility theory. To solve this problem, a hybrid heuristic algorithm (HHA) with four phases including the stochastic simulation and a local search method are proposed. To achieve the best value of two parameters of the model, the dispatcher preference index (DPI) and the assignment preference index (API), and to analyze their influences on the final solution, numerical experiments are carried out. Moreover, the efficiency of the HHA is demonstrated via comparing with the lower bound of solutions and by using a standard benchmark set of test problems. The numerical examples show that the proposed algorithm is robust and could be used in real world problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the fact that customers’ demand is showing an upward trend with competitive prices and a lesser waiting time is desired for receiving the goods, it makes logistics the main issue in supply chain management (Zare Mehrjerdi & Nadizadeh, 2013). In recent years, the efficient, reliable, and flexible decisions on location of depots and the distribution routings are of vital importance for managers (Karaoglan, Altiparmak, Kara, & Dengiz, 2012; Nadizadeh, Sahraeian, Sabzevari Zadeh, & Homayouni, 2011). Many researchers indicated that if the routes are ignored while locating the depots, the costs of distribution systems might be immoderate (Karaoglan, Altiparmak, Kara, & Dengiz, 2011; Martínez-Salazar, Molina, Ángel-Bello, Gómez, & Caballero, 2014). Salhi and Rand (1989) first showed that the solving of the location problem without route consideration may lead to a sub-optimal solution. The location-routing problem (LRP) overcomes this drawback by simultaneously considering the location and routing decisions (Guerrero, Prodhon, Velasco, & Amaya, 2013; Hashemi Doulabi & Seifi, 2013; Jarboui, Derbel, Hanafi, & Mladenović, 2013).The LRP can be defined as a combination of two problems of facility location problem (FLP) and vehicle routing problem (VRP) Escobar, Linfati, and Toth (2013), Lopes, Plastria, Ferreira, and Beatriz Sousa (2014), Stenger, Schneider, Schwind, and Vigo (2012). Since both problems belong to the class of NP-hard problem, the LRP is also an NP-hard problem (Barreto, Ferreira, Paixao, & Sousa Santos, 2007; Belenguer, Benavent, Prins, Prodhon, & Wolfler-Calvo, 2011; Samanlioglu, 2013). In the LRP, customer demands must be satisfied, vehicle capacities should not be exceeded, and the minimization of facility fixed and operating costs, as well as of routing costs have to be realized (Rieck, Ehrenberg, & Zimmermann, 2014). Laporte (1988) was the first researcher who discussed and classified the LRP models. Min, Jayaraman, and Srivastava (1998) reviewed the LRP literature using a hierarchical classification based on the problem characteristics such as the number of depots, the capacity of depots and vehicles, and the form of the objective function. Nagy and Salhi (2007) also performed a comprehensive literature review on the LRP models, solution approaches, application areas and some future works.Recently, Prodhon and Prins (2014) analyzed the new literature on the standard LRP and new extensions such as several distribution echelons, multiple objectives or uncertain data. They also compared the results of state-of-the-art meta-heuristics on standard sets of instances for the classical LRP, the two-echelon LRP and the truck and trailer problem.The LRP is applicable to a wide variety of fields such as food and drink distribution, newspapers delivery, waste collection, drug distribution, bill delivery, military applications, parcel delivery, relief goods distribution in natural disaster, and various consumer goods distribution (Ceselli, Righini, & Tresoldi, 2014; Manzour-al-Ajdad, Torabi, & Salhi, 2012; Rath & Gutjahr, 2014; Ting & Chen, 2013). In capacitated location-routing problem (CLRP), the problem is constrained with the vehicles and the depots capacities. The objectives in CLRP are to determine the location of depots and a set of customers to be assigned by each depot as well as the distribution routes (Baldacci, Mingozzi, & Wolfler Calvo, 2011; Contardo, Cordeau, & Gendron, 2013; Contardo, Hemmelmayr, & Crainic, 2012). Since CLRP is an NP-hard problem, most of papers in the field of CLRP are focused on only new solution methods that are often based on heuristic or meta-heuristic approaches (Nguyen, Prins, & Prodhon, 2012; Yu, Lin, Lee, & Ting, 2010). Some reviews on solution approaches of CLRP exist in the literature that can be found in Duhamel, Lacomme, Prins, and Prodhon (2010) and Derbel, Jarboui, Hanafi, and Chabchoub (2012).The dynamic location-routing problem is a very important area of the LRP which has not been addressed much in the literature. The static (single-period) LRP is very much prone to the criticism that the planning horizons of the location and routing do not match. In other words, the LRP integrates the strategic (location) and tactical (routing) levels. Locational decisions are usually quite stable in time, because of implementation costs and set-up times. On the other hand, routing decisions (even master tour decisions at a tactical level) are more often changed than location decisions, especially when they refer to the transportation of goods to customers with varying demands (Albareda-Sambola, Fernández, & Nickel, 2012). Therefore, by considering a planning horizon for facility location that contain shorter planning intervals for route planning, dynamic LRPs are a much better model of real-life location problems with routing aspects and provide an important means of refuting the above criticism (Nagy & Salhi, 2007).In this paper, the dynamic capacitated location-routing problem with fuzzy demands (DCLRP-FD) is considered. In the DCLRP-FD, depots can only be opened at the beginning of the planning horizon and remain unchanged throughout the planning horizon. On the other hand, the routing of vehicles can be changed at each period due to fluctuations of demands. The vehicles and depots have a limited capacity to serve the customers that their demands change in each time period. Moreover, it is assumed that the demands of customers are fuzzy variables. A fuzzy chance-constrained programming is designed based upon the fuzzy credibility theory to model the DCLRP-FD. The high complexity of this problem makes it impossible to be solved in practice with commercial software. For this reason, a hybrid heuristic algorithm (HHA) with four phases including the stochastic simulation and a local search method are proposed to solve the problem. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first work in the field of LRP that consider both the planning horizon and uncertainty for the customers’ demand.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In the next section, the literature review of the work is presented. In Section 3, some basic concepts of fuzzy theory are given. Section 4 defines the DCLRP-FD in more details and presents a fuzzy chance-constrained programming model using the credibility theory. Details of the hybrid heuristic algorithm to solve the DCLRP-FD are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, different numerical experiments are given to reveal the performance of the proposed algorithm. In the final section, the conclusion remarks of the paper are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
