@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Partial input to output impacts in DEA: The case of DMU-specific impacts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Develops model for measuring efficiency of processes where not all inputs affect all outputs.Input to output impacts may be different for some business units than for others.Applies new efficiency measurement model to a set of highway maintenance crews.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
DEA,Partial impacts,DMU specific impacts,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is a methodology for evaluating the relative efficiencies of a set of decision-making units (DMUs). The original model is based on the assumption that in a multiple input, multiple output setting, all inputs impact all outputs. In many situations, however, this assumption may not apply, such as would be the case in manufacturing environments where some products may require painting while others would not. In earlier work by the authors, the conventional DEA methodology was extended to allow for efficiency measurement in such situations where partial input-to-output interactions exist. In that methodology all DMUs have identical input/output profiles. It is often the case, however, that these profiles can be different for some DMUs than is true of others. This phenomenon can be prevalent, for example, in manufacturing settings where some plants may use robots for spot welding while other plants may use human resources for that task. Consider a highway maintenance application where consulting services for safety corrections may not be employed on low traffic roadways, but are commonly used on high traffic, multilane highways. Thus, input to output links in the case of some DMUs are missing in the case of others. To address this, the current paper extends the methodology presented earlier by the authors to allow for efficiency measurement in situations where some DMUs have different input/output profiles than is true of others. The new methodology is then applied to the problem of evaluating the efficiencies of a set of road maintenance patrols.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since its inception (see Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978), Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) has been widely used to evaluate the relative efficiencies of a set of decision making units (DMUs). Over the 35 year time span following the launch of this seminal work, an enormous volume of literature on the theory of DEA and its application to real world problems has appeared. Many extensions of the basic DEA structure have been advanced in the literature over the past decades, particularly in terms of model structure and types of data encountered. Regarding model structure, the important work of Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (1984) extended the constant returns to scale (CRS) model of Charnes et al. (1978) to allow for variable returns to scale (VRS). Both of these models are of the “radial projection” type in that they presume all inputs (in the case of the input-oriented approach) are reduced proportionally in projecting to the frontier. Charnes et al. (1985) were the first to introduce the additive model where projections to the frontier can involve changes in both inputs and outputs. Many extensions of this idea have subsequently been put forward, particularly those due to Russell (1988) and Green et al. (1996). Tone (2001) formalized some of these ideas to arrive at the so-called slacks based measure. For a survey of models see Cook and Seiford (2009).The conventional DEA model assumes that in a multiple input, multiple output setting all inputs impact all outputs. This assumption, however, does not hold in many situations. In a food manufacturing setting, for example, certain foods are exempt from nutrition labeling and as a result, are not influenced by labeling resources. In the second section below, we discuss an application of efficiency measurement involving highway maintenance patrols or crews where this phenomenon occurs. In particular, we cite the situation where an input such as engineering consultant resources can be viewed as affecting all outputs except road safety corrections. As a result, if one constructs a network of inputs and outputs, and connects an input to each output it impacts, the resulting network structure has missing links, meaning that one cannot directly apply the conventional DEA methodology.While significant research has been documented relating to what is referred to as network DEA, as introduced by Fare and Grosskopf (2000) (see also a survey of models by Cook, Liang, & Zhu (2010) as well as a recent book by Cook and Zhu (2014) on multistage and network structures), none of those models appear to address the partial impacts problem. In earlier work by Imanirad, Cook, and Zhu (2012), the conventional DEA methodology was extended to allow for efficiency measurement in situations where a single set of partial input-to-output interactions exist. That methodology is based on the view of a DMU as a business unit consisting of a set of subunits, and while the conventional DEA model is not directly applicable at the level of the DMU, the conventional methodologyisapplicable at the level of the subunit. Efficiency of the DMU can then be defined as a weighted average of the subunit efficiencies.As indicated above, the DEA model developed by Imanirad et al. (2012) assumes that all DMUs have identical input/output profiles. Referring again, however, to the highway maintenance application, consider the fact that safety measures on low traffic roads are generally routine in nature, often requiring unsophisticated measures like the installation of guard rails, or the paving of gravel shoulders. Consulting services for such safety corrections are generally not employed. Engineering consulting services are commonly used to address safety related issues on high traffic, multilane highways, where rather more sophisticated measures involving roadway alignment corrections are needed. This means that the missing network links in the case of some DMUs (those patrols with primarily low traffic roads) are not missing in the case of other DMUs (those with primarily high traffic roads). To address this fundamental difference among DMUs, the current paper extends the methodology presented earlier in Imanirad et al. (2012) to allow for efficiency measurement in situations where some DMUs have different input/output profiles than is true of others. The new methodology is then applied to the problem of evaluating the efficiencies of a set of road maintenance patrols.The current paper is a direct extension of the earlier work of Imanirad, Cook, and Zhu (2012). The methodology presented in the current paper allows for efficiency measurement where some DMUs have different input/output profiles than is true of others. Section 2 presents an efficiency measurement setting involving highway maintenance crews or patrols, and introduces the basic approach to efficiency measurement in settings where such partial impacts exist. We provide in particular a brief review of the model structure of Imanirad et al. (2012) in the case where the same input to output profile applies to all DMUs. Section 3 describes a problem setting where different groups of input-to-output structures exist for different sets of patrols. A DEA type of model is presented for measuring efficiencies of DMUs in such settings. Section 4 applies the model to data on a set of 45 highway maintenance patrols. Conclusions appear in Section 5.Consider the problem of evaluating a set of 45 highway maintenance crews or patrols. In this setting, a crew carries out all of the maintenance activities relating to the roadway and roadside for that portion of the network for which it is responsible. A number of efficiency studies involving maintenance crews have been undertaken; see, for example, Cook, Roll, and Kazakov (1990), and Rouse, Putterill, and Ryan (1997). It is important to point out that there is no objective definition as to the ‘right’ variables to use in such a study as this. In some cases on the output side variables such as average daily traffic have been utilized as a measure of society impact. Other studies have focused on savings in user cost associated with highway maintenance. See Huen, Tighe, and McCabe (2005). However, user costs can be difficult to estimate since the cost to the driving public needs to consider not only vehicle damage due to roughness of the driving surface, but as well as vehicle and driver insurance costs relating to accidents, and even the value placed on human life. On the input side, some studies have included road condition, such as in Cook et al. (1990). Here again, while road sections are rated by geotechnical staff, these ratings can be very subjective. Thus, while efficiency in this setting can be evaluated in terms of many different sets of inputs and outputs, we have chosen to define it herein in terms of outputs that reflect both size and safety of the road system, and inputs that capture the investment in that system. Specifically, the following input and output parameters have been used:Outputs:y1 = Lane km of roadway managedy2 = Numbers of accident sites repairedy3 = Volume of shoulder and median repairs and routine maintenance accomplishedInputs:x1 = Government dollars spent via ministry operationsx2 = Private consultant dollars spentx3 = Capital expenditures.Now let us suppose that not all inputs influence all outputs. More specifically, assume that while inputs x1 and x3 apply to all three outputs, private consultant dollars impact only outputs 1 and 3. This means that the conventional DEA model, which assumes all inputs impact all outputs, would be inappropriate for measuring efficiency in this setting. Fig. 1illustrates this idea.In earlier work by Imanirad, Cook, and Zhu (2012), the problem of efficiency measurement in the presence of such partial input-to-output interactions was examined within the context of a set of steel fabrication plants. The presented methodology there is based on the idea that a DMU can be viewed as a business unit comprised of K subunits. Each subunit k is represented by its own input/output bundle (Ik, Rk), and is formed in such a way that each input in Ikimpacts every output in Rk. Hence, each subunit k can be considered as a DMU (sub DMU) to which conventional DEA models can be applied.Consider the input/output profile described in Fig. 1 above. The output groupR=(1,2,3)can be viewed as consisting of two mutually exclusive subgroups, namelyR1R1=(1,3),R2=(2). We observe that the input sets corresponding to these two output sets areI1=(1,2,3),I2=(1,3), respectively. Thus, one may view the DMU as consisting of two subunits (I1, R1), (I2, R2). In Section 4 we present a formal algorithm for generating these bundles.Prior to application of the conventional DEA model to each subunit k, however, an appropriate split of each input xigiven by αikshould be assigned to those subunits, of which xiis a member. Specifically, the value of xiin each corresponding subunit k is replaced by αikxi. Fig. 2taken from Imanirad, Cook, and Zhu (2012), in the context of the steel fabrication plant application, demonstrates the apportioning of resources across those subunits of which those resources are members. Imanirad, Cook and Zhu (2012) formalize the derivation of an efficiency score for each DMU by proceeding in three stages:Stage 1:Derive an appropriate split αikof each input i to each bundle k of which it is a member.Using the split of inputs arising from Stage 1, apply the conventional DEA analysis to each of the K subunits.Derive an overall efficiency score by combining the subunit scores.Stage 1: Deriving thesplitofinputsacrosssubunitsWe contend that the overall efficiency of a DMU jocan reasonably be represented as some weighted average of the K subgroup efficiencies. The argument is essentially that the DMU is the sum of its parts, and hence assumes there are no economies or diseconomies of scope. It is emphasized that in cases where it is believed that such economies (diseconomies) of scope are present, our suggested approach may not accurately capture efficiency at the aggregate level, and an alternative methodology may be needed.Given that it is the aggregate efficiency of the DMU that we wish to derive, and that this aggregate will be represented as a convex combination of the K subgroup efficiencies, we set out to determine the α-split of inputs with the objective of maximizing this aggregate efficiency. With this in mind, consider the following input oriented radial projection model for a DMU jo:(2.1a)eo=max∑k=1KWk[∑r∈Rkuryrjo∑i∈Ikνiαikxijo]Subject to:(2.1b)∑k=1KWk[∑r∈Rkuryrj∑i∈Ikνiαikxij]≤1,∀j(2.1c)∑r∈Rkuryrj∑i∈Ikνiαikxij≤1,∀k,j(2.1d)∑k∈Liαik=1,∀i(2.1e)aik≤αik≤bik,∀i,k(2.1f)ur,νi,αik≥ɛ,∀i,kAs indicated above, the key result of solving this problem for each DMU is the derivation of the amount of the inputs, as dictated by the α, that are to be assigned to each subunit. Once the input values are adjusted in their respective subunits, the conventional DEA model can be applied to each of those subunits. The resulting subunit efficiency scores are then combined to arrive at the overall efficiency score of the DMU.The previous section explored the problem of efficiency measurement in the presence of partial input-to-output interactions in settings where all DMUs have the same input/output profile. In this section the methodology presented earlier is extended by allowing for different input/output structures across the DMU set.In the case of the particular highway network involved, let us suppose that three different input-to-output structures are present. As a result, all DMUs can be grouped into three types such that the input-to-output structure is common to all DMUs of a given type. Roadway sections of type 1 generally have low traffic, are two-lane, and have gravel shoulders. The type 2 network (the one shown in Fig. 1) experiences higher traffic volumes and is made up primarily of 2-lane highways with paved shoulders. Finally, the type 3 network has high traffic volumes, four-lane highways, with paved shoulders and medial barriers. Fig. 3displays the subunit profiles for all three DMU groups. The dotted arrows demonstrate the missing interactions among inputs and outputs.In order to evaluate the relative efficiencies of DMUs with different input-to-output structures, in settings where partial input-to-output interactions exist, we first proceed by grouping DMUs into P subgroups such that within any subgroup the input-to-output impacts are common to all DMUs therein. The impacts can be different, however, from one to another. Informally, the input-to-output profiles are formed as follows. For each output, determine the set of inputs that impact that output. Now, determine if any two outputs have the same input bundles. If so, combine these two outputs, otherwise one input-to-output bundle has been derived. Continuing in this manner, a maximal set of input-to-output bundles is derived.Formally, the following algorithm generates the subunit bundles of inputs and outputs for any given DMU group.Step 1:Define S to be an empty set.For each output r, derive I(r), the set of all inputs i that influence r. Add I(r) to S. Set the bundle counter as k =1.For eachI(r) in S, compare it with every other I(r′) in S, and identify all I(r′) that have the same input elements as in I(r). If no such r' is identified, create bundle (Ik, Rk) using I(r) and r so that(Ik,Rk)=(I(r),r). Remove I(r) from S. Go to Step 4. Otherwise, group outputs r and all identified r' (having the same input sets) together to derive Rk, and create bundle (Ik, Rk) using I(r) and Rkso that(Ik,Rk)=(I(r),Rk).Remove I(r) and all identified I(r′) from S. Go to Step 4.If S is non-empty, set k = k+1 and go to Step 3. Otherwise, terminate having formed the set of all bundles.Example, DMU group N2:Step 1:Define the empty set S.Here,I(1)=(1,2,3),I(2)=(1,3),I(3)=(1,2,3). S = {I(1), I(2), I(3)}. Set k =1.For r=1, I(1) is the same as I(3), namely I(1) = I(3) = (1,2,3). The bundle(I1,R1)=((1,2,3),(1,3))is created, and these two members of S are now removed. S now becomes the reduced set {I(2)}. Here, the process takes us to Step 4 where we discover S is non-empty, the counter k is set to 2, and we return to Step 3. This time I(2) is discovered to be the only remaining member of S. Thus, the bundle(I2,R2)=((1,3),(2))is created and I(2) is now removed from S and in Step 4 the algorithm terminates with the two identified bundles above.We state without proof the following theorem.Theorem 3.1The generated set of maximal input-to-output bundles is unique.Let ur, νidenote multipliers to be applied to the rth outputs and ith inputs, respectively. In each Npthe input-to-output structure, as generated by the above algorithm, will dictate the subunits or (input, output) bundles into which the DMUs will be split. Let us denote these bundles by(Ikp,Rkp), kp∈ Kpwhere Kpis the set of bundles for any DMU j ∈ Np. For example, as given in the previous section, N2 (Type 2) has the bundles (I, R) given by (I12,R12) = ((1, 2, 3), (1, 3)), and (I22,R22) = ((1, 3), (2)). Note that the{Rkp}kp∈Kpfor any DMU group Npform a mutually exclusive set, specifically the Rktherein do not overlap. However, any given (Ik, Rk) may appear as a bundle(Ikp,Rkp)in more than one Np.It can be argued that maximizing the overall efficiency ratio of a DMU jo∈ Npis equivalent to maximizing the weighted average of Kpsubunit ratios. It is worth noting, however, that this approach may not be suitable in cases where economies or diseconomies of scope are present. See, for example, Panzar and Willig (1981), and Pulley and Braunstein (1992).Following the ideas outlined in Section 2, to arrive at an overall efficiency score for each DMU, we proceed in three stages. In stage 1 the proportions of inputs i to be allocated to each bundle kpof which it is a member, are derived. Letαikppodenote the proportion of input i to be allocated to subunit kpinNpo, when evaluating the poth subunit joinNpo. In stage 2, subunit efficiency scores are derived by applying the conventional DEA model to each subunit kp, and in stage 3 the overall efficiency score of a DMU is obtained by taking a weighted average of the subunit scores.Stage 1: Deriving thesplitofinputsacrosssubunitsThe purpose of this stage is to determine for each DMU joinNpoan appropriate apportioning of inputs i, as given by theαikppo, to each subunit of which it is a member. With that in mind, let us consider the following CRS input-oriented radial projection model for a DMU join a given DMU subsetNpo:(3.1a)eo=max∑kpo∈KpoWkpojo[∑r∈Rkpouryrjo/∑i∈Ikpoνiαikpopoxijo]subject to(3.1b)∑kpo∈KpoWkpojo[∑r∈Rkpouryrj/∑i∈Ikpoνiαikppoxij]≤1∀j∈Np,kp∈Kp,p=1,…P(3.1c)∑r∈Rkpuryrj−∑i∈Ikpνiαikppoxij≤0∀j∈Np,kp∈Kp,p=1,…P(3.1d)∑kp∈Kpαikppo=1∀i,p=1…P(3.1e)aikppo≤αikppo≤bikppo∀i,kp,p=1,…P(3.1f)ur,νi≥ɛ,∀iIn this model the overall efficiency of the DMU jois expressed as a weighted average (convex combination) of the efficiency scores of the subunits making up that DMU (this is given by (3.1a)). Note that for any DMUjo, theWkpojoassigned to each subunit should reflect the importance of that subunit to the DMU. One reasonable representation of the relative importance of the various subunits of a DMU to the overall DMU, and one widely utilized in accounting, is given by the proportion of that DMU's resources (inputs) consumed by its various subunits. Accordingly, let us define the weightWkpojoto be assigned to subunit(Ikp,Rkp)as:(3.2)Wkpojo=∑i∈Ikpoνiαikpopoxijo/∑kpo∈Kpo[∑i∈Ikpoνiαikpopoxijo]It should be mentioned that constraints (3.1b) specify that the aggregate score for each DMU j should not exceed unity, in line with the conventional DEA methodology. It is also noted that constraints (3.1c) are imposed to ensure thatαikppoare selected in a manner that allows the efficiency scores corresponding to each subunit k of DMU j ∈ Npto not exceed unity for some values of the multipliers ur, vi. That having been said, it is clear that in the presence of (3.1c), constraints (3.1b) are redundant, and may therefore be dropped from the model.Constraints (3.1d) ensure that theαikppovalues allocated to the subunits corresponding to any set Npsum to unity for each i. Finally, constraints (3.1e) restrict the sizes of theαikppvariables.In order to transform Problem (3.1) from its current nonlinear form to a linear structure, it should first be noted that by virtue of the definition (3.2) for theWkpojo, the objective function (3.1a) can be transformed to(3.1a')eo=max[∑kpo∈Kpo∑r∈Rkpouryrjo/∑kpo∈Kpo∑i∈Ikpoνiαikpopoxijo]Now by making the change of variableszikppo=νiαikppo, it is noted that∑kp∈Kpαikppo=1⇒νi∑kp∈Kpαikppo=νi⇒∑kp∈Kpzikppo=νiUsing the standard transformationt=1/∑iνixijo(see Charnes & Cooper, 1962), and definingμr=tur,υi=tνi,γikppo=tzikppo, problem (3.1) becomes:(3.3a)eo=max∑kpo∈Kpo∑r∈Rkpoμryrjosubject to(3.3b)∑iυixijo=1(3.3c)∑r∈Rkpμryrj−∑i∈Ikpγikppoxij≤0∀j∈Np,kp∈Kp,p=1,…P(3.3d)∑kp∈Kpγikppo=υi∀i,p=1…P(3.3e)υiaikppo≤γikppo≤υibikppo∀i,kp∈Kp,p=1,…P(3.3f)μr,υi,γikppo≥ɛ,∀i,kp∈Kp,p=1,…PWe point out here that u, v ≥ ɛ in model (3.1) does not exactly translate intoμ,υ≥ɛin model (3.3). To be completely correct, the proper constraint isμ,υ≥tɛ. However, the purpose of epsilon is to detect “weakly efficient” DMUs, that is DMUs with non-zero slacks. In the envelopment DEA model, one does not need to specify epsilon, rather it is intended for a two-stage calculation (see, e.g., Cooper, Seiford, & Zhu, 2011, Chap. 1). In the multiplier model, one needs to use a very small positive number to identify “weakly efficient” DMUs. However, in the DEA literature, the ratio model has also been expressed as vi/t >= epsilon to address the above issue (see remark on page 8 of Cooper et al., 2011, Chap. 1). Also, one can always use an epsilon to make t(epsilon) a very small positive number so that all nu can be positive. In fact, it is a common practice that epsilon is directly placed in the multiplier model.The purpose of model (3.3) is to apportion the inputs available to each DMU to the subunits comprising that DMU. Utilizing this information, the problem is to now derive the relative efficiency scores for each of the subunits in a DMU.Stage 2: Deriving thesubunitefficiencyscoresFrom the solution to model (3.3), the ‘optimal’ split of inputs, given byα^ikppo=γ^ikppo/υ^iacross their respective subunits or (input, output) bundles, is derived. That is, for each DMU joinNpothe appropriate amount of inputxijo, specificallyx˜ijoko=α^ikpopoxijo, can be assigned to bundle(Ikpo,Rkpo). Now, let M(Ik, Rk) denote the set of all DMU groups that have (Ik, Rk) as a member, that is(3.4)M(Ik,Rk)={Npsuchthat(Ikp,Rkp)≡(Ik,Rk)∈Np}.For example, in the road maintenance setting described earlier,M(I1,R1)={N1},M(I2,R2)={N1,N2},…etc.To derive an efficiency score for each subunit, it appears that there are at least two approaches. One is to extract from the solution to model (3.3), the ratios∑r∈Rkpμryrj/∑i∈Ikpγikppoxijfrom (3.3c). Of, course there may be alternate optima to this problem, meaning that the derived efficiency scores at the subunit level are non-unique. An alternate approach is to set out to optimize the subunit scores. This approach entails applying the conventional DEA model to each of the bundles(Ikpo,Rkpo),kpo∈Kpoof jo. Specifically, for each DMU joand each bundle(Ikpo,Rkpo)corresponding to the setNpocontaining joas a member, solve the DEA model:(3.5)ekp∘jo=max∑r∈Rkp∘μryrjosubjectto∑iυix˜ijok∘=1∑r∈Rkpμryrj−∑i∈Ikpυix˜ijk∘≤0,j∈Np,forNp∈M(Iko,Rko)μr,υi≥ɛThere are pros and cons to both of these approaches. The benefit of the first approach is that a single set of multipliers(μr,υi)is used at both the aggregate DMU and subunit efficiency levels. The negative side of this is that in focusing purely on the aggregate efficiency score via (3.3), no attempt is made to find some level of fair efficiency assessment for the subunits that make up that aggregate. The second method, reflected in (3.5), has the benefit of turning full attention toward optimizing subunit efficiencies. This approach may, however, be criticised for using one set of multipliers(μr,υi)to derive the optimal efficiency scores in (3.3) (and at the same time yielding appropriateαikppoand weights W, as per (3.2)), but other sets to arrive at the optimal subunit scores as per (3.5). Unfortunately, there would appear to be no obvious best overall approach. In some respects, this situation is reminiscent of goal programming where we are attempting to optimize several things simultaneously. In the application in the next section we opt for the second of the two methods discussed above.Stage 3: Deriving theoverallefficiencyscoresIn this stage, the subunit efficiency scores obtained in stage 2 are combined by calculating their weighted average usingWkpojoas given by (3.2) to arrive at the overall efficiency score of the DMU.In this section, the models developed above are applied to data on a set of 45 road maintenance patrols, as displayed in Table A.1 of Appendix A. The input/output profiles of the DMUs are as described in Section 3. As discussed earlier, the DMUs in this case can be grouped into three different types based on their input-to-output impact structures.Theαikpopvalues for each DMU j inNpoare first determined by running model (3.3). Note that to restrict the portion of any input i allocated to any bundle(Ikp,Rkp)of which it is a member, the following (aikpp,bikpp) ranges were used forαikpp:N1:(0.15,0.80)N2:(0.20,0.90)N3:(0.20,0.90)These ranges are based partially on data sampled from transportation department sources, for a set of road sections in the three patrol groups. It is noted that since Type 1 patrols have three subunits as opposed to two subunits in the case of the other two patrol groups, the limits for N1 are lower than for those other two.Theαikppvalues resulting from executing model (3.3) are displayed in Tables A.2–A.4 of Appendix A. It is worth pointing out that the choice of ranges here clearly impacts the efficiency results, meaning that any serious application of this methodology in a real world setting would appear to demand a thorough investigation into the setting of these limits. To gain a sense of the extent to which efficiency scores might be expected to change as the upper and lower limits on theαikppvariables are altered, a sensitivity analysis was carried out. Specifically, two alternative sets of alpha ranges were considered. First, in place of the above ranges onαikpp, a second application of model used the range (0.10, 0.80) for all three patrol groups. This resulted in an average change of approximately 11% in overall efficiency scores (arising from model (4.3)). A second sensitivity analysis using a wider range of (0.05, 0.90) yielded an average change in efficiency scores of approximately 13%. Table 1summarizes the results.Once theαikppvalues are derived, an appropriate split of each input across the corresponding subunits is determined and model (3.5) can be applied at a subunit level to derive the subunit efficiency scores. The subunit efficiency scores are then combined using weightsWkpjpresented in Tables A.5–A.7 in Appendix A, to derive the overall efficiency scores of DMUs, as displayed in Table A.8. Note that this table provides the subunit and overall scores for each DMU. The notation M1, …, M5 was chosen to identify the subunits in the three patrol groups. Specifically:M1:I=(1,2,3)R=(1)M2:I=(1,3)R=(2)M3:I=(1,2,3)R=(1,3)M4:I=(2,3)R=(3)M5:I=(1,2,3)R=(1,2)To summarize Fig. 3, Type 1 patrols have subunits M1, M2 and M4. Type 2 consists of subunits M2 and M3, and Type 3 consists of subunits M4 and M5.It should be pointed out again that the size of the weight Wkjon any given subunit k for a DMU j, reflects the proportion of resources that DMU is dedicating to the subunit in question. It is observed that the Wkjvalues for any subunit k can show a wide variation across the DMUs. In the case of subunit k=2 in N1, for example, this variation is from 6% for patrol #1 to 55% for patrol #12. These weights are derived as part of the process of allocating resources among the subunits of a DMU while maximizing that DMU's aggregate performance. While no attempt is made here to restrict such weight variation across DMUs, such restrictions could be incorporated within this structure.It is pointed out that while at least one efficient DMU appears in the aggregate analysis of stage 1 and for each subunit analyzed in stage 2, such a property may not be in evidence in the overall scores arising from stage 3. In the current application, there is one efficient DMU, namely DMU #23.As a type of comparison, a conventional DEA analysis was carried out on the 45 maintenance patrols. The results are displayed in Table A.9. It is noted that under the conventional DEA analysis 10 of the 45 DMUs are deemed efficient.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
