@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Designing repetitive screening procedures with imperfect inspections: An empirical Bayes approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A batch of complex items is inspected more than once to discover conforming items in repetitive screening.The number of conforming items still remaining in the batch is often estimated by the maximum likelihood method.We propose an empirical Bayes estimation method which considers the heterogeneity in batch quality.We also deal with the problem of when to stop the screening process and salvage the remaining items.In numerical study, we show that the empirical Bayes method is superior to the traditional estimation method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inspection,Product quality,Reliability,Empirical Bayes estimation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A batch of expensive items, such as IC chips, is often inspected multiple times in a sequential manner to further discover more conforming items. After several rounds of screening, we need to estimate the number of conforming items that still remain in the batch. We propose in this paper an empirical Bayes estimation method and compare its performance with that of the traditional maximum likelihood method. In the repetitive screening procedure, another important decision problem is when to stop the screening process and salvage the remaining items. We propose various types of stopping rules and illustrate their procedures with a simulated inspection data. Finally, we explore various extensions to our empirical Bayes estimation method in multiple inspection plans.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In statistical quality control, “acceptance sampling” is an effective tool that improves and assures the quality of the items in a batch (Schilling and Neubauer 2012). A sample of items is picked at random from the batch and, on the basis of information that is yielded by the sample, we make a decision regarding the disposition of the remaining items in the batch.In some situations, however, all the items in the batch are subjected to a series of rigorous tests, and only the items that pass the test successfully are taken out of the batch. Some authors call it “100% inspection” (Duffuaa, Al-Turki, & Kolus, 2009) or “100% attribute sampling” (Dhavale, 1987). Because no real sampling takes place in such a case, we use the term “screening” throughout the paper (Tang & Tang, 1994).During a round of screening, not every conforming item is identified due to inevitable inspection errors. That is why some expensive items are screened more than once in a sequential manner. This “repetitive screening” is also known as a sequential defect removal sampling (Bonnett & Woodward, 1994), a repetitive testing (Greenberg & Stokes, 1995), a repeat inspection (Duffuaa & Khan, 2005; Elshafei, Khan, & Duffuaa, 2006), or a sequential review (Rallis & Lansdowne, 2001).Consider, for example, the semiconductor industry (Greenberg & Stokes, 1995). The fabrication of an integrated circuit (IC) or “chip” is accomplished by depositing a series of film layers upon a silicon wafer, which forms the foundation of the chip. A single wafer may hold hundreds of chips, each of which will go on to power such electronic devices as MP3 players, cell phones, personal computers, and more. At the final stage, packaged chips are subjected to a functionality test, where hundreds of different input patterns are used to ensure that each chip works in accordance with manufacturing specifications.It is possible for a non-defective chip to fail the screening procedure. (e.g., the electrical leads on the packaged device may be contaminated with a small amount of dust or not lined up perfectly with the test head.) Due to the stringency of the test design, however, it is not likely for any defective chips to pass the functionality test successfully. Because the market value of a chip is much higher than the cost of its functionality test, it is cost-effective to re-test any chips that have failed the functionality test.In such a situation, an important managerial decision is how to estimate the number of non-defective chips still remaining in the batch after a given number of screening cycles (Chun, 2006). Conversely, we also want to determine the number of screening cycles that produce the maximum profit or the minimum cost (Chun, 2009). In this paper, we first propose a Bayesian method for estimating the total number of confirming items in a batch, and then we deal with the problem of when to stop the screening procedure.One of the difficulties in Bayesian analysis is how to determine the “prior distribution” of the total number of conforming items in a batch and estimate its parameter values. In the paper, we use the so-called “empirical Bayes” estimation, where the parameter of a binomial prior distribution is estimated from the inspection data. Based on the empirical Bayesian estimate of the number of conforming items still remaining in a batch, we can decide whether to stop the screening procedure or to conduct another round of screening. The optimal stopping rule is the one that satisfies a pre-specified condition or maximizes the expected profit (Jaraiedi, Kochhar, & Jaisingh, 1987).The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we contrast two types of inspection problems, formally introduce the notation that will be used throughout the paper, and briefly introduce the basic concept of the Bayesian approach. We consider the method of maximum likelihood in Section 3, and we propose the empirical Bayes method in Section 4. We then consider various types of stopping rules in the repetitive screening procedure in Section 5. In Section 6, we compare the performance of the empirical Bayes estimate with that of the maximum likelihood estimate, and illustrate the stopping rules with simulated inspection data. The concluding remarks on possible extensions to our empirical Bayes estimation method are given in Section 7.A complex product is composed of a number of elements or items that jointly describe what the consumer or user thinks of as quality (Montgomery, 2012, p. 8). These parameters are often called quality characteristics. Quality characteristics are often evaluated relative to specifications. A products or component is called nonconforming if it fails to meet one or more of its specifications. A specific type of failure is called a nonconformity. A nonconforming product is considered defective if it has one or more defects which are nonconformities that are serious enough to significantly affect the safe or effective use of the product.Consider a complex product, such as an automobile or a software document. The complex product may contain more than one defects, and we need to estimate the number of defects still undiscovered after multiple inspections. Consider another case in which an expensive item, such as an IC chip, is being manufactured in batches. The item under consideration may have one or more “quality characteristics” (e.g., device speed, device delay time, and bond pull strength) that are tested simultaneously. If any of the characteristics do not conform to engineering standards, the item is classified as “non-conforming”.Thus, various screening or inspection procedures could be classified into two groups – (1) one that estimates the number of “conformities” or “non-conformities” in a complex product, and (2) another that deals with the number of “conforming” or “non-conforming” items in a batch of items. As stated by Grant and Leavenworth (1996, p. 17), the technical meanings of the words “defective” items and “defects” in a product as used in manufacturing industries are not the same as the common meanings of these words as used in everyday speech. In the following literature review, we still use the words “defective” and “defect” in their technical sense.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
