@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of fuzzy TOPSIS to scoring the negotiation offers in ill-structured negotiation problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formulate a model of the decision problem in ill-structured negotiations.We modify the classic fuzzy TOPSIS algorithm by changing the PIS and NIS definition.The notion of unstable negotiation problem is introduced.We provide three alternative mechanisms for scoring offers in unstable problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Negotiation support,Multiple criteria analysis,Ill-structured negotiation problem,Fuzzy TOPSIS,Linguistic variables,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we analyze the applicability of the TOPSIS method to support the process of building the scoring system for negotiation offers in ill-structured negotiations. When discussing the ill-structured negotiation problem we consider two major issues: the imprecisely defined negotiation space, and the vagueness of the negotiator's preferences that cannot be defined by means of crisp values. First we introduce the traditional fuzzy TOPSIS model showing the alternative ways of normalizing the data and measuring the distances, which allows to avoid the problem of ranking reversals. Then we formalize ill-structured negotiations using a model which allows the negotiation problem to be defined in a simplified way by means of the aspiration and reservation levels only. Such a definition requires changes in the traditional fuzzy TOPSIS algorithm the development of a mechanism for scoring the offers that fall outside of the negotiation space defined independently and subjectively by the negotiator. We propose three different approaches to handle this problem, that keep the scoring system stable and unchanged throughout the whole negotiation process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preferences by Similarity to Ideal Solution) is one of the methods used for solving multiple criteria decision problems. It was first proposed by Hwang and Yoon (1981), however some Czechoslovakian and Polish researchers have considered a very similar approach more than decade earlier (Hellwig, 1968). The main idea of TOPSIS is to evaluate the alternatives by simultaneously measuring their distances to the Positive Ideal Solution (PIS) and to the Negative Ideal Solution (NIS). PIS is an alternative that is most preferred by the decision maker (DM), i.e. maximizes the benefit criteria and minimizes the cost ones, whereas NIS is the least preferred solution, i.e. it maximizes the cost criteria and minimizes the benefit ones. The preference order is then built according to the relative closeness of the alternatives to PIS, which is a scalar criterion that combines these two distance measures. The traditional TOPSIS method assumes that the evaluation criteria, criteria weights, alternatives and their resolution levels are precisely defined, namely that the problem is defined in the form of a decision matrix filled with crisp data. In other words, it requires the decision problem to be well structured. However, in many real-world decision making situations DMs are usually not able to express their evaluations precisely in terms of crisp data. They may prefer to define them imprecisely, operating with ranges rather than with exact numbers or using verbal descriptions or linguistic variables (Chen & Hwang, 1992). The reasons for this may be various: time pressure, lack of knowledge or information, the expert's limited expertise about the problem domain. Therefore, extensions of TOPSIS have been proposed aiming at the adaptation of the traditional algorithm to the interval or fuzzy data (Chen, 2000; Jahanshahloo, Lotfi, & Izadikhah, 2006a, 2006b). All TOPSIS techniques, such as the traditional (classical), interval or fuzzy ones, help DMs to structure the decision problems, conduct computational analysis and rank the alternatives.In this paper we analyze the applicability of the fuzzy TOPSIS (FTOPSIS) procedure to support certain negotiation tasks that take into consideration subjective and imprecise judgments of negotiators. The FTOPSIS procedure allows for: evaluating the negotiation offers, building the ranking of the compromise solutions, constructing the counteroffers, evaluating and comparing the size of potential concessions; it can also help to improve the compromise achieved by the negotiators themselves by searching for the Pareto optimal and dominant solutions. Usually the traditional simple additive weighting model (SAW) (Keeney & Raiffa, 1976) is applied in such analyses, for instance in the well-known negotiation support systems (NSS) or electronic negotiation systems: Inspire (Kersten & Noronha, 1999), Negoisst (Schoop, Jertila, & List, 2003) and SmartSettle (Thiessen & Soberg, 2003). But the recent research on negotiators’ performance in electronic negotiation, in particular on their use and interpretation of SAW scores shows that they very often misinterpret the ratings and prefer to operate with the linguistic equivalents of the ratings rather than with numbers as such (Paradis, Gettinger, Lai, Surboeek, & Wachowicz, 2010; Wachowicz & Kersten, 2009). At the same time, methods based on the reference points, such as the bi-reference procedure (Michalowski & Szapiro, 1992) or the traditional TOPSIS method for crisp data (Wachowicz & Błaszczyk, 2013), have already proven their usefulness in negotiation support. Fuzzy TOPSIS has also been successfully implemented to support the group decision problems (Ertuğrul, 2011; Krohling & Campanharo, 2011). Therefore in this paper we focus on the FTOPSIS approach, which does not require that the negotiators use crisp numbers or numerical definitions of preferences and, at the same time, has a very clear interpretation of the measures it uses (i.e. distances). The modifications that we propose allow to use FTOPSIS for ill-structured negotiation problems, where the negotiation space is not (or cannot be) precisely defined. First, we assume that the negotiation space does not need to be defined by means of the decision matrix, but the aspiration and reservation levels resulting from the BATNA11BATNA is the negotiation theory concept and is the acronym for Best Alternative to Negotiated Agreement (Fischer & Ury, 1981) describing the solution of the negotiation problem attainable outside of the negotiation process, that can be executed if the negotiation process fails.definition may be used for setting the negotiation frames instead. Such a matrix may be defined, but it will consist of the sample negotiation offers that reflect the negotiator's concession strategy rather than define all possibilities for a negotiation agreement. In this case, it cannot be used as the definition of the negotiation space. Furthermore, with this definition of the negotiation space, we admit the possibility that at the offer exchange stage a negotiation offer falling outside this negotiation space will appear. This is possible, since the counterpart may have (and usually has) a different vision of the negotiation space from that of the focal negotiator. In such a situation the mechanism for scoring these new offers must be developed. Therefore we introduce changes to the traditional FTOPSIS algorithm. We consider alternative normalization procedures as well as a different philosophy of measuring distances if the over-good or under-bad options appear (options better than the aspiration ones or worse than the reservation ones). Three alternative approaches are proposed that differ in calculations of the compensations for over-good and under-bad options: non-compensatory, quasi-compensatory and fully compensatory ones.By presenting a novel, comprehensive fuzzy TOPSIS-based approach to negotiation template design and evaluation, our research contributes to the existing literature on negotiation analysis. Our contribution consists of the following five elements: (1) Formulating the model of the decision problem in ill-structured negotiations, which allows the fuzzy TOPSIS to be applied to scoring the negotiation template. (2) Modifying the classic fuzzy TOPSIS algorithm by changing the way in which the PIS and NIS solutions are defined. Deriving PIS and NIS from BATNA and the definition of the reservation levels allows to fix the stable reference points for the scoring system and eliminates the necessity of defining the complete decision matrix. This allows to score any feasible negotiation package without the necessity of tedious and time consuming rescoring of the whole decision matrix, which could additionally lead to rank reversal. (3) Discussing the impact of applying various normalization procedures and distance measures to the final form of the FTOPSIS-based scoring system. (4) Introducing the notion of unstable negotiation problem, that appears when the parties submit additional offers that fall outside the feasible negotiation space. (5) Providing three alternative methods for scoring the over-good and under-bad packages that differ in the mechanism of evaluating the trade-offs for options from outside of the feasible negotiations space.To present our contribution accurately we divided this paper into four more sections. In Section 2 we present the classic FTOPSIS algorithm applying simultaneously the notion of linguistic scales to handle the imprecise definition of negotiators’ preferences. In Section 3 we formulate the formal model of the negotiation problem that applies the major ideas of FTOPSIS and discuss the potential changes in this model when a new offer (alternative) is added to the initial FTOPSIS decision matrix. We identify the specific situation that requires further consideration, which we call the unstable negotiation problem. Then in Section 4 we propose three different approaches to handle the unstable negotiation problem, each based on a different approach to the new offer's potential excesses over PIS or shortages to NIS. Finally, in Section 5 we show an illustrative example of scoring offers by means of the modified FTOPSIS method and analyze the consequences of its application for unstable problems when all three approaches are applied.In the multiple criteria decision making (MCDM) ranking problem the DM has to rank m alternatives A1, A2, …, Amdescribed by n criteria C1, C2, …, Cn. This problem may be concisely expressed in matrix form as X = [xij], w = [w1, w2, …, wn], wherexijis the resolution level of the alternative Ai(i = 1, 2, …, m) with respect to the criterion Cj(j = 1, 2, …, n), andwjis the weight of criterion Cj(Chen, 2000). From the viewpoint of the quality of data used in the definition of the decision matrix X, MCDM problems may be divided into two categories. The first one includes the classical MCDM problems, where both the ratings and criteria weights are measured by means of crisp numbers. However, crisp data are very often inadequate to model real-life problems. Uncertain human judgments, lack of information or vague preferences cannot be estimated by means of precise numerical equivalents. Therefore, the notion of fuzziness was introduced by Zadeh (1965) to model imprecision or vagueness; it allows the DM to incorporate unquantifiable, incomplete or non-obtainable information into the decision model. Thus the second approach – fuzzy multiple criteria decision-making (FMCDM) – allows the ratings and criteria weights to be expressed imprecisely, subjectively and vaguely by means of linguistic terms, fuzzy numbers or intuition fuzzy numbers (Chen, 2000; Jahanshahloo et al., 2006b). Fuzzy numbers are special classes of fuzzy quantities – more precisely, a fuzzy numberA⌢is a convex normalized fuzzy set. There are different types of fuzzy numbers, but in practice triangular and trapezoidal numbers are most frequently used in problem modeling (Chen, 2000; Kahraman, Büyüközkan, & Ateş, 2007). In the approach presented in this paper we will apply the notions of the fuzzy multiple criteria decision making, since we reckon it is more adequate to describe the negotiation situation, which is usually ill-structured and imprecisely defined. We will also use triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs) because of their computational simplicity and ease in representing subjective and imprecise information.Technically, a TFN is characterized by an interval of real numbers, within which each real number x is described by the level of the membership function μ(x) with values between 0 and 1. Thus a TFN can be denoted in a simplified way by a triplex⌢=(a,b,c),where a is the smallest possible value (μ(x) = 0 for x < a); b– the most promising value (μ(b) = 1); and c – the largest possible value (μ(x) = 0 for x > c) of a particular characteristic described by this TFN. It is assumed that the values of the membership function increase linearly when moving from a to b, and decrease linearly when moving from b to c. Note that both the crisp quantitative data x and the interval data (a, c) can be regarded as fuzzy triangular numbers:(1)(x,x,x),(2)(a,a+c2,c).If necessary (e.g. for calculation purposes), each TFN may also be transformed into a real value (defuzzified). Defuzzification may be performed by means of the following formula (Liou & Wang, 1992)(3)m(x⌢)=a+2b+c4.For non-negative TFNs (i.e. where a ≥ 0) standard arithmetic operations may be used,22For details see Kwang (2005).however, from the viewpoint of the approach proposed in this paper the most interesting is the way of calculating the distances between two TFNs, which depends on the type of the distance measure to be implemented. The three methods most commonly used for TFNs are: vertex distance, weighted Hamming distance and weighted Euclidean distance (Ertuğrul, 2011):○vertex distance:(4)dV(x⌢1,x⌢2)=(a1−a2)2+(b1−b2)2+(c1−c2)23.weighted Euclidean distance:(5)dE(x⌢1,x⌢2)=(a1−a2)2+2(b1−b2)2+(c1−c2)24.weighted Hamming distance:(6)dH(x⌢1,x⌢2)=|a1−a2|+2|b1−b2|+|c1−c2|4.There is a notion of linguistic variables (Zadeh, 1975) that is closely related to the idea of fuzzy numbers. The values of linguistic variables are words or sentences expressed in a natural or artificial language; therefore they allow to approximate the characterization of complex or ill-defined phenomena in a very easy and intuitive way, without using numbers. However, for calculation purposes quantitative equivalents should be assigned to the linguistic variables. These equivalents may be expressed in terms of positive TFNs. An example of such a linguistic variable is given in Table 1.TOPSIS is one of the MCDM methods that have been successfully applied to solve many different selection/ranking problems (Krohling & Campanharo, 2011; Milani, Shanian, & El-Lahham, 2008; Zavadskas, Vilutiene, Turskis, & Tamosaitiene, 2010). It is intuitive, easy to understand and implement in the form of software support tool, and is coherent with rational choices made by a human being. Nevertheless, real world multi-criteria problems are usually not crisply defined because of the uncertainty of human judgments and therefore many various extensions and improvements of the classic TOPSIS method have been developed. Chen (2000) extended the TOPSIS method to fuzzy group decision-making by introducing triangular fuzzy numbers and defining the notion of Euclidean distance between two fuzzy numbers. Tsaur, Chang, and Yen (2002)transformed a fuzzy MCDM problem into a crisp one through centroid defuzzification. Chu (2002) changed a fuzzy MCDM problem into a crisp one and solved the crisp MCDM problem using the TOPSIS method. Chen and Tzeng (2004) used fuzzy integral to transform a fuzzy MCDM problem into a non-fuzzy MCDM and employed gray relation grade to define the relative closeness of each alternative. Jahanshahloo et al. (2006b) transformed TFNs into intervals using alpha-level sets and then normalized them by means of interval arithmetic. Wang and Elhag (2006) proposed a fuzzy TOPSIS method based on alpha-level sets, which is formulated as a nonlinear programming (NLP) problem and can determine the exact fuzzy relative closeness. Kahraman et al. (2007) presented a hierarchical fuzzy TOPSIS method, in which the hierarchical structure was unfolded and represented by an extended decision matrix, and the reference points were determined by using the generalized mean for fuzzy numbers.A fuzzy TOPSIS algorithm, based on positive TFNs, consists of the following seven steps (Chen, 2000):Step 1.Defining the fuzzy decision matrix and vector of weights.The fuzzy decision matrix is constructed asX=[x⌢ij],wherex⌢ijis a positive TFN. The vector of weights has the form:w=[w1,w2,…,wn],wi∈ℜ+and∑jwj=1.The process of weights elicitation may be supported by some MCDM methods (Belton & Stewart, 2002; Tzeng, Chen, & Wang, 1998), among which the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) (Tsaur et al., 2002) or the regression-based approaches such as GRIP (Figueira, Greco, & Słowiński, 2009; Greco, Mousseau, & Słowiński, 2008) can be recommended.Building the normalized fuzzy decision matrix.The normalized fuzzy decision matrixZ=[z^ij]can be expressed by means of various formulas. The most commonly used are based on vector and linear transformations.•vector normalization:(7)z⌢ij=x^ij∑i=1n(x^ij)2wherex⌢ijis the value of alternative i with respect to jth criterion.linear normalization, which depends on the type of criterion.Let I be a set of benefit criteria (the greater value the better) and J be a set of cost criteria (the lower value the better).(8)z⌢ij=(aijmaxicij,bijmaxicij,cijmaxicij),wherej∈I,j=1,2,…,n,(9)z⌢ij=(miniaijcij,miniaijbij,miniaijaij),wherej∈J,j=1,2,…,n.Note that if formula (7) is used, the calculations are a little more complicated, since we have to square each TFN and determine the fuzzy inverse of the total sum of the squared TFNs; while for formulas (8) and (9) it is enough to search the maximum and minimum elements for the series of TFNs. Moreover, formula (7) results in the approximation of the normalized value only and if more detailed data are expected, more sophisticated calculations are required (Kwang, 2005). Formula (9), however, may be only applied to normalize the TFNs for which none of aijis equal to 0. Otherwise, for the normalized criterion j all three numerators in (9) will be zero. In such a situation other normalization procedures should be applied, such as the one based on the feasible ranges of TFNs.Building the weighted normalized fuzzy decision matrix.In the weighted normalized fuzzy decision matrixV=[r⌢ij]the criteria importance is taken into consideration:(10)r⌢ij=wj×z⌢ijfori=1,…,m;j=1,…,n.Determining the fuzzy positive ideal solution (FPIS) and fuzzy negative ideal solution (FNIS).The forms of FPIS (A+) and FNIS (A−) depend on the method of normalization chosen for the FTOPSIS algorithm:•for vector normalization:(11)A+=(v⌢1+,v⌢2+,…,v⌢n+)=((maxr⌢iji,j∈I),(minr⌢iji,j∈J)),(12)A−=(v⌢1−,v⌢2−,…,v⌢n−)=((minr⌢iji,j∈I),(maxr⌢iji,j∈J)),for linear normalization:(13)A+=(v⌢1+,v⌢2+,…,v⌢n+)=(maxr⌢i1i,maxr⌢i2i,…,maxr⌢ini),(14)A−=(v⌢1−,v⌢2−,…,v⌢n−)=(minr⌢i1i,minr⌢i2i,…,minr⌢ini).Calculating the distances of each alternative from FPIS and FNIS, respectively.The single-criterion distance of each alternative from FPIS and FNIS is calculated by means of one of the distance formulas: (4), (5) or (6). The single-criterion distances are then additively aggregated into the form of multi-criteria distances:(15)di+=∑j=1nd(r⌢ij,v⌢j+),i=1,2,…,m(16)di−=∑j=1nd(r⌢ijv⌢j−),i=1,2,…,m.Calculating the relative closeness to the FPIS.For each alternative the closeness coefficient is determined, which aggregates the values ofdi+anddi−into a scalar criterion. For the ith alternative we compute:(17)Ci=di−di−+di+.where 0 ≤ Ci≤ 1, i = 1, 2, …, m.Ranking all alternatives according to descending Ci.The relative closeness formula (17) is a scalar global evaluation criterion and was originally proposed by Hwang and Yoon (1981) for the classic TOPSIS algorithm.Negotiation is a complex process of interaction between the parties that includes the exchange of offers, concessions and argumentation. It requires of the negotiating parties to make a joint decision on the potential solution of the negotiation problem (setting the form of the contract), which is usually described by many issues (Pruitt, 1981). Therefore the MCDM methods and models may be of use in supporting the negotiation process (Raiffa, Richardson, & Metcalfe, 2002), mainly those involving ranking (Roy, 2005). Usually crisp MCDM models are proposed, which are mathematically elegant, but (since the negotiation processes are often very complex) which oversimplify the real negotiation situation and make the practical results unsatisfactory. This is because negotiators may find it difficult to precisely assign the numerical data, such as abstract scores or ratings (i.e. utilities) to negotiation issues and options, and then to correctly interpret the global scores of the alternatives (Paradis et al., 2010; Wachowicz & Kersten, 2009). Therefore the fuzzy MCDM seems to be more appropriate for supporting negotiation processes. The fuzzy approach can effectively handle both qualitative and quantitative elements of the negotiation problem, and allows to define the offers not only by crisp data, but also by interval, fuzzy or linguistic variables.To formalize the negotiation process we start with the following definitions of the basic negotiation elements important from the decision-making viewpoint:○a negotiation package is an offer which the negotiator may send to or receive from his opponent,a negotiation issue is a criterion that the negotiator uses to evaluate the offers,an option is a potential resolution level of the negotiation issue.The problem an individual negotiator faces is to evaluate (or rank) m feasible packages P1, P2, …, Pmtaking into consideration the set of n issues Z = {Z1, Z2, …, Zn}. The set Z can be divided into two subsets: I and J, where I is a subset of benefit issues and J is a subset of cost ones. Let w = [w1, w2, …, wn] be a vector of issue weights, defined subjectively by the negotiator, and describing the relative importance of each negotiation issue.We assume that at the preliminary step of the negotiation problem modeling the negotiator may choose the way of describing the resolution levels of all negotiation issues. He may operate with crisp, interval or fuzzy numbers or use linguistic variables with predefined numerical equivalents. The crisp and interval data are transformed to TFNs using formulas (1) and (2), while the linguistic values can be mapped to TFNs using a predefined scale presented in Table 1. As a result, every package Piis represented by a vectorPi=[x⌢i1,x⌢i2,…,x⌢in],wherex⌢ijis a TFN representation of the option of jth issue in ith package. We also define the lowest acceptable target value and the ideal value for each criterion. Those values represent the maximum limit of demands as well as the minimum limit of concessions and define the negotiation space for each issue.The FTOPSIS may be applied to support the negotiator in the evaluation of the negotiation packages; however, some modifications of the algorithm are required to make it applicable to real-life negotiation processes. The first problem to be solved is common for many multi-criteria procedures including TOPSIS and is known as rank reversal (Belton & Gear, 1983; De Keyser & Peeters, 1996; Schenkerman, 1994). In the rank reversal problem the order of alternatives (ranking) changes when an alternative is added to or removed from the decision problem. In some cases this may even lead to what is called the total rank reversal, where the order of preferences is totally inverted, which means that the alternative considered to be the best becomes the worst (and vice versa). Such a situation cannot be accepted in negotiations, since it could cause confusion in comparing alternatives before and after the new one was submitted. In TOPSIS two elements of the scoring mechanism may cause the rank reversal: (1) the data normalization process and (2) the selection of the positive ideal and negative ideal solutions (García-Cascales & Lamata, 2012). To eliminate the first reason of rank reversal the normalization formula must be selected that will not refer to the whole set of values specified by the decision matrix. Thus linear normalization (formulas (8) and (9)) seems to be better than vector normalization (formula (7)), since the latter can be used only if the set of packages is finite, stable and non-modifiable. Beside the potential risk of rank reversal, operating with vector normalization is also time consuming, since it requires a recalculation of the whole scoring system (i.e. the closeness coefficients of all packages) each time a new package (from outside of the set of predefined alternatives) is considered.The next problem is related to the definition of the ideal and anti-ideal solutions. Normally, the coordinates of the ideal and anti-ideal solutions are represented by the maximum and minimum values of options for all the criteria. Nevertheless, the set of packages which the negotiator decides to evaluate may not cover all possible packages that could be proposed in the forthcoming negotiations. Therefore, we suggest introducing two new packages that will play the role of the ideal and anti-ideal offers. The negotiator defines the ideal and anti-ideal values for each issue by comparing them with the extremes defined in the negotiation space (FPIS and FNIS) or proposes two independent packages, the ideal one (PI) and the anti-ideal one (PAI). If the criteria are defined numerically we can set extreme valuesxj+,xj−such that(18)xj−≤minxijifori=1,2,…,m;j=1,2,…,n;(19)xj+≥maxxijifori=1,2,…,m;j=1,2,…,n.Then(20)x⌢j+={(xj+,xj+,xj+),ifjisabenefitcriterion(xj−,xj−,xj−),ifjisacostcriterionand(21)x⌢j−={(xj−,xj−,xj−),ifjisabenefitcriterion(xj+,xj+,xj+),ifjisacostcriterionare the TFNs that represent the resolution levels for the jth issue in the packages PI, PAI respectively. For the criteria represented by linguistic variables we can use the numerical equivalents of extreme linguistic values such as: very good (VG) or very poor (VP).Having solved the problems stated before we may apply the FTOPSIS procedure to rank packages from the set P∪{PI, PAI} = {P1, P2, …, Pm, PI, PAI}. Let C = {Ci, i ∈ P} be the set of closeness coefficients whose differences ΔCi/k= Ci− Ckcan be interpreted as a cardinal measure of concessions made by the negotiator when moving from offer i to k (i, k = 1, 2, …, m). The negotiator's decision problem can be thus formally described as the 8-tuple:(22)(Z,P,I,J,w,PI,PAI,C).It should be emphasized that it is very important to define the negotiation problem (22) thoroughly and in all details before entering the actual negotiation. In particular, special attention should be paid to the definition of the negotiation space described by PI, PAI, since these elements affect the process of evaluation of any offer from P. Any negotiation offer outside of P that appears later during the actual negotiation (i.e. one proposed unexpectedly by the counterpart) will cause problems and technical confusion in scoring it and may change the initial scoring system C.Let trbe the time variable denoting the negotiation round (r = 0, 1, …, T). In the round t0 one party makes a proposal, i.e. submits an offer, which their counterpart may accept or reject. Its acceptance is equivalent to an agreement and the negotiation ends successfully. Its rejection constitutes a disagreement and the negotiation proceeds to the round t1, in which the counterpart makes their proposal (that the focal negotiator may accept or reject). The process continues as long as one of the offers is accepted or rejected without any following counteroffer. The negotiations are thus paths of offers and counteroffers concluded with an agreement or a disagreement.We will denote by (Z, P, I, J, w, PI, PAI, C)(tr) the negotiator's decision problem in the round tr. Let us assume that during the negotiation process (in a round tr) the negotiator has to take into consideration a new package PN. We will call the negotiation problem stable with respect to the new package PN, if this package, added to P does not change the normalization results (formulas (8) and (9)) and/or the definition of FPIS and FNIS packages (formulas (20) and (21)). If the new package PN does not change the stability of the negotiation problem, the only thing we need to do is simply to incorporate this package into the decision matrix (PN∪P) and to calculate the closeness coefficient PN, which also needs to be included in the new definition of the negotiation problem, i.e.CPN∪C.The problem to be solved is how to proceed in scoring the offers when the new package PN makes the problem unstable. Unfortunately, it is impossible to give an obvious recommendation in such a situation, since it depends on the negotiation problem itself and the negotiators’ philosophy of evaluating a new offer. The simplest way to solve this problem is to add this new package to the decision matrix, i.e. PN∪P, and then to apply the FTOPSIS ranking algorithm again to rescore all the feasible negotiation offers. Unfortunately, all the scores obtained within the set C before adding PN will change, which may lead to rank reversal. From the negotiators’ perspective such a modification may be confusing. Basing on the previous ratings, they may have rejected some counterparts’ proposals, which could have quite a high position in the new ranking (determined after adding PN).To avoid such an ambiguity in the scoring of the offers, we may try to evaluate the new package PN within the scoring system defined by the initial negotiation problem. However, two more questions arise when we try to make such an evaluation. The first one concerns the way in which we decide whether PN is better than PI (or worse than PAI) with respect to some issues (or the entire package). While such a comparison is quite obvious when crisp data are compared, here we cannot clearly confirm the relation PNj> PIj(or PNj< PAIj) for the jth issue. The second one concerns the way we interpret (and take into consideration) the potential excess of the package PN over PI (or its shortage to PAI). The negotiators may wish to evaluate them on a non-compensatory basis. If this case, they would not take into consideration the excess of value between PN and PI, assuming that PN simply gives them the maximum possible satisfaction as PI does (consequently, they would not take into consideration the shortage of value between PN and PAI, assuming that this offer gives them the lowest possible satisfaction, as does PAI). If a compensation needs to be taken into consideration, a new problem arises: how to score the new package applicable here (PN may be much better and therefore distant from PI, which should be (its excesses or shortages on some issues) since the notion of distance is no longer considered as a good point of PN and should increase its score). Below we give some recommendations for both situations.Letx⌢PNj=(aPNj,bPNj,cPNj),x⌢j+=(aj+,bj+,cj+)andx⌢j−=(aj−,bj−,cj−)be the fuzzy triangular numbers that represent the resolution levels for the jth issue in the packages PN,PI,PAI, respectively. Let us assume furthermore, without loss of generality, that the jth issue is of the benefit type (i.e. Zj∈ I). In the unstable negotiation problem we will call the package PNover-good with respect to the jth criterion iff(23)(i)yj−≤yPNjforeveryy,(24)(ii)yj+<yPNjforsomey,where y = a, b, c – are the triangular number parameters.We say that the package PN is under-bad with respect to the jth criterion iff(25)(i)yPNj≤yj+foreveryy,(26)(ii)yPNj<yj−forsomey,where y = a, b, c – are the triangular number parameters.Neither the over-good nor the under-bad package may be scored using the previously defined negotiation offers scoring system embodying the classic FTOPSIS algorithm since they fall outside the extreme resolution levels defined by FPIS and FNIS. The potential excesses of PN over FPIS would generate a positive distance to FPIS, despite the former outperforming the latter. Yet the positive distance to FPIS in TOPSIS indicates that this alternative is worse than FPIS. A similar problem occurs when the distance of the under-bad alternative to FNIS is determined.If we encounter the problem of under-bad alternatives only and if the distances to FNIS are small, we may apply the concept of veto (Daher & de Almeida, 2012) and consider the under-bad alternative as being as bad as the worst one we consider, i.e. preferentially equal to FNIS. However, if the distances are big, and the alternative under consideration is under-bad for one criterion but over-good for another, a vital question arises: can these excesses over the FPIS reference point compensate (and if so, to what extent) for the shortages of this alternative with respect to the FNIS solution?Here we propose three alternative approaches that may be used to evaluate the scores of under-bad and over-good alternatives that differ in the way these excesses and shortages are compensated: the non-compensatory, the quasi-compensatory and the fully compensatory approach. Note that the notion of compensation used here differs from the one defined in the outranking approaches, such as ELECTRE or PROMETHEE. Here it describes a situation in which the trade-offs between the resolution levels of some criteria, that fall outside of the feasible negotiation (decision) space defined subjectively by the negotiator, are measured and balanced out no matter how distant from the feasible space the options are (how “good” or “bad” they are). In the outranking approaches the conditions of acceptance or refusal of the compensation for “good” or “bad” performances are determined by the veto threshold specified individually for each issue. If the difference in performances exceeds this threshold no compensation is considered.The underlying assumption of the non-compensatory approach we propose is that no package can be scored higher than PI or lower than PAI. Therefore, even if on some issues PN results in better consequences than PI, it is assumed that its true performance is equal to that of PI. Similarly, if PN is worse than PAI, its rating is equal to that of PAI. Since the performance of each offer for each issue is described by TFNs we need to check whether none of the three parameters describing the performance of the incoming offer PN is better (worse) than the corresponding parameter describing the performance of PI (PAI) for this issue. If at least one parameter is better (worse), we have to limit (or upgrade) these resolution levels to the corresponding maximum values of PI (or minimum values of PAI). Thus before performing FTOPSIS calculations we will modify the package PN to the form ofP¯N, the elements of which are defined as:(27)x⌢P¯Nj=(a¯PNj,b¯PNj,c¯PNj),where(28)y¯PNj={yj+,ifyPNj>yj+yj−,ifyPNj<yj−yPNj,otherwise.where y = a, b, c – are the triangular number parameters.The non-compensatory distance formula has now the following form:(29)dnc(x⌢PNj,x⌢jref)=d(x⌢P¯Nj,x⌢jref)wherex⌢jref=x⌢j+,x⌢j−and d is a distance measure specified by formulas (4), (5) or (6).These modifications consist in downsizing or upgrading the option values that fall outside the predefined negotiation space. Limiting the values of PN to the resolution levels of PI will make PN as good as PI and as distant to PAI as PI is, for each negotiation issue, which must be guaranteed to keep the calculations of C correct (the same is true for upgrading the values of PN to the resolution levels of PAI). However, this approach totally ignores the excesses and shortages of performances of each alternative over FPIS and FNIS, not allowing to improve its score by the value of each excess and, analogously, reduce it by the value of each shortage. These excesses and shortages do not compensate each other, and hence the name “non-compensatory” for the approach we propose.The quasi-compensatory assumption requires taking into consideration the fact that PN may be somehow better than PI (or worse than PAI). It is not possible to perform all the necessary FTOPSIS calculations according to this assumption, since the method itself is based on the notion measuring distances to the reference points (assumed to be the extreme points). The distance to FPIS expresses the amount by which the offer under consideration is worse than FPIS, while the distance to FNIS expresses the amount by which it is better than FNIS. If we assume now that the offers under consideration are better than PI (or worse than PAI) with respect to some issue then the notion of distance is not sufficient to describe the attractiveness of PN, since it increases the denominator of the formula (17), and consequently decreases the value of the closeness coefficient. To solve this problem partially we may keep the initial form of PN unchanged (not using formulas (27) and (28) as suggested before), assuming, however, that if PN is better than PI, the distance (measured separately for each issue) between these packages is 0. Simultaneously we take into consideration the potential excess of PN over PI while measuring its single criteria distances to PAI. This will make this offer to be more distant from PAI on some issues, which can compensate for the shorter distances (i.e. worse performances) on other issues. This will increasedi−in formula (17), whiledi+will remain stable. The value of the overall closeness coefficient will then increase. Similarly, if PN is worse than PAI on some issues, the single-criterion distances between these packages will be 0, but the corresponding distances to PI will increase and compensate for (reduce) the shorter distances (i.e. better performances) on other issues. This will make thedi−elements of the formula (17) stable, whiledi+will increase. The value of the overall closeness coefficient will then decrease.What should be emphasized here, is that the approach we propose is not fully compensatory. It still does not take into consideration the potential excesses (shortages) in the resolution levels while measuring the distances to PI (PAI). These over-good (under-bad) performances are taken into consideration in measuring the distances to PI (PAI) only. A consequence of this approach is that if PN is globally over-good (i.e. better than PI on all the issues) its closeness coefficient will still be 1. Thus, we may call this approach a quasi-compensatory. Formally, the process of measuring the distances in quasi-compensatory approach will require a modification of the single-criterion distance formulas. For the jth issue the distance between PN and PI should be measured now as:○vertex distance:(30)dVqc(x⌢PNj,x⌢jref)=a˜j2+b˜j2+c˜j23,weighted Euclidean distance:(31)dEqc(x⌢PNj,x⌢jref)=a˜j2+2b˜j2+c˜j24,weighted Hamming distance:(32)dHqc(x⌢PNj,x⌢jref)=|a˜j|+2|b˜j|+|c˜j|4,Note that while normalizing the resolution levels of PN we may still use the formulas (8) and (9) withmaxicijandminiaijderived from PI and PAI. The only effect of this position normalization is that the single criteria performances of PN that exceed the initial PI would have the normalized value greater than 1.Let us observe that if PN is an over-good package with respect to the jth issue then(35)dqc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j+)=dnc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j+),and(36)dqc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j−)=d(x⌢PNj,x⌢j−),where d is the vertex, Hamming, and Euclidean distance, respectively.Similarly, if PN is an under-bad package with respect to the jth issue then(37)dqc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j−)=dnc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j−),and(38)dqc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j+)=d(x⌢PNj,x⌢j+),where d is the vertex, Hamming, and Euclidean distance, respectively.The fully compensatory approach will allow us to score in full the negotiation offers that fall outside of the negotiation space defined by the negotiator's aspiration and reservation levels. For a given alternative it will measure its excesses over PI or shortages to PAI and compensate for them with the resolution levels of other issues. The fully compensatory approach requires, however, changing the TOPSIS-specific idea of measuring distances between alternatives and replacing it with the notion of deviations of each alternative with respect to PI and PAI, respectively.33It is in some way coherent with the idea of positive and negative distances considered by Nasab and Milani (2012).Deviation, in contrast to distance, will not only tell us the distance of an alternative from others (how far it is located from the reference points in the negotiator's decision space), but also if and by how much it outperforms these points (indicates the direction of its location with respect to reference points). While evaluating an offer in the single-issue context we can thus distinguish the offer's positive and negative deviations from the reference points. The positive deviations will indicate how much the given alternative is better than PI and PAI, respectively (which is considered as positive by the negotiator), while the negative deviations will show how much it is worse than these reference points (which is regarded as negative by the negotiator). For instance, if in the maximization problem the alternative's resolution level is greater than the one of PI, it will be considered as distant from PI (as will all other alternatives worse than PI), but simultaneously better than PI. Hence this alternative will have a positive deviation from PI greater than 0 (and a negative deviation from PI equal to 0). In the multi-issue context one alternative may be worse than PI on some criteria and better than PI on others. The notion of deviation will allow us to compensate for all potential losses of worse options (previously measured using only the notion of distance) with the excesses of options better than the aspiration ones, that are now cumulated as positive deviations. In these compensations we use the same mechanisms that are applied in the various distance formulas. To be coherent with the scoring formulas of the classic FTOPSIS algorithm, while aggregating the multi-dimensional deviation we add up the single-issue negative deviations and subtract the single-issue positive ones. The details of the aggregating formulas depend on the distance measure selected for preparing the FTOPSIS scoring. In Fig. 1we show the major differences in evaluating the offers in two-dimensional negotiation space for an alternative descried by crisp data when the notions of distance and deviation are used.In the problem presented in Fig. 1 we used the Manhattan metric to calculate the global deviations of alternatives, which requires simple additive aggregation of single-criteria deviations. We assume that we operate in a normalized decision space, both evaluation criteria have the same weight and the problem is one of vector maximization. The global distance formula for the ith alternative may be represented in a simple form as(39)di=d1i+d2i.In such a situation all four alternatives: A, B, C and D are equally distant from the ideal solution PI (the sums of their single-criterion distances are equal). The dotted rectangle indicates all other alternatives in the decision space with the same distance to PI (equal to 4 units). However, they differ significantly as regards deviations. The alternative A is worse than PI (is dominated by PI) therefore both single-criterion distances d1A and d2A are considered as negative deviations. Thus we say that A has a negative deviation to PI of 4 units. The situation is opposite for the alternative B, since it outperforms PI. Thus its single-criterion distances d1B and d2B are considered as positive deviations and we determine for B the positive deviation to PI equal to 4 units. The calculation of global deviations of alternatives C and D may cause ambiguities. C is better than PI for Z2, but worse than PI for Z1. Thus d2C is considered as the positive deviation, while d1C as negative. Then, according to the main idea of measuring deviations stated before, instead of adding the single-criteria distances (as proposed in formula (46)) we subtract these two values and obtain the global deviation equal to 0. We evaluate the alternative D analogously. D outperforms PI for Z1, but is worse for Z2. From the negative deviation d2D we subtract the positive deviation d1D and obtain the positive distance value dD = 3 − 1 = 2. This means that the negative deviations are, in the final count, greater than the positive ones, therefore the determined value of dD will be considered as the global negative deviation to PI. The viewpoint of deviations changes the way of analyzing the decision space. While for the Manhattan the alternatives evaluated as equal were represented by the series of squares of different sizes, here the alternatives with equal deviations (both positive and negative) are represented by isolines located above (for positive deviations) or below (for negative deviations) the reference point PI. Examples of such isolines are drawn as the dotted lines in Fig. 1.We may also use deviation analysis for evaluating alternatives described by means of TFNs. However, depending on the distance measure selected, this will require modifications of distance formulas. The least modification is required when the weighted Hamming distance is applied. Since we need to differentiate between positive and negative deviations we only need to remove the absolute value operators in formula (6). By doing this, we are able to measure if any element of the given TFN: a, b or c that represents the alternative's option value is better (worse) than the corresponding element of PI (PAI). Thus we obtain the new weighted Hamming deviation formulas:(40)dHfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j+)=(aj+−aPNj)+2(bj+−bPNj)+(cj+−cPNj)4and(41)dHfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j−)=(aPNj−aj−)+2(bPNj−bj−)+(cPNj−cj−)4.In measuring the deviation of the package PN to PI with respect to the jth issue a negative summandaj+−aPNj,bj+−bPNjorcj+−cPNjin formula (40) indicates the positive deviation (excess over PI) of this element of TFN, while a positive summand indicates its negative deviation (shortage to PI). For PAI the situation is opposite. A negative summand in formula (41) indicates the negative deviation (the TFN's element is worse than corresponding element of PAI), while a positive summand reflects the positive deviation of the element of TFN (the TFN's element is better than the one of PAI).It is easy to check that(42)dHfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j+)=m(x⌢j+)−m(x⌢PNj),and(43)dHfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j−)=m(x⌢PNj)−m(x⌢j−),where m is the defuzzification operator defined by formula (3).From (42) and (43) we have the following(44)dHfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j+)+dHfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢j−)=m(x⌢j+)−m(x⌢j−).Based on formulas (42), (43) and (44), the relative closeness formula of the classic TOPSIS (17) may be modified to obtain a new scoring function based on the Hamming-distance for the fully compensatory approach. Note that while using this function the normalized TFNs should be used:(45)Ci=di−di−+di+=∑j=1n(m(r^ij)−m(v⌢j−))∑j=1n(m(v⌢j+)−m(v⌢j−))=1−∑j=1n(m(v⌢j+)−m(r^ij))∑j=1n(m(v⌢j+)−m(v⌢j−)),i=1,2,…,m.This general idea of modification, which consists in replacing the distance absolute value with the signed difference between the corresponding elements of TFNs should be also applied to any other distance measure to be used for a FTOPSIS-based scoring system. For both the vertex distance and the weighted Euclidean distance formulas we need to handle the problem of squaring the subsequent summands that convert any negative deviation into a positive value. Having done this, we also need to deal with the negative value of the sum to be squared. Therefore we propose the following initial modification, common for both these distance measures. We change the way of calculating the differences between the successive elements of TFNs to capture the positive or negative deviation. When PN and PI are compared we use the following formula:(46)y˘j={(yj+−yPNj)2,ifyj+−yPNj>0−(yPNj−yj+)2,otherwise,where y = a, b, c are the parameters of TFN describing the alternative's performance for the jth issue.Whereas to compare PN and PAI we use(47)y˘j={(yPNj−yj−)2,ifyPNj−yj−>0−(yj−−yPNj)2,otherwise.Now we may rewrite the original formulas (9) and (10) using the above definitions of differences between TFNs taking into account two possible results of adding up differences in the elements of TFNs. For the vertex distance we obtain:(48)dVfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢jref)={a˘+b˘+c˘3,ifa˘+b˘+c˘>0−|a˘+b˘+c˘|3,otherwisewherex⌢jref=x⌢j+,x⌢j−.In the case of weighted Euclidean distance we use the following formula:(49)dEfc(x⌢PNj,x⌢jref)={a˘+2b˘+c˘4,ifa˘+2b˘+c˘>0−|a˘+2b˘+c˘|4,otherwiseforx⌢jref=x⌢j+,x⌢j−.Formulas (48) and (49) are applied in the FTOPSIS algorithm in the same way as it was done for Hamming distance analysis (see formula (45)).Let us consider a simple numerical example in which the incoming offer needs to be evaluated by comparing it to the reference alternatives PI and PAI with respect to a single criterion described by fuzzy numbers. Let us assume that the negotiator personally defined the reference points:•for PI:x⌢+=(3,5,8),for PAI:x⌢−=(1,4,6).The incoming offer PN is defined asx⌢PN=(2,4,9).We will show the calculation process for the Hamming and vertex distances only. From the technical point of view all the calculations for Euclidean distance remain the same as for the vertex distance and differ only in the weight assigned to the subsequent elements of TFNs.In the non-compensatory approach we determine the distance between PN and the reference points using the modifications of PN (formulas (27) and (28)). SincecPN>c+, we need to rewrite PN to the formP⇀N=(2,4,8). The vertex distances may be calculated now (see formulas (4) and (29)):dVnc(x⌢PN,x⌢+)=dV(x⌢P¯N,x⌢+)=13((3−2)2+(5−4)2+(8−8)2)≈0.82,dVnc(x⌢PN,x⌢−)=13((1−2)2+(4−4)2+(6−8)2)≈1.29.As the result we obtainCPN=1.29/(1.29+0.82)≈0.61.The Hamming distances are (see formulas (6) and (29)):dHnc(x⌢PN,x⌢+)=dH(x⌢P¯N,x⌢+)|3−2|+2|5−4|+|8−8|4=0.75,dHnc(x⌢PN,x⌢−)=dH(x⌢P¯N,x⌢−)=|2−1|+2|4−4|+|8−6|4=0.75.Consequently:CPN=0.75/(0.75+0.75)=0.5.The quasi-compensatory approach will not modify the form of PN. According to the formula (33) it will only neutralize the difference betweencPNand c+, while in measuring the distance between PN and PAI the original value ofcPNwill be taken into consideration (see formula (34)). The distance is calculated in the following way (see formula (30)):dVqc(x⌢PN,x⌢+)=13((3−2)2+(5−4)2+0)≈0.82,dVqc(x⌢PN,x⌢−)=13((1−2)2+(4−4)2+(6−9)2)≈1.82.Thus we obtainCPN=1.82/(1.82+0.82)≈0.69.In the case of the Hamming distance we obtain the following results:dHqc(x⌢PN,x⌢+)=|3−2|+2|5−4|+|8−8|4=0.75,dHqc(x⌢PN,x⌢−)=|2−1|+2|4−4|+|9−6|4=1.00,and the closeness coefficient is equal toCPN=1/(1+0.75)≈0.57.For the fully compensatory approach and the vertex distance we obtain the following results (see formula (46), (47) and (48)):dVfc(x⌢PN,x⌢+)=13((3−2)2+(5−4)2−(8−9)2)≈0.57,dVfc(x⌢PN,x⌢−)=13((2−1)2+(4−4)2+(9−3)2)≈1.82,andCPN=1.82/(1.82+0.57)≈0.77.In the case of the Hamming distance we have the following (see formulas (40) and (41)):dHfc(x⌢PN,x⌢+)=214−194=0.5,dHfc(x⌢PN,x⌢−)=194−154=1.ConsequentlyCPN=1/(1+0.5)=0.67.Note that if the calculations shown above are to be applied to the multi-criteria problem, the TFNs should be first normalized according to the formulas (7)–(9) discussed in Section 2.2.In this section we present an example showing the main differences between scoring systems obtained by means of the three compensation approaches discussed in Section 4. Let us consider a buyer and a seller, negotiating the conditions of a potential business contract. The following three issues are discussed: Z1 – unitary price (EUR), Z2 – payment conditions (days), Z3 – returns policy. The issues Z1, Z2 are represented directly by TFNs, but the initial definition of the key issue (price) is crisp and the options for price are mapped to TFNs before constructing the decision matrix. The issue Z3 is originally qualitative and may be defined as a complex of options describing the limits of spoilage accepted as well as the scale of penalties and warranty time. Therefore the options of Z3 are subjectively pre-evaluated by the negotiators using linguistic variables, which are also decoded to TFNs using the linguistic scale presented in Table 1. The negotiation space, specifying the feasible ranges of the resolution levels of each negotiation issue, and defined (by both parties) by crisp values for Z1, Z2 and linguistically for Z3 is the following:•price: 〈9, 14〉,payment: 〈2, 14〉,returns: 〈poor (P), good (G)〉.According to the linguistic scale presented in Table 1 the linguistic variable MP (medium poor) is represented by a TFN equal to (0.1, 0.3, 0.5), F (fair) – by (0.3, 0.5, 0.7) and MG (medium good) – by (0.5, 0.7, 0.9). The data specified above is sufficient for the classic FTOPSIS scoring procedure, since the reference points FPIS and FNIS will be derived from the decision matrix defined in Table 2. However, in our approach these reference points are defined individually by the negotiators (as suggested in Section 3.1). Thus we assume that the negotiators defined their aspiration and reservation levels, based on which the ideal and anti-ideal packages are defined (see Table 3).The options G and P of issue Z3 stand for Good and Poor and are represented by their numerical equivalents (0.7, 0.9, 1.0) and (0.0, 0.1, 0.3), respectively (see Table 1).Now we assume that during the actual negotiation phase five new offers are proposed, that fell outside the feasible negotiation space, i.e. made the negotiation problem unstable. These offers (P13, P14, P15, P16, P17) are listed in Table 4. They too have to be scored and compared with the initial set P = {Pi: for i = 1, 2, …, 12}.We start our analysis with studying the major differences between our approach, which uses the FPIS and FNIS definitions based on the aspiration and reservation levels and introduces new rules of scoring for unstable negotiation problems, and the traditional FTOPSIS procedure. The differences are more evident when negotiation dynamics is considered.Let us assume that the negotiators have built their scoring systems on the basis of the initial set of feasible packages P in the prenegotiation phase. For each negotiator two scorings were prepared: (S1) that refers to FPIS and FNIS being the aspiration and reservation packages, and (S2) in which FPIS and FNIS were derived from the weighted normalized decision matrix (the standard TOPSIS approach). Naturally, since the reference points FPIS and FNIS are different, the two scoring systems differ (see columns 2 and 3 in Table 5). Now we assume that the negotiation process starts and in the first negotiation round (t1) a new package P13 is suggested as a potential negotiation agreement. It makes our negotiation problem unstable for S2, since it is outside of the feasible negotiation space for the issue of payment. For S1 we need only to determine the score of P13 according to one of the compensation approaches proposed in Section 4. However, for S2 the whole FTOPSIS procedure needs to be run once again. What is worse, in the new ranking obtained for the scoring system S2 the scores of alternatives are different from the ones computed in the prenegotiation phase (the scoring system in t0). In Table 5 we show such a situation analyzed from the buyer's point of view if the Hamming distance is applied (for S1 the quasi-compensatory approach is used).In each round whenever we encounter a new offer that changes the reference points FPIS and FNIS (from the buyer's viewpoint: rounds t1, t2, t3) the system S2 changes, which also results in rank reversal (shown as shaded cells in Table 5). For instance, in round t1 the package P7 is considered better than P13, while in the next round (t2) the situation is reversed – P13 is better than P7. Moreover, both these packages are considered to be almost of the same quality in round t3, sinceCP7(t3)=0.412andCP13(t3)=0.411. The scores change so much from round to round, that the negotiator may feel confused about the interpretation of the quality of the offers. For instance, the offer P10 is considered as the worst in round t0 with the score equal to 0. Then in t1 its score rises to 0.232, which is a particularly high increase taking into account that the whole scoring system covers the range from 0 to 1. However, quite unexpectedly, this does not change the position of P10 in the final ranking of the offers. Similar changes in scores, often of more than 0.1 scoring points (which is 10 percent of the scoring pool), are common in the successive rankings in the scoring system S2, which makes it virtually useless. The negotiator cannot effectively track the negotiation progress, since it is impossible to describe the concession paths of the parties. He is either unable to say if and by how much he improves his performance while moving from one negotiation round to another. At the same time the scoring system S1 remains stable, since new offers are scored with respect to fixed FPIS and FNIS solutions. The initial ranking and scores determined in the prenegotiation phase remain unchanged despite the addition of new offers (even of ones that make the problem unstable). The negotiator may historically compare the scores of the offers and measure the negotiation progress. He may be always sure that the offers built with feasible options (taken from the ranges defined by the ideal and anti-ideal solutions) will have scores from the range 0 to 1 (as in the classic TOPSIS scoring system). If the fully compensatory approach is applied the scoring system will indicate the globally under-bad or over-good packages by assigning to them scores higher than 1 or lower than 0 (see Table 6).However, it is important to know that using the scoring system S1 does not eliminate the rank reversal entirely. The rankings may differ depending on the distance formula applied in the FTOPSIS scoring procedure. Below we present the scoring systems of both negotiators obtained for the fully compensatory approach and three distance formulas: vertex (V), Euclidean (E) and Hamming (H). We run the FTOPSIS algorithm using linear normalization (formulas (8) and (9)). The scoring results are shown in Table 6.The results we obtained are not surprising. Both in buyer's and seller's ranking lists the order of packages changes when different distances are applied (see the shaded cells in Table 6). The same stays true also for the ranking obtained with the non-compensatory and quasi-compensatory approaches. However, if we compare the scores of the packages (especially of the packages whose order was changed) we will see that the differences are marginal and probably would not be considered vital for negotiators. Nevertheless, the problem of selecting the distance measure for TOPSIS analysis is of vital importance, since these measures should correctly reflect the structure of the negotiator's preferences over each issue. A detailed study of the selection of distance measure that adequately describes the negotiator's preferences in a crisp context has been already presented by Wachowicz and Błaszczyk (2013).Having recognized the advantages of the scoring system S1 we may analyze the differences in scorings determined by means of non-, quasi- and fully compensatory approaches. To simplify the analysis and to avoid a potential confusion caused by changes in scores resulting from various distance measures used in the TOPSIS algorithm we will apply the Hamming distance only, which is computationally the simplest one. No matter which compensatory approach is applied, the initial set of alternatives P created in the prenegotiation phase is always scored the same. This is because P consists of the alternatives built with the feasible options resulting from the aspiration and reservation levels declared by the negotiators. Thus we are interested only in differences of scores of the over-good and under-bad offers (P13, …, P17). We run the FTOPSIS algorithm with linear normalization and obtain the following evaluations of the new packages (see Table 7).What we can observe, and what is coherent with the philosophical fundamentals of our compensatory approaches, is the monotonicity of changes in scores of over-good and under-bad packages for non-compensatory and fully compensatory scorings. The weaker the under-bad offer is or the better the over-good one is (from the viewpoint of the negotiator's preferences), the better it is reflected by the fully compensatory approach. For weak offers the fully compensatory scores are lower than non-compensatory ones. And vice versa, good offers have better scores in full compensatory scorings. For instance, the offer P16 is truly weak for the buyer, therefore it is scored 0.371 in the non-compensatory scoring and 0.356 in the fully compensatory one. It is, at the same time, quite a good one for the seller, so its scores are 0.680 and 1.053, respectively. If an offer of mutual gains is analyzed, the scores grow for both negotiators simultaneously (see package P15).What should be emphasized here, is that the scoring obtained for the quasi-compensatory approach does not need to preserve the monotonicity of scores observed for the non- and fully compensatory approaches. The quasi-compensatory scores may vary and depend on the scale of compensation that is rejected when measuring the excesses over FPIS and shortages to FNIS solutions (for details see Section 4.2). For instance, when P14 is scored in the quasi-compensatory scoring system, their excess over FPIS for the issue of returns, equal to 0.02, and the shortage to FNIS for the issues of price and payment, equal to 0.037, are ignored. Hence, while calculating the fully compensatory score we haveCP14=−0.03+(−0.007)+0.17(−0.03+(−0.007+0.17)+(0.28+0.093+(−0.02))=0.273,but for the quasi-compensatory approach the score is determined as followsCP14=0+0+0.17(0+0+0.17)+(0.28+0.093+0)=0.313.In the non-compensatory scoring system the rating of P14 was equal to 0.308 (see Table 7). Thus, we cannot conclude that for the approaches we proposed the scores decrease (or increase) monotonically, when moving from the non-compensatory, through the quasi-compensatory to the fully compensatory scoring systems.What should also be noticed is the relaxation of the feasible range of scores in fully compensatory approach. The scores are not restricted to the range 〈0, 1〉: the globally over-good (under-bad) packages may have been assigned the score higher than 1 (lower than 0). The fully compensatory approach may seem to convey more precise and detailed information about the true value of scored alternatives, but it cannot be applied to every negotiation situation. If the reservation and aspiration levels declared by the negotiators are perceived as strong constraints, applying the quasi- or even the non-compensatory approach would be more appropriate.An interesting insight into the differences in scorings for various compensatory approaches as well as into the general quality of extreme offers when compared with feasible ones is given in Fig. 2.As we see in Fig. 2, all the over-good and under-bad packages appear to be efficient negotiation solutions except for the package P13, which was scored as inferior. However, we need to remember that P13, although it exhibited better performances (resolution levels) than other offers from P did, was not considered to be over-good in S1, for it does not exceed the FPIS solution defined subjectively by the negotiators (see Table 4). The efficiency of the new extreme packages P14, …, P17 may be surprising, but it is consistently indicated by all three scorings. What is more, if we used the traditional FTOPSIS approach, in which all 17 packages are scored a posteriori using the same Hamming distance and the FPIS and FNIS definitions derived from the decision matrix, these four offers: P14, P15, P16 and P17 would have also been considered as efficient points. Thus, our three new approaches preserve the major properties of the classic TOPSIS ranking, but, at the same time, provide the negotiators with additional information about the scale of the “goodness” or “weakness” of over-good or under-bad packages, depending on the way the excesses and shortcomings are compensated for. In other words, based on our TOPSIS-based approach to scoring the negotiation template, we may draw a general conclusion on building the negotiation offers: that the negotiators may find mutually satisfying and extreme agreements by constructing their offers with the extreme resolution levels of the negotiation issues, so that the significant concessions made on some issues are compensated for by the extremely high demands on other ones.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
