@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The value of competitive information in forecasting FMCG retail product sales and the variable selection problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We incorporate competitive information to forecast product sales for retailers.We investigate the forecasting accuracy for promoted and non-promoted period.Competitive information substantially increases forecasting accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,Business analytics,OR in marketing,Retailing,Promotions,Competitive information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sales forecasting at the UPC level is important for retailers to manage inventory. In this paper, we propose more effective methods to forecast retail UPC sales by incorporating competitive information including prices and promotions. The impact of these competitive marketing activities on the sales of the focal product has been extensively documented. However, competitive information has been surprisingly overlooked by previous studies in forecasting UPC sales, probably because of the problem of too many competitive explanatory variables. That is, each FMCG product category typically contains a large number of UPCs and is consequently associated with a large number of competitive explanatory variables. Under such a circumstance, time series models can easily become over-fitted and thus generate poor forecasting results.Our forecasting methods consist of two stages. In the first stage, we refine the competitive information. We identify the most relevant explanatory variables using variable selection methods, or alternatively, pool information across all variables using factor analysis to construct a small number of diffusion indexes. In the second stage, we specify the Autoregressive Distributed Lag (ADL) model following a general to specific modelling strategy with the identified most relevant competitive explanatory variables and the constructed diffusion indexes.We compare the forecasting performance of our proposed methods with the industrial practice method and the ADL model specified exclusively with the price and promotion information of the focal product. The results show that our proposed methods generate substantially more accurate forecasts across a range of product categories.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Grocery retailers have been struggling with stock-outs for years. Stock-outs cause a direct loss of potential sales and lead to dissatisfied customers. The stock-out of individual items not only has negative impact on their own sales but also on the sales of the whole product category (Kalyanam, Borle, & Boatwright, 2007). Recent studies show that customers whom we once believed to either purchase substitutes or delay purchases when their preferred products are out of stock are actually more likely to switch stores and never come back (Corsten & Gruen, 2003). To avoid the out-of-stock condition, retailers may deliberately increase safety stock (i.e. to over-stock), which substantially reduces profit (Cooper, Baron, Levy, Swisher, & Gogos, 1999). Under such a circumstance, retailers face a dilemma: they need to balance the loss due to stock-outs and the cost of safety stocks. One of the solutions to resolve the service and cost trade-off is to employ accurate forecasts for product sales at the UPC level1UPC (Universal Product Code) and SKU (Stock Keeping Unit) are both tracking methods specifying a product exactly in terms of all of its features such as flavour, colour, and packaging size etc. SKU may however include other elements including the store in which the item is sold. UPC and SKU are used interchangeably in this study as used in the literature.1(Corsten & Gruen, 2003). In supply chain management, accurate forecasts mitigate the bullwhip effect and are critically important for Just-In-Time (JIT) delivery (Kuo, 2001; Ouyang, 2007; Sodhi & Tang, 2011).Forecasting retailer product sales at the UPC level is difficult. Product sales are driven by a large number of factors such as marketing activities including price reductions and promotions. Today’s grocery retailers spend a large proportion of their marketing budget on price reductions and promotions due to more intense competition (Kamakura & Kang, 2007; Raju, 1995). Price reductions and promotions substantially boost the sales of the focal product but also cause brand switching and stockpiling, which amplifies the variation of the product sales and makes product sales more difficult to forecast (Ailawadi, 2006). The sales of the focal product are also subject to the negative impact of the price reduction and the promotion of other competitive products, which exacerbates the forecasting problem (Kamakura & Kang, 2007; Struse, 1987; Walters, 1991; Walters & Rinne, 1986).In this study, we investigate the value of competitive information including the competitive price and the competitive promotion in forecasting product sales at the UPC level for retailers. We focus on the competitive information for two reasons. First, competitive marketing activities including prices and promotions of the competitive products are important driving factors of product sales. Many studies in the marketing literature have been devoted to identifying and estimating the effect of these competitive marketing activities, though they do not explicitly consider the operational question facing the retailer of designing models to forecast product sales at the UPC level (we review these studies in more depth in the next section). Therefore, there is a great potential generating more accurate forecasts by incorporating competitive information at the UPC level. One of main contributions of this paper is the way in which competitive information are incorporated in the model to produce forecasts of product sales at the UPC level.Second, competitive information has previously been used to forecast product sales at the brand level. For example, Curry, Divakar, Mathur, and Whiteman (1995) incorporated the price and the promotion of three competing brands into a Bayesian VAR model to forecast the sales of the focal brand in the canned soup category. Divakar, Ratchford, and Shankar (2005) also incorporated the price, display, and feature of the main competitor (e.g. Pepsi versus Coca) to forecast the sales of the focal brand. The superior performance of their proposed model at the brand level implies the value of competitive information in forecasting product sales. However, forecasting product sales at the UPC level is a different research problem compared to at the brand level. Retailers rely on the forecasts at the UPC level for inventory planning, and use the forecasts at the brand level to arrange marketing tactics and as a negotiation tool in fulfilling agreements with manufacturers (Jiang, Klein, & Pick, 1998; Nijs, Dekimpe, Steenkamps, & Hanssens, 2001; White, 1986). Technically, the data at the disaggregate UPC level contains more noise than at the brand level and exhibit distinct patterns. It is well known that the impact of competitive prices and competitive promotions are not as strong as the impact of the price and promotion of the focal product (see Hoch, Kim, Montgomery, & Rossi, 1995). Thus it is possible for the overall impact of competitive prices and promotions to be submerged in the noise of the data. In addition, there is intra-brand competition at the UPC level. Therefore, a related novel contribution of our research is the identification of key factors that affect product sales at the UPC level.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section two, we review previous studies, which enables us to situate the main contribution of our paper. In section three we explain the problem of too many explanatory variables when incorporating competitive information at the UPC level. In section four we present our methodology. Section five describes the data. Section six introduces the models. Section seven demonstrates our experimental design. In section eight we present the results. In the last section we draw conclusions on the value of competitive information in UPC retail forecasting (both when the focal product is being promoted and when it is not) and also discuss directions for future research.In practice, many retailers use the base-times-lift approach to forecast product sales at the UPC level. The approach is a two-step procedure which initially generates a baseline forecast with simple time series models and then makes adjustments for any incoming promotional events. The adjustments are estimated based on the lift effect of the most recent promotion, and also the judgements made by brand managers (Fildes, Goodwin, Lawrence, & Nikolopoulos, 2009; Fildes, Nikolopoulos, Crone, & Syntetos, 2008). These judgmental adjustments are expensive and potentially prone to systematic biases, and evidence shows that the forecasting accuracy of this approach is far from satisfactory (Cooper et al., 1999; Fildes et al., 2009, 2008; Franses & Legerstee, 2010). In the more recent literature, some studies focus on how to make the adjustment more effectively. For example, a string of studies have been devoted to helping managers with their judgmental decisions for the lift effect (Goodwin, 2002; Lee, Goodwin, Fildes, Nikolopoulos, & Lawrence, 2007; Nikolopoulos, 2010). Cooper et al. (1999) developed a model-based forecasting system to estimate the adjustment for the incoming promotion. The system estimates the lift effect of promotional events using a regression style model with a large number of variables related to the of price, promotion, and store/category specific historical information. The system was subsequently extended to contain information related to manufacturers and product categories (Cooper & Giuffrida, 2000; Trusov, Bodapati, & Cooper, 2006). Apart from these studies, (Taylor, 2007) proposed quantile regression method to forecast supermarket product sales but ignored promotional information.Other studies have attempted to forecast product sales by directly taking into account the promotional information. Rinne and Geurts (1988) considered the forecasting performance as a part of their evaluation of promotional profitability. Their model omitted dynamic and competitive effects and offered no evidence on forecasting accuracy. Preston and Mercer (1990) examined a limited number of product categories and again developed static models without competitive effects and there was no model comparison exercise being conducted. Kuo (2001) proposed a fuzzy neural network model to forecast daily milk sales. The neural network model is integrated with a genetic algorithm which learns fuzzy rules obtained from marketing experts about the promotional effects. However, their research only assessed the performance of their approach in terms of one error measure (MSE) for one product (i.e. 500 cl container of papaya milk). Aburto and Weber (2007) proposed a hybrid model to forecast product sales for a Chilean supermarket at the SKU level. They initially forecasted the product sales with a seasonal ARIMA model and then predicted the residual using a neural network model with the price and promotional information of the focal product. Also they only analyzed their method in terms of one error measure (MAPE) for one product (i.e. vegetable oil, 1L). Gür Ali, SayIn, van Woensel, and Fransoo (2009) proposed various machine learning models to forecast retailer product sales at the SKU level. The model includes the support vector regression (SVR) and the regression tree methods with different priori settings. Their models incorporate a range of explanatory variables including the statistical information of unit sales, price, and promotions. They evaluated their model with a fixed forecasting origin and one error measure (MAE).All the studies above tend to overlook some potentially important features of the product market. For example, those focusing on the promotional event adjustment tend to ignore carryover effect of prices and promotions. Some studies incorporate stock variables (e.g. the total price reduction and promotion for the previous month) ignore the time information since the previous price reduction and promotion (e.g. Cooper et al., 1999). Most importantly, these studies overlook the potential importance of the price reduction and the promotion of other competitive products, apart from Gür Ali et al. (2009) who included stock variables to represent the overall level of competition intensity.The importance of the competitive information on product sales has been well established by previous research (e.g. Dekimpe, Hanssens, & Silva-Risso, 1999; Foekens, Leeflang, & Wittink, 1992; Nijs et al., 2001; Van Heerde, Gupta, & Wittink, 2003; Van Heerde, Leeflang, & Wittink, 2000). A well-known example is the SCAN∗PRO model and its extensions which measure cross price elasticity at the brand level (Andrews, Currim, Leeflang, & Lim, 2008; Wittink, Addona, Hawkes, & Porter, 1988). Other commercially available solutions include PROMOTIONSCAN and BRANDAID (see Lilien, Kotler, & Moorthy, 1992; Lilien & Rangaswamy, 2004). More recent studies have analysed the cross price elasticity for individual items for each store (Wedel & Zhang, 2004). The negative impact of competitive marketing activities can be further divided into the cannibalization effect and the brand switching effect depending on whether the impact originates from the products of the same brand or from different brands (Nijs et al., 2001).Competitive information has been used in forecasting product sales at the brand level. For example, Foekens, Leeflang, and Wittink (1994) examined the impact of the data aggregation level in the geographic dimension (e.g. the single store level, the chain level, and the market level) on the forecasting performance of the SCAN∗PRO model. However, they did not compare the SCAN∗PRO model with other conventional forecasting models because in fact they only wanted to compare relative forecasting performance in order to identify the impact of the data aggregation level on the SCAN∗PRO model. Curry et al. (1995) proposed a Bayesian VAR model to forecast canned soup product sales at the brand level. The model included the sales, price, and advertisement of four competing brands as endogenous variables and feature and display variables as exogenous variables. The Bayesian VAR model outperformed conventional time series models including Box–Jenkins models and the MARMA model in terms of the Theil’s U statistic. Divakar et al. (2005) proposed a regression model to forecast beverage sales for manufacturers at the brand level. The regression model contains the price and promotion of the main competitors (e.g. Coca versus Pepsi), and also includes varying parameters to take into account the heterogeneity across different distribution channels.Table 1summarizes the studies which forecast FMCG product sales at the UPC/SKU level and the brand level respectively. Many of these studies suffer from the problem of limited evaluation exercise, e.g. too few products, inappropriate errors measures, the failure to use a rolling origin, and a fixed lead time design (Tashman, 2000). As a consequence researchers and especially those who use these models for decision making remain unsure about both the appropriate econometric specification and the relative accuracy of alternative and new proposed models. These earlier studies by neglecting the dynamics of the market and competitive effects leave unresolved various methodological questions which we now discuss.Previous studies have used competitive information to forecast product sales at the brand level (e.g. Curry et al., 1995; Divakar et al., 2005; Foekens et al., 1994). They typically incorporate competitive information from the main competitors since there are only a small number of brands in the product category. However, there can be a large number of competing products at the UPC level: a typical product category such as Soft Drinks may contain hundreds of items of different flavours, package sizes, and brands which are all competitors with each other because they satisfy similar customer needs and wants (Kotler, 1997). Accordingly we will have hundreds of competitive explanatory variables. Under such a circumstance, when we incorporate competitive information, we face the problem of too many explanatory variables (Martin & Kolassa, 2009). Time series models can easily get over-fitted and generate poor forecasts and in an extreme case cannot even be estimated because of more explanatory variables than observations. Therefore a mechanism is needed to identify, select, and refine the most relevant competitive explanatory variables (Castle, Doornik, & Hendry, 2008). In this paper we propose a forecasting method which incorporates competitive information in forecasting retailer product sales at the UPC level. Methodologically our research propose an effective forecasting method which solve the problem of too many explanatory variables, an issue of theoretical and practical significance in a world of ‘big data’. More importantly our research offer an operational guidance to the retail forecaster as to how to produce more accurate forecasts as simply as possible.Many studies in the statistical field have been devoted to deal with this problem by seeking for an optimal subset of variables (Miller, 1990). The most popular method is probably stepwise selection. The method starts with a null model and adds explanatory variables, step-by-step. At each step, the variable with the most significant contribution to the fit of the model is considered for addition while those variables in the model are examined to identify the one with the least significant contribution which is then considered for removal. In each case a threshold is established to determine whether or not the action takes place. The process is complete when no additional actions meet the thresholds.The stepwise selection method has been criticized for being likely to retain irrelevant variables and miss relevant variables (Flom & Cassell, 2007; Harrell, 2001). Tibshirani (1996) proposed the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) selection procedure as an alternative. The procedure estimates a regression model including all the potential explanatory variables but with a constraint for the sum of the absolute values of all the parameter coefficients. For example,Y=Xβ+u,subjectto∑j=1N|βj|=η,η⩽η0where Y is the vector for the standadized dependent variable, X is the matrix of the standadized explanatory variables, u is the identically distributed random error, β is the vector of unknown parameters, N is the number of parameters, and η0 is the shrinkage factor which is equal to the sum of all the parameter coefficients.When the constraint is employed, some of the parameter coefficients will tend to be zero, and their corresponding explanatory variables will be removed from the regression model. In the selection procedure, the shrinkage factor is determined by the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).Flom and Cassell (2007) compared the performance of LASSO with stepwise selection using simulation approach. Their results suggest that stepwise selection tends to miss relevant explanatory variable when sample size is small and also retain irrelevant explanatory variables, while LASSO has better performance. However, as stated in Efron, Hastie, Johnstone, and Tibshirani (2004) there is no perfect variable selection method simply because none of them utilize any domain knowledge.Variable selection methods identify the most relevant competitive explanatory variables and the performance of the resulting forecasting model relies exclusively on these variables. Alternatively, we may pool information across all the competitive explanatory variables and condense them into a small set of estimated factors at an acceptable cost of information loss (Stock & Watson, 2002a, 2002b). Many studies in the macroeconomics literature used factor analysis to summarize variations among a large set of variables (e.g. Engle & Watson, 1981; Forni & Reichlin, 1996). In particular, Stock and Watson (2002b) constructed a number of factors (named as “diffusion indexes”) with factor analysis to measure the common movement in a set of macroeconomic variables, and then used them to forecast real economic activities such as price inflation. Their “dynamic factor” model has the following form:Xt=ΛFt+etYt=τF′Ft+τω′Ωt+εtwhere Xtis an N-dimensional multiple time series of explanatory variables, Ftis the matrix with r common factors of latent diffusion indexes, Ytis the value of the dependent variable, Ωtis the vector of the lagged dependent variable, τFand τωare the vectors of the parameter coefficients, and etand ɛtare the errors which are assumed to be iid and uncorrelated with each other.In the model, the original N competitive explanatory variables, Xt, have been condensed into r diffusion indexes at a cost of information loss (i.e. et). Stock and Watson (2002b) found that much of the variation in a large number (>100) of macroeconomic time series (i.e. 39% of the total variation) can be accounted for by only six diffusion indexes. Their proposed models with diffusion indexes outperform the benchmark autoregressive models and VAR models, and they found that the models with the best forecasting performance contained no more than one or two diffusion indexes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
