@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measuring the impacts of production risk on technical efficiency: A state-contingent conditional order-m approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the influence of risk on farms’ technical efficiency levels.An extension of the order-m efficiency scores is used.The state-contingent framework is used to model risk.The empirical application focuses on a sample of Catalan arable crop farms.Accounting for production risks increases the technical performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Linear programming,Data envelopment analysis,Nonparametric order-m efficiency,State-contingent technology,Risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article studies the influence of risk on farms’ technical efficiency levels. The analysis extends the order-m efficiency scores approach proposed by Daraio and Simar (2005) to the state-contingent framework. The empirical application focuses on cross section data of Catalan specialized crop farms from the year 2011. Results suggest that accounting for production risks increases the technical performance. A 10% increase in output risk will result in a 2.5% increase in average firm technical performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A fundamental challenge to modeling production is the design of an appropriate conceptualization of the stochastic environment in which production decisions take place. As noted in the Chavas, Chambers, & Pope, 2010 literature review of the production economics literature over the past century, production uncertainty modeling started with Day (1965) and Fuller (1965) through the use of experimental data on corn yield response to fertilizer application. This literature then evolved to the introduction of stochastic production functions that have allowed for production uncertainty mainly through additive and multiplicative structures. Recognition of the drawbacks of multiplicative and additive specifications, led Just and Pope (1978) to introduce a mean–variance model that characterizes inputs as risk increasing, neutral or decreasing, by evaluating changes in output variability as a response to input changes. Other papers based on the mean–variance or on higher order approaches, the latter allowing to study the impact of input changes on higher order moments, include Yassour, Zilberman, and Rausser (1981), Antle (1983), or Nelson and Preckel (1991).More recently, Kumbhakar (2002) and Wang (2002) have allowed for production uncertainty in efficiency measurement. Inadequate characterization of the stochastic environment may lead to uncertainty being incorrectly attributed to efficiency and productivity differences (Chambers & Quiggin, 2000; O’Donnell et al., 2010). Skevas, Oude Lansink, and Stefanou (2012) investigate the impacts of risk on efficiency using Simar and Wilson (2007) proposal based on truncated regression and bootstrapping techniques. Risk is captured by considering the effect of climatic conditions on farmers’ production environment. Results provide evidence of a dramatic increase in DEA efficiency ratings as a result of considering production uncertainty along with the dynamic impacts of pesticides on production.In a different line of research, Chambers and Quiggin (1998) and Chambers and Quiggin (2000) propose to characterize production under uncertainty by differentiating outputs depending on the state of nature in which they are realized. This characterization leads to a stochastic technology based on a state-contingent input correspondence. The state-contingent framework is based on the Arrow–Debreu–Savage conceptualization of uncertainty in terms of a state space that allows for output substitution across states of nature. Standard stochastic production functions require non-substitutability between state-contingent outputs (Chambers & Quiggin, 2000, 2002, 2006). This restriction implies that producers can only respond to changes in the production environment by changing input use, but not reallocating state-contingent outputs. The state-contingent framework has been shown to yield more precise efficiency measures relative to approaches that impose this restriction (Chambers & Quiggin, 2006; O’Donnell et al., 2010). Serra, Chambers, and Oude Lansink (2014) have recently derived combined technical and environmental efficiency measures for a sample of Catalan farms. Their analysis recognizes the stochastic conditions under which production takes place by means of the state-contingent framework. Chambers, Hailu, and Quiggin (2011) approximate the stochastic technology by a state space partitioned by defining event-specific production relationships. Event-specific representations are applied to a DEA framework by using realized values of the random inputs to partition the data. Under this partition, efficiency estimates increase dramatically, thus confirming that ignoring the stochastic nature of production will lead to biased efficiency estimates.There is ample evidence that economic agents are not neutral to risk (Antle, 1989; Bar-Shira, Just, & Zilberman, 1997; Chavas & Holt, 1990; Hennessy, 1998; Just & Pope, 2002; Saha, 1997; Serra, Zilberman, & Gil, 2008; Serra, Zilberman, Goodwin, & Featherstone, 2006). To the extent that economic decisions are influenced by risk preferences, risk implicit in the state-contingent output distribution should have an impact on the efficiency with which economic agents operate (Battese, Rambaldi, & Wan, 1997). We measure this impact through Daraio and Simar’s (2005) nonparametric frontier model, that allows for the influence of external factors on firm efficiency ratings.In frontier analysis, nonparametric efficiency measures are based upon the assumption that all observed units belong to the attainable production set. As a result, super-efficient outliers can have an influential impact on these envelopment estimators. Robustness can be increased through a trimming process that results in the frontier not enveloping all data points. Daraio and Simar (2005) provide a probabilistic formulation of a robust nonparametric order-m efficiency model, being m the trimming parameter, that allows for the influence of environmental variables that cannot be controlled by the producer, but that shape the outcome of production. Daraio and Simar (2005) proposal allows determining whether the environmental variable promotes or reduces efficiency. However, it does not adequately capture the stochastic conditions under which production takes place. The state-contingent framework proposed by Chambers and Quiggin (2000) can be implemented using standard tools of efficiency analysis when ex-ante outputs are known. As a result, we extend Daraio and Simar’s (2005) framework to examine efficiency and productivity in truly state-contingent terms. The extended model is not only robust to outliers, but also to incorrect interpretations of uncertainty effects as efficiency effects.Our empirical application focuses on cross-section data of arable farms in Catalonia, Spain. We conduct a novel production survey to elicit information from farmers on their ex-ante state-contingent outputs and overall production practices. Eliciting information on ex-ante state-contingent outputs is a highly complex process that can be subject to subjectivity regarding beliefs on the crop yield distribution and that might generate biased responses. Some respondents may provide answers in a rush or exaggerate their responses, hence the importance to use techniques that are robust to the presence of outliers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
