@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lending decisions with limits on capital available: The polygamous marriage problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a set of Markov Decision Process (MDP) models to address lending problems with capital constraints.We show that the problem setting has a flavour of multiple choice secretarial problems.It addresses whom banks lend to when regulators have put caps and floors on the amount to be lent.We prove properties of the optimal policy and give counter examples to some conjectures.We give examples of when this problem arises in other situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic programming,Markov processes,Consumer credit lending,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to stimulate or subdue the economy, banking regulators have sought to impose caps or floors on individual bank's lending to certain types of borrowers. This paper shows that the resultant decision problem for a bank of which potential borrower to accept is a variant of the marriage/secretary problem where one can accept several applicants. The paper solves the decision problem using dynamic programming. We give results on the form of the optimal lending problem and counter examples to further “reasonable” conjectures which do not hold in the general case. By solving numerical examples we show the potential loss of profit and the inconsistency in the lending decision that are caused by introducing floors and caps on lending. The paper also describes some other situations where the same decision occurs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Financial regulators in several countries have sought to rein in or alternatively encourage lending to borrowers by putting caps or floors on the amount a bank can lend over a given time period. Countries such as China, India or Turkey have imposed caps on lending for a number of years. More recently, the UK government also sought to have an annual floor on a bank's lending to small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs). Imposing such regulations on lending will change the decisions on whom to lend to as well as making the lending less profitable for the bank and in consequence leading to inefficient lending. It can also mean there is unfairness in the lending as the accept/reject decision by the bank depends on how much capital is still available before the limit is reached and how long it is until the end of the lending restriction horizon. The objective of this study therefore is to identify the impact of putting caps/floors on inefficiencies and unfairness by solving the lender's accept/reject decision problem optimally.This paper develops a set of Markov Decision Processes (MDP) models which address the lending problem with constraints on the total capital lent. From these, it is possible to investigate the optimal lending policies and how they differ in which borrowers are being accepted and the lender's total profitability compared with the optimal policy when there is no restriction on capital. The models themselves have a flavour of multiple choice secretarial or marriage problems, or the house hunting problem but are quite different in the objective to be optimized and the information available to the decision maker. In this problem the objective is to maximise the total profit to the lender rather than maximising the probability of choosing the k most profitable borrowers. When a potential borrower requested a loan, the lender is told two characteristics – the size of the loan requested and the probability of the borrower not defaulting on the loan. The latter of these is given by a credit score. The form of the optimal policy is to accept a borrower if their probability of non-default is above a certain value which translates into the credit score being above some cut-off score. However, unlike the traditional problem with unlimited capital available, this cut-off level will vary depending on the capital still available and the time until the lending restrictions end. These models show how significant is this unfairness to borrowers and also the drop in the lender's profitability that these capital restrictions cause.In Section 2, we review the literature outlining the restrictions on consumer lending, the basic consumer lending model and the related literature on the secretary problem. In Section 3 we define the lending model with a cap on the amount of capital that can be lent in a given time period. This is a Markov Decision Process model and we describe the optimality equation and the form of the optimal policy. We also suggest two other policies including the optimal policy if there is no cap on the capital. Section 4 describes a discrete state space simplification of the model. This allows us to calculate several numerical examples including some that prove to be counter examples to reasonable conjectures concerning the optimal policy. It also means we can evaluate the difference between the optimal capped and uncapped policies and so address the fairness and profit sub optimality of the former. Section 5 looks at the problem where there is a floor on the capital that must be lent. This has been advocated by several governments particularly for bank lending to SMEs. It turns out that this problem leads to essentially the same Markov Decision Process model as the lending problem with a cap on the capital. We write the original problem with general cost functions though we describe the problem in the text in terms of the lending problem. In Section 6 we describe three other problems which can lead to the model of Section 3. We draw some conclusions in the final section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
