@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling sourcing strategies to mitigate part obsolescence

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Parts obsolescence is important in avionics, military, and in equipment industries.Static sourcing strategies: lifetime buy, part substitution, and line redesign.Propose a contingent sourcing approach.Identify the optimal sourcing strategy analytically and numerically.Numerically find the impact of the key business factors on the solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Manufacturing,Part obsolescence,Life-of-type buy,Part substitution,Line redesign,Diminishing manufacturing sources and material shortage,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Part obsolescence is a common problem across industries, from avionics and military sectors to most original equipment manufacturers serving industrial markets. When a part supplier announces that a part will become obsolete, the OEM can choose from a number of sourcing options. In practice, the three most commonly adopted mitigation strategies are: (1) a lifetime, or life-of-type (LOT), buy from the original supplier; (2) part substitution, which finds a suitable alternative; and (3) line redesign, which modifies the production line to accommodate a new part. We first develop a framework incorporating fixed cost, variable cost, leadtime, demand uncertainty and the discount rate to directly compare and characterize these three sourcing strategies in a static context. We next formulate an integrated sourcing approach that starts with a bridge buy and may continue with part substitution or line redesign when the originals parts are depleted. Through numerical studies, we identify the joint impact of the problem parameters on the static and integrated sourcing strategies and the optimal choice among them. While the integrated sourcing approach outperforms the static ones in many cases it is not a dominant strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Manufacturers in the avionics and military industries have long had to deal with the challenge of effectively managing part obsolescence. In these industries, product lifecycles are measured in decades so effectively managing the parts supply base is a necessary condition for survival. Furthermore, this issue is significant enough that the US military defines this problem area by the acronym DMSMS: diminishing manufacturing sources and material shortages. Over the past decade, the problem of part obsolescence has become a significant issue for original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) in industrial sectors like communications, construction equipment, medical devices, and transportation (Souza, 2003, Shotter, 2012). The increasing importance of part obsolescence in the industrial sector can be directly attributed to the sector’s increasing reliance on parts developed for the consumer-products market. In the consumer-products market, parts evolve rapidly and require frequent upgrading. As a consequence, the long life of the industrial products and the shorter life of its parts create a lifecycle-mismatch problem.Saal and Dube (2001) report that the average part lifecycle has decreased from 7 to 10years in the early 1990s to 2 to 5years in 2001. In some industries like wireless chips the lifecycles of parts can be less than one year. There are thousands of components that reach their end of life (EOL) every month as suppliers prune their offerings (Tyler, 2004), and distributors like Avnet report that they are being asked by customers more than 20 times a week to solve EOL situations (Sullivan & Lamb, 2002). An industry has sprung up that only manufactures parts that have been declared obsolete by the original part manufacturer; one such example is Rochester Electronics (2009). Part obsolescence has been becoming an increasingly acute problem for many equipment companies (Shotter, 2012) because of significant losses associated with these events.When a part supplier makes a part obsolescence announcement, the supplier notifies the OEM about the impending obsolescence event in advance, typically six months ahead of the end of production. Livingston (2000) documents the set of mitigation strategies OEMs have once they are notified of such an event: (1) a lifetime buy, also referred to as a life-of-type (LOT) buy, in which the OEM places its final order from the original supplier to satisfy future demand assuming it will take no other actions; (2) a bridge buy, which is a last-time buy from the original supplier that is then followed by another mitigation tactic; (3) a part substitution, by finding a part with equivalent form, fit, and functions to the obsolete part; (4) an alternate supplier, by finding a vendor supplying the same part; (5) an aftermarket solution, in which a distributor or a manufacturer takes over the production line or inventory from the original supplier; (6) a line redesign/design refresh, in which the OEM needs to design out the original part and replace it with a new part; (7) an emulation, which uses a new-technology component to emulate the original component’s functionality; (8) uprating, which uprates the parts to adapt to a broader environment; and (9) a reclaim from salvaged parts, which is usually the last choice for the OEMs. While there are engineering differences among the aforementioned solutions, operationally some share similarities with others. For example, LOT buy and bridge buy only differ if there is a subsequent action. Emulation and uprating are similar to line redesign or design refresh, which all require substantial engineering efforts. Alternative and aftermarket solutions are similar to part substitution, which all require identifying new suppliers.Stogdill (1999) and Livingston (2000) report that in practice the aforementioned solutions occur with the following frequencies: (1) part substitution (67%); (2) LOT buy (20%); (3) line redesign with a bridge buy (12%); and (4) emulation (1%). The remaining strategies are adopted less frequently. In the case of LOT buy, a relationship already exists with the supplier so only an ordering process is needed. For part substitution, the OEM must engage in a search process to identify a supplier. While the Internet has significantly reduced this effort (Saal & Dube, 2001), the OEM still must test the form, fit, and functions of the part for the product; this incurs cost and takes time. Line redesign is an even more complicated process. It requires evaluating the part to be designed out, finding a new part to be inserted into the new assembly line, and finally testing the line and product. These steps require significant capital, engineering resources, and calendar time. To focus on the salient operational differences, but not the technological and engineering aspects, we evaluate LOT buy, part substitution and line redesign because they represent the three most frequently adopted part-obsolescence mitigation strategies.These three mitigation strategies can be considered in a static or integrated context. In the static context, a single mitigation strategy must be chosen after the obsolescence announcement and executed without modification. We construct a unified framework to choose the optimal strategy in this static setting. We next develop an integrated sourcing approach which starts with a bridge buy followed by a recourse action of part substitution, line redesign, or no action. Such an integrated strategy will be shown to be a better solution under certain, but not all, conditions. While existing literature studies the LOT buy problem, other part-obsolescence solutions have not been analytically modeled, nor have these approaches been compared in a unified framework. Focusing on sourcing a product subject to part obsolescence, we position our work at the intersection of supply management and product lifecycle management.Following the introduction, we review the relevant literature in Section 2. In Section 3, we model the three static sourcing strategies, and then present some structural results for the derived models. In Section 4, we propose an integrated sourcing approach that combines the three static sourcing options with a recourse option. In Section 5, we numerically study the optimal sourcing strategies. Section 6 concludes the paper and presents some future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
