@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
CRM in social media: Predicting increases in Facebook usage frequency

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assess the feasibility of predicting increases in Facebook usage frequency.We evaluate six classification algorithms and assess the importance of many predictors.Stochastic Boosting performs the best with an AUC of 0.66 and accuracy of 0.74.The top predictor is the deviation from regular usage patterns.Facebook can use our approach to customize its service (advertisements, recommendations).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Social media,Data mining,Predictive analytics,Facebook,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this study is to (1) assess the feasibility of predicting increases in Facebook usage frequency, (2) evaluate which algorithms perform best, (3) and determine which predictors are most important. We benchmark the performance of Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Stochastic Adaptive Boosting, Kernel Factory, Neural Networks and Support Vector Machines using five times twofold cross-validation. The results indicate that it is feasible to create models with high predictive performance. The top performing algorithm was Stochastic Adaptive Boosting with a cross-validated AUC of 0.66 and accuracy of 0.74. The most important predictors include deviation from regular usage patterns, frequencies of likes of specific categories and group memberships, average photo album privacy settings, and recency of comments. Facebook and other social networks alike could use predictions of increases in usage frequency to customize its services such as pacing the rate of advertisements and friend recommendations, or adapting News Feed content altogether. The main contribution of this study is that it is the first to assess the prediction of increases in usage frequency in a social network.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With 1.23 billion active monthly users the social network site Facebook has grown one of the world’s largest user bases (Facebook, 2014). Of those monthly users 62 percent uses the site on a daily basis (757 million) (Facebook, 2014). While Facebook’s service is free, its business model is based on advertising. The more time users spend on the platform, the more page impressions Facebook can sell to advertisers. Revenues are directly determined by the number of active users and the time that they spend on the network. Hence, increasing user activity and as such generating ad impressions and clicks is one of Facebook’s primary objectives (Claussen, Kretschmer, and Mayrhofer, 2013).One way of achieving this objective is predicting increases in usage frequency. More specifically, the binary problem of usage increase22Usage frequency increase prediction is equivalent to the more widely known up-sell prediction. Because Facebook is a free service, the term usage increase is more appropriate than the term up-sell.prediction consists in predicting whether a user is going to increase usage of the product or service. If a user is predicted not to increase usage, appropriate actions can be taken. One possible action is to propose friendships with unknown users, in addition to the usual practice of proposing friendships with people the user is likely to know in real life (e.g., friends of friends). These new friendships will drive new content to the user’s personalized on-line newspaper called News Feed, and could provide a stimulation for increased usage.Together with acquisition, cross-sell and retention modeling, usage increase modeling (up-sell) shapes the field of predictive modeling in analytical Customer Relationship Management (aCRM) (Ngai, Xiu, and Chau, 2009). To the best of our knowledge no aCRM study has been attempted in the social media industry. This leaves several questions unanswered such as (1) is predicting usage increases even feasible (i.e., is predictive performance high enough), (2) which algorithms perform best on these data and, (3) which predictors are most important? This study aims to fill this gap in literature by conducting an empirical study using Facebook data.The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In the second section of this manuscript, we highlight our contribution by providing a literature review of aCRM studies per industry. Third, the data, time window, variables, algorithms, assessment criteria, and cross-validation will be detailed in the methodology section. Fourth, we discuss the results. The fifth section concludes this paper. The penultimate section discusses the managerial implications. In the seventh and final section we discuss the limitations and directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study we set out to (1) study the feasibility of usage increase prediction in social media, (2) evaluate which algorithms perform best, (3) and determine the top predictors.The results clearly indicate that usage increase prediction is a viable strategy with AUCs up to 0.66 and accuracies up to 0.74. Based on AUC, AdaBoost is the best choice to model usage increase, followed by (in this order) Random Forest, Logistic Regression, Kernel Factory, Support Vector Machines and Neural Networks. A similar pattern can be observed when accuracy is used as a performance measure. AdaBoost is the top performer, with Random Forest and Support Vector Machines sharing a second place, Logistic Regression and Kernel Factory sharing the third place, and Neural Networks on the fourth place. Overall it is clear that AdaBoost is the best choice, closely followed by Random Forest.The top predictor is the time ratio. This variable is operationalized to capture the user’s deviation from his or her regular usage patterns and has been shown to be negatively related to the probability to increase usage. This seems a plausible finding and is consistent with Buckinx and Van den Poel (2005) in that customers (or users) with higher time ratios (i.e., deviations from established behavioral patterns) are less loyal. This can in turn be translated to a lower probability to increase usage. Other important predictors are frequencies of specific liking behaviors, privacy settings of albums, frequencies of photo uploads and deviations in album creations. Groups memberships, recency since receiving comments, and a users’ age are also very important. A list of the top fifty predictors is provided in Appendix A and serves as a first direction for Facebook Inc. as to which predictors to include in their models. These findings are important for Facebook Inc. and other social media companies for that matter. The following section will discuss the managerial implications.Facebook’s business plan is based on advertising. Therefore, one of Facebook’s primary goals is to increase the time users spend on the platform, increase user activity, and generate ad impressions (Claussen et al., 2013). The social network draws users to its platform by delivering social content to users’ customized on-line newspapers, called News Feeds. This process is governed by an algorithm with the absolute goal to deliver the right content to the right user at the right time (Facebook, 2013a). Every time someone visits Facebook the News Feed algorithm tries to filter out the posts that are important out of an average of 1500 potential stories from connections and pages (Facebook, 2013a).The goal with the advertisements that are shown is identical: the right advertisement has to be delivered to the right user at the right time (Facebook, 2013b). Every time a user visits Facebook, the same algorithm chooses between thousands of advertisements to show the most relevant ones (Facebook, 2013b). However, sometimes users might not want to see any advertisements at all. Showing advertisements at that point might alienate users, decrease usage frequency, and decrease time spent on the platform for long periods of time. Once defective behavior has been observed, Facebook could react and turn off advertisements for that particular user. However it may take a while before the user returns to the platform and it even might be too late to recapture the user. Instead of a reactive strategy, we propose a proactive strategy.More concretely we propose to improve the News Feed algorithm by introducing a predictive component. This will allow Facebook to proactively change tactics and increase revenues. An illustration may clarify our point. Users are attracted if more, new or better social content is delivered to their News Feeds and in contrast they are alienated if more advertisements are delivered. Facebook could employ usage increase prediction as part of the decision process regarding the balance of social content and advertisements. If a user is predicted to increase usage he or she is satisfied with the service (or at least uses the service more than other users) and hence more advertisements can be shown. Friend and page recommendations could be saved for later. In contrast, if a user is predicted not to increase usage, advertisements can be turned off, and new friends and content can be recommended in an attempt to attract and engage the user. Once engaged, advertisements can be turned on again. By proactively adapting its tactics, Facebook can avoid alienating potential unhappy users even further and prevent future defection. At the same time it can count on its satisfied users to create ad impressions and fuel revenue.The predictive models that we have developed in this paper are viable and could be deployed on a large scale for such a proactive strategy. The News Feed algorithm could be adapted by introducing a switch that (1) turns on advertisements and saves friend and page recommendations for later if the user is predicted to increase usage and (2) turns off advertisements and activates friend and page recommendations if the user is predicted not to increase usage.The first limitation is that we do not have access to full network data (i.e., data about all the connections of the recruited sample). Therefore network effects cannot be included in the analysis. There is a large body of research on social networks (Hellmann and Staudigl, 2014) reporting the influence of network effects on a wide range of behaviors (e.g., Bakshy, Eckles, Yan, and Rosenn, 2012). These effects are in part driven by homophily, also called endogenous group formation (Hartmann et al., 2008), and (social) influence (Aral, Muchnik, and Sundararajan, 2009). Failure to include network effects in the analysis could bias variable importance. Unfortunately, data of a user’s friends are very hard to obtain and we currently do not have these data. However, as Benoit and Van den Poel (2012) note, network- based predictors (e.g., Gómez, Figueira, and Eusébio, 2013) may only improve predictions and hence our conclusions about the feasibility of usage increase prediction in social media are substantiated. Future research could try to obtain such data and improve on this study.The second limitation is selection effects. It might well be possible that the users that are unwilling to share their data (i.e., use our application) may be different from the users in our recruited sample. Web crawling, another method of obtaining Facebook data, also suffers from the limitation that private profiles cannot be crawled (Lewis et al., 2008). Although our approach (using an application with an authorization box) does extract data from users with a private profile, it suffers from the limitation that some of the privacy sensitive users will not be willing to share their data with an application. It can be argued that both groups, users with private profiles and users that do not want to give their data to applications, largely coincide. Although we recognize that this may impact the generalizability of our results we firmly believe that our approach is able to extract data from profiles that cannot be extracted using web crawling and consequently suffers less from generalizability issues than web crawling because of the following reasons. First, setting a profile to private is in part a mechanism for forcing candidate viewers of a user’s profile to identify themselves and state their purpose. Candidate viewers that are not deemed trustworthy are not allowed to see a user’s profile and become a connection. Hence, we identified ourselves by providing our contact information, and the university’s, for questions regarding privacy and stated the purpose of our research. We also informed the user that we encode usernames and that we do not extract personal messages. It can be argued that users may be more inclined to share their data to one application for academic research purposes than to the general, unidentified public. Second, given the massive adoption of Facebook applications that all ask the permission to access a user’s profile data, we believe that privacy is of lesser concern in sharing data to applications than it is in sharing data with the general public. Third, we offered an incentive in the form of a prize to share their data. In addition to these arguments, it is important to note that while previous research used a web-crawling approach to extract data from university students (e.g. Lampe, Ellison, and Steinfield, 2007; Lewis et al., 2008), with permission of the university in question and Facebook, it is important to note that our approach is more privacy aware, because we ask permission directly from the user. Moreover, Facebook is a standardized research instrument (Lewis et al., 2008) and results from subsequent data analysis are formally replicable in a way most case study data are not (Lewis et al., 2008).The third limitation of this study is that some of the variables are limited in the number of values. Facebook limits the number of entries per variable that an application can extract to the 25 most recent entries. This limitation has mostly an impact on the frequency variables. To cope with this, we computed the frequency within a specific period of time. We determined the length of this time window per variable as to no user in our database reaches the maximum number of 25 entries. The frequency of status updates, photo uploads and link uploads was computed for the last 7 days, album uploads and check- ins for the last 4 months, and video uploads and notes for the last year. An interesting avenue for future work would be to find ways to alleviate this problem. A possible strategy might be to motivate people to revisit the application at different times and to stack the 25 last entries.The fourth limitation is that private communication data are not included in the analysis. Some work has been done to analyze social relationships in Facebook. Arnaboldi, Guazzini, and Passarella (2013) study 28 Facebook users and all their relationships and determine the drivers of tie strength. Future research could integrate these insights. Fluctuations in tie strength with specific users may be a valuable predictor in usage increase models. Unfortunately our data do not allow us to incorporate individual communication-based variables. We also expect that these data are very difficult to obtain for a large sample in that users have to authorize data collection (the 28 users in Arnaboldi et al. (2013) are members of the authors’ research department).The fifth limitation is that there might be some bias by not taking seasonality into account (e.g., if part of the users are celebrating Christmas and New year and part are not). It is however, very difficult to automatically detect which user is celebrating New Year and which user is not. This bias does not inflate our results: taking seasonality into account would only increase the predictive performance of our models meaning that we have a conservative result. Our finding that it is feasible to predict usage increase is hence valid but including seasonality would be an interesting avenue for future research.The sixth limitation is that we do not model website visits or login events. As such we disregard passive users who visit the social network leaving valuable opportunities for advertising untapped. Unfortunately Facebook does not allow to extract visits or login events. If Facebook decides to share these data, an interesting avenue for future research would be to model passive usage and compare it with active usage. We do want to note that the advantage of active usage is that each activity on Facebook instills a user’s friends to also visit the website. Therefore it might have a greater impact to target active usage increase.As a final remark we want to say that although this study has these data-related shortcomings, it is the first aCRM study using such a variety of data. Other published studies in top journals using Facebook data (for other purposes than this study) have similar limitations (e.g., Aral and Walker, 2011). Large investments have been made to create the extractor app and to the best of our knowledge this study is the first to provide insight into the feasibility of predicting usage increases. In sum, we feel that this is a valuable contribution to literature.