@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Elicitation of criteria importance weights through the Simos method: A robustness concern

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Weighting solutions of the Simos method are vectors of a non-empty convex polyhedron.The results of Simos jeopardize the stability and acceptance of a decision model’s results.Robustness rules and activities on multiple acceptable sets of weights are proposed.Two indicative numerical examples illustrate the paper's evidence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple criteria,Decision analysis,Criteria weights,Robustness analysis,Simos method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the field of multicriteria decision aid, the Simos method is considered as an effective tool to assess the criteria importance weights. Nevertheless, the method's input data do not lead to a single weighting vector, but infinite ones, which often exhibit great diversification and threaten the stability and acceptability of the results. This paper proves that the feasible weighting solutions, of both the original and the revised Simos procedures, are vectors of a non-empty convex polyhedral set, hence the reason it proposes a set of complementary robustness analysis rules and measures, integrated in a Robust Simos Method. This framework supports analysts and decision makers in gaining insight into the degree of variation of the multiple acceptable sets of weights, and their impact on the stability of the final results. In addition, the proposed measures determine if, and what actions should be implemented, prior to reaching an acceptable set of criteria weights and forming a final decision. Two numerical examples are provided, to illustrate the paper's evidence, and demonstrate the significance of consistently analyzing the robustness of the Simos method results, in both the original and the revised method's versions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A significant factor pertaining to the non-compensatory multicriteria decision aiding models (MCDA), such as the outranking methods (i.e. ELECTRE and PROMETHEE), is the criteria weighting, or the importance of the criteria. Generally, these parameters imprint the preferences of a single decision maker (DM) to the model. The existing methods, which are widely used to assess the criteria importance weights, could be classified into two categories: (i) direct assessment procedures, where the DM is asked to explicitly express the criteria weights in terms of percentages, and (ii) indirect methods, inferring the weights from pairwise comparisons of the criteria or reference alternatives. Most of these procedures use mathematical programming formulations (see the reference by Pekelman & Sen, 1974 or the MCDA survey by Figueira, Greco, & Ehrgott, 2005).The second category of methods includes among others:•the method of cards proposed by Simos (1990a, 1990b) that will be described in the following section;the method of centralized weights (Solymosi & Dombi, 1986), which requests from the DM a number of ordinal comparisons of criteria that are formulated as linear inequalities, in order to obtain the centroid of the vertices of a polyhedron;the TACTIC method (Vansnick, 1986) in which the relative importance of the criteria is depicted and assessed as a system of functional representations of relations;DIVAPIME (Mousseau, 1995), which has been adapted to the ELECTRE methods and is implemented by making pairwise comparisons of fictitious alternatives, in order to support the elicitation of importance variation intervals;the analytic hierarchy process (AHP), proposed by Saaty (1994), where the DM is asked to provide pairwise comparisons over the priority of criteria on a prespecified numerical scale; andMACBETH (Bana e Costa, De Corte, & Vansnick, 2012) which infers the weights as values of attractiveness from pairwise comparisons of the criteria on a qualitative scale, measuring thus the magnitude of attractiveness.Recently, Bisdorff, Meyer, and Veneziano (2014) proposed a mixed integer linear programming model to infer the criteria importance weights from overall outranking statements, by maximizing the stability of the induced median-cut outranking digraph. The outranking statements are acknowledged by the DM during an MCDA procedure.The method proposed by Jean Simos in 1990 has gained popularity and has been applied to different types of problems, due to its simplicity, and the convenience it provides to a DM to express her/his preferences. Specifically, it requires the construction of a hierarchy on the evaluation criteria, by involving the DM to a “playing cards” procedure, in order to attribute numerical values to them. Nevertheless, the process recommended by Simos and its revised version proposed by Figueira and Roy (2002) have some robustness issues. In particular, they arbitrarily calculate a unique weighting vector, even though there exist infinitely more weight vectors, also satisfying the preferential statements, which have been defined by the DM during the initial arrangement of the cards.According to Figueira et al. (2005), a robustness concern consists of all possible ways that contribute in building synthetic recommendations based on robust conclusions. In the case of Simos method, a well-structured framework will be developed and used, in order to further facilitate the study of robustness concerns in outranking methods. Furthermore, the framework will address several other issues, affecting the quality of the outcome, in terms of robustness, such as the level of ratio z, introduced in the revised version of Simos (Shanian, Milani, Carson, & Abeyarante, 2008). In addition, the framework has to be appropriately adapted to support the implementation of the ELECTRE and PROMETHEE methods when interaction between criteria is taken into account (Figueira, Greco, & Słowiński, 2009) and when a multiple criteria hierarchy process is applied.The aim of this paper is to expose the arbitrariness of the estimations made through the Simos method (robustness problem) and to propose amendment measures, in order to support DMs in identifying the preferable importance weights themselves. From this point of view, the methodological recommendations propounded in this paper should be considered as complementary and indispensable, when choosing to practice the method. All these rules and measures form a methodological framework, which, if adapted to the original or revised method of cards, can now be referred to as the Robust Simos Method.A brief presentation of the Simos method in its original and revised versions, accompanied by an extended literature review of its implementation, is provided in Section 2. The robustness issues associated with the method are outlined in Section 3, while Section 4 proposes some robustness rules and measures. These formulate the Robust Simos Method, which supports the elicitation of a representative and “acceptable” set of weights. In Section 5, two numerical examples illustrate the paper's evidence and propositions. These experiments come to prove the massive impact of the instability of the weights on the robustness of the final results. The conclusions of this paper are in Section 6.This section describes the original Simos method, as well as its revision by Figueira and Roy (2002). Section 2.2 presents the state-of-the-art, of the use of the method, in the scientific literature.The original Simos method consists of the following three steps, concerning the interaction with the DM and the collection of information:1.The DM is given a set of cards with the name of one criterion on each (n cards, each corresponding to a specific criterion of a family F). A number of white cards are also provided to the DΜ.The DM is asked to rank the cards/criteria from the least to the most important, by arranging them in an ascending order. If multiple criteria have the same importance, she/he should build a subset by holding the corresponding cards together with a clip.The DM is finally asked to introduce white cards between two successive cards (or subsets of ex aequo criteria) if she/he deems that the difference between them is more extensive. The greater the difference between the weights of the criteria (or the subsets of criteria), the greater the number of white cards that should be placed between them. Specifically, if u denotes the difference in the value between two successive criteria cards, then one white card means a difference of two times u, two white cards mean a difference of three times u, etc.The information provided by the DM is utilized by the Simos method for the determination of the weights, according to the following algorithm:i.ranking of the subsets of ex aequo from the least important to the most important, considering also the white cards,assignment of a position to each criterion/card and to each white card,calculation of the non-normalized weights, anddetermination of the normalized weights.The least qualified card is given Position 1, while the most qualified one receives Position n. The non-normalized weight of each rank/subset is determined by dividing the sum of positions of a rank, by the total number of criteria belonging to it. The non-normalized weights are then divided by the total sum of positions of the criteria in each rank (excluding the white cards), in order to normalize them. The obtained values are rounded off to the lower or higher nearest integer value.Following the criticism of Scharlig (1996) that the method processes the information unrealistically, Figueira and Roy (2002) expressed objections to the way the Simos procedure determines the weights. One of the main issues indicated is that it elicits only one set of weights that satisfies the model expressed by the DM. However, other sets of weights could probably better fit the DM's preferences on the relative importance of the criteria. Such sets of weights cannot be obtained by the Simos’ procedure. A second point of criticism is that the procedure processes criteria with the same importance (i.e. the same weight), in a non-robust way. If one tries to re-order the cards between two subsets, she/he realizes that the distance (difference of weights) between the subsequent subsets has changed in an uncontrolled way. This phenomenon occurs because the difference of weights between two successive subsets of criteria is automatically influenced by the number of existing cards in these subsets. The user however “does not have a real or absolute perception of the way in which the numerical values are determined by the procedure”. Finally, Figueira and Roy do not agree with the rounding of the normalized weights to 100, because they perceive this as a non-realistic process.In their effort to address these issues, Figueira and Roy (2002) proposed a revised version of the Simos method. In addition to the three-step data collection process, the new procedure introduces a fourth step, which demands from the DM to state “how many times the last criterion is more important than the first one in the ranking” (ratio z). This ratio is used in order to define a fixed interval between the weights of criteria or their sub-sets. The variable u denotes this interval: u = (z − 1)/e, where e is the number of different weight classes (namely single card, subsets of cards, and white card).The Simos method, although exhibiting considerably easy, almost naïve, data collection and implementation, has been extensively used in the scientific literature. Several authors have made use of the method, mostly combined with ELECTRE type methods, in order to assess the importance of the criteria weights. A review of the literature unveiled a very wide area of application, from energy planning and environmental evaluation problems, to project selection and mechanical engineering problems. Forty such applications are depicted in Table 1. It has also been noticed that many business and market surveys make use of the Simos method, in order to assign weights to the evaluation criteria, but they are rarely published.It is recognized that Figueira and Roy triggered a wide application of the Simos methodology, since most of the aforementioned studies make use of their revised version. However, none of them investigates the robustness of the method, or examines the stability of the weights obtained by Simos, except partially for Shanian et al. (2008), who examine the impact of the parameter “z”, on the final results. The majority of papers use Simos for simplicity and convenience reasons, without examining or analyzing its risks, a fact which jeopardizes the quality and questions the validity of their results.In the frame of the theoretical aspect of this study, two formal properties, related to the results of the Simos criteria weighting method(s), are considered:Property 1The weighting solution of the Simos method(s) is a vector of a non-empty convex polyhedral set.Without loss of generality, suppose the family of n criteria g1, g2, …, gnis rearranged in such a way that gjis less or equally important than gj+1for every j = 1, 2, …, n − 1, according to steps 1 and 2 of the Simos procedure. Suppose additionally that the DM has introduced into the ranking k white cards wc1, wc2, …, wck(k < n) during step 3. Let us denote p1, p2, …, pnthe unknown weights of criteria, and w1, w2, …, wkthe unknown weights of the white cards. Then, the following system of linear relations results:For every j = 1, 2, …, n – 1, and h = 1, 2, …, k:-If gjis followed by gj+1, and gj+1 belongs to the same importance class as gj, write:(1)pj=pj+1If gjis followed by gj+1, and gj+1 belongs to a higher importance class, write:(2)pj<pj+1⇔pj+1--pj≥δIf between gjand gj+1a white card wchhas been inserted, write:(3)pj<whandwh<pj+1⇔wh−pj≥δandpj+1−wh≥δ(4)p1+p2+…+pn=1(5)p1≥0,p2≥0,…,pn≥0;w1≥0,w2≥0,…,wk≥0In the case of the revised Simos method, the following equation should be added, where the z value is actually articulated by the DM:(6)pn=zp1δ is set equal to a minimal value, say 0.01 (1 percent) for instance, to distinguish between two consecutive classes of the ranking. Then all the Simos weighting solutions belong to the polyhedral set:(7)P={p∈Rn/psatisfiesthesystemofrelations(1)--(6)}It is still pending to prove thatPis non-empty. Suppose, without loss of generality, that no criteria are of equal importance according to the DM's answers. This implies that there are no equations of type (1). Obviously, when transforming the inequalities (2)–(3) into equations, by adding (n + k − 1) slack variables, the linear system (2)–(6) comprises (n + k) + (n + k − 1) = 2(n + k) – 1 variables and only (n + k − 1) + 1 + 1 = (n + k) + 1 equations. Consequently,Pis non-empty because it always has a solution.Property 2The polyhedral setPeither contains a single criteria weighting or an infinite number of weighting vectors that are all consistent with the DM's criteria ranking.Following the findings of Property 1, it suffices to identify cases where only one weighting solution exists. Obviously, two such cases could be stated:All criteria are equally important (the DM's ranking consists of a single class of importance). It is thus obvious thatP={(1n,1n,…,1n)}.The DM classifies the first n1 criteria in one weak class and the rest of n2 criteria in a second strong class (n1 + n2 = n); no white card is inserted between the two classes. Let us denote p and q as the common weights of the criteria in the two classes, respectively. According to the relations (1), (4), and (6), the following two relations hold:n1p+n2q=1q=zp,wherep=1(n1+n2z)It follows thatPcomprises again a single weighting solution in which the first n1 components are equal to p and the remaining n2are equal to q.It has previously been shown that the information extracted by the DM, as part of the original, as well as the revised Simos method, is not sufficient to ensure a single or robust criteria weighting. On the contrary, there exists an infinite number of weighting vectors that are consistent to the DM's ranking, which form a hyper-polyhedronP. In other words, although these weighting vectors are compatible with the DM's ranking of the set of criteria, she/he is totally unaware of their existence and unjustifiable exclusion during the implementation of the method. Apart from this, it is possible that this plethora of different sets of weights causes major variation in the final results, when used in outranking or other MCDA approaches, e.g. rank reversals, when implementing the ELECTRE II–III methods.Consequently, the set of robustness rules, which are developed in Section 4.1, should be accounted for and applied by decision analysts, when selecting to implement the Simos procedure for the assessment of the criteria weights.The pursuit of one or more of the following robustness rules is essential, if the analyst wishes to solidly implement the Simos method and obtain tangible and adequately supported results.1.Compute the variation range of the weight of each separate criterion, by solving 2n linear programs of the following type (Max–Min approach):(8)Minpj&Maxpj,forj=1,2,…,ns.t.(9)p∈P2.Compute the average weighting vector (barycenter) of all different vectors (from the 2n solutions obtained in the former rule), as a more representative weighting solution in the hyper-polyhedronP(M-N Average); see also Greco, Kadziński, Mousseau, and Słowiński (2011) about the specification of representative parameter sets.Find and record all the vertices of the polyhedronP, by using the Manas and Nedoma (1968) analytical algorithm. This algorithm traverses the vertices of the Hamiltonian graph, listing them simultaneously, until all are identified. Then, calculate a new average weighting vector, which represents the barycenter ofP(see also the related technique proposed by Solymosi & Dombi, 1986).Implement a random weight sampling algorithm/technique to produce and statistically analyze a great number of weighting sets from the polyhedron. A relevant technique is the stochastic multiobjective acceptability analysis (SMAA) and has been devised by Lahdelma, Hokkanen, and Salminen (1998). A significant number of sampling algorithms have already been proposed (see Lovasz, 1999; Smith, 1984; Smith & Tromble, 2004; Tervonen, Valkenhoef, Baştürk, & Postmus, 2012). The analyst is then capable of computing an average weighting solution, which could be considered as a representative solution withinP.Visualize the ranges of variation of the criteria weights and/or the polyhedron they define, in order to more comprehensively perceive the extent of the instability.Following the implementation of recommendation 4, calculate the ratio of the volume of the criteria polyhedron and the unconstrained criteria area. When implementing a random sampling algorithm, such as the “Simplex Point Picking”, this ratio is interpreted as the number of samples that hit the criteria polyhedron to the number of all samples.For each of the recommendations from 2 to 4, compute the robustness measure ASI (Average Stability Index), which is the mean value of the normalized standard deviation of the estimated weights:(10)ASI=1−1n∑i=1nm∑j=1mpij2−(∑j=1mpij)2mnn−1Suppose nowthat a decision analyst is willing to use a multicriteria outranking or other decision aiding model, in order to choose an action, rank or sort a set of actions A, taking into account that the criteria weightings are confined in the hyper-polyhedronP. In this case, the following activities are recommended:•Build on A two distinct outranking relations, the necessary outranking (aSNb ⇔ aSb, i.e. action a outranks action b, for every weighting vectorp∈P), and the possible outranking (aSPb ⇔ there is at least one weighting vectorp∈Pfor which aSb; (see Figueira et al., 2009; Greco, Mousseau and Słowiński, 2008 for definitions and properties of these outranking relations).Define the maximum and minimum possible ranking positions for every action in A, by means of mixed integer linear programming techniques (see Kadzinski, Greco, & Slowinski, 2012).In the cases of ELECTRE I and ELECTRE IS choice methods, statistically compute the possibility/probability that an action a belongs to the kernel of the outranking graph.Following the implementation of random sampling withinP, compute entropy measures associated with outranking relations between actions in A and ranking positions for each action separately (see Greco, Siskos, & Slowinski, 2013). Entropy is a statistical index indicating either the probability that an alternative a outranks an alternative b, or the probability that alternative a maintains its initial position in the ranking.All the above ideas and set of actions should be integrated into a methodological framework that is called Robust Simos Method. The new algorithmic procedure comprises an initialization phase, which consists of transforming the DM's hierarchy of criteria into a convex n-dimension polyhedronP, which is defined by all the linear constraints (1)–(6) cited in Section 3. This is followed by a holistic procedure, consisting of two robustness control stages.The purpose of the first stage is the examination and analysis of the stability of the criteria weights, making use of the robustness rules proposed in Section 4.1. In the second stage of the Robust Simos Method, the focal point is the implementation of the MCDA method and the decision support procedure that follows. Specifically, the stability of the decision model's results is assessed, in close cooperation between the analyst and the DM, practicing certain robust decision aiding measures (cf.Section 4.2). In case the results of the dual robustness control procedure are judged as unacceptable and/or inadequate to support a decision, the analyst may request additional preference information by the DM in order to further shrink the polyhedronP.Section 5 builds upon the theoretical robustness concerns and recommendations, presented in the previous sections, and experiments on their efficacy. Several robustness measurements and recommendations are examined and implemented, in order to test their efficiency. Two numerical examples are presented: (i) the classic environmental planning problem originally proposed by Simos (1990a) and Maystre, Pictet, and Simos (1994), concerning the evaluation of environmental solutions, and (ii) a metro lines extension planning problem.Let us consider a family F of twelve criteria, used by Maystre et al. (1994) and later by Figueira and Roy (2002), to implement the Simos methods: F = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l}. Let us also suppose that the DM groups together the cards, associated with the criteria of the same importance, into six different subsets of ex aequo, and that she/he also uses a white card, as follows:Ranking of the subset of ex aequo criteria: {c, g, l}, {d}, {white card}, {b, f, i, j}, {e}, {a, h}, {k}For the use of revised Simos, based on the preferential information in formula (6), the value of z is set to 6.5, which means: pk = 6.5pc.The preferential information concerning the grouping of the criteria cards, the insertion of the white card and the setting of the z value to 6.5, has been predefined by Jean Simos and the authors of the revised Simos method. It is thus deliberately preserved for the case of the numerical example presented here.For the complete set of requirements of the Simos method, the polyhedronPis defined by the following linear constraints (relations 1−6; δ = 0.01):Polyhedron P:pg−pc=0;pl−pg=0;pd−pl≥0.01;w−pd≥0.01;pb−w≥0.01;pf−pb=0;pi−pf=0;pj−pi=0;pe−pj≥0.01;pa−pe≥0.01;ph−pa=0;pk−ph≥0.01;pk=6.5pc;pa≥0;pb≥0;pc≥0;pd≥0;pe≥0;pf≥0;pg≥0;ph≥0;pi≥0;pj≥0;pk≥0;pl≥0;w≥0.In a first step, Robustness rules 1 and 5 are practiced, which are related to the calculation and visualization of the variation ranges of the criteria weights. After solving the 2 x n = 24 linear programs (8)–(9), having set δ = 0.01, the range (max-min) of the weights is obtained. Fig. 1compares these weight ranges with the values obtained by the Simos and the revised Simos procedures.The ranges between the minimum and the maximum value of each weight are remarkably significant, and in the specific case, when the constraint z = 6.5 is missing (Fig. 1a), they are totally uncontrollable. For instance, the range for the weight of the k-th criterion, pk, in that case is [11.58 – 73.00].Table 2 (two first rows) shows the normalized weighting vectors as calculated by the procedure of the Simos and the revised Simos methodology. It also depicts the barycenters, as proposed by Robustness rule 3, of the sets of solutions calculated with the Manas-Nedoma (Robustness rule 4) and the Max-Min algorithms with and without the accounting of the z value. Table 3 presents the values of ASI (Robustness rule 7) corresponding to the last four cases in Table 2. Specifically, for the case of the Manas-Nedoma algorithm, ASI is equal to 0.922, while the exclusion of ratio z causes the decrement of ASI to 0.809.It is obvious that the introduction of ratio z considerably improves the robustness of the weighting solutions, but the space in which the latter are constrained, as shaped by the DM's arrangement of the criteria cards, is still excessive. This fact jeopardizes the stability of the evaluation results and may lead to decisions that are not in tune with the DM's viewpoints. In particular, there still exists a multiplicity of different set of weights, arbitrarily not calculated by the revised Simos method, which are possible to cause variations in the results. The effect of the weightings instability on the evaluation results is examined and analyzed in the following example.The application example presented here is a hypothetical problem, concerning the prioritization of six possible metro lines extensions, based on the criteria modeling proposed by Hugonnard and Roy (1983); the data are given in Hurson and Siskos (2014). The following evaluation criteria are used in the evaluation and ranking of the six alternative actions:g1:Number of habitants and workers served per km of line (scale: 0–1 millions)Number of travellers per km of line per day (scale: 0–75 thousands)Construction cost per km of line (scale: 0–125 millions €)Return rate of the investment (scale: 0–20 percent)Network organization index (scale: 0–1)Urban efficiency index (scale: 0–1)All the separate evaluations of six metro extension lines over the six criteria are presented in Table 4.The DM for this problem groups the cards associated with the criteria having the same importance, in four different subsets of ex aequo, as follows: {5,6}, {4}, {1,2}, {3}. She/he also makes use of white cards, which lead to the following subsets of ex aequo criteria: {5,6}, {white card}, {4}, {1,2}, {white card}, {3}.For the first case, where no white cards are inserted, a set of weight vectors is produced by applying the Max–Min and the Manas–Nedoma algorithms. The different weight vectors are presented in Table 5, along with the weight vector produced by applying the Simos procedure. The four different weight vectors represent four distinct vertices of the hyper-polyhedron.Each one of the weight vectorsp∈Pof Table 4 represents a value system, which is compatible with the preferences expressed by the DM, during the initial arrangement of the criteria cards.Fig. 2shows a pictorial representation of the possible variation of each separate weight and the weight vectors calculated using the different algorithms and rules. The values of each specific vector are depicted with a line of the same color and bullets of the same style.The next step concerns the implementation of a “naïve” MCDA ranking methodology, using the different sets of weights in Table 5, in order to identify possible alternations in the rankings. A combination of the ELECTRE outranking method with PROMETHEE II ranking procedure is implemented, once for each different weighting set. In particular, ELECTRE I is applied, to produce an outranking relation, while PROMETHEE II is applied on this relation, in order to obtain a complete ranking of the alternatives, on the basis of net outranking flows. Concordance thresholds are set to s = 0.5 + ε, where ε is a very small positive number, and simultaneously, no veto thresholds are applied. Table 6presents the results of this implementation for each weight vector of Table 5, while Table 7exhibits the extreme ranking positions for each alternative; P*(a) and P*(a) represent the highest and the lowest ranking position obtained by each alternative, respectively.In the second case, with the insertion of two white cards, a set of weight vectors was produced by applying the Max–Min and the Manas-Nedoma algorithms again. The different weight vectors are presented in Table 8, and depicted in Figure 3, along with the weight vector obtained by applying the Simos procedure.ELECTRE combined with PROMETHEE II ranking procedure is again implemented, once for each weight vector of Table 8. Concordance level is again set to s = 0.5 + ε without making use of any vetoes. The results of the multiple implementations are presented in Table 9. Table 10 illustrates the extreme ranking positions for each alternative.Inthis paragraph, the revised Simos methodology is implemented, in order to test and measure the robustness of its results. In this case, the most stable instance including the two white cards is examined. The parameter of the revised Simos method has been considered as z = 6. Table 11 and Figure 4 present the Max–Min and Manas–Nedoma average weighting sets, 3 vertices of the hyper-polyhedron and the weighting set produced after the application of the Revised Simos procedure.By applying the ELECTRE method in combination with the PROMETHEE II ranking procedure again, and by setting the concordance level to s = 0.5 + ε without any vetoes, the different rankings for each weight vectorp∈Pof Table 11 are calculated. The results, surfacing after the consecutive implementations of the synergy of the MCDA methods, are presented in Table 12. Table 13 depicts the extreme ranking positions for each alternative, as calculated in these multiple implementations.Table 14 presents the calculation of the ASI for all the different instances of the metro case study. It is obvious that the ASI improves in the presence of white cards, and especially when the revised Simos procedure is used, instead of the original. The shrinking of the range of weights, when z is introduced, is clearly depicted in Fig. 5. However, again, under no circumstances, the ASI or the visualized criteria weight ranges can be considered as acceptable.Fig. 5 summarizes and visually compares the possible weight ranges for the three different cases of the Metro case study: original Simos without and with white cards (No-W and W) and revised Simos with white cards (R-W). It also depicts the representative weight vectors, calculated using the Manas–Nedoma and the Max–Min algorithms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The contribution of this paper lies in the exposure of the robustness issues of both the original and the revised Simos methods, in the elicitation of the criteria importance weights. In fact, the DM is completely unaware of the existence of several sets of weights, which are also compatible with her/his preferences, and have been unjustifiably excluded or neglected during the implementation of the method.On the other hand, the analyst cannot depend exclusively on the Simos method when it comes to eliciting the preferential information from a DM, in order to calculate the importance weights. When one decides to use the convenience of the Simos procedure, she/he has to apply one or more of the complementary robustness rules and recommendations proposed in this paper. The robustness analysis techniques, proposed in this paper, aid the analysts and DMs to: (i) gain insight on the whole set of weighting solutions, (ii) select a single set of criteria weights, and/or (iii) apply robust rules based on multiple sets of acceptable weights. The visualization of the variation of the weights in particular is an indispensable measure that significantly aids the DMs in limiting the initial feasible weighting space, and eventually, in fixing the criteria weights by themselves.Incase the results are unstable, the decision analyst is required to ask for further preferential information from the DM, through an iterative process. This process ends when the robustness rules produce high levels of stability and the results of the evaluation exhibit no or negligible deviations. The additional preference information may concern information extracted, for instance, through pairwise comparisons between hypothetical alternatives or criteria weights. Alternatively, the decision analyst may prompt the DM to pinpoint the criteria weights, refraining therefore from any further robustness controlling procedures.The numerical examination of the original Simos method, and the possible weighting results it bears, showed that the weights are almost uncontrollable. On the other hand, the revised Simos procedure, characterized by the additional piece of information requested from the DM, confines to some extent the feasible weighting space, leading therefore to results of higher robustness. However, this amendment is not adequate, since the feasible weighting vectors are still unstable to an extent that they still cause significant ranking variations. Specifically, for the case of the Metro lines case study, no conclusion/decision can be drawn, since almost every alternative may get ranked best or worst.