@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of Inventory Record Inaccuracy in Information Exchange Supply Chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The inventory inaccuracy nullifies the benefit provided by the Information Exchange Supply Chain.In a collaborative supply chain, even very small inventory inaccuracy may lead to significant unnecessary costs.The detrimental effect of inaccuracy in upstream supply chain partners is higher than in downstream partners.Countermeasures should be firstly promoted by the upstream stages, i.e. the Manufacturer

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Information sharing,Collaboration,Bullwhip effect,System dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The goal of this paper is to quantify the impact of Inventory Record Inaccuracy on the dynamics of collaborative supply chains, both in terms of operational performance (i.e. order and inventory stability), and customer service level. To do so, we model an Information Exchange Supply Chain under shrinkage errors in the inventory item recording activity of their nodes, present the mathematical formulation of such supply chain model, and conduct a numerical simulation assuming different levels of errors. Results clearly show that Inventory Record Inaccuracy strongly compromises supply chain stability, particularly when moving upwards in the supply chain. Important managerial insights can be extracted from this analysis, such as the role of ‘benefit-sharing’ strategies in order to guarantee the advantage of investments in connectivity technologies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Operations Management community has been identifying Supply Chain (SC) collaboration practices as some of the most effective approaches for limiting SC inefficiencies such as bullwhip effect (Lee, 2010; Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997). Information sharing is at the core of collaborative, SC based business models (Cannella, Barbosa-Povoa, Framinan, & Relvas, 2014; Fawcett, Osterhaus, Magnan, Brau, & McCarter, 2007). The concept of information sharing may be used in terms of access to information about the exact physical location of goods en route from supplier to customer at a particular moment (Jonnson & Mattsson, 2013). Depending on the information shared by firms and on how this information is used, different typologies of SC collaboration practices can be realized. For instance, if members share real-time sharing of market demand data for the generation of conjoint forecasting, they can implement a collaborative supply chain structure known in literature as Information Exchange SC (Holweg, Disney, Holmström, & Småros, 2005). This structure has been shown to be able to remove harmful problems resulting from information distortion (Ali & Boylan, 2011; Ali, Boylan, & Syntetos, 2012;Agrawal, Sengupta, & Shanker, 2009; Cannella, 2014;Cannella & Ciancimino, 2010; Dejonckheere, Disney, Lambrecht, & Towill, 2004; Disney et al., 2004; Holweg et al., 2005; Machuca & Barajar, 2004; Trapero, Kourentzes, & Fildes, 2012; Wong, Lai, & Cheng, 2014; Yuan, Shen, & Ashayeri, 2010). However, as the effectiveness of an inventory management system depends on the quality of information used (Ketzenberg, Geismar, Metters, & van der Laan, 2012), inventory accuracy can be reasonable considered one key aspect to ensure the benefits of the Information Exchange SC. Clearly, even if members benefit from up-to-date information on customer demand, various problems may arise if they manage their stock by using policies that assume perfect information on inventory positions, despite system-reported inventory inaccuracies (Bai, Alexopoulos, Ferguson, & Tsui, 2012). More specifically, if the recorded inventory quantity does not match the actual quantity in the shelf, the system will either order unnecessary items, or fail short of orders (DeHoratius & Raman, 2008; Rekik, 2011;Rekik, Sahin, Jemai, & Dallery, 2008a; Sahin, Buzacott, & Dallery, 2009; Sarac, Absi, & Dauzre-Prs, 2010). This dysfunction is known in literature as "Inventory Record Inaccuracy" (IRI). The effects of IRI are numerous and can put at risk the financial performance of a firm through diverse factors such as: lost sales, delay penalties, re-scheduling, suboptimal planning and increase in use of small transport vehicles amongst others (Thiel, Hovelaque, & Thi Le Hoa, 2010). In the present day, the difference between physically inventory level and system inventory level is not sufficiently understood to explain or predict its effect on performance (Nachtmann, Waller, & Rieske, 2010; Rekik, 2011; Rekik & Sahin, 2012; Rekik, Sahin, & Dallery, 2008b). However, inventory inaccuracy appears to be a significant problem in practice (Kang & Gershwin, 2005, Heese, 2007, Uçkun, Karaesmen, & Savas, 2008, Sahin & Dallery, 2009, Hollinger & Adams, 2010, Xu, Jiang, Feng, & Tian, 2012, Hardgrave, Aloysius, & Goyal, 2013, Mersereau, 2012, Metzger, Thiesse, Gershwin, & Fleisch, 2013, Bruccoleri, Cannella, & La Porta, 2014)In an empirical investigation, DeHoratious & Raman (2008) observed inaccuracies of 65 percent on 369.567 inventory records collected from 37 leading retailers in USA. In their study, they conclude that these inaccuracies do not only affect retailers’ operational performance, but also that of upstream supply chain partners (Kwak & Gavirneri, 2014). Inaccuracies and their eventual correction are likely to increase the bullwhip effect by increasing the variability of orders (Gel, Erkip, & Thulaseedas, 2010, Bruccoleri et al., 2014). The inventory error will propagate through the entire supply chain (Dai & Tseng, 2012). In fact, as shown by Kök and Shang (2014), when an echelon in the SC suffers an IRI problem, it generates orders characterized by a higher variability with respect to orders based on accurate inventory information. These orders are transmitted to the supplier and also impact on its inventory management (Kwak & Gavierneri, 2014). This is mainly because the forecast on the incoming demand from downstream stages of the chain is used by the supplier for setting his/her levels of inventory. Essentially, it is expected that the increased variability of the total demand due to IRI will be transferred from the retailer to the manufacturer (Xu et al., 2012). Thus, inventory loss across locations in a supply chain is a factor that may contribute to the bullwhip effect (Kok & Shang, 2014). This increased variability in the order can generate a negative impact not only in a traditional SCs, but also in collaborative structures in which members share real-time sharing of market demand. For instance, in the Information Exchange SC, even if an upstream member of the supply chain accesses to and benefits from updated information on customer demand, she continues to use the information of orders placed by the downstream stages for the management of her inventory requirements. Thus, she continues to be exposed to a high variability of incoming order, and consequently to a distorted information. This ``phantom demand'' (Min & Zhou, 2002) caused by the ``phantom inventory'' (Hardgrave et al., 2013), can undermine the expected benefit of information sharing and the effort in IT investment.Moreover, IRI problems can occur for each echelon of a multi-echelon inventory system instead of a single echelon (Gumrukcu, Rossetti, & Buyurgan, 2008). Transaction errors (i.e. shipment errors, delivery errors, scanning), shrinkage errors (i.e. consumer or employee theft, shoplifting, administration and paperwork errors, vendor fraud), and inaccessible inventory (i.e. misplaced item) (Sarac et al., 2010) may affect both retailers and manufacturers of the same information sharing SC. In this case, it is expected that inventory errors across several members could even more exasperate the information distortion and propagate the bullwhip effect along the SC (Dai & Tseng, 2012, Xu et al., 2012). Despite the importance of this phenomenon, only a few papers have explored the impact of inaccurate information on the benefits of information sharing (Kwak & Gavierneri, 2014). Indeed, most related literature makes the aprioristic assumption that data used is highly accurate (Kapoor, 2009).In this context, this paper wishes to contribute to this stream of literature by analysing the impact of the IRI on the dynamics of collaborative supply chains, both in terms of operational performance (i.e. order and inventory stability) and customer service level.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the main motivations of our study and presents the problem statement and details the objective of our work. The modelling assumptions and the mathematical formalisms are presented in Section 3. Section 4 reports simulation experiments and discusses the performance metrics adopted in this work, i.e., bullwhip ratio, inventory variance ratio and backlog. Sections 5 and 6 provide discussions and managerial implications, respectively. Conclusions and suggestions for future research developments are presented in the last section.In the scientific literature, there are two main streams of research dealing with SC modelling and analysis under the assumption of IRI. The former has focused on the optimization of inventory policies in presence of errors (Sahin et al., 2009), while the latter on the impact of inventory data inaccuracies on the behaviour of SCs. The studies belonging to the first stream usually adopt OR techniques, mainly due to the fact that these techniques are very suitable at a local (i.e. single-node) tactical level in the design of SCs and in day-by-day decision making (Cannella & Ciancimino, 2010; Riddalls, Bennett, & Tipi, 2000). Thus, this approach is the most appropriate tool for solving problem such as the determination of the optimal order policy in presence of error (Sahin et al., 2009), or the required buffer size to minimize shortage costs for specific order rules (Thiel et al., 2010), among others.On the contrary, studies in the second stream are commonly undertaken using methodologies based on the dynamics of system (i.e. system dynamics simulation, discrete event simulation, or agent-based simulation). These approaches are considered to be more suitable for studying the implications of the strategic design on SC performance and on the global behaviour of the network (Riddalls, Bennett, & Tipi, 2000, Cannella, Barbosa-Povoa, Framinan, & Relvas, 2013a, Dominguez & Framinan, 2013). Furthermore, the majority of these studies in this stream mainly focus on the impact of IRI on traditional SC structure. To the best of our knowledge, only few studies have analysed the effect of the IRI in collaborative SCs (see e.g. Fleisch & Tellkamp, 2005, Sari, 2008, Dai & Tseng, 2012). Although these works have certainly contributed to show how the whole performance of a specific SC structure can be affected by the discrepancy between the physical inventory and the information inventory, they have not addressed on the dynamic effect at the different stages of the SC. The only work that explicitly studies the effect of IRI in a collaborative SC (i.e. Sari, 2008) measures the total cost for the entire SC and the customer service level of the retailer. In addition, there are not quantitative studies showing how IRI impacts on customer service level in the upstream partners of a SC11The related literature rarely emphasizes the effect of inventory inaccuracy upon service-level quality (Thiel et al. 2010). Nonetheless, in the presence of structured contracts between partners, if the retailer receives her orders after the due date, the supplier might be subject to a penalty (Eliman & Dodin, 2013). In fact, the cost of late-delivered and cancelled orders due to stock-outs is commonly observed in practice, and needs to be considered (Miranda & Garrido, 2009, Lu, Tsai, & Chen, 2012). Therefore, it can be concluded that the effect of IRI is not confined to the operational performance of the retailer but also impacts the performance of upstream SC partners (Xu et al., 2012, Dai & Tseng, 2012).Motivated by these observations, the proposed research aims at contributing to the quantification of the impact of IRI on the operational performance and customer service level in collaborative SCs. More specifically, the objective is to analyse and contrast the effect of IRI on the different stages of a collaborative SC structure. To fulfil this research objective, we study and compare the response of the different echelons of the Information Exchange Supply Chain (IESC) (Holweg et al., 2005) in terms of demand amplification, inventory stability and customer service level of under two scenarios (1) accurate inventory record and (2) error in inventory record. In order to study the performance of the different echelons we adopt a classical four-serial multi-echelon structure (i.e. 1 Retailer, 1 Wholesaler, 1 Distributor and 1 Manufacturer) as in other several studies dealing with the dynamics of supply chains (see e.g. Sterman et al., 1989, Dejonckeere et al., 2004, Chatfield, 2013). To make our findings more general, we assume that the replenishment in each stage of the structure is generated by adopting the periodic-review Order-Up-To (S, R) (Disney & Lambrecht, 2008, Ciancimino, Cannella, Bruccoleri, & Framinan, 2012), which is widely used in practical applications. In this policy, the system's inventory position (on-hand inventory + outstanding orders + backorders) is reviewed every period and an “order” is issued to bring the inventory position ‘up-to’ a defined level. To model inventory inaccuracy, we simulate a gap between the physical inventory, (i.e. the units actually available in stock) and the inventory record, (i.e. the units that, according to the information system, are available in stock). Thus, the periodic order generated by the SC's members is based on the level of inventory recorded by the information system and not on the level of actual current inventory. More specifically, we focus on an inventory inaccuracy condition caused by a specific error: the shrinkage error, a permanent inventory loss, resulting in smaller actual inventory when compared to the record in the Information Technology (IT) system (Dai & Tsang, 2012). It is to note that current inventory control systems do not take into account the disappearing inventory due to this shrinkage (DeHoratious & Raman, 2008). We focus on this particular type of inaccuracy for three reasons. Firstly, among all inventory inaccuracy sources, shrinkage has the biggest impact on SC costs (Beck, 2002, Fleisch & Tellkamp, 2005, Gumrukcu et al., 2008, Rekik, Sahin, & Dallery, 2009, Agrawal & Sharda, 2012, Dai & Tsang, 2012, Zhu, Mukhopadhyay, & Kurata, 2012, Kok & Shang, 2014). Secondly, the impact of inaccuracies due to different causes should be accounted for separately, since actions to address different causes may be quite different (Gel et al., 2010). Finally, the literature addressing IRI in general, and errors resulting from shrinkage in particular, is limited (Rekik & Sahin, 2012). In line with previous studies (Fleisch & Tellkamp, 2005, Sari, 2008, Dai & Tsang, 2012) the inaccuracy is modelled in each SC member.As this study belongs to the stream of research on IRI dealing with the impact of inventory data inaccuracies on the behaviour of SCs, we adopt a methodology based on the dynamic of systems, i.e. the System Dynamics modelling approach (Forrester, 1961). This methodology has largely contributed to the development and improvement of operations management and nowadays continue to play a crucial role in advancing knowledge supply chain (see e.g., Sterman, 1989; Holweg & Bicheno, 2002, Akkermans & Dellaert, 2005, Croson & Donohue, 2006, Yuan et al., 2010, Cannella, Ciancimino, & Framinan, 2011, Syntetos, Georgantzas, Boylan, & Dangerfield, 2011, De Marco, Cagliano, Nervo, & Rafele, 2012, Hussain, Drakem, & Lee, 2012, Tako & Robinson, 2012, Campuzano-Bolarín, Mula, & Peidro, 2013, Hämäläinen, Luoma, & Saarinen, 2013, Mula, Campuzano-Bolarin, Díaz-Madroñero, & Carpio, 2013, Cannella, Bruccoleri, Barbosa-Povoa, & Relvas, 2013b, Spiegler & Naim, 2014). With this research we expect to show how the expected benefits in the IESC may be compromised by IRI, not only in terms of bullwhip effect and inventory variability, but also in terms of customer service. These results can help us to characterise the role of incentives that could be provided by the upstream echelons to the downstream echelons for limiting the detrimental consequence of “phantom inventory”, preserving the benefits of SC collaboration.In IESC the information flow consists on the transmission of orders to upstream members and on sharing with them the information on market demand. An echelon i receives information on the order quantity from the downstream adjacent echelon and on the up-to-date market demand. This echelon then generates the order quantity on the basis of local data and parameters, incoming orders and market demand. Unlike traditional SC, all echelons receive information about market demand. The customer demand forecast is, indeed, directly included in the replenishment rule (Cannella & Ciancimino, 2010). Fig. 1 shows up the information flow in the Information Exchange SC.The following assumptions characterise the SC model presented in this work:(a)Single-product, K-stage production–distribution serial system. Each echelon in the system has a single successor and a single predecessor. The generic echelon's position is represented by index i. Echelon i = 1 stands for the manufacturer and i = K + 1 for the final customer.Non-negative condition of order quantity. Products delivered cannot be returned to the supplier.Backlogging is allowed as a consequence of stockholding. In each echelon the backlog will be fulfilled as soon as on-hand inventory becomes available. Therefore, orders not fulfilled in time are backlogged so that inventory remains a positive or null value.A generic echelon i receives information on the order quantity Oi+ 1 from the downstream adjacent echelon and on the up-to-date market demand d.In order to simulate IRI, we consider two types of inventories: the physical inventory, i.e. actually available units, and the inventory record, i.e. what it is available according to the information system.According to Fleisch & Tellkamp (2005), in order to simulate the rational behaviour of the inventory manager and to isolate the effect of the inventory error on the SC performance, we do not consider a periodic inventory cycle counting. The alignment between the Physical Inventory and the inventory record is merely performed when a given low value of inventory is achieved.Inaccuracy condition is modelled for any SC member by inserting an error factor in each period's actual inventory position. More specifically, IRI is generated by modelling the shrinkage error (or stock loss error). We assume that, in each time period, the physical inventory is decreased by the Shrinkage Flow.The adopted replenishment rule is a periodic-review Order-Up-To (S, R) (Disney & Lambrecht, 2008). More specifically, we adopt a specific typology of Order-Up-To named Automatic Pipeline Variable Inventory and Order Based Production Control System (APVIOBPCS) (Dejonckheere, Disney, Lambrecht, & Towill, 2003, Lalwani, Disney, & Towill, 2006, Sarimveis, Patrinos, Tarantilis, & Kiranoudis, 2008, Cannella et al., 2011, Wang, Disney, & Wang, 2012).The above assumptions are commonly adopted in supply chain dynamics literature, as it has been proved that the results obtained work for the real business worlds (see e.g. Sterman, 1989). Furthermore, thanks to these assumptions we can easily contrast the trend of the demand amplification with other analogous published works focusing on behaviour of collaborative supply chain. Among those Chatfield, Kim, Harrison, & Hayya (2004), Dejonckheere et al. (2004), Crespo Marquez (2010), Cannella & Ciancimino (2010), Barlas & Gunduz (2011), Ciancimino et al. (2012) can be mentioned.The mathematical nomenclature is reported in Table 1.The mathematical model of the SC configurations is reported in Table 2. The replenishment order quantity (Eq. (1)) is the sum of the following components: market demand forecast (Eqs. (11) and (12)), work in progress gap, and inventory record gap. The work in progress gap is the difference between target work in progress (Eq. (5)) and the work in progress (Eq. (7)). The relation regulating the work in progress variable is such that, for each echelon i, the products sent from supplier Ci − 1(t)immediately become work in progress. Thus, for a generic echelon i at time t, work in progress is increased by quantity Ci − 1(t) (items sent by the supplier i − 1 at time t) and decreased by quantity Ci − 1(t − Tpi) (items sent by the supplier i − 1 at time t − Tp). The target work in progress is the product of the forecast on the order from the subsequent echelon and the production-distribution lead time (Eq. (5)). This gap is divided by the work in progress proportional controller.The inventory record gap is the difference between target inventory (Eq. (6)) and inventory record, divided by the inventory proportional controller. The target inventory (Eq. (6)) is the product of the forecast on the order from the subsequent echelon and the safety stock factor. According to assumption (f), inventory record (Eq. (4)) is equal to physical inventory increased by the shrinkage flow (Eq. (8)), if the physical inventory (Eq. (2)) is greater than a perceptual of the physical inventory at the initial time simulation (Eq. (3)). Analogously, if the physical inventory is lower than this percentage, the recorded inventory matches the physical inventory and the real level of inventory on-hand is used in the order policy. The physical inventory (Eq. (2)) every review time is increased by the quantity Ci − 1(t − Tpi) (items sent by supplier i − 1 at time t − Tp), decreased by the quantity Ci(t) (items sent to the downstream echelon) and by the shrinkage flow (Eq. (8)). According to assumption (g), this flow is equal to the physical inventory level at the previous time period multiplied by the shrinkage error value λ. The dynamic of the discrepancy between the physical inventory level and the inventory record level is regulated by Eq. (3).Eq. (9) describes the backlog as the sum of unfulfilled orders (orders from the subsequent echelon minus delivered items). Eq. (10) defines the item delivery from one echelon to its successor. Eq. (11) models the exponential smoothing demand forecast rule, where the value of α reflects the weight given to the most recent observation. Eq. (12) defines that the order received in echelon K (retailer) is equal to the customer demand. Eq. (13) models the non-negativity condition of order quantity. Eq. (14) models the unlimited raw material availability assumption, i.e. orders from echelon i = 1 are always entirely fulfilled.To set the numerical values for the experiments, we employ values taken from the related literature. More specifically, lead time values, the demand smoothing forecasting factor, and the safety stock factor refer to the setting of the beer game model by Sterman (1989). This setting was used in several relevant SC analyses, such as Wikner, Towill, & Naim (1991), Van Ackere, Larsen, & Morecroft (1993), Machuca & Barajas (2004), Strozzi, Bosh, & Zaldivar (2007), Jakšič & Rusjan (2008), Wright & Yuan (2008), Crespo Márquez (2010), Barlas & Gunduz (2011), or Ciancimino et al. (2012), to name a few.The customer demand is modelled according to the framework proposed by Towill, Zhou, & Disney (2007) for studying the bullwhip effect. This framework suggests the typology of endogenous input that can be adopted in bullwhip analysis in order to study different characteristics of the SC (Domínguez, Framinan, & Cannella, 2014). In our experiment we adopt the so-called “variance lens perspective”, by which we infer on the performance of SC under stable market condition emulated by a stationary input demand.The numerical experiments are performed under the following settings:-The serial system is composed by four echelons (K = 4), i.e. Retailer (i = 4), Wholesaler (i = 3), Distributor (i = 2), and Manufacturer (i = 1).Inventory alignment boundary is ψ = 0.1*Ii(0) ∀i.The levels of the proportional controller is Ty= Tw= 2Tp.The customer demand is:N(i`d,o´d)=N(100,10).The initial values of the state variables are: [Wi(0), Ii(0), Bi(0)] = [Tpd(0), Tcd(0), 0]∀i.The lead time levels is Tp= 2 ∀i.The safety stock factor is Tc= 3 ∀i22As the stock-out phenomenon due to the variability of the market demand can contribute to the generation of bullwhip effect, in order to isolate the effect of the IRI on the dynamic behaviour of the supply chain, the safety stock factor is overestimated (i.e. three times the value of the mean demand)..The demand smoothing forecasting factor is α = 0.33 ∀i.Numerical experiments are performed for a time length T = 1000.The solutions for the initial-value problem are approximated through Vensim PLE.We conducted four sets of experiments under four levels of shrinkage errors: [λ1 = 0 percent; λ2 = 1.5 percent; λ3 = 3.0 percent; λ4 = 4.5 percent] ∀ i. Percentages of four levels have been chosen from the work of Raman, DeHoratius, & Ton (2001). Based on these studies, an average inaccuracy level of 3 percent of the physical inventory is adopted. Since, according to Fleisch & Tellkamp (2005), there are no sources providing comparable data for distributors and producers, we use the same data for all echelons.For each set of experiments, we conducted 30 replications in order to guarantee, for the output variables, that the width of the 95 percent confidence intervals of the mean is lower than 10 percent of the mean itself. This value has been computed with GPower 3 Statistical software.The SC operational performance was measured via a set of metrics whose reduction reflects the improvement in cost effectiveness of members’ operations (Cannella et al., 2013a). Such metrics are the bullwhip ratio (Eq. (15)) proposed by Chen, Drezner, Ryan, & Simchi-Levi (2000) and the inventory variance ratio (Eq. (16)), proposed by Disney & Towill (2003). On the contrary, mean backlog (Eq. (17)) is representative of customer service level. This metric is derived by the backlog (Eq. (6)), which represents a cumulative measure of undelivered goods to the final customer. The magnitude of this metric shows how a generic echelon is able to fulfil customer (internal customer or consumer) orders.(15)Bullwhip ratioi,(16)Inventory variance ratioi,(17)Mean backlogiThis bullwhip ratio provides information on potential unnecessary costs for suppliers, such as lost capacity, or opportunity costs and overtime working and subcontracting costs (Cannella et al., 2013a). The inventory variance ratio quantifies the fluctuations in inventory. An increased inventory variance results in higher holding and backlog costs, inflated average inventory cost per period (Disney & Lambrecht, 2008), and increasing holding costs per unit, missing production schedules, job sequencing and resource re-allocation. Finally, the backlog is a cumulative measure of undelivered goods to the final customer and is recorded to assess customer service level.Results from the ANOVA, conducted using the Minitab software tool, are reported in Table 3. Columns report the performance parameters, the F values (the statistic used to test that the effects of λ factor are significant), and the p-values (Montgomery, 2005).In Table 4, the values for the bullwhip ratio and Inventory variance ratio are presented. Results are reported by echelon (column), and by shrinkage error levels (row).Finally Table 5reports the average backlog and the maximum backlog for each echelon. Analogously to Table 4, results are reported by echelon (column), and by shrinkage error levels (row).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The aim of this paper is to analyse the impact of the IRI on a collaborative SC structure, i.e. the IESC. Inaccuracy was modelled for any SC member by inserting an error factor in each period's actual inventory position. More specifically, IRI was generated by modelling the shrinkage error (or stock loss error). We have compared the performance of this collaborative SC under perfect inventory record information with the behavioural response under the presence of the inventory error. SC performance has been measured in terms of the bullwhip ratio and the inventory variance ratio in order to assess the dynamics of the system's response in terms of bullwhip effect and inventory stability, and with the mean backlog for assessing the customer service level at each level of the SC.The simulation results have shown how the benefits provided by sharing information by SC members are strongly compromised by the inaccuracy in the inventory recording activity. More specifically, there is an intense deterioration on the performance of the SC for the upstream stages of the chain. This indicates how IRI can undermine the benefits of the investments in connectivity technologies. Furthermore, due to the fact that the detrimental effect of inaccuracy in upstream SC partners is higher than in downstream partners, the upstream stages – i.e. the manufacturer– not only potentially experiment the extra costs due to the demand amplification, but are also subject to the risk of paying penalties to their direct customers  … for a problem generated by the customers themselves! Also, our results show that, no matter what the magnitude of the error is, its effect on performance is dramatic. Thus, we can argue that, in order to benefit from the advocated bullwhip avoidance property of the collaborative effort in SCs, the upstream member should promote strategies aimed at realising a “zero inventory error”, such as prevention and integration policies. In this manner, we suggest to adopt the principle of “sharing of benefit” in SC. This action can represent a specific solution to avoid the risk of annihilating investments in SC collaboration effort and to guarantee a win–win situation among partners.Unlike the few previous works dealing with the impact of the IRI in collaborative SC, this study focuses on dynamic responses at the different stages of the SC. Thus we have been able to specify the effect of IRI in any level of the SCs structures and to identify the members who are more affected by this problem. In this fashion, we have identified who should promote the improvement strategies for avoiding this phenomenon, and proposed how these strategies can be specifically implemented.The limitations of the present study also represent opportunities for further research in this field. First, our research focus was set particularly on the impact of shrinkage error. In contrast, other sources of inaccuracies (e.g., misplacement, unreliable suppliers, transaction errors,) were not considered in our analysis. Further works can extend our model to include all such errors. In this work we have assumed the same inventory error for all echelons. Further models can consider different level of inventory error and focus on the relation between the different magnitude of the IRI and supply chain performance. Furthermore, we merely considered the no periodic inventory alignment condition. In our next step we want to extend this model to the periodic alignment policy in order to evaluate the trade-off between improving the accuracy of system reported inventory and the associated costs. In addition, our analysis is limited to a single product. Thus, it is not clear to what extent we may generalize from this results to multi-product SC. Also further studies can analyse and contrast the performance of different members of both traditional SCs and other enriched SCs (i.e. Synchronised SC) under the errors in inventory information. In addition, due to the increasing interest in sustainability issue in operations management, the impact of IRI on closed loop supply chain (Turrisi, Bruccoleri, & Cannella, 2013) can represent a significant new direction in supply chain dynamics studies. An additional effort can be represented by modelling IRI for different typologies of demand. Particularly, due to the extreme volatility and impetuous alteration of the market produced by the current economic recession (Cannella, Barbosa-Povoa, & Framinan, 2014), it can be relevant to analyse the response of a supply chain affected by IRI under stress impulse of the market demand. Finally, it has to be mentioned that this study has been developed adopting the serial SC assumption. Due to the increasing interest in the analysis of more complex supply chain (Dominguez et al., 2014), in future work we plan to study the effect of IRI on divergent SCs.