@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the upgrading policy after the redesign of a component for reliability improvement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Preventive upgrading and corrective upgrading policies are modeled.Convexity-like properties which are utilized for optimization are derived.Best policy depends on improvement in reliability and downtime costs, among others.An extension of our original model for positive replenishment lead times is provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Replacement,Reliability,Inventory,After-sales service,Performance-based contract,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider an OEM who is responsible for the availability of her systems in the field through performance-based contracts. She detects that a critical reparable component in her systems has a poor reliability performance. She decides to improve its reliability by a redesign of that component and an upgrade of the systems by replacing the old components with the improved ones. We introduce a model for studying the following two upgrading policies that she may implement after the redesign: (1) Upgrade all systems preventively just after the redesign (at time 0), (2) Upgrade systems one-by-one correctively; i.e., only when an old component fails. Under Policy 2, the OEM decides on an initial supply quantity of the improved components. Once this initial supply is depleted, she can procure improved components in fixed-sized batches with a higher unit price. Per policy, we derive total cost functions, which include procurement/replenishment costs of the new components, upgrading costs, repair costs of the new components, inventory holding costs and downtime costs. We perform exact analysis and provide an efficient optimization algorithm for Policy 2. Through a numerical study, we derive insights on which of the two policies is the best one and we show how this depends on the lifetime of the systems, the reliability of the old components, the improvement level in the reliability, the increase in the unit price, downtime costs, the size of installed base, and the batch size.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Advanced technical systems (e.g. power generators, manufacturing systems, computer networks, medical systems, material handling systems, defense systems) serve for primary operations in our society. They must be kept up and running for operational continuity in power plants, factories, banks, hospital, airports, warehouses, etc. Interruptions of these systems lead to significant losses; for example, downtime costs of computer systems of large e-commerce companies and brokerage companies can reach up to $1,000,000 per hour (cnet news, 2001; Patterson, 2002). In general, the opportunity costs due to downtime of bottleneck machines in factories are also very high, the downtime of step-and-scan systems in semiconductor companies may result in losses of millions of Euros (Kranenburg and van Houtum, 2009). Extensive maintenance activities are carried out for these systems to avoid these high costs; taken together, downtime costs and maintenance costs of such systems may account for 70–80 percent of their Total Cost of Ownership; see e.g. Öner, Franssen, uller, and van Houtum (2007), and Saranga and Dinesh Kumar (2006).Consequently, after-sales service has evolved into an important business. According to a report by the Aberdeen Group, spare parts and after-sales services accounted for 8 percent of the annual gross domestic product in the United States in 2003, and the total annual global spending on after-sales services was over $1.5 trillion (AberdeenGroup, 2003). A large portion of after-sales service business is carried on by Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) as it provides competitive advantages in sales and enables long-lasting revenue generation with high profit margins which may contribute significantly to business sustainability and growth; see Kim, Cohen, and Netessine (2007), and Cohen, Agrawal, and Agrawal (2006).Traditionally, OEMs provide after-sales services to their customers through so-called time and material contracts. Under a time and material contract, a customer pays the OEM for spare parts, labor, and other resources that are used during service activities. However, performance-based contracts are becoming more common recently. Under a performance-based contract, the customer pays for a certain service level with respect to the availability of the system(s) and OEMs become responsible for the costs of resources (spare parts, labor, etc.) used for services and downtime costs; see Cohen et al. (2006), and Guajardo, Cohen, Kim, and Netessine (2012).OEMs monitor the systems that they support through performance-based contracts to determine systemic problems that lead to dissatisfaction of availability requirements and/or significant maintenance costs and downtime costs. One of the frequently identified problems is a poor reliability level of one or multiple critical components due to its/their design. A critical component of a system is a component whose failures lead to system failures; whenever we refer to a component in the remainder of this paper, we mean a critical component. OEMs may choose to redesign such components to improve their reliability and upgrade the systems in the field by replacing the components in the field (old components) with the improved ones (new components).In this paper, we address the problem about the timing of upgrades once an OEM improves a component through redesign: she might choose either to upgrade the systems in the field immediately when the component has been redesigned or to replace the old components only when they fail. We develop a quantitative model to support the economical comparison of these options and derive insights about the effect of various relevant parameters on their superiority against each other.We consider a situation in which the OEM supports a general number of systems in the field through a performance-based contract which specifies a downtime penalty: the OEM pays a certain amount of money to its customers per unit of downtime. Repair-on-site is applied for the improved component; that is, when a component fails, it is repaired at the customer site rather than being replaced by a ready-for-use one. So, no spare parts are kept on stock.In general, an OEM and a supplier of the new components might agree on different terms for the supply of the new parts, such as one-for-one replenishment, replenishment in batches, unit price, etc. The setting that we investigate is as follows: The OEM can buy any number of new parts just after the redesign (at time 0) and she can replenish new parts only in batches after time 0. The replenishment lead time is zero (we also discuss the cases with positive replenishment lead time in a separate section). The OEM and the supplier agree on a fixed batch size and unit price(s) of the new parts through negotiations. The unit price after time 0 is larger than or equal to the unit price at time 0. This is a very likely situation as the production facility of the supplier might undergo some changes after time 0 (e.g., the production line or the technology might change) and an extra effort might be necessary to produce the new parts. Although the replenishment lead time is zero, the OEM keeps inventory of the new parts due to the increase in the unit price of the new parts after time 0 and the fixed batch size after time 0.The OEM considers the following two upgrading policies for the N systems in the field:•Policy 1 – Upgrade all systems preventively at time 0: N new components are bought at time 0 and all the old components in the field are preventively replaced with the new ones at time 0.Policy 2 – Upgrade systems one-by-one correctively: A number of new components is bought at time 0 (initial supply) and is kept on stock. When an old component in the field fails, it is correctively replaced with a new one from the inventory. The OEM replenishes new components in batches whenever a new components is needed and there is a stock out after time 0.Under Policy 1, the OEM faces less failures and less downtime as all old components are replaced with the new ones immediately after the redesign. However, she forfeits the remaining lifetimes of the old components. Under Policy 2, the OEM benefits from the remaining lifetimes; however, she faces more failures and downtime. An increase in the unit price after time 0 (which is probable as we stated above) favors Policy 1. All factors that play a role in Policy 1 are predetermined. The initial supply quantity is a decision that the OEM has to make and it affects the costs incurred under Policy 2. All other factors in Policy 2 are predetermined.The contributions of this paper are: First, we introduce a model for the upgrading problem with Policy 1 and Policy 2 for a general number of systems. We formulate total costs incurred under Policy 1 and Policy 2. These costs include procurement costs of the new components, costs incurred for upgrading the systems, costs incurred during repairs of the new components and downtime costs under Policy 1; and costs of the initial supply, costs incurred for upgrading the systems, repair costs incurred during repairs of the new components, replenishment costs after time 0, inventory storage costs and downtime costs under Policy 2. We develop a problem formulation in which the relationship between the initial supply quantity and the costs affected by the initial supply quantity under Policy 2 is explicitly established. Second, we perform an exact analysis on the total costs under Policy 2 and we derive several analytical properties. Third, we develop an efficient solution procedure for the optimal initial supply quantity in Policy 2. Fourth, we perform a numerical study and provide insights about conditions which favor each policy. We use the percentage difference in the MTBF of the old components and the MTBF of the new components as a measure of the reliability improvement. Policy 1 is advantageous for low values of the number of systems, long lifetime of the systems, low values of the MTBF of the old components (for fixed percentage improvement in MTBF), high values of the percentage improvement in MTBF, high values of the increase in the unit price of the new components after time 0, large batch sizes, and high values of the downtime penalty. The reverse of each of these conditions favors Policy 2. Our numerical study shows that varying any of the mentioned factors may lead to a change in the best policy.The outline of this paper is as follows. We summarize the literature related to our model in Section 2. We present our model assumptions and problem formulation in Section 3. In Section 4, we derive the total cost function per policy and provide a number of analytical properties and an optimization procedure for the total cost function of Policy 2. We give the setting and the results of our numerical study in Section 5. In Section 6, we discuss the extension and use of our model for cases with positive replenishment lead times. We finalize the paper by drawing conclusions and give directions for future research in Section 7.Our model is closely related to the area of research which investigates replacement decisions due to technological obsolescence. In practice, new units (components or systems) which have the same functionality as the old ones in use but with a higher performance often become available in the market. The higher performance could be in terms of reliability, efficiency, energy consumption, purchase cost, etc. The timings of replacements of old units with the new ones are studied in this area. The major difference between our model and the existing ones is that the perspective of an OEM, who is responsible for the availability of an installed base of systems through a performance-based contract, is taken in our model while the perspective of users/owners of one or multiple units is taken in the others. Related to this, we only consider the improvement in terms of reliability as the other performance measures are not relevant for availability, and so is not a concern of the OEM within the scope of our problem.The replacement decision literature can be considered in two streams. The first stream addresses replacement problems for a single unit while multiple units are considered in the second stream. In the first stream, the problems are formulated periodically in general. At each period, one has to decide whether to replace the old unit with one of the available improved ones. Sethi and Chand (1979), Chand and Sethi (1982), and Dogramaci and Fraiman (2004) introduce models with deterministic technological changes; that is, the timing and the nature of changes are known with certainty. Nair and Hopp (1992), Nair (1995), Rajagopalan, Singh, and Morton (1998), and Mehrez, Rabinowitz, and Shemesh (2000) model cases in which stochasticity in the timing and/or the nature of change is involved; see also Bethuyne (2002) for a continuous-time model in which technological progress is treated as a geometric Brownian motion. In this stream, inventories are incorporated into a model only by Nguyen, Yeung, and Castanier (2013), who study the impact of spare parts inventories on replacement decisions. However, no quantity decision regarding the spare parts inventories is included in the model. Instead, the model assumes supply of a fixed-sized batch of spares together with the new asset whenever a replacement decision is taken.In the second stream, which is more relevant to our problem, a so-called K strategy is studied. This strategy is introduced by Mercier and Labeau (2004) for a general number, N, of identical and independent units on some finite time interval [0, T]. They investigate a situation in which the failure rate and the energy consumption rate of a unit are improved. The upgrading period is separated into two phases under this strategy. Until the Kth failure of the old units,K∈{0,1,…,N},failed old units (including the Kth unit) are replaced with the new ones correctively. Afterwards, the remainingN−Kold units are replaced preventively.K=0represents the strategy under which all old units are replaced preventively at time 0 whileK=Nrepresents the strategy under which each old unit is replaced correctively (no preventive replacement). When a new unit fails, it is replaced with another new unit with zero lead time. They formulate the mean discounted total cost over [0, T] at time 0. The mean discounted total cost includes replacement costs and energy consumption costs. They show that only three strategies can be optimal: the strategies withK=0,K=1,andK=N,respectively.Mercier (2008) extends the model introduced by Mercier and Labeau (2004) for general failure rates (e.g., with degradation) and show that the optimal strategy can be different thanK=0,K=1,andK=N; and it depends on the time horizon T.Notice thatK=0corresponds to the same policy as Policy 1 in our model; andK=Nresults in a policy similar to Policy 2 with an initial supply quantity of zero and a batch size of 1 for replenishment after time 0. However, the price of a new unit in the K strategy remains constant throughout [0, T] in the cases studied by Mercier and Labeau (2004) and Mercier (2008), while it may increase after time 0 in our problem, which makes the analysis of Policy 2 critical.In Mercier and Labeau (2004) and Mercier (2008), inventory decisions are not incorporated into the models. The new items are available at any instant. In recent papers by Clavareau and Labeau (2009a); 2009b), inventory decisions are incorporated into a Petri net model and a simulation model, respectively, which are developed to investigate the K strategy. The price of a new unit is also constant throughout [0, T] in these models. The inventory is managed by the so-called point command method in Clavareau and Labeau (2009b), while a modified version of the Economic Order Quantity is used in Clavareau and Labeau (2009a). That is, the order quantity is not optimized with respect to the total costs incurred for upgrading the systems. These models also include other details (e.g., different types of maintenance actions, limited maintenance capacity, priority rules for different actions, effectiveness of a repair, etc.) which makes it difficult to realize the interaction between the inventory decisions and the optimal strategy. In our model, the initial supply quantity under Policy 2 is a decision variable. We formulate the relevant costs as a function of the initial supply quantity and optimize the initial supply quantity with respect to total costs.An OEM provides service for N identical systems that she produced and sold with a performance-based contract which specifies a downtime penalty rate p. The contract covers the systems’ lifetime and we assume that the lifetime of all systems will end at the same time.The OEM redesigns one of the critical repairable components as she realizes that it is economical to improve its reliability and to upgrade the systems. Each system has a single unit of the critical component. The OEM may start to upgrade the systems at time 0 (just after the redesign) and the lifetime of the systems ends at time T; i.e., the new components can be used throughout the time interval [0, T]. The remaining lifetime of the systems (T) is in the order of 1–30 years, say.We denote the Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) of the old components by τold, which is in the order of 1–10 years. After the redesign, an MTBF of τnew > τold is achieved for the new components. We assume that the time to failure of each old component and time to failure of each new component in the field have exponential distributions with mean τold and τnew, respectively, throughout [0, T]. We further assume that τold and τnew are fixed throughout [0, T].The OEM has two options for the procurement of new components: First, she can buy any number of new components with a unit price of c0 at time 0. Second, she can replenish batches of q1 new components throughout (0, T] with a unit price of c1. The batch size q1 (q1 ∈ {1, 2, ...N}) is a fixed value that the OEM and the supplier of the new components agree on. The OEM may choose to keep an inventory of the new components for upgrading the systems. The storage cost rate per component is h > 0. We do not model inventory holding costs for tied-up capital as the procurement cost of new components are already taken into account.There are two types of upgrading per system:•Preventive upgrading: Planning and executing the replacement of the old component in a system before the old component fails.Corrective upgrading: Replacing the old component when it fails.In both cases the following actions are taken. A new component is transported to the customer site; a service engineer visits the customer site and replaces the old component with the new one; the old component is transported to a disposal site and discarded. As a preventive upgrading is planned beforehand, operational downtime is avoided; that is, no downtime penalty is incurred during a preventive upgrading. A system suffers from a random downtime with mean tuwhen it undergoes a corrective upgrading and an expected downtime penalty ofdu=ptuis incurred. The expected costs of a preventive upgrading and a corrective upgrading are u1 and u2, respectively. These costs include administrative costs, costs of a visit of a service engineer, and transportation costs of the new component and the old component. As the visit of a service engineer is planned beforehand for preventive upgrading, the costs of the visit of a service engineer incurred during a preventive upgrading are less than that incurred during a corrective upgrading. All the actions that are taken in both cases are the same; thus, the difference between the upgrading costs stem from the difference between the service engineer costs; it holds that u1 ≤ u2.When a new component fails in the field, a service engineer visits the customer site and repairs the component, (i.e., the failed component is not replaced with a ready-for-use one but repaired on site). We denote the expected costs of such an on-site repair by r. This r includes administrative costs, costs of a visit of a service engineer, and the repair costs of a new component. A system suffers from a random downtime with mean trduring an on-site repair and an expected downtime penalty ofdr=ptris incurred.The salvage value of an old component and that of a new component are sold and snew, respectively. The values sold and snew can be positive or negative. Positive values mean that revenue is generated and negative values mean that discarding costs are incurred by salvaging components. We assume that sold ≤ snew as new components have better performance. We also assume that snew ≤ c0; that is, the new components cannot be salvaged at a higher value than their unit price. All new components (either on stock or installed in the systems) are salvaged at time T. An old component is salvaged either immediately after it is replaced with a new one or at time T, depending on whether it undergoes an upgrade or not.The OEM chooses one of the following two upgrading policies after the redesign:1.Policy 1 – Upgrade all systems preventively at time 0: N new components are replenished and all old components in the field are replaced with new components at time 0.Policy 2 – Upgrade systems one-by-one correctively: q0 (q0 ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...N}) new components are replenished at time 0, where q0 is a decision variable. After their replenishment, the components are kept in an inventory. When an old component fails, it is replaced by a new component from the inventory as long as there is a ready-for-use component available. After the initial supply, whenever a failure of an old component occurs and there is a stock-out of the new components, a batch of new components is replenished. After each replenishment, one of the q1 new components is used to replace the failed old component which triggered the replenishment. The remainingq1−1new components are kept in the inventory for later use to replace the old components when they fail.The OEM’s decision about the implementation policy depends on the total costs that would be incurred throughout [0, T]. Under Policy 1, the total costs are equal to the sum of the investment costs of N new components, upgrading costs, repair costs of new components, downtime costs, and salvage value. Under Policy 2, the total costs are equal to the sum of the costs of initial supply, upgrading costs, inventory costs, replenishment costs that are incurred after the usage of the first q0 new components, repair costs of new components, downtime costs and salvage value. We assume that the production costs, upgrading costs, and salvage value of the old components under Policy 1 and initial replenishment costs of q0 components under Policy 2 are incurred at time 0. As the other costs are incurred throughout [0, T], we formulate the Net Present Values (NPVs) of these costs at time 0. We denote the discount rate by α > 0.We assume that the replenishment lead time, which plays a role only under Policy 2, is zero. An extension of our model for cases with positive replenishment lead time is provided in Section 6.We use the following notation for the costs incurred under the two policies:π1:The expected NPV of the total costs under Policy 1.The expected NPV of the total costs under Policy 2.The expected NPV of the procurement costs of N new components under Policy 1.The expected NPV of the salvage value under Policy 1.The expected NPV of upgrading costs Policy 1.The expected NPV of the repair costs of the new components Policy 1.The expected NPV of the downtime costs under Policy 1.The expected NPV of the procurement costs of the initial supply under Policy 2.The expected NPV of the inventory storage costs under Policy 2.The expected NPV of the replenishment costs incurred after time 0 under Policy 2.The expected NPV of the salvage value under Policy 2.The expected NPV of upgrading costs under Policy 2.The expected NPV of the repair costs the new components under Policy 2.The expected NPV of the downtime costs under Policy 2.Under Policy 2, the old components are replaced with the new ones whenever they fail, thus the upgrading costs U2 are independent of q0. The failure process of the new components do not depend on q0; therefore, the repair costs R2 are not a function of q0 either. Downtime costs D2 are not a function of q0 since downtime stems from upgrades and repairs of the new components. The other costs are functions of q0. For Policy 2, the following optimization problem has to be solved:(Q)minπ2(q0)s.t.q0∈M={0,1,2,…,N},whereπ2(q0)=P2(q0)+S2(q0)+K2(q0)−V2(q0)+U2+R2+D2,andP2(q0)=c0q0.The formulations of the other costs will be derived in Section 4.Letq0*be an optimal solution of problem (Q) andπ2*=π2(q0*); i.e.,π2*is the minimum cost found for problem (Q). The OEM compares π1 andπ2*,and selects the policy with the minimum cost. That is, ifπ1≤π2*,she will implement Policy 1; otherwise, she will implement Policy 2 with initial supply amount ofq0*.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we introduced a model for studying the following two upgrading policies that an OEM may implement after the redesign of a component:•Policy 1 – Upgrade all systems preventively at time 0.Policy 2 – Upgrade systems one-by-one correctively.Under Policy 2, new components are kept on stock and the initial supply quantity is a major factor affecting the costs. We developed a problem formulation which includes the relationship between the initial supply quantity and the relevant costs under Policy 2. We performed exact analysis on our problem formulation and developed a solution procedure for the optimal initial supply quantity. Through a numerical study, we found out that Policy 1 is favored by low values of the number of systems, long lifetime of the systems, low values of the MTBF of the old components (for fixed percentage improvement in MTBF), high values of the percentage improvement in MTBF, high values of the increase in the unit price of the new components after time 0, large batch sizes, and high values of the downtime costs per failures. The reverse of each of these conditions favors Policy 2.We assume that the replenishment lead time is zero in our original model. We also provide an extension of our model and explain its use for cases with positive replenishment lead times.Our research can be extended in multiple directions in the future. One direction can be the investigation of other policies (e.g. policies covering the full range of the K strategy, upgrading systems in clusters identified by geographical locations) together with inventory decisions. One may consider treating the batch size q1 as a decision variable. Incorporation of general failure rates into the model may also enrich the insights.