@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sequential heuristic for the two-dimensional bin-packing problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A heuristic for the 2D bin-packing problem is proposed.The sequential value correction method is applied to the problem.Both guillotine and free patterns can be used.The algorithm yields solutions better than those of the published algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Packing,2D bin-packing,Sequential value correction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A heuristic approach for the two-dimensional bin-packing problem is proposed. The algorithm is based on the sequential heuristic procedure that generates each pattern to produce some items and repeats until all items are produced. Both guillotine and non-guillotine patterns can be used. Each pattern is obtained from calling a pattern-generation procedure, where the objective is to maximize the pattern value. The item values are adjusted after the generation of each pattern using a value correction formula. The algorithm is compared with five published algorithms, using 50 groups of benchmark instances. The results indicate that the algorithm is the most efficient in improving solution quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the industries such as wood, metal and glass, it is often necessary to produce a set of rectangular items i∈I={1,…,m} with length liand height hi(the demand of each item type is 1), from larger bins with length L and height H. This can be modeled as the two-dimensional bin-packing problem (2BP). The objective is to minimize material input (number of bins). It is assumed that each item must be packed parallel to the edge of a bin, in either the given orientation or 90 degrees rotated. A choice should be made between either using guillotine patterns or free (non-guillotine) ones.The 2BP can be classified according to the following two rules (Lodi, Martello, & Daniele, 1999):(1)Orientation: the items may have either a fixed orientation or 90 degrees rotated.Type of cuts: whether or not the cutting patterns should meet the requirement of guillotine cuts.Considering the combination of these two rules, the 2BP can be classified into four types:(1)2BPOG: Items are oriented (O) and guillotine cuts are required (G).2BPRG: Items may be rotated by 90 degrees (R) and guillotine cuts are required (G).2BPOF: Items are oriented (O) and cutting is free (F).2BPRF: Items may be rotated by 90 degrees (R) and cutting is free (F).The solution of the 2BP is a cutting plan that contains a set of cutting patterns, each of which has specified items layout. The (usage) frequency of each pattern is one, or equivalently, the number of patterns is equal to the number of bins used.In this paper, a sequential value correction heuristic (SVC2BPR) for 2BPR (both 2BPRG and 2BPRF) is presented. The algorithm is denoted as SVC2BPRG when guillotine patterns are used and as SVC2BPRF when free patterns are allowed. It generates a specified number of cutting plans, using different item values. The cutting plan that yields the minimum number of bins is selected as the solution. Each pattern in the current cutting plan is obtained from calling a pattern-generation procedure, where the objective is to maximize the pattern value, that is, the total value of the included items. Initially the item values are equal to their areas. To diversify the cutting plans, the values of the items included in the current pattern are corrected after each pattern being generated based on the size of the items and the material utilization of the pattern, using a formula similar to those in the literature (Belov & Scheithauer, 2007; Belov, Scheithauer, & Mukhacheva, 2008; Cui, Yang, & Chen, 2013). 500 benchmark instances in 50 groups are used to test the performance of the algorithm. The computational results show that the algorithm can achieve better solutions in a reasonable amount of time, compared to five algorithms published in the literature (Boschetti & Mingozzi, 2003; Charalambous & Fleszer, 2011; Harwig, Barnes, & James, 2006; Hayek, Moukrim, & Negre, 2008; Polyakovsky & M’Hallah, 2009).The paper makes contributions possibly from the following aspects:(1)It may be the first to solve the 2BPR with a sequential procedure that is based on value correction of the itemsIt may be the first to use the patterns with the specified geometric structure (described later in Section 3.1) to solve the 2BPRG. This type of patterns is easy to use in practice.It proposes a look-ahead strategy adequate for improving the quality of the free patterns used in this paper.The proposed algorithm is able to improve the average solution qualities of both 2BPRG and 2BPRF benchmark instances.The next sections are arranged as follows. Literature is reviewed in Section 2. The SVC2BPR is presented in Section 3. In Section 4, benchmark instances are used to evaluate the algorithm’s effectiveness in material input minimization, and the computational results are compared with those of five published algorithms. Conclusions are given in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The sequential value correction heuristic SVC2BPR for the 2BPR is proposed in this paper. It is rely on the combination of pattern generation procedures and the value correction scheme. The computational results indicate that the algorithm is more efficient in improving solution quality than five published algorithms for the instances tested.Future research direction may include the extending of the algorithm to solve the 2BPR with multiple bins and the two dimensional cutting stock problem.