@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Subset Sum game

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A game theoretic version of the Subset Sum problem is considered.Two agents take turns to fill a shared knapsack with their items.Natural heuristic strategies are proposed and analyzed from a worst-case perspective.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Subset Sum problem,Multi-agent optimization,Performance analysis,Game theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work we address a game theoretic variant of the Subset Sum problem, in which two decision makers (agents/players) compete for the usage of a common resource represented by a knapsack capacity. Each agent owns a set of integer weighted items and wants to maximize the total weight of its own items included in the knapsack. The solution is built as follows: Each agent, in turn, selects one of its items (not previously selected) and includes it in the knapsack if there is enough capacity. The process ends when the remaining capacity is too small for including any item left.We look at the problem from a single agent point of view and show that finding an optimal sequence of items to select is anNP-hard problem. Therefore we propose two natural heuristic strategies and analyze their worst-case performance when (1) the opponent is able to play optimally and (2) the opponent adopts a greedy strategy.From a centralized perspective we observe that some known results on the approximation of the classical Subset Sum can be effectively adapted to the multi-agent version of the problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the computer science literature of the last two decades several classical combinatorial optimization problems have been revisited in a game theoretic setting where multiple deciders take over the role of a single decision maker. This new field of research is receiving growing attention and led to the emergence of algorithmic game theory (Nisan, Roughgarden, Tardos, & Vazirani, 2007).In this context we address the problem of two agents competing for a shared resource. It can be described as a game theoretic variant of the classical Subset Sum problem, in which there are two players, or agents, called Paand Pb, and a given amount c of a shared resource. Each agent owns a set of items with non-negative weights and knows the other agent’s item set, i.e. there is perfect information.The Subset Sum game works as follows: Starting with Pa, the agents take turns to select exactly one of their items which was not selected before. The total weight of all selected items must not exceed the capacity c at any time. The aim of the game is, for each agent, to select a subset of its items with maximum total weight. This problem is new and has not been studied in the literature before. In the following we point out some possible application scenarios.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have analyzed a game theoretic variant of the well known Subset Sum problem in which the agents take turns to select their items to be included in a capacitated shared resource. This round-robin dynamics has been considered in other game theoretic studies of classical combinatorial problems (Agnetis et al., 2007; Auletta et al., 2009; Piliouras, Valla, & Vegh, 2012), however a possible topic for further research is to consider, as in Marini et al. (2013) and Nicosia et al. (2011), a different game theoretic variant of the Subset Sum problem where the round-robin mechanism is replaced by a central decision mechanism (coordinator) which picks only one of the two items selected by the two agents in each round (cf. Section 1.2). Hence, a coordinator may decide to enforce different rules, that incorporate some idea of fairness (which is for instance very important in the context of telecommunication networks).Another possible direction for future research is to analyze the existence and the properties of equilibria, which can be used by a coordinator to enforce solutions from which the agents have no incentive to deviate.Finally, one could study the problem in which an agent has limited information on the other agent’s items.