@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrating operations and marketing decisions using delayed differentiation of products and guaranteed delivery time under stochastic demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Price-lead time-inventory trade-off with product variety and uncertain demand.The model is a two-stage, stochastic, integer, non-linear programming problem.Demand correlation, lead time & price sensitivity of demand, semi-finished goods.Solve large problem instances based on variant of Benders’ Decomposition method.Improved cost and lower bound over Classic Benders’ and Non-linear B&B methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic programming,Generalized benders’ decomposition method,Marketing,Operations interface,Delayed product differentiation,Guaranteed lead time,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this research, we integrate the issues related to operations and marketing strategy of firms characterized by large product variety, short lead times, and demand variability in an assemble-to-order environment. The operations decisions are the inventory level of components and semi-finished goods, and configuration of semi-finished goods. The marketing decisions are the products price and a lead time guarantee which is uniform for all products. We develop an integrated mathematical model that captures trade-offs related to inventory of semi-finished goods, inventory of components, outsourcing costs, and customer demand based on guaranteed lead time and price.The mathematical model is a two-stage, stochastic, integer, and non-linear programming problem. In the first stage, prior to demand realization, the operation and marketing decisions are determined. In the second stage, inventory is allocated to meet the demand. The objective is to maximize the expected profit per-unit time. The computational results on the test problems provide managerial insights for firms faced with the conflicting needs of offering: (i) low prices, (ii) guaranteed and short lead time, and (iii) a large product variety by leveraging operations decisions.We also develop a solution procedure to solve large instances of the problem based on an accelerated version of the Generalized Benders’ Decomposition (GBD) method. The accelerating mechanism involves search intensification and diversification around solutions which improve the upper bound. The suggested GBD method gives a better solution and a tighter lower bound in a given time period than the conventional GBD implementation and the non-linear branch-and-bound method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Firms producing large variety of short life cycle products, such as computers, fashion apparel, and smart phones, are re-designing their products and processes to be responsive to demand uncertainties and increasing customer expectations (Brown, Lee, & Petrakian, 2000; Lee, 1996). The key business strategy of these firms is to offer customized products, shorter lead times, and competitive prices. This has strategic implications on the operations and marketing strategy of firms. For instance, one of the key elements of operations strategy of the firms offering customized products during the last decade has been to postpone the product differentiation at final assembly stages (Feitzinger & Lee, 1997). To this end, shorter lead times are sustained by holding inventory in the form of semi-finished products. Swaminathan and Tayur (1998) refer to these semi-finished products as vanilla boxes in the context of computer industry. The vanilla boxes are designed so that they serve broad product lines and that the end-products can be assembled-to-order (ATO) in a short lead time. Strategies for assembling vanilla boxes and their differentiated products are based on exploiting component commonality. Component commonality is present where end-products share several common components in different ratios (Baker, 1985; Collier, 1981, 1982). As mentioned, this strategy is increasingly being used by firms characterized by large variety, uncertain demand and short lead times. Notable among them are firms in the computer industry (Swaminathan & Tayur, 1998), the fashion industry (Signorelli & Heskett, 1984) and the food processing industry (Van Donk, 2001).Another interesting development for firms characterized by high variety and uncertain demand has been the marketing strategy of offering guaranteed lead times (Liu, Parlar, & Zhu, 2007; Rao, Swaminathan, & Zhang, 2005). The lead time guaranteed is often uniform for products which are minor variants of each other. Guaranteed lead time offers an additional incentive to capture demand for firms competing on price and lead time. However, guaranteed lead time has several implications on production planning. While short lead times are a recipe for increasing the profits by attracting more demand, they also impose coordination issues with operations (Hayes & Pisano, 1996; So & Song, 1998). Typically, the lead time and pricing decisions are taken by the marketing department, whereas, capacity, production planning, and related order fullfilment decisions are determined by operations.In this research, we integrate the contemporary issues of operations and marketing strategy of firms characterized by high product variety, need for short and guaranteed lead times, and demand variability. Our discussions with some of the firms that face this complex market environment motivated this research. The conventional tool of managing this complexity with pure assemble-to-order is in conflict with guaranteed short lead times. A contrasting, make-to-stock strategy would obviously be vulnerable to supply–demand mismatch resulting in classical newsvendor trade-offs of excess inventory and shortages.In this research, we consider a manufacturing environment where a firm postpones the final assembly of the products in order to serve high variety with an objective of minimizing the supply–demand mismatch. The firm holds inventory in the form of semi-finished goods. The marketing strategy of the firm is to offer uniform guaranteed lead time. Existing results on managing product variety with semi-finished goods inventory (example Swaminathan & Tayur, 1998) do not address demand management issues like lead time and price. Similarly, the extensively available literature on pricing and lead time decisions (example Rao et al., 2005) do not consider the production planning issues that arise by choice of configuration of semi-finished products.One of the main objectives of this research is to jointly address the operation decisions of configuration and quantity of semi-finished goods, and the marketing decisions of guaranteed lead time and price. Based on our understanding from discussions with some of the apparel and smart-phones producers dealing with these issues, an integrated approach to determine operations and marketing decisions would mitigate the coordination problems arising due to independent optimization of these decisions. Motivated by the existing literature on these issues, specifically, we aim to integrate the operations decisions (vanilla box configuration and inventory) addressed in Swaminathan and Tayur (1998) and marketing decisions (guaranteed lead time and price) considered in Rao et al. (2005). Hence, we consider production environment similar to their work. Our aim is to capture the trade-offs arising due to joint optimization of lead time, price, and inventory of semi-finished goods under demand uncertainty and other complexities discussed earlier. We expect to derive managerial insights and develop an implementable solution approach from the integration of above mentioned operations and marketing decisions.The marketing and operations decisions in our research problem are taken before the actual demand realization. We model the demand as a sum of two components. The first component is a strictly decreasing function of price and lead time. The second component captures demand uncertainty. We also assume that demand across products is correlated. The problem is modeled as a two-stage stochastic, mixed integer, non-linear programming (SMINLP) problem. In the first stage, we determine marketing decisions and inventory levels of semi-finished goods. Next, we allocate the semi-finished goods to implement the production plan after realizing the market demand.In order to make our analysis robust and implementable for real-life problems, we contribute to the literature by developing an efficient solution procedure for solving the model. The literature on SMINLP problem is scanty (Bruni, 2006). Representing the stochastic component in such problems by a set of scenarios with associated probabilities (Swaminathan & Tayur, 1998; Wets, 1982) results in an equivalent deterministic MINLP problem. Large number of scenarios depicts reality more accurately but impacts the problem complexity and computational effort. The MINLP problem is solved mainly using: (1) Generalized Benders Decomposition (GBD) method (Benders, 1962; Geoffrion, 1972), (2) Outer-Approximation (OA) method (Duran & Grossmann, 1986), and (3) Non-linear Branch and Bound (NBB) method (Gupta & Ravindran, 1985). Kravanja, ilih, and Kravanja (2005) provide a comprehensive list of other techniques. All the three methods decompose the MINLP problem into a mixed-integer problem (MIP) and a stochastic non-linear problem (SNLP). GBD method in particular, at each iteration, selects configuration of semi-finished goods to stock (MIP problem) and then determines corresponding marketing and inventory level decision (SNLP problem). It then utilizes the dual values of constraints in SNLP problem to improve the decision to stock semi-finished goods. GBD method can solve the SNLP problem as a linear programming problem and a stochastic LP (SLP) problem. Applying this to our research problem, at each iteration, the first step is to determine the marketing decision (LP problem). Next, the inventory level of semi-finished goods is determined (SLP problem). The dual values of constraints in SLP problem then improve the marketing decisions. GBD method decomposes the SLP problem, if required, into a series of LP problems. This permits computational tractability for large problem sizes. However, with increase in number of binary variables, conventional implementation of GBD method leads to weaker lower bounds and slow convergence. Hence, it is usual to incorporate techniques to accelerate the conventional GBD algorithm.Our contributions in this study are as follows:1.We study an assemble-to-order (ATO) production environment which considers delayed differentiation of products using semi-finished goods, uniform guaranteed lead time and pricing decisions. We provide a model that captures trade-offs related to inventory of semi-finished goods, inventory of components, outsourcing costs, and customer demand based on guaranteed lead time and price.We develop a computationally tractable and robust solution approach based on an accelerated version of GBD method that incorporates local search techniques of intensification and diversification for solving large size problems. A comparison of our solution procedure with classical GBD method, OA method, and NBB method based upon four large problem instances shows encouraging results.Our model jointly determines the marketing and operations decisions. Our analysis provides managerial insights into the structure of the problem and captures effects of variability of demand, demand correlation among products, lead time and price sensitivity of demand, and permitted number of vanilla box configurations. We expect that our integrated approach would reduce the coordination costs and conflicts arising due to independent decision making of marketing and operations.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the related literature and positions our work in the literature. Section 3 describes the research problem and develops that mathematical model. Computational results and discussion are provided in Section 4. Section 5 proposes the procedure for solving large instances and develops accelerating mechanism within GBD method. Section 6 concludes and provides directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
