@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Technology adoption with limited foresight and uncertain technological learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Most previous optimization models on technology adoption assumes perfect foresight.This paper analyzes the effects of limited foresight and uncertain technological learning.Decisions minimizing the total cost of each period could result in a non-optimal solution.The range of technological bifurcation is much larger than that with perfect foresight.Uncertainty in technological learning tends to reduce the range of technological bifurcation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in societal problem analysis,Technology adoption,Limited foresight,Endogenous technological change,Uncertain technological learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most previous optimization models on technology adoption assume perfect foresight over the long term. In reality, decision-makers do not have perfect foresight, and the endogenous driving force of technology adoption is uncertain. With a stylized optimization model, this paper explores the adoption of a new technology, its associated cost dynamics, and technological bifurcations with limited foresight and uncertain technological learning. The study shows that when modeling with limited foresight and technological learning, (1) the longer the length of the decision period, the earlier the adoption of a new technology, and the value of a foresight can be amplified with a high learning rate. However, when the decision period is beyond a certain length, further extending its length has little influence on adopting the new technology; (2) with limited foresight, decisions aiming at minimizing the total cost of each decision period will commonly result in a non-optimal solution from the perspective of the entire decision horizon; and (3) the range of technological bifurcation is much larger than that with perfect foresight, but uncertainty in technological learning tends to reduce the range by removing the early adoption paths of a new technology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Most of the literature on technology adoption is from the perspective of the psychology-based acceptance of new technologies by individual users or organizations. Well-known works from this perspective include the technology adoption lifecycle model (see Rogers, 1962), the Bass diffusion model (Bass, 1969), and the technology acceptance model (TAM) (see Bagozzi, Davis, & Warshaw, 1992; Davis, 1989). There are times when human society as a system needs to consider the adoption of new technologies for the sustainable development of the system, i.e., there are occasions when technology adoption needs to be studied from the perspective of social planning instead of from the perspective of individual users or organizational psychology. Technology adoption with social planning is not commonly appropriate for end-use technologies; instead, they are more applicable to infrastructures, such as power plants and railways.Operational optimization models have been a major tool in the study of technology adoption from the perspective of social planners. The purpose of these models is mainly to determine the optimal technology adoption path that minimizes the total cost of the entire system, satisfying various constraints. Well-known examples of such models include the MESSAGE (Messner & Strubegger, 1994) and MARKAL (Seebregts, 2001) models. Historical observations show that the diffusion of new technologies commonly takes a long time (e.g., see Geroski, 2000), and the environmental impact of using some technologies could be longer; for example, CO2 emitted by power-generating technologies may remain in the atmosphere for a very long time (IPCC, 2007). Thus, these models are developed with a long-term perspective.Most works analyzing technology adoption with an operational optimization framework assume perfect foresight for a long period of time (e.g., see Azar, Lindgren, & Andersson, 2003; Barreto & Kypreos, 2002; Ma, 2010). That is, these models assume that there is a decision-maker who has complete information about the future. However, in fact, nobody can have such perfect foresight. There are always many unpredictable factors that may affect the future development of the system. These models usually address unpredictable factors by assuming different future scenarios. In the real world, decision-makers commonly adjust technology strategies, based on evaluations of the market and technologies at different stages. In short, decisions related to technology adoption are commonly made with limited foresight, but adaptively, in reality.In recent years, some researchers have begun to introduce limited foresight into operational optimization models of technological change. For example, Hedenus, Azar, and Lindgren (2006) introduced limited foresight into the Global Energy Transition (GET) model; Martinsen, Krey, and Markewitz (2007) developed a multi-period IKARUS optimization model in which optimal solutions for previous stages have effects on later ones; Keppo and Strubegger (2010) developed a multi-stage MESSAGE model to study the diffusion of new energy technologies and their impact on CO2 emissions, and the decision periods and their overlaps in their model can be determined freely. These studies focused mainly on the application of limited foresight. Technological change in these studies was treated mainly as exogenous and deterministic.Technological learning is considered to be the endogenous driving force of the adoption of new technologies (e.g., see Ma, Grubler, & Nakamori, 2009; Schwoon, 2008). This means that the cost of using new technologies tends to decrease as the experience of using them accumulates (Arrow, 1962; Arthur, 1989). Historical observations show that technological learning is quite uncertain (McDonald & Schrattenholzer, 2001). In optimization models with perfect foresight, the expected risk cost that results from overestimating technology learning is summed over the entire time horizon (e.g., see Grubler & Gritsevskyi, 1998; Ma, 2010). However, with limited foresight, decision-makers are expected to address the risk cost stage-by-stage separately and how this will influence the adoption of a new technology remains an unexplored question.With technological learning, optimization models will be non-linear and non-convex, and thus, there could be more than one local optimal solution with very similar total costs but different technology adoption paths and thus different environmental impact, which has been called technological bifurcation (Chi, Ma, & Zhu, 2012; Ma, 2010). Studies on technological bifurcations can help decision-makers understand how to lead the adoption of advanced and environmentally friendly technology without incurring extreme costs. With limited foresight, technology adoptions will be decided by a series of sequential decisions instead of by a one-time decision with perfect foresight, and how this will influence technological bifurcations constitutes another unexplored question.With a stylized techno-economic system, we explore in this paper the adoption of a new technology, its associated cost dynamics, and technological bifurcations with two types of limited foresight schemes and uncertain technological learning. The model and study presented in this paper are not intended by any means to be “realistic” in the sense of showing technological or sectoral detail. Rather, the model is intended to be used primarily for exploratory modeling purposes and as a heuristic research device to examine in depth the impacts of alternative model formulations of the dynamics of technology adoption.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces an optimization framework for technology adoption and two types of limited foresight schemes. Section 3 introduces a simplified techno-economic system model based on the optimization framework introduced in Section 2. With the stylized model introduced in Section 3, Section 4 analyzes how different limited foresight and uncertain learning influence the adoption of a new technology and its associated cost dynamics. Section 5 analyzes technological bifurcations with the two limited foresight schemes. Section 6 provides concluding remarks.Fig. 1is an illustration of the modeling framework used in this paper. The left side of the figure lists natural resources, such as coal, crude oil, and gas; the right side lists human demands, such as transportation and heating, and, in the middle, there are various types of technologies (denoted as Tech 1,Tech 2,…,Tech N) that link human demands to natural resources. For example, Resource 1 is coal, Tech 1 is a technology to extract coal from nature, and Tech 2 is a coal power plant that can generate electricity with coal. Thus, Tech 1’s output can be Tech 2’s input, and Tech 2’s output – electricity – can be used as an input for other technologies to provide services such as heating and transportation. Many large-scale models in use, such as the MESSAGE (Messner & Strubegger, 1994) model and the MARKAL (Seebregts, 2001) model, have essentially the same structure as that shown in Fig. 1.With the structure shown in Fig. 1, suppose there are N technologies available in the economic system under study, the technology strategy at time t can be denoted asXt=x1t⋮xNt, and the cost vector for strategy Xtcan be denoted asCt=(c1t,…,cNt). Here, the strategy of using a technology is expressed numerically, it is quantified by the new installed capacity and production of the technology, i.e.,xit={sit,pit}, wheresitdenotes the volume of technology i’s capacity installed at time t, andpitdenotes the production of technology i at time t. The simplified objective function (see Messner, Golodnikov, & Gritsevskyi, 1996) of a deterministic (endogenous/exogenous) technological change model can be written as:(1)min∑t=1TCtXt,where T denotes the time scale of the problem. The above objective function will be subject to various constraints related to demands, resources, and relationships among technologies (one technology’s output may be another’s input). With technological learning, Ctis a function of initial status and decisions at previous strategies; that is,(2)Ct=f(X0,X1,…,Xt-1,B),where B is a vector containing technology learning rates and X0 denotes the initial status of technologies. Note that the initial status plays an important role in technological learning models. Combining Eq. (2) with Eq. (1), the objective function can be written as(3)min∑t=1Tf(X0,X1,…,Xt-1,B)Xt.UsingX‾t-1to denote (X0,X1,…,Xt−1),Eq. (3) can be simplified to(4)min∑t=1Tf(X‾t-1,B)Xt.With technological learning, the objective function in Eq. (4) is a non-linear non-convex function.When incorporating the uncertainty of technological learning into the model, the elements in vector B in Eq. (4) are treated as random values.1In real applications, we can assume that some technologies have no learning effect, and their learning rates can be viewed as deterministic and equal to 0. For example, see the introduction to “existing” technology in Section 3.1We define the vector of uncertain technological learning rates as B(W), where W denotes the vector of elements from probability spaces that are commonly characterized by lognormal distributions (McDonald & Schrattenholzer, 2001). For a given strategy along the entire time scale, X={X1,…,XT}, and an observed scenario W of the cost path{f(X‾0,B(W)),…,f(X‾t-1,B(W))}, the positive deviation of the observed total cost∑t=1Tf(X‾t-1,B)Xtfrom the calculated cost∑t=1Tf(X‾t-1,B(W))Xtis defined as:(5)R(X,W)=∑t=1Tmax{0,[f(X‾t-1,B(W))-f(X‾t-1,B)]Xt}.R(X,W) is an expression of the underestimation of the costs of strategy X using the deterministic cost function. R(X,W) results from overestimating technological learning rates, and we call it a risk cost in the following explanation. The R(X,W) can also be formulated in other ways. For example, Grubler and Gritsevskyi (1998) applied a square format: thus,R(X,W)=∑t=1Tmax{0,[f(X‾t-1,B(W))-f(X‾t-1,B)]Xt}2. The expected risk cost can be denoted as:(6)R(X)=ER(X,W),where E denotes expectation. With the risk-factor method, the expected risk cost R(X) enters the objective function as an additional “penalty” term, as shown in Eq. (7):(7)min∑t=1Tf(X‾t-1,B)Xt+ρR(X),where ρ (⩾0) is a risk factor denoting the decision-makers’ attitude toward risk. Messner et al. (1996) argued that a risk factor ρ>1 emphasizes the risk, whereasρ⩽1reflects a tendency toward risk neutrality. With the formulation shown in Eq. (7), a small ρ will favor the early adoption of technologies that are currently expensive but have learning potential.Most of the existing studies using the modeling framework above assume perfect foresight for the entire decision horizon. However, in reality, it is likely that decision-makers will continuously adjust their technology adoption strategies based on evaluations of the market and technologies. That is, decisions are made with limited foresight, but adaptively. Keppo and Strubegger (2010) summarized that there could be two different decision schemes with limited foresight (Fig. 2). With perfect foresight, the entire time horizon is composed of only one decision period, while with limited foresight, the entire time horizon is divided into several connecting decision periods, with each decision period shorter than the entire decision horizon, and a decision-maker makes sequential decisions in the connected decision periods. In the first scheme, limited foresight (1) in Fig. 2, there is no overlap between two connecting periods, while in the second scheme, limited foresight (2), there is an overlap between two connecting decision periods, meaning that decision-makers will adjust decisions before the end of a decision period. Each decision period is composed of several decision intervals. A decision interval is a basic time unit for installing new capacities of technologies.In the following section, the perfect foresight in Fig. 2 is abbreviated PF, and limited foresight (1) and (2) are abbreviated LF1 and LF2, respectively.With limited foresight, a decision-maker is myopic. He/she focuses only on minimizing cost in the current decision period, and thus, the decisions on technology adoption might differ from those that would be made with perfect foresight.With technological learning, the optimization model will be non-linear and non-convex. With limited foresight, in each decision period, there could be more than one local optimal solution for technology adoption with very similar total costs but different technology adoption paths. The selection of different local optimal solutions in the previous period will influence the decision in the current period. From the perspective of the entire time horizon, this path-dependent effect might result in different technology adoption paths versus the perspective with perfect foresight.In the following sections, with a simplified techno-economic system for heuristic analysis, we will explore how different limited foresight schemes influence the adoption of a new technology, its associated cost dynamics, and the technological bifurcations.For the sake of transparency, the structure of our model is quite simple. The simplification also follows previous research on endogenous technological change models (e.g., see Grubler & Gritsevskyi, 1998; Ma & Nakamori, 2009; Manne & Barreto, 2002). In the model, the economy demands one homogenous good, e.g., electricity, and demand increases over time. There are three types of technologies that can be used to produce the goods. The first is called existing technology, or, simply, T1, which has low efficiency and low initial investment cost. The second is called incremental technology, or T2, which has higher efficiency and higher initial investment cost. The third is called revolutionary technology, or T3, which has the highest efficiency and the highest initial investment cost. T2 and T3 have learning potential; that is, their initial investment cost will decrease as experience of using them increases. It will be shown later that our model is a non-linear and non-convex model.Let T denote the length of the entire decision horizon, and let δ denote the discount rate in the model. The investment cost of technology i (i=1, 2, 3) at time t (t=1,2,…,T), denoted asCFit, is calculated using Eq. (8).(8)CFit=CFi0×(C‾it)-bi,where biis the elasticity of the investment cost with regard to cumulative installed capacity and it is easy to prove that1-2-bi(which is called learning rate of technology i) is the percentage of the decrease in the investment cost when the cumulative installed capacity doubles, andC‾itdenotes the cumulative installed capacity of technology i at time t, which is calculated with Eq. (9).(9)C‾it=∑j=-∞tCij=∑j=1tCij+C‾i0,whereC‾i0denotes the initial cumulative installed capacity of technology i,Citdenotes the total installed capacity of technology i at time t, and(10)Cit=∑j=t-τityij,where τidenotes the plant life of technology i, andYitdenotes the new installed capacity of technology i at time t.The cost of extracting each unit resource at time t, denoted asCEt, is a linear function of resource depletion, and it is calculated with Eq. (11).(11)CEt=CE0+kER‾t,whereCE0denotes the initial cost of extracting each unit resource at time t, coefficient kEdenotes the sensitivity of the extraction cost to cumulative extraction, andR‾tdenotes the cumulative extraction at time t, which is calculated with Eq. (12).(12)R‾t=∑j=1tRj,where Rtdenotes the total resource consumption at time t and is the sum of resources consumed by each technology at time t, as shown in Eq. (13).(13)Rt=∑i=131ηixit,where ηidenotes the efficiency of technology i, andxitdenotes the production of technology i at time t.Demand increases over time with a constant annual growth rate, as shown in Eq. (14).(14)Dt=D0(1+α)t,where Dtdenotes the total demand at time t, D0 denotes the initial demand, and α denotes the annual growth rate of the demand.With the assumption of deterministic learning, the optimization model minimizes the total cost of the system with Eq. (15) as its objective function.(15)min∑i=13∑t=1T1(1+δ)tCFityit+∑t=1T1(1+δ)tCEtRt+∑i=13∑t=1T1(1+δ)tCOMixit,where CoMidenotes the operation and maintenance (O+M) cost of each technology i.The constraints of the optimization model include Eqs. (16)–(19)(16)Dt⩽∑i=13xit(t=1,…,T),(17)xit⩽Cit(t=1,…,T)(i=1,2,3),(18)xit⩾0(t=1,……T)(i=1,2,3),(19)yit⩾0(t=1,…,T)(i=1,2,3).Constraint function (16) indicates that at each time t, the total production of all of the three types of technologies must satisfy the demand. Constraint function (17) denotes that for each technology i, its production at time t cannot go beyond its total installed capacity. Constraint functions (18) and (19) denote that none of the decision variables can be negative.With uncertain technological learning, the objective function can be written as Eq. (20).(20)min∑i=13∑t=1T1(1+δ)tCFityit+∑t=1T1(1+δ)tCEtRt+∑i=13∑t=1T1(1+δ)tCOMixit+ρE∑t=1Tmax{0,[CF3t(ψ)-CF3t]y3t},The first part of objective function (20) is the same as objective function (15), and in the second part, ρ denotes the decision-maker’s attitude toward risk (a larger ρ indicates a more risk-averse attitude). E denotes expectation andCF3t(ψ)is a random variable; here, ψ denotes an element from a probability space characterized by a lognormal distribution. The constraints remain the same as they appear in the constraint functions (16)–(19).In reality, as the experience of adopting a new technology accumulates, the uncertainty of learning could decrease, especially in the long run. In our simplified model, the learning rate is treated as a random value following a lognormal distribution for the full time horizon, i.e., in our model, there is no learning about the learning rate. Introducing a learning mechanism of the learning rate remains a potential avenue for future work.With perfect foresight, the T in the above equations denotes the entire time horizon, and with limited foresight, the T denotes the length of a decision period. With limited foresight, from the second period, the total and cumulative installed capacity of T1, T2, and T3 and the cumulative resource consumption are determined by decisions made in previous periods.To analyze the adoption of T3, we first run baseline simulations with PF, LF1, and LF2 with the parameters indicated in Table 1. Then, we vary the length of the decision periods and the learning rate of T3 to see how they will influence the adoption of T3. As shown in Table 1, in the baseline simulations, the learning rate of T3 is treated as deterministic, and the decision period is 30years with LF1 and LF2.In the baseline simulations, we run an optimization for six connecting periods with LF1 and LF2; therefore, in total, the decision horizon is 180years. In each decision period, there could be more than one local optimal solution with similar total costs but with different technology adoption paths. We select the solution with the minimal cost in each decision period. Fig. 3plots the diffusion of T3 in the baseline simulations, from which we can see that with PF, T3 is adopted quite early, and with LF1 and LF2, T3 is adopted approximately 70–80years later. With LF2, the adoption of T3 is 10years earlier than the adoption of T3 with LF1. In the following, we will vary the length of the decision period and the driving force of the adoption of T3 (i.e., the learning rate of T3) to see how they influence the adoption of T3.This paper mainly focuses on how technological learning, its uncertainty, and the lengths of the decision-making periods influence the diffusion of a new technology. It is worth noting that other parameters, such as the initial capacity of T3 together with demand level, influence the diffusion of new technologies. With a low initial capacity of T3, once it seems useful to invest in the technology, the cumulative capacity can be doubled many times before the demand is fulfilled and thus induce a high learning effect. Applying additional constraints can also influence the diffusion of T3, for example, if the T3’s market penetration ratio is limited, the diffusion of T3 might not be as fast as shown in Fig. 3.Fig. 4plots the taking-off time2When T3’s share reaches 10% in the system.2of adopting T3 with different combinations of deterministic learning rates and lengths of the decision period. The left part of Fig. 4 plots the taking-off time of T3’s adoption with LF1, and the right part plots the taking-off time with LF2. For comparison, we also plot the adoption of T3 with PF. From Fig. 4, we can observe the following:(1)Generally, the longer the length of the decision period, the earlier the adoption of T3. However, when the decision period is beyond a certain length, further extending the length of it has little influence on adopting T3. In Fig. 4, when the decision period extends from 60years to 90years, it does not much influence the adoption of T3. The decision period with PF is the longest, so the adoption of T3 is always earlier than that with LF1 and LF2. This is because with a short decision period, a decision-maker only cares about minimizing the total cost of the short period. Thus, he/she tends to avoid adopting a new technology with high cost currently (i.e., the learning potential is ignored). In this sense, the shorter the length of the decision period, the less a decision-maker would consider adopting an expensive new technology. As the length of the decision period gets longer, a decision-maker tends to consider the learning potential of a currently expensive technology and thus tends to adopt it earlier.With LF1, the taking-off time of T3’s adoption is not brought forward monotonously with the increase in the length of the decision period. For example, with the learning rate at 30% and when the length of the decision period increases from 40 to 50years, the taking-off time is not brought forward; instead, it is postponed from 2110 to 2120. This is because with a decision period of 40 or 50years, the adoption of T3 cannot take off in the first two decision periods; instead, it will take off in the third decision period. With the length of a decision period of 50years, the third decision period starts from 2100, 20years later than that with the length as 40years. Thus, with this inopportuneness, when the length of the decision period increases, the taking-off time is delayed.The taking-off time is earlier with LF2 than it is with LF1 in most cases. For example, when the learning rate is 30% and the length of the decision period is 60years, with LF1, T3 appears in 2090, but with LF2, T3 appears in 2070. This is because with LF2, the overlaps between decision periods can help in removing the inopportuneness mentioned above.The higher T3’s learning rate is, the earlier it will be adopted. This is true for PF, LF1, and LF2. This means that with limited foresight, learning potential is also an endogenous mechanism for the adoption of new technologies, although its effect is weaker than it is with perfect foresight.Next, we explore how uncertainty in technological learning influences the adoption of T3. We assume that T3’s learning rate is a random value following a lognormal distribution with its mean as 30%. Fig. 5plots the delay (compared with that with deterministic learning) of the adoption of T3 with uncertain technological learning and differing attitudes toward risk, ρ. As shown in Fig. 5, uncertainty in learning will generally postpone the adoption of T3. In Fig. 5, for the same length of the decision period, the larger the ρ, the longer the delay in the adoption of T3. The delay landscape is quite rugged along the length-of-decision-period dimension. This is because there is opportuneness as well as inopportuneness between two periods. For example, when the decision period is 80years, with deterministic learning, the taking-off time is approximately 2110, and it is in the second decision period; with uncertain learning, the taking-off time is also in the second decision period, and thus, this opportuneness results in a very small difference in the adoption of T3. In most other cases, however, with uncertain learning, the adoption of T3 will be postponed until the next decision period, and this inopportuneness, together with a long decision period (e.g., 90years), will result in long delay in the adoption of T3. With LF2, the overlaps between decision periods can help to remove the inopportuneness or opportuneness mentioned above, so the delay landscape with LF2 is less rugged than the one with the LF1.Fig. 6plots the total cost over 180years with different combinations of deterministic technological learning rates and lengths of the decision period. As shown in Fig. 6, the smaller the learning rate, the higher the total cost, and the shorter the length of the decision period, the higher the total cost. Additionally, with LF1 and LF2, the total cost is higher than the total cost with the PF. This is because with limited foresight, the adoption of T3 will be delayed, and thus, its learning effect is lower than that with perfect foresight, especially when the decision period is very short. From Fig. 6, we can also see that generally, the value of a foresight can be amplified with a higher learning rate. When the learning rate is 0.25, increasing the length of the decision period does not result in a large reduction in the total cost, while when the learning rate is 0.45, increasing the length of the decision period results in a large reduction in the total cost.Fig. 7plots the increase in the total cost with uncertain learning and different risk attitudes. The total cost in Fig. 7 does not include the expected risk costs because they are not real costs but a term that simulates risk-avoiding behavior. As shown in Fig. 7, after adding uncertainty to T3’s learning rate, the total costs are increased, and the larger the ρ, the higher the total cost. This is because with a larger ρ, the adoption of T3 will be delayed. Fig. 7 also shows that with an increase in the length of a decision period, the increased costs generally tend to be larger. This is because with a long decision period, the adoption of T3 tends to be earlier than that with a shorter length decision period, as shown in Fig. 4. With a short decision period, the adoption of T3 is late and is thus mainly driven by resource depletion instead of by technological learning, so adding the uncertainty in learning does not much influence the adoption of T3 versus the adoption of T3 with a long decision period.Previous research with a perfect foresight assumption has shown that with technological learning, the optimization model could result in technological bifurcations, meaning that there could be more than one local optimal solution of technology adoption with very similar total costs but with different technology paths (see Chi et al., 2012; Ma, 2010). With limited foresight, the adoption of a new technology could also be bifurcated into different paths not only because of different optimal solutions in each decision period but also the path-dependent effect between connecting decision periods. In this section, we will explore how the assumption of limited foresight influences technological bifurcations.First, we explore technological bifurcations with baseline simulations with LF1. The upper part of Fig. 8plots substitution among the three technologies (T1, T2, and T3) in the baseline simulation with LF1, called path A. As mentioned above, path A is generated by selecting the local optimal solution with the minimal cost in each decision period. In each decision period, there could be more than one local optimal solution. For each decision period, with the same initial status, if a local optimal solution results in a total cost (of that decision period) more than 10% above the minimal cost, it is treated as an obvious bad solution; otherwise, it is treated as a near-optimal solution. The lower part of Fig. 8 shows another path (B), which is generated by selecting randomly from those near-optimal solutions in each decision period. As shown in Fig. 8, in path A, T2 dominates the system from 2040 to approximately 2140, and T3 begins to dominate the system in approximately 2150. In path B, T2 was not implemented at all, and T3 begins to dominate the system from approximately 2100, 50years earlier than in path A.Fig. 9plots the cost of each decision period for paths A and B. As shown, with path A, because the solution with the minimal total cost was selected in each period, at the beginning, its annual cost is lower than that of path B. However, from the 4th decision-making period (2090–2120), the annual cost of path A becomes higher than that of path B. This is because with the selection of the solution with the minimal cost, path A does not favor the early adoption of T3; instead, it adopts T2. This could result in lower costs in the beginning, but it postpones the benefits from T3’s technological learning. In path B, although it costs more in the beginning to adopt T3, T3’s learning effect helps it save many costs in the long run.Fig. 10plots the total cost of different adoption paths with LF1, with path A’s and path B’s total costs as two of these paths. We can see that although path A was generated by selecting the solution with the lowest cost, its total cost is not the lowest one. Fig. 11plots the total cost of different adoption paths with LF2 in which path A also denotes the path that is generated by selecting the solution with the lowest cost in each decision period. As we can observe, there are three other paths with total costs lower than path A’s total cost. In summary, what we can learn from Figs. 8–11 is that there can be different technology adoption paths by selecting different solutions in each decision period, and selecting the solution with the lowest cost in each decision period does not mean that the total cost will be the lowest.The left part of Fig. 12plots the different adoption paths of T3 with LF1 and with the risk attitude as 0 (i.e., the technological learning is treated as deterministic). The right part of Fig. 12 plots the different adoption paths of T3 with the risk attitude as 10. The different adoption paths in Fig. 12 are the results of taking randomly near-optimal solutions for each individual 30-year decision period. As shown, with a risk-averse attitude, the paths with the early adoption of T3 disappeared and the range of the technological bifurcations reduced dramatically.We use Eq. (21) to calculate the range of technological bifurcations(21)B=tl-te,where B denotes the range of technological bifurcations, tldenotes the time when the share of T3 is 50% in the latest adoption path of T3, and tedenotes the time when the share of T3 is 50% in the earliest adoption path of T3. Fig. 13plots the range of technological bifurcations with PF, LF1, and LF2, and with different attitudes toward risk. In Fig. 13, all of the parameters are the same as in the baseline simulations except that the learning is uncertain. For a certain risk attitude, the bifurcation is calculated with all possible paths that are built with all possible near-optimal solutions (as defined, with no more than 10% above the minimal total cost) in each decision period. Different risk attitudes will result in a different number of possible paths, which is not reflected in Fig. 13. From Fig. 13, we can observe the following.•Most of the time, the range of technological bifurcations with limited foresight is much larger than that with perfect foresight. This is because the adoption paths with limited foresight are generated by a series of connecting decision periods, and the small difference of the adoption of the T3 in the early decision periods will be enlarged by the following decision periods with path-dependent effects.With LF1 and LF2, with an increase in ρ, the range of technological bifurcation tends to decrease, but with PF, the increase in ρ will result in a slight increase in technological bifurcations. This is because with LF1 and LF2, the adoption of T3 is quite late (Fig. 3), adding uncertainty to learning will remove the early adoption paths of T3, for the late adoption paths of T3, the adoption of T3 is driven mainly by resource depletion instead of by technological learning, and adding uncertainty to learning does not greatly influence these late adoption paths. Thus, adding uncertainty to learning will result in a decrease in the range of technological bifurcations. With PF, the adoption of T3 happens quite early and is driven mainly by technological learning. In this case, adding uncertainty to learning will postpone some adoption paths, and because the decision is made for a very long-term perspective (180years), this postponement is not very distinct. Thus, adding uncertainty to learning results slightly increases the range of technological bifurcations.Fig. 13 also shows that when decision-makers are not sensitive to uncertainty, the change in the range of technological bifurcations is quite small. In summary, adding uncertainty to learning can result in increased, decreased, or unchanged ranges of technological bifurcations, depending on the decision-makers’ risk attitude and the driving force of the adoption of a new technology.Most previous optimization models on technology adoption assume perfect foresight over the long term. With a stylized techno-economic system, this paper explores the effect of limited foresight and uncertain technological learning on the adoption of a new technology that is advanced but currently expensive. The study presented in this paper shows the following facts when modeling with limited foresight.•Generally, with limited foresight and technological learning, the shorter the foresight, the later the adoption of an advanced, but currently expensive, technology – in other words, the longer the length of the decision period, the earlier the adoption of the new technology – and the value of a foresight can be amplified with a high learning rate. However, when the decision period is beyond a certain length, further extending its length has little influence on adopting the new technology. With limited foresight, decisions aiming at minimizing the total cost of each decision period will commonly result in a non-optimal solution from the perspective of the entire decision horizon.With a limited foresight, the range of technological bifurcations is much larger than with perfect foresight because the small difference in the adoption in early decision periods will be enlarged in the following decision periods with path-dependent effects. Additionally, uncertainty in technological learning tends to reduce the range of technological bifurcations because it will remove the early adoption paths of an advanced technology.The implications of the above findings are: when all things are the same, the adoption of a new technology in different economic systems might be different simply because the lengths of their planning cycles are different; when the progress of an innovative technology is quite certain, it might result in more divergent adoption pattern in different economic systems, while when there is a large degree of uncertainty in an innovative technology, the adoption pattern in different economic systems might be more convergent because most planners intend to postpone the adoption.The model presented in this paper is quite stylized, and it is not by any means “realistic” in the sense of showing technological or sectoral detail. Rather, it is mainly intended to analyze the impacts of alternative model formulations on the dynamics of technology adoption. The technological learning rate of the advanced technology is treated as a random value following a lognormal distribution. In reality, the uncertainty of technological learning for different technologies could be different. For example, the learning rate of a technology might follow different distributions at different stage. In addition, future demand and resource costs might also be uncertain. In our future work, we will include these uncertainties into the model and study the advantages of adaptive decision making with limited foresight.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
