@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust optimization for interactive multiobjective programming with imprecise information applied to R&D project portfolio selection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multiobjective binary linear programming under interval uncertainty is captured.An interactive robust optimization approach is developed to solve the model.DM’s preference is articulated and incorporated into the solution process.The approach is applied to an R&D project portfolio selection benchmark.Quality solutions with substantial improvement in robustness are achieved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiobjective programming,Robust optimization,Imprecise information,Portfolio selection,Interactive procedures,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A multiobjective binary integer programming model for R&D project portfolio selection with competing objectives is developed when problem coefficients in both objective functions and constraints are uncertain. Robust optimization is used in dealing with uncertainty while an interactive procedure is used in making tradeoffs among the multiple objectives. Robust nondominated solutions are generated by solving the linearized counterpart of the robust augmented weighted Tchebycheff programs. A decision maker’s most preferred solution is identified in the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure by progressively eliciting and incorporating the decision maker’s preference information into the solution process. An example is presented to illustrate the solution approach and performance. The developed approach can also be applied to general multiobjective mixed integer programming problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In today’s fast paced and highly competitive economy, engaging in meaningful Research and Development (R&D) activities is essential for any organization striving to achieve and maintain competiveness. R&D projects are resource intensive and, therefore, benefits gained from and costs associated with each R&D project must be carefully considered. R&D project portfolio selection is a complex and non-trivial problem with important organizational implications.Organizations usually have more candidate R&D projects than they have resources to support them. The purpose of R&D project portfolio selection is to select a feasible subset of promising projects as a portfolio from a set of candidate projects based on multiple criteria. R&D project portfolio selection is always constrained by limited resources such as budget, research staff, laboratory space, and other technical scarcities. In addition, R&D project portfolio selection may have other restrictions such as corporate policies and contractual relationships with other stakeholders. Furthermore, uncertainties are always involved in R&D, such as uncertainties in the outcomes of the projects, in the resource availability and usage, and in the interdependence and interactions among the projects. Given these constraints and uncertainties, R&D managers must select a portfolio of projects based on multiple criteria representing corporate goals or objectives. Objectives, such as profit maximization, market share maximization, risk minimization, or human resource utilization minimization, are usually conflicting and fraught with uncertainties which further complicate the R&D project portfolio selection. The challenge is how to select the best portfolio of R&D projects based on these competing objectives within the resource restrictions while giving consideration to uncertainties.R&D is often an original endeavor with long lead time and unclear life time expenditure, resource usage and market outcome. These unique characteristics imply that much of the information required in making R&D decisions is very imprecise and impossible to accurately estimate. To address uncertainties, probabilistic and fuzzy approaches have been proposed to capture the imprecision of data by considering reasonable distributions to describe possible values of imprecise coefficients in optimization models. One drawback of such approaches is, however, that they cannot handle the situation where there is a possible range for each of these coefficients, but the most probable or plausible value within the range cannot be estimated (Carlsson, Fullér, Heikkilä, & Majlender, 2007). This calls for novel approaches which can more adequately capture the real-world situation of R&D project portfolio selection.The focus of this study is to develop a method for dealing with imprecise information associated with the multiobjective problem of selecting a portfolio of R&D projects. The proposed method integrates two complementary approaches to deal with both uncertainties and multiple objectives. Uncertainties in the problem coefficients, both in the objective functions and constraints, are modeled through robust optimization while the multiobjective problem is solved through interactive multiobjective programming. Interval uncertainties, i.e., each imprecise coefficient belongs to an interval of real numbers without prior distribution details, are assumed. An interactive approach is used to capture the decision maker (DM)’s preference information with respect to the multiple objectives in the problem.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The relevant R&D project portfolio selection and robust optimization literature is reviewed in Section 2. The nominal multiobjective binary integer programming model for R&D project portfolio selection is presented in Section 3. Following a brief introduction to robust optimization, the robust counterpart of the nominal model is formulated in Section 4. The solution of the robust counterpart within an interactive procedure by repeatedly solving robust augmented weighted Tchebycheff programs is discussed in Section 5. An example of R&D project portfolio selection problem is presented to illustrate the proposed approach and the results of computational experimentation are reported in Section 6. Finally, the article concludes with a summary in Section 7.Portfolio selection, whether financial, investment or R&D, is always fraught with uncertainty and is inherently multiobjective. Steuer, Qi, and Hirschberger (2005) presented a list of possible objectives in a financial portfolio selection problem. Because the objectives are incommensurate, the DM’s preference information has to be used to make tradeoffs in order to find a final portfolio. However, a review of the literature in this area indicates that most of proposed solution techniques either focus on the multiple objectives or address the uncertainties but not both.Multiobjective optimization techniques in solving the multiobjective project portfolio selection problem, like in other applications, can be classified into three major categories, i.e., requiring a priori, a posteriori, and progressive articulation of preference information, based on the time the DM’s preference information is articulated and used (Hwang & Masud, 1979).In the first category, a priori preference information articulation from the DM regarding the criteria is assumed, and a compromise solution is obtained by converting multiple objectives of the problem to a single objective. To this end, some authors assign different weights to the objective functions according to their importance to the DM, and use a weighted sum of the objective functions as a single objective function (Ghasemzadeh, Archer, & Iyogun, 1999; Klapka & Piños, 2002; Medaglia, Hueth, Mendieta, & Sefair, 2008). This approach can only find basic solutions for linear problems and may fail to balance objective functions in relation to their importance (Steuer, 1986). Some authors use goal programming to address this problem (Badri, Davis, & Davis, 2001; Graves & Ringuest, 1992; Lee & Kim, 2001; Santhanam & Kyparisis, 1995; Schniederjans & Santhanam, 1993; Zanakis, Mandakovic, Gupta, Sahay, & Hong, 1995). Azmi and Tamiz (2010) provided a review of the goal programming approaches. However, setting aspiration levels and weights for the goals is challenging and may even result in a dominated solution (Ringuest & Graves, 1989; Santhanam & Kyparisis, 1995).The second category includes approaches requiring a posteriori articulation of DM’s preference information. Accordingly, it is assumed that a priori preference information articulation regarding the criteria is unavailable. Therefore, a two-phase procedure is implemented that first identifies the whole or a large set of efficient, i.e., Pareto-optimal or nondominated, portfolios possibly using metaheuristics (Carazo et al., 2010; Doerner, Gutjahr, Hartl, Strauss, & Stummer, 2004, 2006; Ghorbani & Rabbani, 2009; Rabbani, Aramoon Bajestani, & Baharian Khoshkhou, 2010; Stummer & Sun, 2005; Yu, Wang, Wen, & Lai, 2012), and then explores the set of identified efficient solutions possibly through an interactive approach (Stummer & Heidenberger, 2001, 2003). However, determining the set of all efficient solutions is challenging and becomes increasingly demanding or even impossible as the number of projects and/or the number of objectives grows because integer programming problems are usually NP hard. In addition, the DM may be confronted with a large number of competing portfolios in the second phase and selecting the one that is most preferred is not an easy task, which further complicates the process of project portfolio selection.The third category includes interactive approaches in which the DM’s preference information is progressively articulated during, and incorporated into, the solution process so as to locate the DM’s most preferred solution. Interactive methods are one of the most promising approaches for solving multiobjective programming problems (Steuer, 1986). Zopounidis, Despotis, and Kamaratou (1998) developed a multiobjective linear programming model to select a portfolio of stocks and used an interactive approach to solve the problem. Stummer and Heidenberger (2001, 2003) presented an interactive procedure for solving the multiobjective R&D project portfolio selection problems. Steuer et al. (2005) discussed tools and techniques from multiple criteria optimization to analyze and solve the portfolio selection problem.The majority of project portfolio selection formulations in the literature are based on deterministic data. However, as mentioned earlier, an important characteristic of R&D project portfolio selection is that future attributes of R&D projects, e.g., costs and revenues, availability and usage of human resources and material supplies, development of technical skills and risks, and market outcomes, are very difficult to estimate. Consequently, stochastic (Abdelaziz, Aouni, & Fayedh, 2007; Birge & Louveaux, 1977; Gabriel, Kumar, Ordóñez, & Nasserian, 2006; Gutjahr & Reiter, 2010; Medaglia, Graves, & Ringuest, 2007) and fuzzy (Aryanezhad, Malekly, & Karimi-Nasab, 2011; Bhattacharyya & Kar, 2011; Coffin & Taylor, 1996; Łapuńka, 2012; Tolga, 2008) approaches are introduced to the classical multiobjective programming formulations to address the issue of incomplete and imprecise information. However, both of these approaches assume prior details about coefficient distributions, an assumption which is often flawed for R&D projects as ground-breaking endeavors.There are a few studies that address uncertainties of project portfolio selection within an interactive procedure. Nowak (2006) developed an interactive procedure for selecting one project that is based on STEM (Benayoun, de Montgolfier, Tergny, & Laritchev, 1971), a well-known interactive procedure for multiobjective programming. In this procedure, risk and uncertainty are modeled through stochastic dominance. Shing and Nagasawa (1999) proposed an interactive portfolio selection method for selecting a preferred portfolio from a set of candidate portfolios for the case where the mean and the variance of returns of securities have several scenarios with known occurrence probabilities.Robust optimization is a relatively new approach that has experienced an explosion of applications in many areas of management science such as supply chain management, health care systems, and portfolio selection (Gabrel, Murat, & Thiele, 2013). In robust optimization, imprecise information is incorporated by way of set inclusion, i.e., the true value of an imprecise coefficient is contained in an interval characterized by the DM without any assumption on the distribution of the coefficient. Introduced by Soyster (1973), robust optimization addresses the problem of data uncertainty by guaranteeing the feasibility and optimality of the solution for the worst instances of the problem, which results in overly conservative solutions. Ben-Tal and Nemirovski (2002) and El-Ghaoui, Oustry, and Lebret (1998) took first steps to address the over conservatism issue and considered ellipsoidal uncertainties, which results in conic quadratic robust counterparts for linear formulations with uncertainties. Although ellipsoidal uncertainties can be used to approximate more complicated uncertainty sets, they lead to counterpart models that are nonlinear and, hence, computationally less tractable and less practical than linear models. Bertsimas and Sim (2003, 2004) developed the “budget of uncertainty” approach leading to robust counterparts that have the advantage of being linear rather than quadratic. In addition, their approach provides full control over the degree of conservatism for every constraint.A recent literature review by Gabrel et al. (2013) reveals that almost all of the studies that have introduced robust formulations of multiobjective problems have used notions of robustness that are very different from the classical robust optimization concepts, resulting in complex optimization models that can only be tackled by heuristic or metaheuristic methods (Chen et al., 2012; Deb & Gupta, 2005; Düzgün & Thiele, 2010; Gaspar-Cunha & Covas, 2008; Laguna, 1995; Liesiö, Mild, & Salo, 2008; Luo & Zheng, 2008; Ono, Yoshitake, & Nakayama, 2009; Suh & Lee, 2001). Perhaps the only relevant work in multiobjective robust optimization is by Hu and Mehrotra (2012) where objective function weights are uncertain and all other model parameters are deterministic. They used a multicriteria robust weighted sum approach called McRow to identify a robust Pareto optimal solution that minimizes the worst-case weighted sum of the objectives.As a major step forward, the current study develops an interactive robust optimization procedure based on the budget of uncertainty approach (Bertsimas & Sim, 2003, 2004) to solve multiobjective R&D portfolio selection problems with imprecise coefficients in the objective functions and constraints. The approach developed in this study is the first method that truly extends the classical robust optimization concept to multiobjective optimization and opens a new avenue for solving other multiobjective optimization problems under uncertainties.The aim of the multiobjective R&D project portfolio selection problem is to select a subset as a portfolio from a large set of possible candidate projects considering multiple conflicting objectives, subjected to a set of constraints. Let K denote the number of objective functions, m the number of constraints, and n the number of candidate projects in the entire set. There is no prior requirement for the number of projects to be selected into the portfolio. Without loss of generality, all objective functions are assumed to be minimized. The multiobjective R&D project portfolio selection model is stated as in (1) in the following:(1)minzk=fk(x)∀ks.t.gi(x)⩽bi∀ix∈Bn.In the model,xis the vector of binary decision variables,fk(x)=∑j=1nckjxjis the kth objective function, andgi(x)=∑j=1naijxj⩽biis the ith constraint. Although each application is different, the objective functions may include the maximization of total expected profit, maximization of expected market share, or minimization of total expected risk, while the constraints may include limited budget, scarce human and material resources, and interdependence and interaction among the candidate projects. A project j is selected into the portfolio if xj=1 and otherwise if xj=0. In addition to the binary decision variables representing the selection of projects, other decision variables may be used in the model to represent the interdependencies and interactions among the projects in some specific applications. The multiobjective R&D project portfolio selection model (1) is the nominal model assuming the values of aij, ∀i, j, and ckj, ∀k, j, are exactly known. The nominal model (1) is an ordinary multiobjective binary integer programming model.Since the objective functions are usually in conflict, model (1) usually does not have a single feasible solution that simultaneously minimizes all K objective functions. The optimal solution is defined to be a feasible solution that maximizes the DM’s value function (Steuer, 1986; Yu, 1985). Because the DM’s value function is not readily available, the solution process of the multiobjective R&D project portfolio selection model (1) is to search for a solution which is most preferred by the DM.The following concepts are borrowed from Steuer (1986). The set of solutions satisfying all constraints, i.e.,X={x∈Bn|gi(x)⩽bi,∀i}, is the feasible region, and a pointx∈Xis a feasible solution, in decision space. The setZ={z∈RK|zk=fk(x),x∈X}is the feasible region in criterion space. A pointz∈Zis a feasible solution in criterion space or a feasible criterion vector. A pointz¯∈Zis a nondominated criterion vector if there does not exist any criterion vectorz∈Z, such thatz⩽z¯andz≠z¯.Z‾is used to represent the set of all nondominated solutions in criterion space. A pointx¯∈Xis an efficient solution in decision space ifz¯∈Z‾such thatz¯k=fk(x¯), ∀k.X‾is used to represent the set of all efficient solutions in decision space. A criterion vectorzˆ∈Zis optimal if it maximizes the DM’s value function. However, a DM’s value function in real-life problems is hard to estimate and its functional form is usually unknown (Yu, 1985). Ifzˆis optimal,zˆ∈Z‾, i.e., an optimal solution must be nondominated. A pointz∗∈RK, such thatzk∗=min{fk(x),x∈X},∀k, is the ideal point. For most multiobjective programming problems, z∗∉Z, i.e., z∗ is infeasible. A pointx∗∈Bnsuch thatzk∗=fk(x∗),∀k, usually does not exist (Sun, 2005). A pointz∗∗∈RK, such thatzk∗∗=zk∗-εk, whereεk>0and small∀k, is called a utopian point.When a multiobjective programming problem is solved, especially when an interactive procedure or an approach requiring a posteriori articulation of the DM’s preference information is used, many nondominated solutions need to be generated as trial solutions. These nondominated solutions are usually evaluated by the DM so as to elicit preference information from the DM. Nondominated solutions are usually generated by solving augmented weighted Tchebycheff programs derived from the nominal model (1) (Steuer, 1986). The weighting vector space is defined as(2)W=w∈RKwk>0,∑k=1Kwk=1.Anyw∈Wis a weighting vector. For a givenw∈W, an augmented weighted Tchebycheff program for the nominal model (1) is formulated as in (3) in the following(3)minα+ρ∑k=1K(zk-zk∗∗)s.t.α⩾wk(zk-zk∗∗)∀kzk=fk(x)∀kgi(x)⩽bi∀ixj∈{0,1}∀jzkunrestricted∀kα⩾0,where ρ>0 is a small scalar. Usually ρ=0.001 is sufficient.Note that in the augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (3), each objective function is converted into a constraint and, hence, the number of objective functions is not a concern from a computational point of view. The augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (3) is a single objective binary integer programming problem. If its optimal solution is represented by the composite vector (xw,zw,αw), thenxw∈X‾andzw∈Z‾, i.e., xwis efficient and zwis nondominated. For a given w∈W, the augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (3) generates a given nondominated solution. By using a widely dispersed set of weighting vectors in W, a widely dispersed set of representative nondominated solutions can be generated.As previously stated, the values of most of the coefficients in the nominal model (1) are not known with certainty given the nature of the R&D project portfolio selection problem. When the values of these coefficients are not precisely known, the solution obtained for the nominal model (1) may not be close to the true most preferred solution of the DM or, even worse, could be infeasible for a realization of these imprecise coefficients. Given that aij, ∀i, j, and ckj, ∀k, j, are uncertain and their exact values are unknown but within a certain interval, the focus of this study is on finding a solution of model (1) such that the solution is not only feasible with a very high probability, but also very close to the most preferred solution of the DM. An interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure is proposed for this purpose.A robust optimization framework is briefly discussed first for single objective optimization problems. This framework is then extended to multiobjective optimization problems through the augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (3).Consider the following standard binary integer programming problem(4)minf(x)s.t.gi(x)⩽bi∀ix∈Bnwheregi(x)=∑j=1naijxj⩽bi, as in (1), is the ith constraint andf(x)=∑j=1ncjxjis the single objective function of the problem. Model (4) with precise aij, ∀i, j, is the nominal formulation.Now assume that each aijis an imprecise coefficient with unknown exact value in the interval[a¯ij-aˆij,a¯ij+aˆij]wherea¯ijis the nominal value andaˆijis the half-interval width of aij. The precise values of cj, ∀j, are assumed to be known. The purpose of robust optimization is to find an optimal solution, called the robust optimal solution, which remains feasible for almost all possible realizations of the imprecise problem coefficients. Obviously, as much as it is unlikely that all uncertain coefficients are equal to their nominal values, it is also unlikely that they are all equal to their worst-case values. The worst-case solution actually occurs with a negligible probability because large deviations in the coefficients aijtend to cancel out each other as n grows. Consequently, the most conservative approach, where all coefficients are equal to their worst-case values, leads to a severe deterioration of the optimal solution without being fairly justified in practice. Therefore, adjusting the degree of conservatism of the solution in order to make a reasonable trade-off between robustness and performance is a necessity (Bertsimas & Sim, 2003, 2004).This concept is quantified by reformulating the nominal model in (4). The absolute value of the scaled deviation of the imprecise coefficient aijfrom its nominal valuea¯ij, denoted by δij, is defined in the following(5)δij=|(aij-a¯ij)/aˆij|∀i,j.Apparently, δijtakes values in the interval [0,1]. A budget of uncertainty Γiis imposed to the ith constraint in the following sense(6)∑j=1nδij⩽Γi0⩽Γi⩽n,where Γi=0 and Γi=n correspond to the nominal and worst cases, respectively. Bertsimas and Sim (2003, 2004) showed that varying Γiin the interval [0,n] will appropriately adjust performance against robustness. Intuitively, the use of Γican rule out large deviations in∑j=1naijxjthat play a predominant role in worst-case analysis but happens with negligible probability. When each aijis treated as a variable, the nonlinear robust formulation of the nominal model in (4) can be stated as (7) in the following(7)minf(x)s.t.maxaig¯i(ai,x)∑j=1nδij⩽Γi⩽bi∀ix∈Bn,where aiis the vector of imprecise coefficients in the ith constraint with eachaij∈[a¯ij-aˆij,a¯ij+aˆij]andg¯i(ai,x)=∑j=1naijxjis the counterpart of gi(x) in (4) but with each aijtreated as a variable. Bertsimas and Sim (2003) proved that the nonlinear robust formulation in (7) has the following robust linear counterpart(8)min∑j=1ncjxjs.t.∑j=1na¯ijxj+Γiqi+∑j=1nrij⩽bi∀iqi+rij⩾aˆijyj∀i,j-yj⩽xj⩽yj∀jqi⩾0∀iyj⩾0,xj∈{0,1}∀jrij⩾0∀i,j.The highly attractive feature of this formulation is that the counterpart model is of the same class and complexity as the nominal model in (4). In addition, even if the budget of uncertainty constraints are not satisfied, the robust solution will remain feasible with a very high probability (Bertsimas & Sim, 2003, 2004).Under uncertainty, the problem coefficients in (1) are uncertain and, hence, the selected portfolio must be robust, i.e., the solution should remain feasible (constraint robust), efficient and most preferred by the DM (objective function robust) under almost all possible realizations of imprecise coefficients. Both aijand ckjare considered uncertain and their uncertainty is captured using the interval uncertainty discussed earlier. The nominal valuea¯ijand the half-interval widthaˆijof each aijare defined in the same way as in the single objective optimization problem discussed above. The nominal value and the half-interval width of ckjare represented byc¯kjandcˆkj, respectively. The kth objective function is expressed asf¯k(ck,x)=∑j=1nckjxj, where ckis the vector of imprecise coefficients in the kth objective function with eachckj∈[c¯kj-cˆkj,c¯kj+cˆkj]. While being the counterpart of fk(x) in (1),f¯k(ck,x)is a function of both ckand x, because each ckjis treated as a variable. Similar to δijdefined for aijin (5), the absolute value of the scaled deviation of ckjfrom its nominal valuec¯kj, denoted byδkj′, is defined in the following:(9)δkj′=|(ckj-c¯kj)/cˆkj|∀k,j.Similar to (6), a budget of uncertaintyΓk′is imposed to the kth objective function such that(10)∑j=1nδkj′⩽Γk′0⩽Γk′⩽n,whereΓk′=0andΓk′=ncorrespond to the nominal and worst cases, respectively. Note that while Γicontrols the robustness of the ith constraint,Γk′controls the robustness of the kth objective function against the level of conservatism. For notational convenience, letΓ∈RmandΓ′∈RKbe the vectors of budgets of uncertainty for the constraints and for the objective functions, respectively. Imposing the budgets of uncertainty for the constraints and the objective functions will ensure that the solution will remain both constraint robust and objective function robust. The nonlinear robust formulation of the nominal model in (1) is stated as(11)minzk=maxckf¯k(ck,x)∑j=1nδkj′⩽Γk′∀ks.t.maxaig¯i(ai,x)∑j=1nδij⩽Γi⩽bi∀ix∈Bn.Unlike the single objective model (7), each ckjin the objective functions is considered imprecise in (11).Any feasible solution to the above model is called a robust feasible solution. The set of all robust feasible solutions, i.e.,XΓ=x∈Bn|maxaig¯i(ai,x)∑j=1nδij⩽Γi⩽bi∀i, is called the robust feasible region in decision space for a given Γ. Ax∈XΓis called a robust feasible solution in decision space. For given Γ′ and Γ, the setZΓ,Γ′=z∈RK|zk=maxckf¯k(ck,x)∑j=1nδkj′⩽Γk′,x∈XΓis the robust feasible region in criterion space. Az∈ZΓ,Γ′is called a robust feasible solution in criterion space or a robust criterion vector. A nondominated robust criterion vectorz¯∈ZΓ,Γ′, an efficient robust solutionx¯∈XΓ, and an optimal robust criterion vectorzˆ∈ZΓ,Γ′can be defined in similar ways to their counterparts for the nominal model (1). Similarly, the robust ideal pointz∗∈RKis defined aszk∗=minxmaxckf¯k(ck,x)∑j=1nδkj′⩽Γk′,x∈XΓfor all k. Corollary 1 in Appendix A provides a formulation to determinez∗. A robust utopian point is also defined asz∗∗∈RKsuch thatzk∗∗=zk∗-εkwithεk>0and small for all k.For a given weighting vectorw∈W, a robust augmented weighted Tchebycheff program for the nonlinear programming model in (11) is formulated from (3) as the following(12)minα+ρ∑k=1K(zk-zk∗∗)s.t.α⩾wk(zk-zk∗∗)∀kzk=maxckf¯k(ck,x)∑j=1nδkj′⩽Γk′∀kmaxaig¯i(ai,x)∑j=1nδij⩽Γi⩽bi∀ixj∈{0,1}∀jzkunrestricted∀kα⩾0.Similar to the coefficients in the objective function of model (7), the coefficients in the objective function of model (12) are exactly known.An optimal solution to (12) minimizes the augmented weighted Tchebycheff metric between z∗∗ and anyz∈ZΓ,Γ′while respecting the budget of uncertainty constraints. The solution to this formulation has some interesting properties. First, it is a nondominated solution for the selected Γ and Γ′. Second, unlike its nominal counterpart, it is robust, i.e., insensitive to existing uncertainties in both the objective functions and constraints. This means that given all possible realizations of aijand ckj, the solution of (12) not only will have a much higher probability of being feasible than the nominal solution of (3) but also will have a corresponding criterion vector which performs comparably well to the nondominated nominal criterion vector. These properties are significant because model (12) can assist the DM as a tool in finding nondominated robust solutions by properly balancing performance versus robustness. Using this formulation, the nominal solution closest to the nominal utopian point z∗∗, measured by the augmented weighted Tchebycheff metric, is slightly sacrificed but, in return, this sacrifice is compensated by the robustness of the solution.Corollary 2Model(12)has the following mixed binary integer programming counterpart(13)minds.t.α+ρ∑k=1Kαk-d⩽0wkαk-α⩽0∀k∑j=1nc¯kjxj+Γk′qk′+∑j=1nrkj′-αk⩽zk∗∗∀k∑j=1na¯ijxj+Γiqi+∑j=1nrij⩽bi∀iqk′+rkj′⩾cˆkjyj∀k,jqi+rij⩾aˆijyj∀i,jxj⩽yj,yj⩾0,xj∈{0,1}∀jqi⩾0∀iαk,qk′⩾0∀krkj′⩾0∀k,jrij⩾0∀i,jd,α⩾0.See Appendix B.□In recent years, many interactive methods have been proposed to solve the nominal model (1) of the multiobjective project portfolio selection problem. In this study, the interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure (Steuer & Choo, 1983; Steuer, 1986) is used to solve the robust version (11) of the multiobjective project portfolio selection problem. The interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure is a weighting vector space reduction method (Steuer, 1986) in which the weighting vectors are generated from progressively reduced subsets ofWdefined in (2).The mixed binary integer programming counterpart (13) of the robust augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (12) is used to generate nondominated robust solutions. Within the interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure, a set of dispersed weighting vectors is generated at each iteration. The set is then filtered to reduce to a smaller manageable subset. The mixed binary integer programming model in (13) is then solved for each weighting vector in this smaller subset to obtain a set of nondominated criterion vectors. The resulting nondominated robust criterion vectors are then filtered to obtain a smaller subset of dispersed ones. This subset is presented to the DM who selects the most preferred robust solution. In the next iteration, the weighting vector space is reduced around the weighting vector corresponding to the current most preferred solution selected by the DM, new dispersed weighting vectors are generated in this reduced weighting vector space, the newly generated set of weighting vectors is filtered, new nondominated robust solutions are generated, and so on. The procedure terminates after a predetermined number of iterations have been performed or when the DM is satisfied with a nondominated robust solution that has already been found.In the following, the integer I represents the iteration number. While indicating superscripts inW(I),w(I) and z(I), I denotes power in rI. The interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure (Steuer & Choo, 1983; Steuer, 1986) described step-by-step in the following is similar to that in Drinka, Sun, and Murray (1996).Step 1.Determine the maximum number of iterations Imax, the number of solutions P to be presented to the DM at each iteration, and the weighting vector space reduction factor r. Let I=0 and [lk,uk]=[0,1] for all k. Obtainzk∗by solving the robust model (B.1) for eachkand then determine the robust utopian point z∗∗.Let I=I+1. FromW(I)=w∈RK|wk∈(lk,uk),∑k=1Kwk=1randomly generate 20K weighting vectors. Reduce the 20K weighting vectors to obtain the 2P most widely dispersed ones.Solve the robust mixed binary integer programming model (13) for each weighting vector to obtain 2P nondominated robust criterion vectors. Reduce the 2P nondominated robust criterion vectors to P most dispersed ones.Present the P nondominated robust criterion vectors, together with the most preferred solution from the previous iterationz(I-1)if I>1, to the DM to acquire the most preferred solutionz(I)at iteration I.Terminate the solution process if I=Imax or if the DM is satisfied withz(I); continue otherwise.Compute the weighting vectorw(I)that can generate the current most preferred solutionz(I)withNote that when Γ=0 and Γ′=0, the above procedure reduces to the interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure for the nominal problem (1). The size of 20K weighting vectors in Step 2 is a generally accepted size in order to generate widely dispersed weighting vectors (Steuer, 1986). Similar to Steuer (2003), the relative distance measure is used to reduce the 20K weighting vectors to 2P in Step 2, and to reduce the 2P robust criterion vectors to P in Step 3. Appendix C has a discussion on the approach used to reduce the set of vectors.The choices of Imax and P are dependent on DM’s preferences. Larger values for Imax increase the decision making time and the burden on the DM but increase solution quality, whereas larger values of P make the comparison of multiple solutions more time consuming and increase the burden on the DM but may elicit more preference information from the DM. Both Imax and P may be revised during the solution process upon DM’s desire. For a detailed discussion of the interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure, see Steuer and Choo (1983) and Steuer (1986).Value functions are usually used as proxy DMs in computational experiments to test the performance of solution procedures.LP-metric value functions are used to act as proxy DMs in this study in order to simulate the solution process using the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure with the involvement of a DM. TheLP-metric value function of a criterion vectorz∈RKhas the following functional form(16)VP(z)=K-∑k=1K[wk′(zk-zk∗∗)]P1P,whereKis a large constant ensuringVP(z)>0for all feasible robust criterion vectors,w′∈Wis a weighting vector selected by the user for the purpose of computational experiment, andP⩾1is an integer. The value functionVP(z)in (16), however, is used only as a proxy DM to evaluate representative solutions in Step 4 of the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure and is not used directly in searching for the optimal solution in the solution process.A project portfolio selection problem presented in Santhanam and Kyparisis (1995) is used to demonstrate the proposed interactive robust Tchebycheff procedure. Ringuest and Graves (2000) also used the same problem to test their solution method.An IT company faces the selection of a portfolio from a total of n=14 projects where data on costs, benefits, and other related information for these projects are estimated. Existing cost interdependencies and synergistic benefits among projects are also identified. There are m=2 resource constraints for hardware costs and software costs of the projects that must be satisfied. The problem has K=3 objectives: maximization of total benefits, minimization of total risk scores, and minimization of total miscellaneous costs. The total hardware and software budgets are 20,000 and 6000, respectively. Tables 1 and 2present the original problem data.Similar to those in Santhanam and Kyparisis (1995), 22 binary variables (xj) are defined and used to model the selection of a portfolio from the n=14 projects as well as to model the 8 project interdependencies. The final linearized multiobjective binary integer programming model is formulated as model (D.1) in Appendix D. Note that maximization of total benefits is treated as a minimization objective function in model (D.1). However, the corresponding positive values of this objective function are reported in the tables and texts. The ideal solution is z∗=(60643,5,0). For this illustrative example, ɛk=0, ∀k, is used, hence z∗∗=z∗.In the following, a large set of nondominated solutions is generated first for the deterministic, i.e., the nominal, model by solving augmented weighted Tchebycheff programs (3). The interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure is then applied to the nominal model. The interval uncertainties on coefficients in the objective functions and constraints are considered next and the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure is applied to find preferred robust solutions for proxy DMs represented by theLP-metric value functions (16). A simulation study is finally performed to evaluate the feasibility and quality of the solutions by introducing uncertainties into the coefficients. The parameters used in theLP-metric value function (16) are arbitrarily set toK=20,000 and w′=(0.3,0.4,0.3) for this example. In the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure, Imax=8, P=8, and r=0.2 are used. In the following tables reporting results, the headings R&G, S&K, and H&N&S represent the results from Ringuest and Graves (2000), Santhanam and Kyparisis (1995), and the current study, respectively.All computations were conducted on a personal computer with a 2GHz Core 2 Duo processor and 3GB of RAM. The reported results reflect the performance of the proposed approach on this computer.The augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (3) formulated from model (D.1) is used to generate nondominated solutions for the nominal model (1). Generation of a large set of nondominated solutions is usually the first phase in solving multiobjective programming problems requiring a posteriori articulation of the DM’s preference information (Hwang & Masud, 1979). A set of 300 weighting vectors is randomly generated fromWdefined in (2) that is then reduced to a subset of 200 most dissimilar ones. An augmented weighted Tchebycheff program is solved for each of the 200 weighting vectors. Because some augmented weighted Tchebycheff programs formulated with different weighting vectors share the same optimal solution, only 39 distinct nondominated criterion vectors are obtained. The solution process took a total CPU time of 190seconds.Santhanam and Kyparisis (1995) solved this problem with a goal programming approach with preemptive priorities. They considered two different priorities with different goal targets and solved 25 problems which yielded 8 nondominated and 1 dominated solutions. Ringuest and Graves (2000) solved the same problem using the Parameter Space Investigation (PSI) method (Steuer & Sun, 1995). Using the PSI method, they randomly generated binary solutions over a hyperrectangle that completely encloses the feasible region. These binary solutions were then evaluated by each of the constraints to check for feasibility. Those not satisfying at least one of the constraints were discarded until 100 feasible solutions were generated. The total number of solutions, including feasible and infeasible, was not reported. The solution set was then screened for dominance which resulted in 33 distinct solutions among which 31 are not dominated by others. Table 3lists all solutions reported by Ringuest and Graves (2000), Santhanam and Kyparisis (1995), and those generated by solving augmented weighted Tchebycheff programs in this study. A solution is represented by the index set of the projects selected into the portfolio, i.e., J={j|xj=1}.A complete enumeration (CE) was performed to find all efficient solutions for this problem. The problem has 234 feasible solutions of which 63 are efficient and 171 are not. From the set of efficient solutions, 54 distinct nondominated criterion vectors are found. There is a difference between the number of efficient solutions and the number of nondominated criterion vectors because some different portfolios share the same criterion vectors. Because projects 7 and 8 have the same coefficients in the objective functions, given that the solution remains feasible, replacing one with the other in an efficient portfolio will create a different efficient portfolio with the same criterion vector. A further examination of the 31 solutions not dominated by others reported in Ringuest and Graves (2000) found only 15 of them are actually nondominated.The total number of feasible solutions, number of nondominated solutions and the number of nondominated criterion vectors found by these methods are summarized in Table 4. Table 4 shows that the augmented weighted Tchebycheff program can generate a richer set of nondominated criterion vectors than the other methods with similar computational efforts. In addition, solutions generated with the augmented weighted Tchebycheff programs are guaranteed to be nondominated whereas those found with the other two methods may be dominated.The interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure is applied to the nominal model to search for a final solution for proxy DMs represented by theLP-metric value functions (16). For the nominal model,Γk′=0for k=1, 2, 3 and Γi=0 for i=1, 2.Because all nondominated solutions are found through CE, the optimal solution for each proxy DM can be found by directly evaluating all nondominated solutions with the corresponding value function and then selecting the solution with the largest value. These optimal solutions are then used to measure the quality of the solutions obtained with different methods. Solutions obtained with the interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure at successive iterations as well as the optimal solutions obtained by R&G, S&K, and CE are summarized in Tables 5–7for theLP-metric value functions withP=2,P=4andP=∞, respectively. As it is clear from these tables, the interactive weighted Tchebycheff procedure can find the optimal solution within 3 or 4 iterations. In addition, although Ringuest and Graves (2000) and Santhanam and Kyparisis (1995) did not use any value function as proxy DM to search for the optimal solution, their best solutions for theLP-metric value functions withP=2,P=4andP=∞are close to the optimal solutions.In the following, the data in Tables 1 and 2 are viewed as nominal values and interval uncertainties are introduced into all costs, benefits, and risk scores. Tables 8 and 9present the half-interval widths for the data in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.Given all possible outcomes of the uncertainties, the purpose of the solution process is to find a DM’s most preferred nondominated solution which is robust in terms of uncertainties in both objective functions and constraints. In the solution process, the mixed binary integer programming counterpart (13) of the robust augmented weighted Tchebycheff program (12) is solved in Step 3 of the iterative robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure. However, in order for the DM to be impartial toward robustness of the presented solutions, the proxy DM is assumed to always choose the preferred solution in Step 4 using the nominal criterion vectors, i.e., the criterion vectors computed with the nominal coefficient values in the objective functions are evaluated with theLP-metric value functions (16). Note that this assumption is made merely to facilitate the illustration of the solution process.For demonstration purposes, arbitrary values ofΓk′=0.7for k=1,2,3 and Γi=0.5,1.0,1.5 for i=1,2 are used in order to examine the effect of the budget of uncertainty levels on solution feasibility and quality. The interactive procedure starts with lower budget of uncertainty levels, i.e., with Γi=0.5 for i=1,2. Similar to the interactive procedure discussed in Section 6.2, the DM is presented with a set of robust, rather than deterministic, solutions at each iteration of the interactive procedure. The DM selects the most preferred solution and decides to either proceed to the next iteration or terminate the solution process. This process is performed for the three levels of robustness, i.e., Γi=0.5,1.0,1.5 for i=1,2. In order to keep the results concise, only the final solutions obtained with the iterative robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure are presented. The solutions for theLP-metric value functions withP=2,P=4andP=∞are reported in Tables 10–12, respectively.As expected, the value function is negatively correlated with the budget of uncertainty levels because an increase in the budget of uncertainty generally shrinks the feasible region and may render the current solution infeasible. It is also observed that as consequences of choosing the most preferred robust solution instead of the most preferred nominal solution, the value function deteriorates by at most 0.49%, 0.80%, and 1.45% for theLP-metric value functions withP=2,P=4andP=∞, respectively. Therefore, it appears that for eachP, the DM’s most preferred robust solution is at close proximity of the most preferred nominal solution.Since input data are fraught with uncertainty, comparing the performance of solutions using the nominal criterion vectors may not legitimately capture the effects of uncertainty on solution feasibility and quality. To address this issue, a simulation study is performed to mimic the performance of the above nominal and robust solutions in the real world. For real-world applications, the simulation study may be performed at each iteration of the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure so that the DM can compare the trial solutions using the robust rather than the nominal values of the objective functions. The DM then makes tradeoffs among the objective functions as well as between robustness and performance.For each imprecise coefficient in the objective functions and in the constraints of the project portfolio selection model, a value is randomly selected from its uncertainty interval. These selected coefficient values, instead of the nominal values, are then used in model (D.1) to formulate the project portfolio selection model. The formulated model is not solved but is used to evaluate the final solutions of the nominal model and of the robust model obtained with the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure. The best solutions reported in Ringuest and Graves (2000) and Santhanam and Kyparisis (1995) are also evaluated with the formulated model. Each set of randomly selected coefficient values represents one realized instance of the imprecise coefficients in the project portfolio selection model. A total of 10,000 sets of randomly selected coefficient values are generated. Each solution is then evaluated by the constraints of the formulated model to determine if it is feasible. Only when the solution is feasible, it is evaluated with the three objective functions of the formulated model to obtain the corresponding values for each zk. The criterion vectors z are then evaluated by (16) to calculate the corresponding values ofVP(z)whereaszk∗∗is also updated for the realized coefficient values. The percentage of feasible solutions over the 10,000 realizations of the uncertain coefficients, the average and the worst-case performance of the individual objective functions andVP(z)for theLP-metric value functions withP=2,P=4andP=∞, are reported in Tables 13–15, respectively.From these tables, it is first observed that non-robust solutions have generally very low percentages of feasibility. On the other hand, the robust solutions have generally very high percentage of feasibility. This is a critical issue because the feasibility of a solution is always the primary concern of any optimization problem. In Tables 13–15, results for any budget of uncertainty higher than 1.5 are not reported because the feasibility of solutions is always satisfied when Γi=1.5 and hence, further increase in Γimay deteriorate the quality of the solutions without the need to improve feasibility. In addition, for the L2-metric value function in Table 13, 100% of the solutions are feasible when Γi=0.5. Hence, the solutions obtained for Γi>0.5 are reported in this table just for completeness.Table 16presents the performance of the robust solutions for the individual objective functions and theLP-metric value functions withP=2,P=4andP=∞. In the table, the percentages of change in feasibility, in the value functions, and in the individual objective functions are calculated with respect to the corresponding optimal nominal solutions.As previously mentioned, a table similar to Table 16, without the columns labeledVP(z), may be presented to the DM at each iteration of the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure. Each row of the table will represent one trial solution including the DM’s most preferred solution selected in the previous iteration if I>1. The DM then makes tradeoffs among the robust objective function values and between robustness and performance when choosing the current most preferred solution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, the problem of selecting a portfolio of R&D projects is considered when there are multiple conflicting objectives and when there are uncertainties in problem data including objective function and constraint coefficients. A robust augmented weighted Tchebycheff program is formulated and its linear counterpart is employed within the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure to generate robust nondominated solutions. The final portfolio is most preferred by the DM and is robust in terms of all possible realizations of imprecise problem coefficients. Through an illustrative example, the robust solutions are shown to have not only a very high percentage of feasibility but also average and worst-case performance that is comparable to that of the nominal solutions.An extraordinary strength of the proposed approach is that this robustness is achieved without bothering the DM in supplying unknown distribution details for the imprecise coefficients which is a major inconvenience in practical applications. Moreover, the proposed approach can be readily extended to other multiobjective mixed integer programming problems with uncertainties existing in both objective function and constraint coefficients. Extending ellipsoidal uncertainty to multiobjective programming problems should also serve as a direction for future research.Corollary 1The robust ideal pointz*can be determined from the following model for all k=1,…,K,(A.1)minzks.t.∑jc¯kjxj+Γk′qk′+∑jrkj′⩽zk∀k∑ja¯ijxj+Γiqi+∑jrij⩽bi∀iqk′+rkj′⩾cˆkjyj∀k,jqi+rij⩾aˆijyj∀i,j-yj⩽xj⩽yj,xj∈(0,1),yj⩾0∀jqi⩾0∀iqk′⩾0,zkunrestricted∀krkj′⩾0∀k,jrij⩾0∀i,j.The robust ideal point z∗ can be determined using the following nonlinear model for all k=1,⋯,K,(A.2)minzk=maxckf¯k(ck,x)|∑jδkj′⩽Γk′s.t.maxaig¯i(ai,x)|∑jδij⩽Γi⩽bi∀ixj∈{0,1}∀j.Model (A.2) can be reformulated as model (A.3) in the following(A.3)minzks.t.maxckf¯k(ck,x)∑jδkj′⩽Γk′⩽zk∀kmaxaig¯i(ai,x)∑jδij⩽Γi⩽bi∀ixj∈{0,1}∀jzkunrestricted∀kModel (B.1) is directly obtained from model (A.3) by following the derivation of (8) from (7).□Model (12) is first reformulated as(B.1)minds.t.d⩾α+ρ∑kαk∀kα⩾wkαk∀kmaxckf¯k(ck,x)∑jδkj′⩽Γk′-αk⩽zk∗∗∀kmaxaig¯i(ai,x)|∑jδij⩽Γi⩽bi∀ixj∈{0,1}∀j.Using the derivation of (8) from (7), (13) follows.□The following procedure reduces 2P robust criterion vectors to P most dispersed ones using the d-norm relative distance measure (Steuer, 2003). In the procedure, Z2Prepresents the set of the robust criterion vectors that have not been selected while ZPthe set of the most dispersed ones that have been selected.Step 1.Calculatez¯k=max{zk|z∈Z2P},z̲k=min{zk|z∈Z2P},πk=(z¯k-z̲k)-1∑k(z¯k-z̲k)-1. Randomly select a vector from Z2P and transfer it to ZP.Findzmax∈Z2Pso that zmax is the most dissimilar vector from all vectors in ZP, that isStep 1.Transfer zmax to ZP. If |ZP|=P, then terminate; otherwise go to Step 2.The procedure above is used in Step 3 of the interactive robust weighted Tchebycheff procedure to reduce 2P criterion vectors to P most dispersed ones. It is also used in Step 2 to reduce 20K weighting vectors to 2P most dispersed ones.(D.1)min-f1(x)=-1600x1-425x2-213x3-213x4-2600x5-750x6-11x7-11x8-3x9-18x10-40800x11-1200x12-3000x13-8000x14-85x3.4-3400x12.13.14minf2(x)=5x1+4x2+3x3+3x4+3x5+3x6+x7+x8+x9+x10+2x11+x13minf3(x)=10200x11+300x12+750x13+2000x14s.t.16000x1+500x2+350x3+500x4+2500x5+1000x6-268x3.4-350x4.5-250x4.6-250x5.6-600x4.5.6⩽200003250x1+1000x2+350x3+500x4+2500x5+1000x628x7+27x8+7x9+44x10-155x2.3-225x2.4-188x3.4-200x4.5-175x4.6-125x5.6-375x4.5.6⩽6000-x1+x2⩽0,-x2+x3⩽0,x3-x4⩽0,-x5+x7⩽0,-x5+x8⩽0,-x5+x9⩽0,-x5+x10⩽0,-x1+x11⩽0,-x11+x12⩽0,-x11+x13⩽0,-x11+x14⩽0,x2+x3-x2.3⩽1,-x2-x3+2x2.3⩽0,x2+x4-x2.4⩽1,-x2-x4+2x2.4⩽0,x3+x4-x3.4⩽1,-x3-x4+2x3.4⩽0,x4+x5-(x4.5+x4.5.6)⩽1,-x4-x5+2(x4.5+x4.5.6)⩽0,x4+x6-(x4.6+x4.5.6)⩽1,-x4-x6+2(x4.6+x4.5.6)⩽0,x5+x6-(x5.6+x4.5.6)⩽1,-x5-x6+2(x5.6+x4.5.6)⩽0,x4+x5+x6-x4.5.6⩽2,-x4-x5-x6+3x4.5.6⩽0,x12+x13+x14-x12.13.14⩽2,-x12-x13-x14+3x12.13.14⩽0,x1=1xj∈{0,1},∀j