@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Incremental network design with shortest paths

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the optimal choice and timing of network expansions.We introduce a new class of incremental network design problems.We develop a 4-approximation algorithm for incremental network design with shortest paths.Analysis shows that coordinating timing of expansions increases the complexity of network design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Network design,Multi-period,Heuristic,Approximation algorithm,Integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We introduce a class of incremental network design problems focused on investigating the optimal choice and timing of network expansions. We concentrate on an incremental network design problem with shortest paths. We investigate structural properties of optimal solutions, show that the simplest variant is NP-hard, analyze the worst-case performance of natural greedy heuristics, derive a 4-approximation algorithm, and conduct a small computational study.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Consider a network optimization problem, e.g., a shortest path problem, a maximum flow problem, or a traveling salesman problem. Next, assume that this optimization problem has to be solved in a number of consecutive time periods and that in each time period the value of an optimal solution is incurred, e.g., the cost of ans–tpath, the value of ans–tflow, or the cost of a TSP tour. Let the objective be to minimize or maximize the total (cumulative) cost or value over the planning horizon. At this point, that simply means solving the network optimization problem and multiplying the value of an optimal solution with the number of time periods in the planning horizon. It becomes more interesting when a budget is available in each time period to expand the network, i.e., to build additional links. Expanding the network may improve the cost or value of an optimal solution to the network optimization problem in future time periods and thus may improve the total cost or value over the planning horizon. However, deciding which links to build and the sequence in which to build them is nontrivial. In part, because in some situations the benefits of building a link will only materialize when other links have been built as well, e.g., adding a single link to the network does not lead to a shorter TSP tour, but adding two links to the network does.We introduce a class of incremental network design problems that focuses on the optimal choice and timing of network expansions given that these network expansions impact the value of a solution to an optimization problem that is solved on the network in each of the periods of the planning horizon.We are primarily interested in establishing the complexity of incremental network design problems, and, in case they are NP-hard, in their approximability, i.e., establishing whether aρ-approximation algorithm exists, where an algorithm achieves an approximation ratioρ⩾1for a minimization problem if, for every instance, it produces a solution of value at mostρvoptwithvoptthe value of an optimal solution. Therefore, we focus on what appears to be one of the most basic incremental network design problems, namely the incremental network design problem with shortest paths.We investigate structural properties of optimal solutions, show that even the simplest variant is NP-hard, establish a class of instances that can be solved in polynomial time, analyze the worst-case performance of natural greedy heuristics, derive a 4-approximation algorithm, and conduct a small computational study.Even though single-stage or single-period network design problems have been studied extensively by the operations research community, multi-stage or multi-period network design problems, which occur just as often in practice, have received much less attention. We hope that our investigation demonstrates that multi-period network design problems present interesting challenges and can produce intriguing and surprising results.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the class of incremental network design problems. In Section 4, we introduce the incremental network design problem with shortest paths. In Sections 5–7, we analyze the complexity of the incremental network design problem with shortest paths, and we explore greedy heuristics and design an approximation algorithm, respectively. In Section 8, we introduce an integer programming formulation and present the results of a small computational study. Finally, in Section 9, we discuss possible extensions and future research.Incremental network design problems have two characteristic features: a design feature, since we are deciding which arcs will be part of a network, and a multi-period feature, since the ultimate network design is built over a number of time periods.The general structure of an incremental network design problem is as follows. We are given a networkD=(N,A)with node set N and arc setA=Ae∪Ap, whereAecontains existing arcs andApcontains potential arcs. Each arca∈Ahas a capacityCa. Let T be the planning horizon. A budgetBtis available in every time periodt∈{1,…,T}. The budget can be used to build potential arcsa∈Ap, which will be available for use in the following period. For each potential arca∈Ap, there is an associated build-costca⩽B. Letyatbe a 0–1 variable indicating whether arca∈Aphas been built in or before time period t, with all potential arcs initially unbuilt (ya0=0). Thus,yat-yat-1=1indicates that arc a is built in time period t and can be utilized in periodt+1. In every time period, a network optimization problem P has to be solved over the usable arcs in time period t, i.e., the existing arcs and the potential arcs that have been built before time period t. Letxatrepresent the flow on arca∈Ain time periodt∈{1,…,T}in an optimal solution to the network optimization problem. LetF(P)define the “structure” of feasible solutions to the network optimization problem, i.e., the set of constraints imposed on the flow variables (that it has to be ans–tpath,s–tflow, a TSP tour, etc.). The value of an optimal solution to the network optimization problem P in time period t is a function of the flows on the arcs in that period and denoted byv(xt). The objective is to minimize the total cost over the planning period. Thus, the generic formulation of an incremental network design problem is as follows:(2.1)min∑t∈{1,…,T}v(xt)+∑t∈{1,…,T},a∈Apca(yat-yat-1)s.t.(2.2)xt∈F(P)∀t∈{1,…,T}(2.3)xat⩽Cayat-1∀a∈Ap,t∈{1,…,T}(2.4)∑a∈Apca(yat-yat-1)⩽Bt∀t∈{1,…,T}The objective function (2.1) has two components: (1) the total cumulative value of the solutions to the network optimization problem solved in each period of the planning horizon and (2) the total cumulative cost of the network expansions carried out during the planning horizon. Constraints (2.2) ensure that the solution in each period of the planning horizon has the required structure (i.e., the structure that characterizes solutions to the network optimization problem). Constraints (2.3) ensure that flow on an arc occurs only when the arc has been built in any of the previous periods and that the flow on the arc does not exceed the capacity of the arc. Constraints (2.4) ensure that the cost of building arcs in a period does not exceed the budget available for construction in that period of the planning horizon.Incremental network design problems have characteristics in common with various network design problems. A brief review of some relevant literature is given below.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
