@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Environmental efficiency measurement and the materials balance condition reconsidered

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Coelli et al.’s (2007) environmental efficiency measure does not reward pollution control.Neglecting efforts to control pollutants may lead to biased environmental efficiency scores.A new environmental efficiency measure that rewards pollution control efforts is proposed.A numerical example using Data Envelopment Analysis is provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in environment and climate change,Environmental efficiency,Data envelopment analysis,Weak G-disposability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This note takes up a shortcoming of Coelli et al.’s (2007) popular environmental efficiency measure and its extension to economic-environmental trade-off analysis (see Van Meensel et al. (2010)), namely that they do not reward emission reductions by pollution control. A new environmental efficiency measure that overcomes this issue and - similar to Coelli et al.’s efficiency measure - is in line with the materials balance principle is proposed and further decomposed into “technical environmental efficiency” and “material and nonmaterial allocative environmental efficiencies”. The new efficiency measure collapses into Coelli et al.’s efficiency measure if none of the considered Decision Making Units control pollutants. A numerical example using Data Envelopment Analysis is provided to further explore the properties of the new efficiency measure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The productivity and efficiency analysis literature has become engaged with production processes in which undesirable outputs (pollutants) are jointly produced with desirable outputs. Consequently, the appropriate way to model undesirable outputs has been debated. Among the most popular approaches are to incorporate pollutants as freely disposable inputs (Baumol & Oates, 1975; Pittman, 1981) or weakly disposable outputs (Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, & Pasurka, 1989; Färe, Grosskopf, Noh, & Weber, 2005) in the production model. They have recently been criticized for not complying with the materials balance condition (e.g. Coelli, Lauwers, & Van Huylenbroeck, 2007; Rødseth, 2013; Rødseth & Romstad, 2014), a law of physics that explains the generation of pollution in many conventional production processes.Coelli et al. (2007) introduced a new environmental efficiency measure that ensures consistency with the materials balance condition. Unlike the above-mentioned modeling approaches, Coelli et al. (2007) do not treat pollutants as inputs or outputs to be included in the production model, but utilize material flow coefficients to identify the input mix that results in the minimal material inflow required to produce a certain bundle of desirable outputs. Their material inflow minimization problem is parallel to the well-known cost minimization problem in economics, and Coelli et al.’s (2007) efficiency measure therefore corresponds to Farrell's (1957) cost efficiency measure. Economic-environmental trade-offs can further be assessed by comparing the material inflow minimization to cost minimization; see e.g. Van Meensel, Lauwers, Van Huylenbroeck, and Van Passel (2010).This note takes up an issue that was not satisfactory dealt with by Coelli et al. (2007), namely the role of pollution control in environmental efficiency measurement. More specifically, it shows that Coelli et al.’s efficiency measure may provide biased efficiency rankings in cases where pollution control is a common compliance strategy. The reason is that their approach only cares about reallocation (or minimization) of material inputs to minimize uncontrolled emissions, and neglects the fact that additional inputs can be used to control pollutants. Pollution control, e.g. end-of-pipe abatement, is quite common in many of the industries which Coelli et al.’s model has been applied to – e.g. electricity (Welch & Barnum, 2009) and agriculture (Coelli et al., 2007) – although it has not been taken into account in these empirical analyses.Rødseth (2015) recently introduced the axioms “weak G-disposability” and “output essentiality” and showed that they allow the specification of a production model that includes pollutants and, at the same time, is consistent with the materials balance condition. Hampf and Rødseth (2015) showed how Rødseth's theoretical production model can be implemented using Data Envelopment Analysis (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978), abbreviated DEA. This approach makes up the foundation of the current note, which introduces a new environmental efficiency measure that rewards emission reductions by pollution control. Coelli et al.’s (2007) environmental efficiency measure is a special case of the proposed efficiency measure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
