@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Linking validation: A search for coherency within the Supermatrix

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Consistency in pairwise comparisons matrices is reviewed.Unintended results are shown in four Supermatrices where consistent pairwise comparison matrices provide suboptimal final priorities.Simulations are carried out to explore the frequency of such events occurring in general.The Linking Coherency Index is proposed to identify and correct this problem.The Linking Coherency Index is applied in a concise example.The method can be applied using the Programming language R code in the supplementary data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Analytic Network Process (ANP),Coherency,Consistency,Linking validation,Linking Coherency Index,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The consistency check within each pairwise comparison matrix is an important step in an Analytic Network Process (ANP) decision. In an ANP network there is both the ability and the need to test for additional levels of consistency or coherency among the priority vectors. Examples are used to highlight cases where a Supermatrix with priority vectors that were obtained from either perfect or nearly perfect consistent pairwise comparison matrices generates suboptimal decisions. Simulations are used to further demonstrate the frequency of these occurrences in general ANP networks. A form of cross validation within the Supermatrix called linking validation is developed and demonstrated. The linking validation method allows decision makers to use the priority vectors within the Supermatrix to validate other priority vectors within the Supermatrix. The linking validation method involves generating linking estimates. The linking estimates are compared against each other to identify the most incoherent priority vector by calculating the Linking Coherency Index (LCI) scores. The decision maker can then update the specified priority vector and repeat this process until the LCI-score for every linking estimate is below the given threshold. The use of linking validation to test for coherency further improves the validity of ANP models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Analytic Network Process (ANP) is an amazing decision making method that takes advantage of our natural ability to make relative comparisons. The influential criteria in a decision can be organized into clusters within a network and through the aggregation of the relative comparisons the overall relative influence of the alternatives can be calculated. The ANP and a specific subset of ANP problems referred to as the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) can be considered a disruptive technology; and since its initial debut it has been applied in many areas (Saaty & Ozdemir, 2008). As with any great tool or method the results are only as good as the user input; and hence the common phrase, “garbage in, garbage out,” can be used to emphasize the need for unbiased, reliable, and valid data under any method or approach including the ANP. One way to test and control for the quality of the inputs in an ANP model is the consistency index (Saaty, 1977) for the pairwise comparison matrix (PCM). Many variations of this method that focus on the PCM have been proposed (Ergu, Kou, Peng, & Shi, 2011).Human decision makers are subject to all sorts of biases (Kahneman, 2011). While there is no reason to suspect the ANP exacerbates any of these biases, it would not be safe to assume the method serves as a total immunization from them. With the original consistency index, when one was not ordinally consistent and said that a > b, and b > c, but then said c > a or if the intensity of the measured relationships was not consistent enough, it would not be advisable to proceed because of data quality issues within the PCM. More about the consistency index in a PCM is discussed in greater detail in the literature review; but what about consistency beyond the PCM?As we think of realms of influence in an ANP network, the priority vectors obtained from the PCMs are aggregated within a much larger realm of influence within an ANP Supermatrix. As a Supermatrix is an aggregate of multiple measurements across many scales, it is difficult to see how one could check for a greater level of consistency beyond the PCM. But what if one could? What if there was a way to cross validate the overall Supermatrix for a level of consistency or coherency that would serve as a data quality check for the priority vectors within the Supermatrix? One might also wonder why such a test would be needed if there is a high level of, or even perfect, consistency within the PCMs. After reviewing the relevant literature, Section 3 motivates the need for such a test with examples to highlight realistic scenarios where a problematic Supermatrix can arise and would otherwise currently go undetected. While this new safeguard could be termed a Supermatrix consistency check, it is simply referred to herein as linking validation and coherency testing. Next, in Section 4, simulated decisions further demonstrate in general that performing coherency testing within a Supermatrix is crucial in order to obtain meaningful results with the ANP. In Section 5, a Linking Coherency Index (LCI) is proposed to provide another level of checks and safeguards to improve the reliability of ANP decision models. Section 6 contains a sample decision Supermatrix that is derived from the examples in Section 3 where the LCI is demonstrated to identify the problematic priority vectors. Finally, in Section 7, concluding remarks and suggestions for future research are discussed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
