@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A long-haul freight transportation problem: Synchronizing resources to deliver requests passing through multiple transshipment locations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new model for a real-world long-haul freight transportation problem.The model solves problems with requests owing through multiple transshipment points.We propose a matheuristic based on a relax-and-x scheme that outperforms CPLEX.A case-study is solved with real-world instances of a Portuguese logistics operator.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Tractor-and-trailer,Resource synchronization,Fix-and-optimize,Case-study,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research aims at tackling a real-world long-haul freight transportation problem where tractors are allowed to exchange semi-trailers through several transshipment points until a request reaches its destiny. The unique characteristics of the considered logistics network allow for providing long-haul services by means of short-haul jobs, drastically reducing empty truck journeys. A greater flexibility is achieved with faster responses. Furthermore, the planning goals as well as the nature of the considered trips led to the definition of a new problem, the long-haul freight transportation problem with multiple transshipment locations. A novel mathematical formulation is developed to ensure resource synchronization while including realistic features, which are commonly found separately in the literature. Considering the complexity and dimension of this routing and scheduling problem, a mathematical programming heuristic (matheuristic) is developed with the objective of obtaining good quality solutions in a reasonable amount of time, considering the logistics business context. We provide a comparison between the results obtained for 79 real-world instances. The developed solution method is now the basis of a decision support system of a Portuguese logistics operator (LO).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Setting an efficient and flexible logistics network and defining its planning and operational processes is one of the most complex challenges one can find in the transportation sector. In the last two decades, we have witnessed a considerable effort towards the creation of a new generation of transportation systems (Crainic, Gendreau, & Potvin, 2009) which have to fit the value proposals of each company, focusing on distinct strengths such as quality, speed, reliability or cost.Recently, cost pressures fostered a modification in the logistics paradigm and transshipment points are being deployed for long-haul freight transportation, introducing more flexibility into logistics networks. Usually, LO find different solutions for the challenges imposed by long distance trips, such as using more than one driver per vehicle. However, adopting a transshipment-based distribution process may be truly advantageous.From a global point of view, the transportation network becomes much more flexible as it provides additional possibilities to perform the transportation of freight. Since the tasks assigned to each resource are much shorter, points in time when a resource becomes available can be rationally spread along the entire area occupied by the customers and will happen more frequently. In what concerns real-world cases, knowing that the variance of the planning variables may drastically affect timings, this is an advantage to ensure the execution of a transportation plan. In fact, this flexibility will be reflected in an increment of the service level as the network offers more solutions per unit of time. Furthermore, this flexibility not only accounts for the aforesaid facts, but also may yield solutions with less and shorter empty truck paths, which are a major concern among LO.Logically, these advantages come at a cost. On one hand, the complexity of a planning problem considering transshipment points is much larger. On the other hand, the operational complexity at each facility is also likely to increase due to the difficulties imposed by the need to synchronize resources. This also means that it is extremely difficult to obtain a feasible solution manually.In this research we develop a systematic approach on top of a real transportation network that has both the intermediate facilities and the human expertise to perform transshipment operations. Since in Mitrovic-Minic and Laporte (2006) the authors state that transshipment points have shown to be very useful in clustered instances (typical found in long-haul transportation) and that the advantages of using those nodes increases with problem size (real-world instances are large), we consider that our challenge is a valuable research topic.In order to provide an example of the aforementioned networks and context, Fig. 1is shown. In this novel problem, a set of tractors (Fig. 2a) is located in each depot and the objective is to pickup requests from a certain location and deliver them to other locations. A request consists in the transportation of an entire semi-trailer (Fig. 2b) and thus, considering that each tractor can only pull one semi-trailer at a time, we are in the presence of a full truckload case. Whenever a customer submits a request, both a pickup and a deliver time-window have to be defined, meaning that loading and unloading operations have to occur during those intervals. It is also possible to request each operation to be made in different days and for that reason, semi-trailers can be temporarily stored in a transshipment location (note that every depot also has a transshipment location). Additionally, a service to be provided by a tractor can only occur during the period in which its base depot is opened. Tractors can only travel inside their reach radius which is defined by the maximum number of hours that drivers are allowed to work.This real-world challenge includes a combination of conditions that are rare in the literature.Firstly, in consideration of the company’s desire to maintain a certain level of comfort among its drivers, the maximum working time (including driving and other activities) is assumed to be 9 hours. Note that tractors are obliged to return to their base depot in the end of a workday. Therefore, drivers have a limited reach radius of approximately 4.5 hours which clusters the customers around each depot. In sum, we may assume that policies found in short-haul transportation activities are preferred.Secondly, since drivers are confined to a limited region around their base depot, the necessity of executing multiple transshipments with the same request may be imposed in some services. Thus, in order to provide long-haul services by means of short-haul jobs, the company allows for the possibility of performing transshipments at certain locations. In fact, different regions may only communicate in these locations where two vehicles are able to exchange freight. This is strictly necessary, otherwise it would not be possible to send requests between every combination of sender/receiver, while ensuring compliance with the law and with the policies of the company. It is now clear that if a request is to be picked in the zone of a certain depot and to be delivered in the zone of another depot, it is mandatory that at least one transshipment is going to happen. Additionally, a transfer is only possible if the compatibility between tractors and semi-trailers is assured (the terms “transfer” and “transshipment” are used interchangeably in this paper).Thirdly, tractors are only able to leave a certain depot if they are to return pulling a semi-trailer, meaning that the delivery of a request must always be paired with the pickup of another request in the same trip (throughout the paper we use the term path to describe the movement of a vehicle from one location to another and the term trip to refer to a set of paths performed by a vehicle). Specifically, a tractor is not allowed both to leave or to arrive at its base depot without pulling a semi-trailer. In fact, if this condition is verified in every trip, the distance travelled without pulling semi-trailers will be minimized since the only possibility to execute such trips is reserved to the case when a tractor travels from an unloading location to a loading location. In reality, if the truck unloads a semi-trailer and picks another semi-trailer in the same location (despite being represented by different nodes), trips including empty truck paths can be fully extinguished from the transportation plans emerging from this pairing strategy. Additionally, there is no room for complex itineraries because most of the requests have different pickup and delivery zones, meaning that the semi-trailers will most likely be transported directly from their initial location to a depot or between depots before reaching their final destination.Lastly, given the latter conditions, one may conclude that in long-haul requests there is a portion of the total journey to be crossed by the request that is defined a priori, specifically, the depots through which the request has to pass in order to be moved from one zone to another are known in advance. The necessary transshipment, pickup and delivery paths are defined in the moment a request is posted. Therefore, the objective of minimizing the travelled distance was not considered to be critical when analyzing movements between zones. However, if a tractor unloads a semi-trailer in a certain location and has to return without pulling a semi-trailer, an empty truck path is incurred. Since these empty truck paths are undesirable among the transportation sector, although they are essential to continuing operations as stated by Crainic (1998), the company decided to follow the strategy of maximizing the number of pairings which are the trips where a tractor delivers and picks a semi-trailer. Although this pairing maximization objective is not the most common, if we consider that the arcs to be traversed are roughly defined in the beginning of the planning phase, we conclude that the routing part is not the main concern of this problem and thus it is admissible not to focus the attention in the objective of minimizing the travelled distance. Still, one does not have an idea of the exact moment when the trips are to be executed and the tractor that will execute them. Additionally, in requests with pickup and delivery time-windows to be made in different days, a minimum number of transfers must be accomplished in order to ensure that a feasible solution exists in the future. This is due to the fact that the length of the considered planning horizon may be shorter than the difference between the pickup and delivery time-windows of a given request.To the best of our knowledge such conditions were never addressed in a systematic manner before. Furthermore, being motivated by a real-world case, this research has to consider practical aspects which confer an additional complexity to the planning problem that hampers the computation of a feasible solution manually, even for planners with years of experience. We developed a novel mathematical formulation which models transshipment locations based on the approach presented by Cortés, Matamala, and Contardo (2010). In order to address the necessary practicalities of the real-world problem, some enhancements had to be made resulting in a more complex formulation, which is only capable of solving small instances. Aiming at the resolution of larger instances and with the objective of obtaining better quality solutions in a reasonable amount of time, a matheuristic was developed in order to iteratively decompose the set of integer variables in the original MIP and explore simpler sub-problems.The remainder of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, a literature review of problems with similar features is performed. The problem description is detailed in Section 3. In Section 4, the novel mathematical formulation capable of producing real-world applicable solutions is introduced. Section 5, is devoted to the proposed solution method and Section 6 reports numerical experiments that were performed on real-world instances. Finally, in Section 7, the paper summarizes the main achievements and future works that may arise from this research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper the long-haul freight transportation problem with requests flowing through multiple transshipment points is presented. A novel mathematical formulation is proposed in order to obtain solutions for a real world problem faced by a Portuguese LO. Additionally, with the objective of obtaining good quality solutions in short periods of time, we propose a fix-and-optimize matheuristic, proving its superiority compared to solutions obtaining by solving the mathematical model with a commercial solver.The main contribution of this research is threefold. Firstly, a new operational model for the pickup and delivery problem is presented. Although this is a very specific case of a full truckload vehicle and scheduling problem, this is a new glance at the possibilities of using transshipment locations to support distribution. Considering that the use of transshipment locations is part of a new logistics paradigm, this work surely presents a fresh approach to vehicle routing and scheduling problems. Additionally, we unified the best of long-haul and short-haul policies, resulting in a broader concept which can offer more service types without jeopardizing the comfort and working conditions of the drivers as well as the compliance with the legislation. Secondly, we provide an overview over different parts of the VRP literature. As this paper unfolds, it becomes clear that this problem includes a set of features that is present in several problems. In some cases, the similarities may only be physically noticeable whereas in other cases there are similarities only in the methodologies and modeling techniques used. Thirdly, we provide a solution approach that is able to beat one the best commercial solvers on the market. In fact, the developed matheuristic is able to obtain better solutions and converges more rapidly.Regarding real-world results, although we are not allowed to reveal detailed information, it is worth mentioning that the company obtained a reduction of 6 percent in the cost per shipment for the requests served in the year after the implementation of the transshipment paradigm. This reduction is computed relatively to the year before the implementation, where the requests were delivered following a direct shipment strategy.Finally, taking into account the lack of variety of papers addressing the tractor and trailer concept, we consider that tackling problems with the concept of modular vehicle parts may be an interesting field of research since these ideas can provide greater flexibility, occupation and efficiency. Furthermore, it would be interesting to extend this study to the case where request paths are not given in advance. In this extended version, the mathematical model would have to make additional decisions. The routing part becomes more complex and the synchronization possibilities are more diverse. Therefore, it would be interesting to test if our solution approach would be able to efficiently explore this new search space as it is larger and more difficult to be explored.