@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The risk-averse newsvendor problem with random capacity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the effect of capacity uncertainty on a risk-averse newsvendor’s decision.We consider two criteria: Value-at-Risk as a constraint and Conditional Value-at-Risk.Capacity uncertainty decreases the order quantity under the CVaR.Capacity uncertainty may increase or decrease the order quantity under the VaR constraint.Under the VaR constraint, the effect depends on the confidence level.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Conditional Value-at-Risk,Value-at-Risk,Newsvendor problem,Capacity uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study the effect of capacity uncertainty on the inventory decisions of a risk-averse newsvendor. We consider two well-known risk criteria, namely Value-at-Risk (VaR) included as a constraint and Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR). For the risk-neutral newsvendor, we find that the optimal order quantity is not affected by the capacity uncertainty. However, this result does not hold for the risk-averse newsvendor problem. Specifically, we find that capacity uncertainty decreases the order quantity under the CVaR criterion. Under the VaR constraint, capacity uncertainty leads to an order decrease for low confidence levels, but to an order increase for high confidence levels. This implies that the risk criterion should be carefully selected as it has an important effect on inventory decisions. This is shown for the newsvendor problem, but is also likely to hold for other inventory control problems that future research can address.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In most of the inventory control literature, demand uncertainty is the only type of uncertainty considered. However, there are many reasons why in real life situations capacity may also be uncertain. These include yield loss (related to quality considerations), unreliable machinery and unplanned maintenance. We refer interest readers to Yano and Lee (1995) and Grosfeld-Nir and Gerchak (2004) for summaries of the effects of random capacity on inventory control.Random capacity, resulting from the before mentioned uncertainties, has been studied for the well-known newsvendor problem. Ciarallo et al. (1994) show that random capacity does not affect the order quantity of the risk neutral newsvendor, i.e., under the profit maximization objective. More general, as discussed in detail in Section 2.1, the effect of random capacity under the risk-averse criterion on the single period problem is limited. However, Schweitzer and Cachon (2000) provide experimental evidence suggesting that inventory managers are risk averse for high-value products. Thus, the assumption of risk neutrality is not always applicable. In view of this, a number of authors have therefore considered the risk aversion issue through the use of some related objectives, such as utility functions, the mean–variance objective function, VaR (downside risk) and CVaR (coherent measures). We will summarize key results in Section 2.2. It will appear that risk aversion has not been studied on inventory systems with random capacity.In this paper, we consider a risk-averse newsvendor problem with uncertainty in both demand volume and production capacity. We find that the risk criterion should be carefully selected, as different criteria affect the inventory decision in different ways. More specifically, we find that capacity uncertainty always leads to a lower order quantity under the CVaR criterion, but it may lead to either a lower or a higher order quantity under the VaR constraint. So, different from the risk neutral setting, we find that additional uncertainty may lead to a lower inventory level under both considered risk averse criteria.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we review the literature on the newsvendor problem with random capacity and on the risk-averse newsvendor problem. Section 3 introduces the risk-averse newsvendor model and the various criteria. In Section 4, we derive the optimal order decisions under different risk measures. Section 5 discusses the impact of the randomness of capacity and the mean-CVaR criterion. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
