@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrating soft and hard operational research to improve surgical centre management at a university hospital

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Soft and hard OR methodologies were used in a case study in a Brazilian hospital.Cognitive maps facilitated a dialogue between hospital staff and the analysts.The approach incorporated specialists' views in simulation experiments.Findings can signal actions for resolving/improving real-world problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Problem structuring,OR in health care,Simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this work is to present the practical applications of an integrated use of soft and hard methodologies applied in a case study of the Surgical Centre of the University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho, where the low volume of surgeries is of major concern. The proposed approach is particularly appropriate in situations where there is limited time, financial resources, and institutional cooperation. Cognitive maps were used to elicit the perspectives of health professionals, which supported simulation experiments and guided the model's execution. Human-resource, patient-related, room-schedule, material, and structural constraints were found to affect the number of surgeries performed. The major contribution of this paper is the proposal of a multi-methodological approach with a committed focus on problem solving that incorporates specialists' views in simulation experiments; these specialists’ collaborative work highlights actions that can lead to the resolution (or improvement) of real-world problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of operations research (OR) in healthcare differs from its use in other fields because of the special characteristics of healthcare, including the differing influence of the decision-making of different stakeholders and the existence of an indirect command line, as described by Brailsford and Vissers (2011). Moreover, there are challenges in the use of OR in healthcare; Kopach-Konrad et al. (2007) identified some of these to be the rigid division of work in health service operations and management and the scepticism and mistrust of health professionals regarding agents from other fields. It is therefore very important to maintain an interface between OR researchers and health professionals to ensure the success of the research and its applications. According to Hämälläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013), this can be linked to Behavioral Operations Research (BOR), since it is a “behavioral aspect related to the use of OR methods in modelling, problem solving and decision support”.Soft OR methods can contribute significantly to this purpose and provide a focus for system participants when building solutions; they represent a commitment to the problem which these participants want to solve. These features may be related to the observation made by Brailsford and Vissers (2011) that there is an increasing number of health-related studies using soft methodologies.In addition to soft methodologies, hospital managers who face financial constraints need hard methodologies to provide quantitative information on the impact of proposed actions, enabling them to allocate available resources more effectively. However, direct experimentation in health services can harm patients. Thus, discrete event simulation (DES) methods are often used in health service studies to enable evaluation in both an operational and a strategic context (Davies & Davies, 1995; Lagergren, 1998).Howick and Ackermann (2011) discussed the mixed use of different methodologies, emphasising the lack of ‘generic lessons’ in the literature arising from using different methodologies. These lessons may include obstacles encountered in conducting studies, perceived limitations of models, observations regarding the quality of models, and the results.This study was an original and independent initiative that was supported by the health professionals of the hospital where the case study took place but absent of any long-term funding. It is a simplified model, with quantitative and qualitative elements, appropriate for situations where there is limited time, financial resources, and institutional cooperation. It aims to present a methodology combination—a variety of multi-methodology (Mingers & Brocklesby, 1997) wherein the methodologies complement each other, which affords several advantages for modelling and simulation experiments—and apply this combination in a case study. The major contribution of this paper is the proposal of a multi-methodological approach with a committed focus on problem solving that incorporates specialists' views in simulation experiments, working collaboratively to signal actions that can lead to the resolution or improvement of real-world problems. The lessons learned during the execution and the presentation of the discussion may be valuable for future work in healthcare and OR.The following section presents the theoretical background and some contextual information, which guided our procedure in the case study. Section 3 presents the abstract model in some detail. Section 4 states the case study and its results. Finally, we discuss the results in Section 5, and report the conclusion in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
