@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
One- and multi-directional conditional efficiency measurement – Efficiency in Lithuanian family farms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper extends the Multi-directional Efficiency Analysis (MEA) to the conditional framework.Efficiency of Lithuanian family farms is analysed by the means of the conditional order-m frontiers and MEA.The time trend and subsidy rate have a significant influence on the output efficiency.Input-specific results obtained via the conditional MEA are also presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Free disposal hull,Order-m measures,Multi-directional efficiency analysis,Conditional measures,Farming efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper analyses farming efficiency by the means of the partial frontiers and Multi-Directional Efficiency Analysis (MEA). In particular, we apply the idea of the conditional efficiency framework to the MEA approach to ensure that observations are compared to their homogeneous counterparts. Moreover, this paper shows that combining the traditional one-directional and multi-directional efficiency framework yields valuable insights. It allows one to identify what factors matter in terms of output production and input consumption. The application deals with Lithuanian family farms, for which we have a rich dataset. The results indicate that the output efficiency positively correlates to a time trend and negatively to the subsidy share in the total output. The MEA-based analysis further suggests that the time trend has been positively affecting the productive efficiency due to increase in the labour use efficiency. Meanwhile, the increasing subsidy rate has a negative influence upon MEA efficiencies associated with all the inputs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since Farrell (1957) developed the idea of relative efficiency measurement, we can distinguish two broad approaches to measure efficiency. First, parametric methods do require the a priori specification of a representation11Primal representations of the production technology include production function and distance functions, among others. Dual representations of the production technology include the cost function, the profit function and the revenue function.of the production technology, which is often unknown. Therefore, they can easily lead to specification errors (Yatchew, 1998). On the other hand, non-parametric methods do not require any assumptions on the functional form of the representations of the production technology. Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA; Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978) can be given as a typical non-parametric frontier method. However, being a deterministic method in its nature, it does not account for random errors. Particularly this random variation is likely to occur in the context of farm efficiency analysis due to measurement errors, fluctuations related to operation environment, etc.A partial frontier approach addresses these shortcomings. The partial frontiers (also referred to as the robust frontiers) are introduced by Cazals, Florens, and Simar (2002). The idea is to benchmark an observation not against all the observations dominating it but rather against a randomly drawn sample of these. The latter methodology has been extended by introducing the conditional measures enabling to analyse the influence of the environmental variables on the efficiency scores (Daraio & Simar, 2005, 2007a, 2007b).The traditional Farrell's and Shepard's efficiency measures define a proportional contraction (resp. expansion) of inputs (resp. outputs). In many settings, including agriculture, the output-oriented direction is insightful as it reveals the output gap for given input levels. It can be used for benchmarking purposes as well as for policy insights in the potential improvements. Nevertheless, information on the potential input reductions or output expansions yields only partial insights due to three reasons. First, it considers proportional contractions or expansions.22However, it is possible to employ the subvector approach based upon the radial measures to obtain non-radial efficiencies (Färe et al., 1994). Indeed, we will follow this approach to a certain extent when employing the Multi-directional Efficiency Analysis.In many settings, including agriculture, it is particularly interesting to obtain insights on the potential reduction of each input variable separately. The proportional contractions for all inputs hide too much information such that it is less useful for farmers and policy makers. Second, a decomposition of the (aggregate) efficiency scores into the input-specific efficiency scores would enable one to identify the sources of (in)efficiency, i.e. the inputs correlating to an overall decrease in productivity and efficiency. Third, for many observations it is not relevant to be benchmarked against any other observation as external variation might influence the input–output ratio. Indeed, it is more relevant to be benchmarked against context-specific ideal points, which operate in a similar operational environment.A technique which allows us to deal with those issues is Multi-directional Efficiency Analysis (MEA, Bogetoft & Hougaard, 1999). The latter methodology has been employed to analyse productive efficiency across various sectors, namely health care, banking, and energy (Asmild & Matthews, 2012; Asmild & Pastor, 2010; Wang, Wei, & Zhang, 2013).In this paper we will combine the traditional measures to estimate relative efficiency with multi-directional efficiency. We show that this allows us to identify factors of efficiency along with the sources relaying the impact of these factors. This yields valuable and complementary insights for the evaluated observations, policy makers and researchers.The economic crisis stressed the importance to look for efficiency gains in the agricultural sector. As it is the case in all Central and East European (CEE) countries, the agricultural sector constitutes an important part of the Lithuanian economy. Eurostat (2014) reports that the share of the gross domestic product (GDP) generated in the latter sector decreased from 4 per cent in 2004 down to 2.3 per cent in 2009; however it rebounded to 3.2 per cent in 2011 (in current prices). To compare, the respective figures for the 27 European Union (EU) Member States (EU27) are 1.8 per cent, 1.3 per cent, and 1.5 per cent. As for the “old” EU Member States (EU15), these figures are even lower, viz. 1.6 per cent, 1.2 per cent, and 1.3 per cent. The same pattern is revealed by considering the structure of employment: the share of employees working the agricultural sector is 15 per cent back in 2004, whereas it subsequently decreased to 8.3 per cent in 2008 and further down to 7.7 per cent in 2011. Meanwhile, the EU27 featured the shares of 5.8 per cent, 5 per cent, and 4.9 per cent, respectively. Considering the EU15, the corresponding figures are 3.2 per cent, 2.8 per cent, and 2.8 per cent. Thus, the Lithuanian agricultural sector still plays a relatively more important role in the Lithuanian economy as opposed to the economically advanced EU Member States. Even though the outcomes of the economic transition are evident, agriculture remains an economically and socially important activity in Lithuania.In addition, the Lithuanian agricultural sector faces certain transformations due to the historical context prevailing in the CEE countries. Specifically, the collectivisation and de-collectivisation rendered distortions of the factor markets, which, in turn, have been shaping farmers’ decisions to a certain extent. Another important factor of the agricultural development in Lithuania is the European integration processes. Lithuania acceded to the EU in 2004 and thus adjusted its agricultural policy in the lines of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). As a result, the farm structure has been changing in terms of both land area and farming type. The aforementioned circumstances stress the need for researches into efficiency of the Lithuanian farms. In particular, these studies should identify the main reasons of inefficiency and possible paths for development. From an empirical perspective, this paper paves the road to do so.This is not the first paper to analyse agricultural efficiency in CEE countries. Gorton and Davidova (2004) presented a survey of the relevant studies. Thiele and Brodersen (1999) used data envelopment analysis (DEA) to analyse the underlying differences in efficiency as regards East German and West German farms. Brümmer (2001) employed DEA and stochastic frontier analysis (SFA) to analyse the efficiency of Slovenian farms. Brümmer, Glauben, and Thijssen (2002) utilised SFA to analyse the changes in total factor productivity in dairy farms across Germany, Poland and the Netherlands. Bezlepkina and Oude Lansik (2006) utilised DEA in a two-stage framework to analyse the impact of financial indicators upon technical efficiency in Russian farms. Later on, Bojnec and Latruffe (2011, 2013) analysed the relationships between size and efficiency of Slovenian farms. Bojnec and Fertő (2013) employed SFA to analyse the relationships between efficiency and off-farm income. Latruffe, Balcombe, Davidova, and Zawalinska (2004, 2005) employed the bootstrapped DEA along with the SFA to estimate the efficiency of Polish farms. Balcombe, Davidova, and Latruffe (2008) analysed the determinants of the total factor productivity change in Polish farms. Davidova and Latruffe (2007) related the Czech farm efficiency to the financial indicators. Latruffe, Davidova, and Balcombe (2008) utilised the double bootstrapping methodology to assess the Czech farm efficiency. Chaplin, Davidova, and Gorton (2004) analysed the efficiency of Polish, Czech, and Hungarian farms. Latruffe, Fogarasi, and Desjeux (2012) compared the Hungarian and French farm performance by the means of DEA and meta-frontier approach. Baležentis and Kriščiukaitienė (2013) analysed the determinants of Lithuanian family farms’ efficiency by the means of the Tobit model, whereas Baležentis, Kriščiukaitienė, and Baležentis (2014) employed the bootstrapped DEA and the non-parametric regression for the latter purpose. Fousekis, Kourtesi, and Polymeros (2014) utilised the conditional framework to analyse the performance of Greek olive farms.This paper exhibits certain noteworthy methodological and empirical features. From a methodological perspective it extends the MEA-model to include the operational environment. We do so by limiting the MEA reference observations to observations which have similar characteristics, as determined by a nonparametric multidimensional kernel specification. Second, this paper provides a framework to juxtapose the traditional one-directional efficiency estimations with multi-directional efficiency estimations. We show that a combination of the two approaches yields complimentary and valuable insights. Third, we examine the variables that correlate to agricultural efficiency in Lithuania. Given the economic crisis, the relatively high share of agriculture in GDP and call for efficiency gains within the European Common Agricultural Policy, insights in the drivers of efficiency are important for policy makers. The application makes use of rich farm-level data coming from the Farm Accountancy Data Network (Lithuanian Institute of Agrarian Economics, 2010).This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the frontier methods, viz. order-m and MEA measures along with their conditional extensions. Section 3 presents the data used for benchmarking. The results are discussed in Section 4. The article concludes with policy advice and general remarks.Ever since Koopmans (1951) and Debreu (1951) we define a production technology as the set of combinations of inputs,x∈R+p, and outputs,y∈R+q. The technology set, T, consists of all feasible combinations of inputs and outputs:(1)T={(x,y)∈R+p+q∣xcanproducey}.We assume that inputs and outputs are freely disposable (Shepard, 1970).The input- and output-oriented Farrell measures of efficiency can be defined, respectively, as (Farrell, 1957):(2)θ(x,y)=min{θ|(θx,y)∈T},(3)λ(x,y)=sup{λ|(x,λy)∈T}.In empirical studies, the ‘true’ set T and hence the efficiency scores are unknown. We only observe a random sample of the decision making units (DMUs), χK= {(xk, yk)|k = 1, 2, ..., K}. For this sample of observations, one can estimate relative efficiency by using a non-parametric method (Charnes et al., 1978; Deprins, Simar, & Tulkens, 1984; Farrell, 1957).Cazals et al. (2002) introduced the probabilistic description of the production process. The latter approach is particularly useful for the estimation of the robust frontiers. The production process can be described in terms of the joint probability measure on(X,Y)∈R+p×R+q.As a remedy to the outlier problem, Cazals et al. (2002) suggested considering the expected minimal value of m i.i.d. random variables, {Yl}l = 1, 2, …, m, generated by the conditional q-variate distribution function,FY|X(y|x)=Pr(Y≤y|X≤x), and obtain the random production possibility set of order m for DMUs consuming less than x.The order-m measures enable one to estimate the efficiency scores by ignoring the outliers, yet they still do not enable to assess the influence of the environmental variables upon the productive efficiency. As a remedy, Cazals et al. (2002) introduced the conditional measures of efficiency (see Section 2.3).The conventional FDH approach compares an observation to the point on the production frontier defined by moving along the ray in between the point of origin and an observation. Therefore, some information regarding input- or output-specific inefficiencies might be masked. The MEA model accounts for this by benchmarking an observation against an ideal point determined by its operational environment, i.e. the curvature of the production frontier (surface). The MEA model has first been proposed by Bogetoft and Hougaard (1999) and Asmild, Hougaard, Kronborg, and Kvist (2003).The MEA approach works in a similar vein as slacks (cf. Tone, 2001, 2002). As Avkiran, Tone, and Tsutsui (2008) pointed out, the slack-based measures might involve non-radial movements yielding change in proportions of the input (or output) mix. They therefore introduced the connected slack-based measure of efficiency based on arbitrary parameters defining the feasible region. The main difference between the slack-based FDH and MEA stems from the fact that MEA uses the observation-specific directional vectors and thus measures the input-specific efficiencies against different ideal points ensuring the proportional reductions in inputs (or outputs). Suchlike analysis is especially topical for the agricultural sector as input markets can be regulated via the support policies. Another input-specific measure is the Russell measure (Färe & Knox Lovell, 1978). However, Bogetoft and Hougaard (1999) showed that the latter measure does not ensure technological monotonicity, as benchmark is defined by the intersection of a supporting hyperplane based on the observed input quantities and a technology set. The MEA, thus, is superior from this viewpoint.In a similar vein as Wang et al. (2013), calculating the input specific efficiency scores of farm (x0, y0) is defined as(4)ei,0=xi0−β*(xi0−xi*)xi0,i=1,2,...,p.The conditional measures of efficiency are developed for a univariate framework by Cazals et al. (2002), for a continuous multivariate framework by Daraio and Simar (2005) and for discrete control variables firstly by Bădin, Daraio and Simar (2010) and then by De Witte and Kortelainen (2013).33For some innovative applications applying conditional efficiency measures, see the recent studies by Halkos and Tzeremes (2013), Serra and Lansink (2014), Cordero et al. (2015) and Tzeremes (2015).The conditional measures seek to compare homogeneous DMUs among themselves. The conditional framework of efficiency measurement assumes that the environmental variables impact the distribution of efficiencies, the very efficiency frontier, or both (Bădin, Daraio & Simar, 2012).The environment a certain observation operates in can be described by a vector of environmental variables,Z=z∈Rr. The joint probability function given in Cazals et al. (2002) can then be extended as:(5)HXY|Z(x,y)=Pr(X≤x,Y≥y|Z=z).The following decomposition is possible:(6)HXY|Z(x,y)=Pr(Y≥y|X≤x,Z=z)Pr(X≤x|Z=z)=SY|X,Z(y|x,z)FX(x|z)The support of SY(y|x, z) defines the production possibility set given Z = z. In order to account for outlying observations, one can consider the expected maximum of the output of the m randomly drawn observations with X ≤ x as a yardstick. The conditional order-m output efficiency score is then obtained as:(7)λ^m,K(x,y|z)=E^Y|X(λ˜m(x,y|z)|X≤x,Z=z)=∫0∞[1−(1−S^Y|X,Z(uy|x,z))m]duAs Eq. (7) involves the additional constraint, Z = z, the estimator needs to be smoothed in z. In practice, the empirical estimator is updated with the kernel densities:(8)S^Y|X,Z(y|x,z)=∑k=1KI(Xk≤x,Yk≥y)Kh(Zk,z)∑k=1KI(Xk≤x)Kh(Zk,z),where Kh( · ) is a kernel function with an associated bandwidth vector, h. The compact support kernels (e.g. Epanechnikov, 1969) should be used for the conditional efficiency analysis. The environmental variables can be both discrete and continuous (Racine & Li 2004). As suggested by Jeong, Park, and Simar (2010) and De Witte and Kortelainen (2013), the kernel of Aitchison and Aitken (1976) can be used for unordered discrete variables, whereas that of Li and Racine (2007) – for ordered discrete variables. Hall, Racine, and Li (2004) and Li and Racine (2008) presented the least squares cross validation method for bandwidth selection.The influence of the environmental variables upon the efficiency scores can be quantified by computing the ratios of the conditional measures over the unconditional ones:Qz=λ^m,K(x,y|z)λ^m,K(x,y). In a fully non-parametric framework, one can specify a non-parametric model to relate the ratios,Qkz, to the environmental variables, zk:Qzk=f(zk)+ϵkfor k = 1, 2, …, K (De Witte & Kortelainen, 2013; Jeong et al., 2010). The locally linear estimates, α(z) and β(zc), are then obtained by minimizing the following function:(9)minα,β∑k=1K(Qkz−α−(zkc−zc)β)2Kh(z,zk),where zc∈ z denotes the continuous elements of z. The statistical significance of the environmental variables can be further analysed by employing procedures described in Racine, Hart, and Li (2006). These are implemented in the R package np (Hayfield & Racine, 2008). By drawing the partial regression plots, one can easily check the direction of the influence of the environmental variables upon the efficiency ratios. In an output-oriented framework, an upward slope of a regression curve implies a positive influence of an environmental variable on the productive efficiency (Daraio & Simar, 2007b). The opposite holds for an input-oriented framework. Furthermore, in order to disentangle the behaviour of the dependent variable associated with changes in the independent ones, one can draw the partial regression plots for different quantiles of the independent variables (i.e. environmental variables). These plots then would show the influence of each environmental variable upon the efficiency ratio while the remaining environmental variables are held at the respective quantile.The significance of the explanatory variables is tested in the spirit of Racine (1997) and Racine et al. (2006). However, it is due to Daraio and Simar (2014) that the statistics of interest might be improved by employing the double bootstrap procedure in case measures other than order-α are used.Zschille (2014) suggests that the conditional measures of efficiency can be based not only on order-m measures, but also on any other estimator. We apply this insight to extend the MEA approach to conditional estimators.In the conditional MEA model we restrict the reference set by considering densities generated by the kernels used for the environmental variables. The coordinates of an ideal point in the conditional framework are found by solving the following programme for each input:(10)xi*=minxi,λkxis.t.∑k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛλkxik≤xi∑k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛλkx−ik≤x−i0,−i={1,2,…,p}∖i∑k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛλkyjk≥yj0,j=1,2,…,q∑k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛλk=1λk={0,1},k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛwhere k|Kh(z0, zk) ≥ ɛ defines a set of indexes k which are operating in a similar environment as the evaluated observation, (x0, y0). In case one uses a compact kernel, ε can be set to zero. In our case, however, we decided to use ε equal to the 0.85 quantile of the densities observed for a given production plan, i.e. Kh(z0, zk). A vector of input-specific efficiencies is then found by solving the following linear programming problem over the restricted reference set:(11)β*=maxβ,λkβs.t.∑k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛλkxik≤xi0−β(xi0−xi*),i=1,2,...,p∑k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛλkyjk≥yj0,j=1,2,...,q∑k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛλk=1λk={0,1},k|Kh(z0,zk)≥ɛand subsequently calculating the conditional input specific efficiency scores, ei, k|Z:(12)ei,0|Z=xi0−β*(xi0−xi*)xi0,i=1,2,...,p.The second stage analysis can be facilitated analogously to the order-m scores.The data for 200 farms selected from the FADN sample cover the period of 2004–2009. In total, our balanced panel data set includes 1200 observations. The FADN has been established in order to facilitate the monitoring and evaluation of the EU common agriculture policy. Its primary users are government agencies and research institutions across the EU. The farms are included into the survey sample on a basis of the farm structure survey and agricultural census data. This might create some sampling bias as FADN focuses on commercial farms, which are generally larger ones.The selection of input and output variables is in line with earlier literature (e.g., Bojnec & Latruffe, 2008). We define input variables which correspond to the land, labour and capital resources of farms. The utilised agricultural area (UAA) in hectares is chosen as land input variable, annual work units (AWU) as labour input variable, intermediate consumption in local currency Litas (Lt), and total assets in Litas as a capital factor. The last two variables are deflated by respective real price indices provided by Eurostat. The three output indicators represent crop, livestock, and other outputs44Other output includes rental income, forestry produces, receipts of tourism etc.in Litas, respectively. The output indicators are deflated by respective price indices and aggregated into a single one. The aggregation is necessary to ensure that the output values are reasonable and comparable across farms of the different specialisation. Moreover, the aggregation in one variable avoids zero values for highly specialised farms and increases the operationality of the model (as order-m computations are quite cumbersome with our dataset).Descriptive statistics are provided in Table C.1. It is clear that the analysed sample covers relatively large farms (mean agricultural area of 244 hectares). As for labour force, the average is 3.6 annual work units.Using the conditional efficiency model, we include characteristics of the operational environment in the analysis. The existing literature suggests that farming efficiency might be impacted by farm size, technology, farmers’ characteristics, market integration, and temporal variations. Abdulai and Tietje (2007) estimated a stochastic production frontier for German dairy farms which included a set of explanatory variables. The latter set included the ratio of assets to livestock units, farmer's age and education, off-farm employment, farm size in terms of herd size and UAA, hours worked, and expenditures for feed and livestock. Kumbhakar, Lien, and Hardaker (2014) analysed the efficiency of Norwegian grain farms by the means of SFA and used the following environmental variables: off-farm income share, subsidy income share, entrepreneurial orientation index obtained during a survey, farmer experience in years, and education dummies. Latruffe et al. (2004) considered the following variables as determinants of efficiency: total output, technical ratios (land to labour, capital to labour), the use of external factors (share of hired labour, the share of rented land), the degree of market integration (the share of marketed output), soil quality index, and farmer's age. It is due to Davidova and Latruffe (2007) that the following variables had been taken into account when analysing the patterns of farming efficiency in CEE countries: size variables (UAA), variables capturing the use of external factors (the share of hired labour, the share of rented land), and financial ratios (the ratio of debt to assets, the ratio of current debt to current assets). Balcombe et al. (2008) accounted for farm size (UAA), the ratio of capital to labour, the share of hired labour, the degree of market integration, age, the share of other income, education, and time period. Bojnec and Latruffe (2013) explained the variation in the efficiency scores by considering the farm size, the share of rented land, the ratio of assets to labour input, farming type dummy, and time period dummy.Using these insights from earlier literature, we use the following variables to account for the heterogeneity among farms. First, a time trend (Year) to account for temporal variations in output. Second, the logged UAA (lnUAA) represents the scale of operation and is considered as a proxy for farm size. Thanks to using logarithms we mitigate the significant variation in the size. Third, age of the farmer (Age) is introduced to ascertain whether young farmers-oriented measures can influence the structural efficiency. Fourth, the ratio of crop output to the total output (CropShare) captures the possible difference in farming efficiency across crop and livestock farms. Fifth, the effect of production subsidies on efficiency is estimated by considering the ratio of production subsidies to output (SubsShare). Finally, the technological environment and capital accumulation is assessed by considering the logged ratio of assets to labour input (lnAssetsAWU).Note that the environmental variables should not be controlled by the producer (cf. Bădin et al., 2012). Yet, in our setting and in many other agricultural studies, some of the environmental variables are either involved in production model or are dependent on such variables. Specifically, we include the logged UAA along with crop share as the environmental variables as these are likely to be associated with different shapes of production frontiers. Indeed, we thus assume that the latter factors are not likely to be impacted by farmers’ decisions in the short run.Furthermore, we assume no separability55Indeed, a formal test for separability has been offered by Daraio et al. (2010). For the implications involved when accepting or dropping the separability assumption, see Simar and Wilson (2011).among the environmental variables and the shape of the production frontier.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper analysed the determinants of efficiency prevailing among Lithuanian family farms. For the latter purpose, both aggregate (Farrell) one-directional and multidimensional input-specific efficiencies are computed. From a methodological perspective, we adopt the Multi-Directional Efficiency Analysis (MEA) to the conditional efficiency framework such that it allows for a more reliable efficiency estimation. Moreover, thanks to this methodological advance, one can estimate the influence of environmental variables on the efficiency scores.The output-oriented one-directional conditional efficiency estimation suggests that the time trend and subsidy rate have a significant influence on relative efficiency. The former has a positive influence (i.e. a technical progress is observed), whereas the latter features a negative correlation. The multi-directional conditional input-specific analysis renders somewhat different sets of significant variables as well as their influence directions. The land use efficiency is significantly impacted by the ratio of assets to labour input, whereas time trend and subsidy share variables also exhibited rather small areas of rejection of the null hypothesis of insignificance. The labour efficiency is significantly dependent on the time trend, crop share in the total output, subsidy rate, and asset intensity. The intermediate consumption efficiency appeared to be significantly related to the subsidy rate only. Finally, the asset efficiency is significantly dependent on the subsidy rate with farmer's age and asset intensity featuring rather low p-values. Therefore, the application of different frontier methodologies enabled to identify the factors of efficiency in terms of output production and input consumption.The results suggest that the livestock farming is relatively more efficient than the other farming types. However, the profitability of the livestock farming is not sufficient to increase the attractiveness of the latter farming type. Therefore, the support policy should aim at increasing support for the livestock farms. The employed data sample covered a variety of farming types. Further analyses could focus on farming type-specific samples to check whether there exists any kind of difference in the determinants of efficiency among Lithuanian family farms.In this paper we employ the FDH along with order-m measures, yet the MEA is employed in the deterministic form. A further research avenue is therefore extending the MEA into the probabilistic framework as described by Simar and Vanhems (2012) and Daraio and Simar (2014). However, it must be noted that the probabilistic setting renders the instances of super-efficiency, which, in turn, induce infeasibilities in the MEA. Furthermore, we could analyse “pure” and managerial efficiency (Bădin et al., 2012).