@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adding flexibility in a natural gas transportation network using interruptible transportation services

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a natural gas pipeline network with a system operator and a shipper.We examine the effect of introducing interruptible transportation services.We use stochastic programming to model uncertainty in prices and network capacity.Interruptible transportation services increase network flow and profitability.Increased security of supply levels increases the effect of interruptible services.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in energy,Interruptible transportation service,Natural gas,Security of supply,Stochastic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a modeling framework for analyzing if the use of interruptible transportation services can improve capacity utilization in a natural gas transportation network. The network consists of two decision makers: the transmission system operator (TSO) and a shipper of natural gas. The TSO is responsible for the routing of gas in the network and allocates capacity to the shipper to ensure that the security of supply in the network is within given bounds. The TSO can offer two different types of transportation services: firm and interruptible. Only firm services have a security of supply measure, while the interruptible services can freely be interrupted whenever the available capacity in the transportation network is not sufficiently large. We apply our modeling framework on a case study with realistic data from the Norwegian Continental Shelf. The results indicate substantial increased throughput and profits with the introduction of interruptible services.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we discuss whether the introduction of interruptible transportation services in a natural gas network can increase throughput without deteriorating the security of supply. In our modeling framework we include both firm and interruptible transportation services, where firm services are characterized by a guaranteed level of security of supply while interruptible services are delivered provided there is available capacity on the given day. We present a general model framework and a case study based on realistic data from the Norwegian natural gas transportation system that covers nearly 20 percent of European gas consumption (Norwegian Petroleum Directorate, 2012).Interruptible transportation services are well known within the natural gas supply chain, as they are available in the US and in several European systems (including the Norwegian). These services allow the TSO to oversell the capacity by reselling capacity that is booked firm but not nominated without relieving the obligation to the original buyer, as described in Doane, McAfee, Nayyar, and Williams (2008). It is usually required that all firm capacity, defined by a predefined static limit, is sold before any capacity can be resold as interruptible. The intention of the interruptible services is to improve the short term redistribution of transportation capacity to support an efficient use of the network (Ruff, 2012). Our motivation for introducing interruptible transportation services is different. We focus on increasing the capacity initially made available by the TSO rather than redistribution of allocated capacity between the producers. The latter will increase the utilization of the offered capacity in the network, while the former will increase the capacity offered. This implies a slightly different definition since we discuss interruptible contracts in a primary market without any assumption on resale. We are not aware of any natural gas network or examples in the literature where interruptible services are used for this purpose.A high level of security of supply is important on the market side, for the shippers to be able to deliver in long-term contracts. It is also important on the production side, to ensure that the oil production on the fields with associated gas will not be decreased. In order to maintain a high level of security of supply on firm services, it is necessary for the system operator to withhold some capacity in the system at the time of booking to have flexibility to handle uncertainties in the final operation. This withheld flexibility can decrease the capacity utilization in the network. Security of supply can be expressed through different measures. Within the power sector the N-1 method, requiring feasible operation even if one element in the network goes down, is a traditional way of providing robustness in case of contingencies (see for instance Vournas, 2001). Bopp, Kannan, Palocsay, and Stevens (1996) use a set of business rules to achieve satisfactory security of supply when optimizing the planning problem of a local natural gas distribution company. Guldmann and Wang (1999) include a curtailment cost on not satisfied demand for a similar problem. In the stochastic programming literature a variety of risk measures are presented (see for example Rockafellar, 2007), but so far these are rarely applied in natural gas applications. We define the security of supply level as the expected throughput in the whole system relative to the total firm booking:(1)Securityofsupply=∑s∈ScenariosProbabilitys∑i∈NodesFlowis∑iNodesBookingisThis is the same definition as used by Hellemo, Midthun, Tomasgard, and Werner (2013), but in contrast to them we also report numerical analysis.Unplanned events, such as outages and technical failure, cause uncertainty in the available capacity in the transportation network. Furthermore, the system operator must take into account system effects that make it impossible to a priori determine fixed capacities (see Midthun, Bj°rndal, and Tomasgard, 2009). This corresponds to the arguments by Vazquez, Hallack, and Glachant (2012) who point out that the shipper’s simplified view on the transportation network, only acting in accordance with entry and exit booking points, requires the TSO to withhold some capacity to match the booking obligations with the physical network capabilities.The short-term system flexibility comes from the possibility to increase production levels in some fields, to reroute the gas, and from the storage capabilities in the pipelines (linepack). Midthun, Nowak, and Tomasgard (2007) and Keyaerts, Hallack, Glachant, and D’haeseleer (2011) show that linepack also has a commercial value that introduces a trade-off in relation to security of supply. We have not included linepack and this trade-off in our analysis to limit the model complexity and to focus the analysis on effects of interruptible contracts. In our single-period model the availability of linepack would have increased the network capacity that could reduce the value of introducing interruptible services, while in a realistic dynamic setting this effect would highly depend on the time structure of network events and the trade-off between commercial use and security of supply considerations.Modeling the physics of gas transportation in pipeline networks is challenging, mainly due to nonlinear properties in pressure dynamics in pipelines, compressor efficiency and gas quality management. Martin, Möller, and Moritz (2006) and Tomasgard, R°mo, Fodstad, and Midthun (2007) optimizes a steady-state representation of gas network pressures and flows. Moritz (2007) models transient flows, while Ulstein, Nygreen, and Sagli (2007), Selot, Kuok, Robinson, Mason, and Barton (2008) and Li, Armagan, Tomasgard, and Barton (2011) model gas quality issues. We use a linear steady-state approximation of the pressure dynamics in pipelines. We assume a homogeneous gas quality, and thereby avoid the nonlinearities from gas quality management. This assumption is a reasonable approximation in networks with small quality variations, for instance downstream of processing, but it is otherwise a simplification.Our contribution is both a modeling framework that allows for detailed analysis of interruptible services to address uncertainty in network capacity availability in the natural gas transportation network, as well as a case study based on realistic data and topology from the Norwegian Continental Shelf (NCS). In addition, we introduce a new production cost function for natural gas fields that takes into account associated oil production. Our models are based on stochastic programming and do not include strategic behavior of the participants. The validity of this will be discussed in further detail when we introduce our models.In Section 2 we describe in more detail the decision sequence as well as some of our assumptions. We then present the modeling framework in Section 3, before we move on to the case study in Section 4. Finally, we conclude in Section 5.In this section we present the model structure and discuss the underlying assumptions. In our model framework, we establish a decision sequence involving the agents in the supply chain (see Fig. 1). At t = 1 the shippers submit their booking requests under the uncertainty of available firm capacity and at t = 2 the TSO allocates the capacity between the shippers. The TSO tries to minimize the deviation between requested booking and allocated capacity while meeting the security of supply requirements (see Eq. (1)). At t = 3, when the allocated firm booking is known by the shippers, they book interruptible capacity. The interruptible capacity is unlimited, but the shippers will include the probability of interruptions when making booking decisions. At t = 4 uncertainty regarding network events and market prices are resolved. The TSO then allocates interruptions based on a feasible routing pattern. Finally, at t = 5 the shippers produce and do short term trades. The decision sequence we have described is similar to the one used in the current system on the NCS, apart from the difference in use of interruptible services.The objective of this work is to evaluate the potential from introducing interruptible transportation services for the network as a whole, while recognizing that different agents in the system have different incentives. The modeling has been guided by the Norwegian system. We have made some important modeling choices to make the model framework tractable and focus on the effects we intend to analyze:(1)We analyze the perfect competition situation which means we can model all shippers as a single agent. It implies that any strategic behavior that could improve a single shipper’s performance, but reduce the overall supply chain performance, is not captured. It is not clear if such gaming is present in the transportation market on the NCS, thus we have decided to not model gaming for our initial study. The aggregation of all shippers into a single agent reduces the uncertainty seen by the shippers, since the modeled shipper knows the total booking in the system. This also means that we find a benchmark solution for the shipper’s profits in the network when interruptible services are introduced. This corresponds to maximizing the total supply chain profits in our model. With more than one shipper competing for the booking capacity, the shippers’ profits in the network will be reduced (or at best stay the same) compared to the situation when all shippers are unified to one decision unit. The difference will depend on the rules for capacity allocation between the different shippers, and is not the focus of this paper.We model booking of firm and interruptible services by a sequential procedure. The reason for this is that we want to force the shippers to prioritize firm capacity, and provide realistic incentives for firm services relative to interruptible services. Existing interruptible services are available only if firm capacity is already fully utilized, which we expect to be a requirement also if interruptible services are introduced in the primary transportation service market. The sequential model setup implies that the shipper will book firm services as long as the marginal value exceeds the firm tariff, without the option of gambling on the future availability of cheaper interruptible services.We model the TSO and the shipper as independent agents rather than an integrated agent even though we seek a perfect competition situation. This is reasonable since we model a regulated TSO rather than a profit maximizing TSO. The modeling choice makes us able to observe how the two agents’ different objectives and access to information about different parts of the supply chain affect the overall performance.We assume that both shipper and TSO base their expectations of network events on statistical properties from historical observations which are common knowledge for both. We expect this to closely resemble the real-world situation.Booking tariffs can be set as a market driven equilibrium price or defined as a regulated fixed tariff. The existing regime on NCS use fixed tariffs. These are set to cover short and long term costs of the network and a “reasonable” rate-of-return for the investors. Regulated tariffs support the underlying principle that profits on the NCS should be generated from production and sales of natural gas, not from the transportation network. On the other hand, this regime is more limited on providing price signals for efficient allocation of capacity than a market driven price. For more details, see Dahl (2001) and Gassco (2012).From a shipper’s perspective it is reasonable to expect interruptible tariffs to be less than firm tariffs, but that might not be the result when tariffs are based on costs. For example if interruptible capacity is seen as additional capacity “on top of” the firm capacity, the interruptible capacity will typically be priced by a more expensive part of the compressor cost curve. To keep our model in accordance with the current regime on the NCS, we use fixed tariffs and the tariffs for interruptible services are lower than for firm (Gassco, 2012).This section provides a mathematical formulation of the models. A model system overview is given in Fig. 2, and the full notation is provided in Appendix B. The model system consists of five optimization models, three shipper problems, SP1–SP3, and two models for the TSO, TSO1–TSO2. Among these, three models are stochastic problems, SP1, SP2 and TSO1, while two models are deterministic problems, SP3 and TSO2. Fig. 2 shows the sequence the models are run in (from left to right), the decisions that are taken in each model and the information flow (division into stages). The text within each box belonging to a model describes the decisions taken by the model. Results from each problem except SP3 are used by all the following models, as illustrated by the curved arcs on top. The three horizontal areas in the illustration, white, light gray, and dark gray, indicates the information set that each decision is based on, and corresponds to the scenario tree illustrated in Fig. 3. The outcomes in the second stage (light gray) represent network events,s2∈S2and the outcomes in the third stage (dark gray) represent market prices,s3∈S3. These outcomes are assumed to be independent of each other and identical in all the models. A scenario then consists of a combination of an event and a price outcome. The outcomes have the corresponding probabilitiesπs2andπs3.In the first shipper problem, SP1, the producer requests booking based on event and market outcomes and estimates of future interruptions, production and sales decisions. At this stage the shipper does not see the possibility to book interruptible capacity later. Based on the booking request the TSO allocates firm capacity in TSO1. In the second shipper problem, SP2, interruptible booking decisions are taken. This problem is similar to SP1, except that firm capacity is given and interruptible booking capacity is made available. When all booking is decided and the events in the transportation network have become known the TSO decides how much interruptible and firm capacity he needs to interrupt in TSO2. Based on the final available capacity and the realized market prices the shipper decides on the amounts to produce and sell in SP3.SP1 and SP2 are three stage quadratic stochastic programs, while SP3 is a deterministic model that is run for all nodes in the last stage of the scenario tree. The first stage decision in SP1 and SP2 is capacity booking, while in the second stage the shipper’s estimates of the TSO’s interruption decisions are made based on the event outcomes. The third stage is the actual operation with production and sales. SP2 and SP3 are variants of SP1, where firm booking is fixed in SP2 while both booking types are fixed in SP3. SP3 is the same problem as the last stage of SP1 and SP2.The TSO problems use a network composed of field nodes,g∈G,market nodes,m∈M,intermediate nodes,i∈Iand connecting pipelines. The field nodes and market nodes constitute the booking nodes,n∈N=G∪M,that are the network nodes in the shipper’s problems. In accordance with the separate responsibilities of TSO and shipper in an entry–exit system (Alonso, Olmos, and Serrano, 2010), the shipper does not see the pipelines, but rather a fully connected network.In SP1 interruptible booking is set to zero. This means that the shipper does not foresee the possibility to book interruptible capacity as he makes his initial booking request. This mimics the market design rule that interruptible capacity should only be made available if all firm capacity is allocated.The objective of a shipper is to maximize his expected profit that is the expected income from selling gas in the spot markets less the expected production costs and the transportation cost (booking tariffs):(2)max∑s2∈S2πs2∑s3∈S3πs3(∑m∈M(Pm,s3xm,s2,s3)−∑g∈GFg(yg,s2,s3))−∑n∈NTnFznF,wherePm,s3is the market price in market m in market outcome s3,xm,s2,s3is the volume sold in market m in the scenario given by event outcome s2 and market outcome s3. The production cost is given by the cost function Fg() which is a function of the productionyg,s2,s3in field g. The cost of firm booking is given by the tariffTnFin node n and the booking levelznF,and these costs are independent of whether the capacity is interrupted or not.The production cost function consists of two parts, one for production with associated oil, called “must-take”, and one for the swing field production. The reasoning behind this is that each of the field nodes in our network represents a set of fields, each with different properties. In the must-take area, the natural gas is closely linked to the oil production. If the gas production is decreased, the oil production must also be decreased. Such a decrease will then lead to a substantial loss for the shipper. For the swing fields, the gas production will not influence the oil production. We represent the production costs for these fields with a quadratic cost function based on a modification of the function provided by Golombek, Gjelsvik, and Rosendahl (1995). We omit the logarithmic part that, in effect, provides maximum production levels. Instead we have implemented a fixed upper limit for the production in each field node. The production cost function is represented by (3)–(6) and is illustrated in Fig. 4. The production cost for the must-take production,cg,s2,s3MT,is modeled by a set of Q linear constraints:(3)cg,s2,s3MT≥Cg,qAMT+Cg,qBMTyg,s2,s3g∈G,q∈Q,s2∈S2,s3∈S3,whereCg,qAMTandCg,qBMTare cost parameters for field g and linear constraint q. In addition, there is the quadratic production cost function in the swing fields:(4)cg,s2,s3SW=CgBSWyg,s2,s3SW+CgCSWyg,s2,s3SW2g∈G,q∈Q,s2∈S2,s3∈S3,whereCgBSWis the cost parameter for the linear part of the cost function in field g whileCgCSWis the cost parameter for the quadratic part of the cost function. The production related to swing capacity in a field is given byyg,s2,s3SWwhich is the difference between the total production in a node,yg,s2,s3and the defined must-take levelYgMT:(5)yg,s2,s3SW≥yg,s2,s3−YgMTg∈G,s2∈S2,s3∈S3.The cost functionF(yg,s2,s3)is then given as:(6)F(yg,s2,s3)=cg,s2,s3MT+cg,s2,s3SWg∈G,s2∈S2,s3∈S3.Production should stay within the production capacity limits:(7)yg,s2,s3≤Yg,s2g∈G,s2∈S2,s3∈S3.The shipper has to book capacity to inject gas into the network from the field nodes and to extract gas from the network to the market nodes. Firm capacity is booked in the first stage and we require that the requested booking for entry capacity in the fields should equal the requested booking for exit capacity in the markets:(8)∑g∈GzgF=∑m∈MzmF.The TSO will always allocate capacity such that the firm booking is balanced. This is necessary to make it possible for the TSO to evaluate the capacity in each node, which depends on the flow pattern in the system.In reality the shipper has historical data and observations on network capacities and events. In our model we need to approximate this in a transportation capacity,Hn,s2,that depends on the event outcomes. This is done by a preprocessing procedure described in Appendix A. The transportation capacity is static in the sense that it does not take into account how the shipper’s own production and delivery decisions affect the flow patterns and thereby the capacity. The shipper’s estimate for interruption of firm booking,an,s2Fcan then be described by the difference between the transportation capacity and the bookingznF:(9)an,s2F≥znF−Hn,s2n∈N,s2∈S2.Gas is sold in spot markets with perfect competition. The total sales by the shipper are then limited by the total production:(10)∑g∈Gyg,s2,s3=∑m∈Mxm,s2,s3s2∈S2,s3∈S3,wherexm,s2,s3is the volume sold in market m in event outcome s2 and market outcome s3. In addition, the sale in market m is limited by the uninterrupted booking into this node:(11)xm,s2,s3≤zmF−am,s2Fm∈M,s2∈S2,s3∈S3.Finally, we must make sure that the uninterrupted booking is sufficient for the production levels in the field nodes:(12)yg,s2,s3≤zgF−ag,s2Fg∈G,s2∈S2,s3∈S3.The TSO allocates firm capacity to the shipper based on the booking requests from SP1. The TSO seeks to satisfy the requests, but are limited by the transportation capacities in the network and a requirement on expected security of supply. TSO1 is a two-stage quadratic stochastic program, where allocations are given in the first stage; while the routing decisions are made in the second stage after the network capacity availability is known. The objective of this problem is to minimize the square deviation from booking requests, such that the allocation stays close to the requests from the shipper:(13)min∑n∈N(z¯nF−znF)2,wherez¯nFis the booking requests made by the shipper whileznFis the allocated capacity to the shipper from the TSO. We must make sure that the shipper capacity allocation is no more than he requestedz¯nF:(14)znF≤z¯nFn∈N.On expectation, the security of supply should be at least R, which corresponds to limiting the expected interruption-to-booking-ratio to be less than 1 − R. The security of supply is the total expected delivery rate by the TSO over total firm booking. This limits the expected interruptions, which are represented by the difference between the allocated firm bookings to a market node m,zmFand the sum of flowsfj,m,s2from nodes j to market m:(15)∑s2∈S2πs2∑m∈M(zmF−∑j∈I(m)fj,m,s2)≤(1−R)∑m∈MzmF.We then add constraints to make sure that the flows are limited by the allocated booking in the booking nodes (fields g and markets m). The setO(j)gives the nodes which are connected directly downstream to a pipeline going from node j, while the setI(j)gives the nodes that are connected directly upstream to a pipeline in node j.(16)∑j∈O(g)fg,j,s2≤zgFg∈G,s2∈S2,(17)∑j∈I(m)fj,m,s2≤zmFm∈M,s2∈S2.For the intermediate nodes (that are not booking nodes) we must take care of the mass balance:(18)∑i∈I(j)fi,j,s2=∑k∈O(j)fj,k,s2j∈J∖N,s2∈S2.The events are modeled by reduced capacitiesKi,j,s2in pipelines between nodes i and j. In fields and markets the reduced capacity is given byKj,s2:(19)fj,i,s2≤Kj,i,s2j∈J,i∈O(j),s2∈S2,(20)∑j∈O(g)fg,j,s2≤Kg,s2g∈G,s2∈S2,(21)∑j∈I(m)fj,m,s2≤Km,s2m∈M,s2∈S2.The dynamic capacity of the network depends on the pressure in each node, and is described through a Weymouth equation for each pipeline. The Weymouth equation has the following form:(22)fj,i,s2=Kj,iWpj,s22−pi,s22j∈J,i∈O(j),s2∈S2,whereKj,iWis the Weymouth constant for the pipeline going from node j to node i. This constant depends on characteristics of the pipeline such as diameter, length and roughness (for more details, see for instance Campbell (1992)). The pressure in node j in event outcome s2 is then given bypj,s2. Since (22) is not linear, an outer approximation derived by Taylor series expansion around fixed pressure points PIland POlis used (R°mo et al., 2009):(23)fj,i,s2≤Kj,iW(PIlPIl2−POl2pi,s2−POlPIl2−POl2pj,s2)l∈L,s2∈S2,where the setLgives the fixed points used for the linearization. In our experience around 20 of these constraints are needed to assure a good fit to the Weymouth equation. Finally, we must make sure that the pressure in each node j is within its upper and lower limit (P¯jandPj):(24)P̲j≤pj,s2≤P¯jj∈J,s2∈S2.In SP2 the objective function in SP1 (see Eq. (2)) is extended with interruptible booking tariff(25)−∑n∈NTnIznI.The main change is that the allocation of firm capacity has been done by the TSO and is now input to the shipper’s optimization problem,z¯nF. In the first stage in this three-stage stochastic program the shipper decides how much interruptible capacity to book,znI. In the second stage the network capacity availability becomes known and finally, in the third stage, the market prices become known.When the network capacity availability becomes known in the second stage, the TSO decides upon routing and thus on how much of the shipper’s booked capacity that must be interrupted. The shipper estimates the event dependent interruption,an,s2,as the difference between the total booking and the shipper’s estimate for available capacity in event outcome s2,Hn,s2:(26)an,s2≥(z¯nF+znI)−Hn,s2,n∈N,s2∈S2.Finally, the shipper assumes that the TSO will allocate capacities such that the final booking is balanced in the sense that entry (field) capacity equals exit (market) capacity:(27)∑g∈G(z¯gF+zgI−ag,s2)=∑m∈M(z¯mF+zmI−am,s2)s2∈S2.We also need to include the mass balances in this problem, now including both firm and interruptible booking. The injections and extractions are not allowed to exceed the allocated capacity in each booking node, that is the booked firm (z¯gFandz¯mF) and interruptible capacity (zgIandzmI) less the estimated interruptions (ag,s2andam,s2).(28)yg,s2,s3≤z¯gF+zgI−ag,s2,g∈G,s2∈S2,s3∈S3,(29)xm,s2,s3S≤z¯mF+zmI−am,s2,m∈M,s2∈S2,s3∈S3.TSO2 is a quadratic mixed integer linear program run for each of the event outcomes inS2. When the network capacity availability is known, the TSO decides how much firm and interruptible capacity that can be delivered. The allocation of firm capacity has been determined in TSO1, and the interruptible booking by the shipper was determined in SP2.The objective is to minimize the square of interruptions weighted by the booking tariffs. Note that this is different from minimizing the total interrupted booking capacity. Instead of decreasing the total available booking for the shippers, the ISO will try to maintain the same booking pattern as before the interruptions. This is to avoid large interruptions in parts of the network when this is possible to avoid by evening out the interruptions.(30)min∑n∈N(TnFan,s2F2+TnIan,s2I2).The TSO must then make sure that there is a balance between firm bookingz¯gF,interruptible bookingz¯gI,interruption of firm and interruptible capacity (ag,s2F+ag,s2I) and the flowfg,j,s2in each booking node:(31)∑j∈O(g)fg,j,s2=z¯gF+z¯gI−ag,s2F−ag,s2I,g∈G,(32)∑j∈I(m)fj,m,s2=z¯mF+z¯mI−am,s2F−am,s2I,m∈M.The TSO must also make sure that the interruption of capacity is not larger than the allocated booking of firm and interruptible services:(33)an,s2F≤z¯nF,n∈N,(34)an,s2I≤z¯n,s2I,n∈N.To give firm booking priority, no firm booking should be interrupted unless all interruptible booking in the same node is interrupted. The two following constraints enforce this by the use of the binary variableβn,s2that is 1 if some firm booking is interrupted:(35)an,s2F≤z¯nFβn,s2,n∈N,(36)an,s2I≥z¯nIβn,s2,n∈N.The flows are limited by the capacities in the network, with constraints equal to (18)–(24) of TSO1.In this section we first present the data and the assumptions for our case study. We then discuss the numerical results and our main findings.The topology in our case study is based on the topology on the NCS, and is illustrated in Fig. 5. The basis for the topology is given in Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (2011), while details on production and transportation capacities and plans are confidential and provided by the Norwegian system operator, Gassco. Our network has a maximum delivery capacity of 351 mega standard cubic meters, while the largest daily delivery from NCS in 2011 was 361 mega standard cubic meters (Gassco, 2011). The eight fields that we use in our case study represent approximately 50 real fields, aggregated by region. These aggregated fields can cover both must-take fields and swing fields, and the swing fields imply a larger daily production capacity than transportation capacity. All fields and markets are booking nodes in the network, such that they require booking of transportation capacity corresponding to their production and sale. The booking tariffs for firm transportation capacity correspond to the real tariffs on the NCS, defined individually for each booking node, and are available at Gassco (2012). We have assumed the booking tariff for interruptible services to be half the price of firm services. The model has been tested with security of supply requirements, R, for firm services in the range from 0.99 to 1 (where 1 indicates that all firm capacity must be delivered in all scenarios).Real production cost data are not easily available, so we have based our estimates on different sources. The production costs of must-take production are estimated based on gas-to-oil ratios in Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (2011), where larger oil share gives a larger marginal production cost. The oil price is taken from the Norwegian national budget for 2012. For the production cost in the swing fields, we have based our parameters on Golombek, Gjelsvik, and Rosendahl (1998) and Kon-Kraft (2003).We have generated price outcomes based on real spot prices from 2010 to 2011 for all market hubs directly connected to the NCS export network, which is NPB (UK), Zeebrugge (Belgium), Gas Pool (Germany) and NetConnect (Germany). Since we only have one node representing the markets in Germany, we have defined the price for the market node “Germany” as the average of the two German market hubs. The Dunkerque price is estimated as 10 percent of the GasPool price and 90 percent of the Zeebrugge price. The market prices are represented by 10 outcomes that are generated with the moment-matching procedure described in Høyland, Kaut, and Wallace (2003). Testing our model framework on multiple sets of generated market price outcomes showed that 10 was a sufficient number of outcomes to achieve in-sample stability (Kaut, Wallace, Vladimirou, and Zenios, 2007), with a standard deviation of 0.01 percent on the SP3 objective function value. Fig. 6shows the prices for the 10 outcomes.Due to lack of real data, our events are described by constructed data. We have defined 19 events with reduced capacity, each corresponding to a separate outcome. In addition, we have a default outcome where the system operates at full capacity. We do not consider multiple simultaneous events in any of the outcomes. This means that each event outcome only gives capacity reduction in a single node. The event outcomes are constructed such that all markets and fields have capacity reduction in one outcome, while the two processing plants Kollsnes and Kårstø (in our test case a field and an intermediate node, respectively) have four events each. The probability and extent of the capacity reductions are calibrated so that the availability corresponds to the average availability figures reported by Gassco (2010); 2011). Since our field nodes represent an aggregate of several smaller fields we have distinguished between field nodes that represent only a few underlying fields and field nodes that represent many. The capacity reduction is larger for field nodes with few underlying fields and smaller but more likely for field nodes with several underlying fields. Table 1lists the events with the affected node, probability and the capacity reduction.In total the 10 market outcomes and 20 event outcomes give a three-stage scenario tree with 200 scenarios.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have developed a framework for analysis of interruptible transportation services in the natural gas system. We have also developed a new production cost function where the effects of reduced gas production on oil production in the same field are incorporated. We have tested the modeling framework on a case study with realistic input data, and a topology that is similar to the topology on the Norwegian Continental Shelf. The results from our case study show that there is a substantial gain in efficiency in the network when interruptible services are introduced to address network events. Both total flow and income in the system is drastically increased compared to the benchmark solution where interruptible services are not available. For the highest level of security of supply, the increase in flow and income in the system is as large as 250 percent.