@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Product variety and channel structure strategy for a retailer-Stackelberg supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Develop equilibrium variety and channel structure strategies in a retailer-led supply chain.Study how leadership, endogenization of variety and decentralization affect channel structure.Adding direct channel may raise the unit wholesale price and retail price in the indirect channel.Show that manufacturer’s leadership power weakens its motivation to use dual channels.Channel decentralization/endogenization of variety may invert the channel structure decision.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Product variety,Customization,Dual channels,Game theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Motivated by the observations that the direct sales channel is increasingly used for customized products and that retailers wield leadership, we develop in this paper a retailer-Stackelberg pricing model to investigate the product variety and channel structure strategies of manufacturer in a circular spatial market. To avoid channel conflict, we consider the commonly observed case where the indirect channel sells standard products whereas the direct channel offers custom products. Our analytical results indicate that if the reservation price in the indirect channel is sufficiently low, adding the direct channel raises the unit wholesale price and retail price in the indirect channel due to customization in the direct channel. Despite the fact that dual channels for the retailer may dominate the single indirect channel, we find that the motivation for the manufacturer to use dual channels decreases with the unit production cost, while increases with (i) the marginal cost of variety, (ii) the retailer’s marginal selling cost, and (iii) the customer’s fit cost. Interestingly, our equilibrium analysis demonstrates that it is more likely for the manufacturer to use dual channels under the retailer Stackelberg channel leadership scenario than under the manufacturer Stackelberg scenario if offering a greater variety is very expensive. When offering a greater variety is inexpensive, the decentralization of the indirect channel may invert the manufacturer’s channel structure decision. Furthermore, endogenization of product variety will also invert the channel structure decision if the standard product’s reservation price is sufficiently low.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of e-commerce and Internet technologies, increasing numbers of manufacturers that previously sold their products indirectly through third-party retailers have established sales channels to sell to customers directly. Some well-known examples are Compaq, Hewlett–Packard, IBM, Eastman Kodak, Nike, Mattel, and Apple, among others (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2008; Tsay and Agrawal, 2004; Wilder, 1999). The U.S. Department of Commerce reported that total U.S. e-commerce sales jumped by 14.8% in 2010 to about US$165.4 billion (Brohan, 2011). To cater for a broader (more heterogeneous) mix of consumer groups, supply chains are increasingly providing a higher product variety to attract customers (Dekimpe et al., 2011). Product variety here refers to the number of variants within a specific product group. Customization is an important value-adding service of the direct channel (which is more effective compared with the indirect channel) because it can better satisfy the heterogeneous demands of customers for product attributes. It is well known that there exists channel conflict between the indirect channel and the direct channel because both channels compete for customers.1A classic example of channel conflict is Levi’s case (Laudon and Laudon, 2002, p. 130 ), in which Levi’s had to give up its online direct sales channel because of a fierce channel conflict with its indirect channel.1Hence, the manufacturer must cautiously avoid channel conflict and make a careful trade-off between product variety and customization. In fact, incorporating this trade-off to address whether and when the manufacturer has an incentive to use dual channels is a main objective of this paper.Consider the sales channel of Nike, an international brand for footwear and apparel, in Hong Kong. Since Hong Kong is a market in which retail brands mainly rely on bricks-and-mortars stores to sell their products, Nike’s standard products are only available in physical retail stores. At the same time, Nike launches its renowned NIKEiD mass customization programme online. Consumers in Hong Kong can select and buy a pair of customized shoes with their names printed via this online sales channel. Obviously, Nike’s dual channel strategy is one designed to avoid channel conflict, which is the exact business model that we examine in this paper.Dual channels, as a part of the popular concept of multi-channel retailing, are usually associated with the Internet direct sales channel. The recent literature has explored dual channels from various perspectives. Perspective one assumes that the dual channel structure of a manufacturer is given and explores the corresponding operational issues. There is no consideration of the strategic action of adding the direct channel in the pure indirect channel strategy (e.g., Cattani et al., 2006;Mukhopadhyay et al., 2008). Perspective two considers the strategic choice as to whether there are incentives for manufacturers to add a direct channel (e.g., Bernstein et al., 2008). For both perspectives, customer acceptance and preference for the direct channel relative to traditional stores (the indirect channel) undoubtedly influences the success of dual channels (see, e.g., Chiang et al., 2003 for some more arguments and examples). Moreover, the difference in marginal cost between the two channels plays an important role in determining the existence and configuration of dual channels. For instance, Tsay and Agrawal (2004) pointed out that in the personal computer industry, direct selling facilitates the “assemble-to-order” strategy that typically entails less inventory risk than the “make-to-stock” approach of retail distribution. Dumrongsiri et al. (2008) found that the manufacturer is likely to be better off using dual channels than using the single channel when the retailer’s marginal cost is high, and the wholesale price, customer valuation, and demand variability are low. Hendrikse and Jiang (2011) studied dual distributions in franchising based on incomplete contract. In this paper we follow perspective two in the above reviewed literature on dual channels and examine the strategic challenge from adding the direct sales channel. We consider the case where the two channels sell different products (the indirect channel sells a standard product while the direct channel sells a custom product) and customers have different reservation prices for the products in different channels. Chiang et al. (2003) argued that reducing double marginalization effect is a main incentive for adding the direct channel. However, as we shall show in later sections, we find that adding the direct channel may strengthen double marginalization effect, which has a negative effect on the indirect channel’s profitability and weakens the motivation to use dual channels.Using dual channels for the business model as adopted by Nike Hong Kong, the manufacturer has two revenue sources, which would increase the manufacturer’s profit. However, the presence of the reservation price disadvantages of the direct channel over the indirect channel and probable channel conflict between the two channels together reduce the manufacturer’s profit. In particular, when the retailer (i.e., the indirect channel) is a Stackelberg leader of the supply chain channel, the counter-force for the development of the direct channel and channel conflict can be large. As a consequence, it is unclear whether the manufacturer in a retailer-Stackelberg (RS) supply chain should use the dual channel strategy. In the literature, in view of the emergence of retail giants such as Wal-Mart and Hudson’s Bay, there is a growing body of studies on exploring the effect of downstream power shifting in supply chains (see, e.g., Geylani et al., 2007). To be specific Geylani et al. (2007) studied how a manufacturer strategically reacts to a dominant retailer to decide the unit wholesale price for the weak retailer and advertising investment, where the bargaining power is described by the (exogenous) unit wholesale price for the dominant retailer. Since the effect of adding a direct channel on the unit wholesale price plays an important role in making the channel structure decision, unlike Geylani et al. (2007), we consider the endogenous wholesale price case. Notice that recently a number of studies have examined the RS supply chain (Choi and Fredj, 2013; Gerchak and Wang, 2004; Pan et al., 2010;Wang and Liu, 2007). Based on the observed industrial trend and the literature on RS supply chain management, we focus on examining the probable existence of dual channels in a RS supply chain in this paper. The channel leadership structure (sequence of decisions) affects the equilibrium outcome (Choi and Fredj, 2013), which further influences the channel structure strategy of the manufacturer. Some works are made in the effect of channel leadership structure. For example, Pan et al. (2010) discussed different contract strategies under both manufacturer-Stackelberg (MS) and RS supply chains and identified the conditions under which the leader is better off using a revenue-sharing contract. Edirisinghe et al. (2011) studied the implications of channel power (capability of being a leader) on supply chain stability for a two-supplier and one-retailer supply chain. Choi et al. (2013) examined the closed loop supply chain with different channel leadership. To the best of our knowledge, the effect of channel leadership structure on the channel structure decision of the manufacturer is still under-explored. We try to fill this important research gap by comparing the RS model with the MS model.Increasing product variety is an effective business strategy because it can raise market demand. When a new product emerges, firms often produce many variants. For example, in the automobile industry, manufacturers differentiate their products according to interior color, power specifications, and seat materials (Fisher and Ittner, 1999). In the bicycle industry, manufacturers offer different products according to frame material, frame size, frame color, and components (Randall and Ulrich, 2001). In the literature, product variety is well-regarded as an important factor that influences customers’ buying decisions (Gaur and Honhon, 2006; Hoffman and Novak, 1996; Xia and Rajagopalan, 2012). For instance, Xia and Rajagopalan (2009) studied the standardization and customization decisions of two firms in a competitive setting and found interestingly that increasing product variety will not intensify price competition if firm differentiation is sufficiently high. Gaur and Honhon (2006) developed a location-choice model to study an assortment planning and inventory management problem for a retailer under stochastic demand. However, increasing product variety is not without drawbacks (Matsubayashi et al., 2009). For example, it is well known that having a greater product variety within a supply chain tends to increase the corresponding operational costs (see, e.g., Randall and Ulrich, 2001 for more discussions). Furthermore, product variety alone (without proper customization) may not well satisfy the heterogeneous demands of customers. As a result, some firms offer customization service, such as the popular mass customization service, to address this issue. For instance, apparel brands adopting mass customization allow consumers to select various customizable attributes such as color, rise, front pocket style, leg, waist, inseam, and seat shape of their pants (Mendelson and Parlaktürk, 2008). With the concepts of mass customization and dual channels in mind, Dewan et al. (2003) found that the simultaneous adoption of customization in a duopoly game reduces differentiation between the players’ standard products but does not intensify price competition. In this paper we consider product variety, mass customization, and dual channels simultaneously. These factors affect the double marginalization effect and market demand in the indirect channel, which in turn influences the channel structure decision. Our scenario is supported by real-world cases (e.g., Nike) and obviously helps reduce the pressure of channel conflict. In the literature, Randall and Ulrich (2001) investigated the interaction between product variety and supply chain structure by examining U.S. bicycle industry, where supply chain structure is characterized by production efficiency and facility location. Unlike Randall and Ulrich (2001), we study whether the manufacturer has an incentive to add a direct channel to the indirect channel. Thonemann and Bradley (2002) studied how product variety affects the expected leadtime and expected cost at the retailers. However, we explore how product variety affects channel structure strategy. In addition, it is interesting to study how the channel structure strategy affects product variety decision through influencing the pricing and demand for the indirect channel. In short, our objective is to understand how product variety and customization affect the double marginalization effect, and the interaction between the product variety decision and the channel structure decision.2As a remark, both adding the direct channel and increasing product variety can raise the total market demand. To a certain extent, the two approaches substitute each other. However, both approaches incur different costs.2To the best of our knowledge, these issues are still not addressed in the literature and hence this paper attempts to address them. In particular, we focus on how the exogenization of product variety affects the channel structure strategy. We find that this effect is essential because the interaction between product variety and pricing is absent.As a remark, our model in this paper is also related to the circular spatial market model (Balasubramanian, 1998; Dewan et al., 2003; Salop, 1979). Essentially, Salop (1979) pioneered and introduced a variant of the traditional Hotelling (1929) model, known as the circular spatial market model, where the consumers are modeled to be uniformly distributed on a circle and all the firms are located evenly on the circle. Salop’s circular spatial market model is influential and has been employed in many studies (Soberman and Parker, 2006). For instance, Balasubramanian (1998) considered the competition between a direct marketer and conventional retailers in price with the behaviors of the suppliers being ignored. Dewan et al. (2003) developed a duopoly model where each firm first chooses a customization scope and then optimally determines the conventional market price. Since in the context of RS supply chain management, a consumer-utility driven demand model can better capture the different demand patterns of dual channels, we employ the circular spatial market in developing our model.In this paper, in order to address the research issues raised above, we first develop a formal analytical RS supply chain model in a circular spatial consumer market. In this “basic model”, the retailer is the Stackelberg pricing leader and the manufacturer is the follower. In the indirect channel, the manufacturer sells a standardized (standard) product with variety through the retailer; in the direct channel, the manufacturer sells a mass customized (custom)3In this paper we follow the literature (Xia and Rajagopalan, 2009) to use “custom product” and “standard product” for the terms “customized product” and “standardized product”, respectively.3product directly to consumers (cf: Nike). As a benchmark, we first consider the dual channel strategy of a vertically integrated firm. We find that when the product variety investment is very expensive, the integrated firm inclines to use dual channels. We then study the equilibrium decisions of the decentralized supply chain, with a focus on the dual channel strategy of the manufacturer. We obtain the closed-form conditions under which it is optimal for the manufacturer to use dual channels. We find that the decentralization of the supply chain may invert the effect of channel structure on the equilibrium product variety. Unlike the extant literature on dual channels (Chiang et al., 2003), we show that adding the direct channel raises the prices in the indirect channel if the (consumer) reservation price of the standard product is sufficiently low, i.e., intensifying the double marginalization effect, which weakens the motivation of using dual channels. We analytically reveal why the manufacturer would prefer and use dual channels even though adding the direct channel intensifies the double marginalization effect. To examine the effect of the channel leadership on the manufacturer’s decisions and the retailer’s profit, we also develop an MS model and compare its results with those of the RS model. We show that whether the retailer has an incentive to act as a Stackelberg leader depends on whether the market is fully covered. In addition, we examine how product variety and exogenization of product variety affect the implementation of the dual channel strategy. We find that endogenizing product variety may invert the channel structure strategy of the manufacturer. To the best of our knowledge, our model and analysis are novel and different from the extant dual channel literature in two important ways: (i) we examine how dual channel strategy relates to product variety strategy, and channel leadership structure (RS and MS), and (ii) we employ a consumer-utility driven “circular spatial market” model. To enhance presentation, we put some technical propositions in Appendix A and use Theorems and Corollaries to summarize the main insights. Detailed proofs are relegated to an online supplementary document.Consider a supply chain consisting of one manufacturer and one bricks-and-mortar retail store (“retailer” in short). The manufacturer sells the standard product through the retailer (indirect channel). Now, the manufacturer has an opportunity to consider whether to add a direct (online) channel to supplement the indirect channel, where the direct channel sells a fully customized product to satisfy consumer requirements (custom product). If deemed beneficial to add the online channel, the manufacturer would use dual channels with both indirect and direct channels as the channel structure strategy; otherwise, it only uses the single indirect channel. In other words, we consider in this paper the case where the manufacturer needs to select either the “single indirect channel” or the “dual channels” strategy.We construct the basic model based on the commonly adopted circular spatial market in the literature (Balasubramanian, 1998; Salop, 1979; Soberman and Parker, 2006). In the circular spatial market, the preferences of consumers are uniformly distributed on a circle of unit circumference (the locations represent their ideal products) and n types of a standard product are evenly distributed on the circle, i.e., the manufacturer evenly divides the unit circular market into n segments such that the arc length of each segment is 1/n (see Fig. 1). Each consumer has a unitary demand in each period and the unit reservation price of the standard product is r. A standard product at an arc distance y units away from the consumer generates a gross utility of r−ty, where t is called the fit cost per unit distance and reflects the attribute differentiation of the standard product (Dewan et al., 2003). Gaur and Honhon (2006) considered a location-choice model for a retailer under the uncertain environment. To focus on the channel competition and the channel structure decision, we assume that the market environment excluding consumers’ locations is deterministic. As a remark, we adopt the circular spatial market because it can well describe the effects of product variety and heterogeneity of consumers on market demand for dual channels.The retailer orders the standard product from the manufacturer. In the basic model, we consider the supply chain as a RS channel where the retailer is the pricing leader that first determines the profit margin m and then the manufacturer determines the unit wholesale price w for the standard product.4Notice that the case in which the retailer determines the profit margin is very common in the literature and practice (see, e.g., Kadiyali et al., 1999; Sudhir, 2001; Trivedi, 1998).4Owing to symmetry of the locations of the different types of the standard product, the equilibrium retail prices are identical, i.e., the manufacturer should charge the retailer the same unit wholesale price such that the retailer offers the same retail price p(=w+m) for all types of the standard product (Xia and Rajagopalan, 2009). Thus, the (net) utility of the consumer that buys a unit of the standard product from the retailer is r−ty−(w+m), y⩽1/(2n).Denote the reservation price of the consumer that buys the custom product from the direct channel as rdand the (direct) retail price of the custom product as pd. rdmay be different from r due to a virtual inspection and a lead time (i.e., waiting time). The (net) utility of the consumer that buys the custom product from the direct channel is rd−pd. Here a consumer can save fit cost by buying custom product to satisfy its requirements. However, buying standard product incurs a fit cost because this standard product may be different from its preference. To prevent the retailer from buying from the direct channel (the retailer’s arbitrage behavior), the manufacturer charges the retailer a unit wholesale price lower than the direct channel’s retail price, i.e., w⩽pd(Chiang et al., 2003). Let the unit production cost of the manufacturer be c. The retailer incurs a marginal selling cost of the standard product cr; the direct channel incurs a marginal selling cost of the custom product cd.5crincludes costs like stocking, labor, and facility maintenance costs; cdincludes the costs of maintaining the website, the distribution system, and extra unit production cost due to customization.5Note that the retail prices in the two channels are higher than the total marginal costs, i.e., w+m⩾c+crand pd⩾c+cd. To avoid the trivial cases, we assume throughout this paper that (i) the total surplus of each channel is positive, i.e., r−c−cr>0 and rd−c−cd>0 (otherwise, the channel with a non-positive value will withdraw from the market because the manufacturer cannot make a profit from the channel), and (ii) the indirect channel has a higher total surplus than the direct channel (otherwise, the manufacturer will sell all the products through the direct channel despite having dual channels), i.e., r−cr⩾rd−cd. For a notational purpose, denote (i) the total surplus of the indirect channel as A1=r−c−cr(>0), (ii) the total surplus difference between the two channels as A2=cd−cr+r−rd>0. Since rd−c−cd>0, we have A1>A2.Increasing product variety incurs costs to the manufacturer (Xia and Rajagopalan, 2009). A higher variety level often raises the difficulty of increasing variety such that a higher marginal variety cost is incurred. Thus, we extend the linear cost structure (nf) in Xia and Rajagopalan (2009) to the case where product variety n incurs a cost ηn2/2+nf, including the product development cost and the labor learning cost, and f, η>0.6Notice that even though equilibrium analysis is still feasible for a more general product variety cost function, in order to obtain closed-form analytical results, we follow the literature by assuming that the product variety cost function is a quadratic function.6This quadratic cost structure means that the marginal cost of product variety increases with the variety level, which is consistent with that in the literature on innovation (e.g., Gupta, 2008). A similar cost structure with a quadratic term is used by Dewan et al. (2003) who study product customization. We call η the variable marginal cost coefficient (VC) and f the constant marginal cost of product variety.For the sake of convenience, in the basic model, we use the first number suffix 1 to represent the case of using the single indirect channel and 2 to represent the case of using dual channels.From r−ty−(w+m)⩾0 and y⩽1/(2n), we see that when the manufacturer only uses the indirect channel, the market demand is(1)x1=2n(r-w-m)/t,ifw>r-m-t/(2n)1,ifw⩽r-m-t/(2n),which means that the market is not fully covered if the retail price is sufficiently high (w>r−m−t/(2n)). Furthermore, the manufacturer’s profit function is(2)πM1=πM11,ifw>r-m-t/(2n)πM12,ifw⩽r-m-t/(2n),where πM11=(w−c)·2n(r−w−m)/t−ηn2/2−nf and πM12=(w−c)·1−ηn2/2−nf. The retailer’s profit function is πR1=x1·(m−cr). The second number suffix j(=1,2) represents branch j.Unlike Dewan et al. (2003), we consider the case that the manufacturer sells the standard product through the indirect channel and the custom product through the direct channel that can customize the whole circle. We consider the market demand (x) for the standard product. In dual channels, since the direct channel can customize the product to meet consumers’ specifications, no fit cost is incurred to consumers and each consumer obtains a surplus rd−pd. If pd>rd, the manufacturer achieves a higher profit under the single indirect channel than under dual channels because the dual channels strategy is degenerated to be a single indirect channel and incurs a positive fixed cost of adding direct channel. Thus, the manufacturer should offer a direct retail price pdless than the reservation price rdin dual channels such that a consumer that buys the custom product will obtain a nonnegative surplus rd−pd⩾0. Furthermore, the market is fully covered and each consumer buys from either channel in dual channels. Since the effect of the fixed cost from adding direct channel to the channel structure decision is well understood, we ignore it, which does not impact our main results.When the manufacturer uses dual channels and there is a positive demand for the custom product, the manufacturer’s profit function is(3)πM2=2n(r-w-m)(w-c)/t+[1-2n(r-w-m)/t](pd-c-cd)-ηn2/2-nf,where the first term is the manufacturer’s gross profit coming from the indirect channel and the second term is the manufacturer’s profit coming from the direct channel. In dual channels, the retailer’s profit function is(4)πR2=2n(r-w-m)(m-cr)/t.The retailer should take the manufacturer’s wholesale price reaction into consideration in order to maximize its profit function.The sequence of decisions in the game in our basic model (the RS model) is given as follows:(i)The manufacturer chooses the single indirect channel (the standard product) or dual channels (standard and custom products), and then determines product variety n for the standard product;The retailer determines the (profit) margin m of the standard product;If the manufacturer uses dual channels, it determines the unit wholesale price w of the standard product in the indirect channel and the retail price pdof the custom product in the direct channel; otherwise, it determines the unit wholesale price w.In the above RS game, we can derive the Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibrium (SPNE) using the standard backward induction technique. This game does not result in a holdup issue because the unit wholesale price affects the retail price as well as market demand. In addition, we also develop an MS model to explore the effect of channel leadership structure on the equilibrium channel structure strategy.To understand the economic force for dual channels, we first consider in this section the channel structure strategy of an integrated firm, and then consider the channel structure strategy of a manufacturer that sells the standard product through an independent retailer (i.e., a decentralized supply chain).In this subsection the indirect channel is operated by an integrated firm. When the integrated firm only uses the indirect channel, it decides the retail price and variety to maximize πind(=πM1+πR1); and when the integrated firm chooses dual channels, it decides the retail prices and variety to maximize πI(=πind+πd=πM2+πR2). Similar to Balasubramanian (1998) and Xia and Rajagopalan (2009), we relax the integrality of variety n to ease the exposition. Since the market is fully covered, the manufacturer would like to raise the retail prices of the standard and custom products to extract the consumer’s surplus until the marginal consumer obtains zero surplus.7When the manufacturer offers a second-degree discriminatory pricing scheme—a scheme under which the manufacturer sets prices for its products, and among all the product-price pairs, each consumer picks the one that maximizes its surplus (Dewan et al., 2003), we find that the retail price of the custom product is also the reservation price rd.7Thus, the manufacturer always offers the retail price rdof the custom product if the manufacturer wants to sell the custom product, i.e.,pdI∗=rd. Table 1summarizes the optimal decisions and profits, whereηˆI1=A1A12-2ft/(2t2),ηˆI2=A2A22-2ft/(2t2)<ηˆI1, and nI1 is the unique positive root of −2ηn3−2fn2+t=0. Here the suffix I indicates the integrated setting.From Table 1, A1>A2>0 and rd−cd−c>0, we derive Corollary 1.Corollary 1(i) When the variety cost is sufficiently large(η>ηˆI1), the integrated firm offers a higher retail price, provides a smaller product variety, and produces a smaller quantity of the standard product in dual channels than in the single indirect channel; and (ii) when the variety cost is sufficiently small(η<ηˆI2), the integrated firm offers a higher retail price and provides a greater product variety in dual channels than that in the single indirect channel.Corollary 1 is intuitive. When the market is not fully covered by the standard product(η>ηˆI1), adding the direct channel, the integrated firm can better extract the consumer’s surplus by raising the retail price, providing less product variety to save the variety cost, and attracting some consumers from the indirect channel to the direct channel, which decreases the demand for the standard product. Adding the direct channel raises the total market demand, i.e., product customization acts as a substitution for variety for attracting consumers. However, when the market is fully covered by the standard product(η<ηˆI2), adding the direct channel raises the product variety in dual channels relative to that in the single indirect channel because this increases the difficulty of attracting consumers to the indirect channel.Proposition 1 summarizes the optimal channel structure strategy of the integrated firm.Proposition 1The integrated firm uses dual channels if the variety cost satisfiesη>ηˆI1or (ηˆI2<η⩽ηˆI1andA22-2ft2/(8t2η)-A2+t/2nI1∗+ηnI1∗2/2+fnI1∗>0); otherwise, the integrated firm uses only the indirect channel.Proofs of all the propositions are given in the online supplementary document. Proposition 1 is intuitive, for the integrated firm, when the variety cost (f,η) is sufficiently high, the integrated firm has an incentive to add the direct channel to the indirect channel to save the variety cost; and when it is sufficiently low, the integrated firm has no incentive to add the direct channel because the integrated firm can always meet customers’ demand through the indirect channel and dual channels cannot improve its profit. As a result, we find that with the addition of the direct channel, the manufacturer should take the variety cost into consideration in determining whether adding the direct channel decreases product variety depends on the variety cost. Moreover, the variety cost plays an important role in determining the channel structure strategy for the integrated firm.In a decentralized supply chain, the players make their decisions independently. We first consider the setting in which the manufacturer only uses the indirect channel; then we consider the dual channels setting; finally, we explore the channel structure strategy of the manufacturer by comparing the two settings. Proposition A.1 (Appendix A) summarizes the equilibrium outcome in the single indirect channel.Under the single indirect channel, we have the following findings (i) When the variety cost (f,η) is sufficiently low (η⩽ηˆ1), the manufacturer would like to offer a great product variety to cover the market; otherwise, the manufacturer would only meet part of the demand due to a high cost of variety. (ii) If the market is fully covered, when the total surplus A1 increases, the retailer raises the margin to share the benefit such that the manufacturer reduces product varietyn1∗to save the variety cost because the market has been covered. (iii) However, if the market is not fully covered, the manufacturer no longer decreases product variety. It is now the case where the manufacturer increases product variety. This happens because the manufacturer can strategically raise price to attain a higher unit profit and provide a greater variety to attract consumers when the market is not fully covered. The manufacturer shares the benefit of the increased total surplus in the indirect channel with the retailer. Thus, they have full incentives to cooperatively raise the total surplus in the indirect channel by decreasing costs or raising the consumer’s reservation price. (iv) When the fit cost (t) increases, the profits of the two players decrease because this discourages consumers if the market is not covered; if the market is covered, the manufacturer’s profit decreases because the manufacturer must invest more in variety to cover the whole market while the retailer’s profit is unchanged.Define A3=r−cr−rd. Throughout this paper, we shall assume A3>0 to ensure that the equilibrium outcome exists. From rd>c, we have A1>A3. For a convenience’s sake, we denote the case where r<2cd+cr+rdor where 2cd+cr+rd⩽r<3cd+cr+rdandcd⩾2-1A3asCase I, and the case where r⩾3cd+cr+rdor where 2cd+cr+rd⩽r<3cd+cr+rdandcd<2-1A3asCase II. Observe thatCase Irefers to the scenario in which the reservation price r is sufficiently low and the marginal selling cost in the direct channel cdis sufficiently high, whereasCase IIrefers to the case where the reservation price r is sufficiently high and the marginal selling cost in the direct channel cdis sufficiently low.Proposition A.2 (Appendix A) summarizes the equilibrium outcomes of these two cases in using dual channels. From Propositions A.1 and A.2, we know that, in Case I, when the variety cost is sufficiently high, the retailer offers a lower margin and obtains a lower demand while the manufacturer charges a higher unit wholesale price and provides a smaller product variety in using dual channels than using the single indirect channel. Furthermore, we have Corollary 2.Corollary 2In Case I: (i) if the reservation price r is sufficiently low and the variety cost is sufficiently high, the effects of the channel structure on the manufacturer’s decisions are similar to those in the centralized setting (seeCorollary 1); and adding the direct channel decreases the retailer’s profitability. (ii) Since the manufacturer can serve part of consumers through the direct channel, the manufacturer decreases product variety to reduce the variety cost if VC is sufficiently high. (iii) Adding the direct channel raises the unit wholesale price and retail price in the indirect channel if the reservation price r is sufficiently low, i.e., enhancing the double marginalization effect.Notice that the finding of Corollary 2(iii) is different from that in Chiang et al. (2003), who claimed that the wholesale and retail prices are always lower when the manufacturer uses dual channels than when it relies only on retail distribution. Specifically, in Case I, the arbitrage constraint w⩽pdis nonbinding such that the negative effect of this constraint on the unit wholesale price does not exist. Note that the retailer extracts most of the total surplus of the indirect channel, and the reservation price for the direct channel relative to the indirect channel is not too low. Moreover, the customization avoids the consumer’s fit cost (trip cost), which increases market demand for the direct channel and decreases that for the retailer. As a result, the manufacturer transfers some consumers from the indirect channel to the direct channel through raising the unit wholesale price.In Case II, when the variety cost is sufficiently high, although adding the direct channel decreases the retailer’s margin, the results on the unit wholesale price, product variety, and market demand depend on the values of the parameters as summarized in Proposition A.3 (Appendix A). Notice that in Case II, on one hand, adding the direct channel can raise the control of the manufacturer over the unit wholesale price due to product customization in the direct channel. On the other hand, the relative profitability of the indirect channel to the direct channel is high and the unit wholesale price constraint w⩽rdin dual channels is binding such that the manufacturer leaves more profit to the retailer to prevent the retailer from switching purchases to the direct channel. The higher the reservation price r is, the higher the relative profitability of the indirect channel will be. As a consequence, we have Corollary 3.Corollary 3In Case II, if the reservation price r is sufficiently high (r>cr−3c+4rd), the manufacturer charges the retailer a lower unit wholesale price in using dual channels than using the single indirect channel; otherwise, it charges a higher unit wholesale price.Corollary 3 means whether adding the direct channel decreases the unit wholesale price directly depends on the reservation price. By adding the direct channel, the manufacturer can decrease product variety to save the variety cost. On the other hand, when the marginal selling cost of the custom product cdincreases, the manufacturer increases product variety to stimulate the demand for the standard product. In Case II, the manufacturer provides a greater product variety in using dual channels than using the single indirect channel if the marginal selling cost of the custom product (cd) is sufficiently high regardless of VC, which is inconsistent with the centralized setting (see Corollary 1). Thus, we can see that the decentralization of the supply chain may invert the effect of channel structure on product variety.The custom product can substitute for the standard product such that adding the direct channel negatively influences the demand for the standard product in the indirect channel. On the other hand, the market demand for the standard product positively depends on product variety. Moreover, adding the direct channel may decrease the unit wholesale price and the retailer’s margin of the standard product, which increases the market demand due to a lower retail price. As a result, when the variety cost is sufficiently high(η>max{ηˆ1,ηˆ22}), adding the direct channel raises the demand for the standard product if the marginal selling cost of the custom product is very high(cd>cˆd1). From Proposition A.2 and Table 1, it is clear that in using dual channels, the integrated firm offers a lower retail price and produces a larger quantity of the standard product than in the decentralized supply chain; and the product variety of the integrated firm is greater than that in the decentralized supply chain. That is, decentralization raises the retail price of the standard product due to the double marginalization effect and decreases product variety because the manufacturer only reaps part of the benefit from increasing product variety, which decreases the demand for the standard product.Proposition 2 summarizes the conditions under which the manufacturer uses dual channels.Proposition 2(i) InCase I, the manufacturer uses dual channels ifη>ηˆ1; and (ii) inCase II, the manufacturer uses dual channels if 2rd+cr−c<r<4rd−3c+crandη⩽min{ηˆ1,ηˆ22}.From Propositions 1 and 2, we know that the results on the channel structure strategy in the decentralized setting may be different from those in the integrated setting. Specifically, the manufacturer may have an incentive to use dual channels even when the variety cost is sufficiently low(η⩽min{ηˆ1,ηˆ22}), which differs from the findings in Proposition 1 because the manufacturer can reduce the retailer’s profit margin by adding the direct channel.Proposition 2(ii) implies that dual channels for the manufacturer may be better than the single indirect channel even when there is no demand for the direct channel because adding the direct channel decreases the retailer’s profit margin. This finding is consistent with that in Chiang et al. (2003).Proposition 3A higher unit production cost c or marginal selling cost cddecreases the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels.From Proposition 3, we know that when the unit production cost increases, the manufacturer has a weaker incentive to use dual channels. Specifically, when the unit production cost c increases, the manufacturer’s profit decreases regardless of the channel structure strategy. However, the negative effect of the higher unit production cost on the manufacturer’s profit in using the single indirect channel is smaller than that in using dual channels because the total demand in dual channels is higher than that in the single indirect channel. This explains why the manufacturer has a higher incentive to use dual channels when th unit production cost decreases. When the marginal selling cost cdincreases, the demand for the standard product increases, which raises the manufacturer’s profitability; on the other hand, the demand for the custom product decreases and the variety cost increases due to a greater product variety, which decreases the manufacturer’s profitability. Moreover, if the marginal selling cost of the custom product cdincreases, the manufacturer’s profitability in using the direct channel will decrease. As a consequence, the manufacturer’s profit in using dual channels decreases with the marginal selling cost cdbecause its negative effect outweighs its positive effect, which further decreases the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels. Theorem 1 below summarizes the core insights from the above discussions.Theorem 1(a) The effect of channel structure on product variety may be inverted by the supply chain decentralization. (b) When the variety cost is sufficiently low: the decentralization of indirect channel may invert the manufacturer’s equilibrium channel structure strategy, i.e., decentralization raises the motivation of using dual channels. (c) It is more likely for the manufacturer with either a low unit production cost or low marginal selling cost for the direct channel to use dual channels.Figs. 2–4illustrate how the manufacturer’s profit depends on some of the key parameters, the default values of which are as follows:c=5,cd=2,cr=3,f=0.1,r=34,rd=10,t=20,andη=2.In Figs. 2–4, the fine curve represents the manufacturer’s profit in using the single indirect channelπM1∗and the thick curve represents the manufacturer’s profit in using dual channelsπM2∗.From Fig. 2, we know that a higher marginal selling cost of the standard product crraises the incentive for the manufacturer to use dual channels due to a lower unit wholesale price in using the single indirect channel. Fig. 3 indicates that a higher reservation price r weakens the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels. To be specific, when the reservation price r increases, the manufacturer increases product variety to stimulate the demand for the standard product in using dual channels. However, in using the single indirect channel, the manufacturer can raise the unit wholesale price to extract the consumer’s surplus, which further induces a greater product variety to stimulate demand. As a consequence, the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels decreases with the reservation price of the standard product.Fig. 4 implies that a higher fit cost t strengthens the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels. Specifically, if the market is fully covered by the standard product, the manufacturer increases product variety to cover the market as fit cost t increases; otherwise, the manufacturer reduces product variety to save the variety cost because it is more difficult to stimulate demand by increasing product variety. If the market is fully covered by the standard product, the manufacturer offers a greater product variety to react to the increased fit cost in using the single indirect channel than using dual channels because adding the direct channel decreases the retail price of the standard product, which means that using dual channels reduces the increased variety cost. If the market is not fully covered by the standard product, the demand advantage of using the single indirect channel over dual channels decreases with the fit cost due to a smaller variety difference. As a consequence, the manufacturer has a stronger incentive to use dual channels as the fit cost increases. In other words, it is more likely for a manufacturer to use dual channels when consumers are very sensitive to product differentiation.Proposition 4 addresses the issue of whether adding the direct channel harms the retailer.Proposition 4(i) InCase I, adding the direct channel is detrimental to the retailer; (ii) inCase II, adding the direct channel is not detrimental to the retailer if and only if (a)ηˆ1<η⩽ηˆ22andrd<rˆd1or (b)η>max{ηˆ1,ηˆ22}andcd⩾cˆd2, whererˆd1=r-cr-A12A12-8ft/(16t2η)andcˆd2=A12A12-8ft/16A33+ft/A3; (iii) In Case II, the Pareto range over which the two players are better off using dual channels is non-empty.Proposition 4 states that adding the direct channel may reduce the equilibrium profit of the retailer due to reduced demand for the standard product or a lower profit margin. However, under some conditions, adding the direct channel is beneficial to the retailer because the retailer can secure a higher profit margin or obtain a higher demand. Thus, the retailer may encourage the manufacturer to add the direct channel because this action raises the retailer’s profit. This argument is consistent with Tsay and Agrawal (2004), who found that given the retail price, the addition of a direct channel alongside an indirect (reseller) channel is not necessarily detrimental to the reseller. Proposition 4(iii) means that the dual channel structure for the two players may Pareto dominate the single indirect channel in Case II. Thus, they may have an incentive to collaborate with each other to add the direct channel.In this section, based on the basic model, we develop two alternative models to examine the robustness of the channel structure strategy to channel leadership and exogenization of product variety by comparing them with the basic model. Alternative model 1 assumes that the manufacturer acts as the Stackelberg pricing leader and the retailer is the follower, and alternative model 2 assumes that the product variety level is exogenously set.We have considered the RS model where the retailer is the pricing leader and the manufacturer is the follower. How does the channel leadership structure (i.e., sequence of decisions) affect the manufacturer’s equilibrium channel structure strategy? To address this issue, we consider an MS model in which the manufacturer is the Stackelberg leader. Specifically, in the first stage, the manufacturer first decides whether to engage in direct sales, and then determines the product variety n, unit wholesale price w of the standard product, and price pdof the custom product (if the manufacturer opens the direct channel). In the second stage, the retailer determines the retail price p of the standard product.For the sake of convenience, in this subsection we use the first number suffix 3 to represent the case of using the single indirect channel and 4 to represent the case of using dual channels. We first consider the case where the manufacturer only uses the indirect channel. The market demand is given by Eq. (1). The retailer’s profit is πR3=x1·(p−w−cr) and the manufacturer’s profit is πM3=(w−c)x1−ηn2/2−nf. Table 2summarizes the equilibrium outcomes and profits, where n32 is the unique positive root of t−ηn3−fn2=0, andηˆ3=A1A12-4ft/(8t2).When the market is partially covered, the effects of the parameters on the equilibrium outcomes and profits are similar to those under the RS model. When the market is fully covered and n32>2t/A1, we find that product variety decreases with the variety cost factors (η, f) and is independent of the total surplus of the indirect channel (r−c−cr), which differs from the RS model. If n32⩽2t/A1, the product varieties under the two models are identical when the market is fully covered. Furthermore, from Proposition A.1 and Table 2, we see that the manufacturer charges a higher unit wholesale price and achieves a higher profit under the MS model than under the RS model. When the market is fully covered, the retailer makes a smaller profit under the MS model than under the RS model. That is, there exists a first-mover advantage for the retailer (Choi and Fredj, 2013). However, when the market is partially covered, the first-mover advantage no longer exists for the retailer. It is now the case where the retailer can counter-intuitively gain a higher profit due to a higher demand under the MS model than under the RS model. We summarize the core insights in Theorem 2.Theorem 2(a) In the single indirect channel setting, channel leadership plays an important role in determining product variety if the variety cost is sufficiently low; otherwise, the effect of channel leadership on product variety is small. (b) Whether the retailer has an incentive to act as a leader depends on whether the market is fully covered in the single indirect channel setting.When the manufacturer uses dual channels, the marginal consumer is indifferent between the standard and custom products, i.e., r−p−tx/(2n)=rd−pd⩾0. Thus, in using dual channels, the demand for the standard product is x4=2n(pd−p+r−rd)/t. Furthermore, the retailer’s profit isπR4=2n(pd-p+r-rd)(p-w-cr)/tand the manufacturer’s profit isπM4=2n(pd-p+r-rd)(w-c)/t+[1-2n(pd-p+r-rd)/t](pd-c-cd)-ηn2/2-nf.Solving the first-order condition ∂πR4/∂p=0 for p, we have p4=(cr+pd+r−rd+w)/2. Substituting p4 into x4, we have x4(w)=n(r−cr+pd−rd−w)/t. When the constraint x4(w)⩽1 is satisfied, inserting p4 into πM4, we obtain the manufacturer’s profit πM4(n,pd,w). Differentiating πM4(n,pd,w) with respect to w yields the first-order conditionSolving it for w, we have w(pd)=pd+(r−cd−cr−rd)/2. If r<cd+cr+rd, we have w(pd)<pd, so the unit wholesale price reaction is w4(pd)=w(pd). If r⩾cd+cr+rd, the constraint w(pd)⩽pdis binding such that the unit wholesale price reaction is w4(pd)=pd. Considering the unit wholesale price of the standard product in using the indirect channel, the manufacturer determines (n,pd) to maximize πM4(n,pd,w4 (pd)). We can show that πM4(n,pd,w4(pd)) is an increasing function of pdand a concave function of n. Similar to the RS model, the manufacturer has no incentive to use dual channels if pd>rd. Thus, the manufacturer will offer the direct channel pricepd4∗=rdin using dual channels. Table 3summarizes the equilibrium outcomes and profits, whereηˆ41=A2A22-4ft/(8t2)<ηˆ3andηˆ42=A3(cdA3-ft)/t2=ηˆ22.From Proposition A.2 and Table 3, we observe that in using dual channels, the effects of the parameters on the equilibrium outcomes and profits are similar to those under the RS model. However, the range over which the unit wholesale price is lower than the direct channel price is smaller than that under the RS model. If the reservation price r of the standard product is sufficiently large, the equilibrium outcomes are identical under both the RS and MS models. If the reservation price of the standard product is sufficiently low (r<cd+cr+rd), the unit wholesale price and retail price in using dual channels are higher than using the single indirect channel. This result is different from Chiang et al. (2003). However, it is consistent with that under the RS model. Hence, we argue that the channel leadership is not one of the major factors that account for this difference (in the effect of channel structure on prices) but customization in using the direct channel is the major factor.Similar to Propositions 1 and 2, we derive the following.Proposition 5Under the MS model, we have: (i) when r<cd+cr+rd, the manufacturer chooses dual channels if and only ifη>ηˆ3, orηˆ41<η⩽ηˆ3andA22-4ft2/(32t2η)-A2+t/n32∗+n32∗f+ηn32∗2/2>0; and (ii) when r⩾cd+cr+rd, the manufacturer chooses dual channels ifη⩽min{ηˆ3,ηˆ42},A1<2A3, and n32<t/A3.Comparing Propositions 1, 2, and 5, we find that the qualitative results on the channel structure strategy are robust to the relative channel leadership of the players. Similar to Proposition 3, we can show that a higher marginal selling cost cddecreases the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels.From Propositions 2 and 5, we see that ifη>ηˆ3(>ηˆ1)and r<cd+cr+rd, the manufacturer uses dual channels under both the RS and MS models; and ifη>max{ηˆ3,ηˆ42}(⩾max{ηˆ1,ηˆ22})and r⩾3cd+cr+rd, we can show[(cdA3-ft)2-(A12-8ft)2/64]/(2t2η)>[(cdA3-ft)2-(A12-4ft)2/16]/(2t2η), which implies Corollary 4.Corollary 4The manufacturer has a stronger incentive to use dual channels under the RS model than the MS model if the variety cost is sufficiently large.We can explain Corollary 4 as follows: when the retailer is the leader, the retailer extracts most of the profit in the indirect channel, which decreases the manufacturer’s profitability. Thus, one of the main incentives for the manufacturer to use dual channels is to strengthen its bargaining power in the indirect channel. When the manufacturer is the leader, the incentive of the manufacturer to strengthen its bargaining power via adding the direct channel is weaker. That is, the channel leadership advantage of the retailer gives the manufacturer a stronger incentive to use dual channels.We have considered the endogenous variety setting and we now investigate how the exogenization of product variety affects the optimal channel structure strategy. From Proposition A.1 and A.2, we derive Proposition A.4 (Appendix A). We find that if the reservation price r is sufficiently low, the manufacturer prefers dual channels to the single indirect channel because adding the direct channel can attract more consumers or reduce the retailer’s profit margin, regardless of product variety. However, in the endogenous variety setting, if the variety cost (η) is sufficiently low, this result is no longer valid. Now, the manufacturer has no incentive to use dual channels. Here, the insight is summarized in Theorem 3:Theorem 3(i) The endogenization of product variety inverts the manufacturer’s channel structure strategy if the reservation price of the standard product and the variety cost are sufficiently low. (ii) If the reservation price r is sufficiently low, the retailer may object to the addition of the direct channel because adding the direct channel harms the retailer through reducing the retailer’s profit margin or demand.In the exogenous variety setting, if the reservation price r is sufficiently high, the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels depends on product variety, i.e., product variety plays an important role in making the channel structure decision. Specifically, if product variety is sufficiently high (n⩾max{t/A3,2t/A1}), a higher product variety will increase the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels due to a lower unit wholesale price in using the single indirect channel. However, if product variety satisfies t/A3⩽n<2t/A1, a greater product variety weakens the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels due to a higher gross profit excluding the variety cost in using the single indirect channel. If product variety is sufficiently small (n<t/A3), the manufacturer chooses dual channels only if the marginal selling cost in using the direct channel cdis sufficiently low due to a high profitability for the direct channel. Here, we have Theorem 4.Theorem 4The monotonicity of the manufacturer’s motivation to using dual channels in product variety depends on product variety, and the reservation price or costs in the direct channel.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
With the emergence of e-commerce, the dual channel distribution structure is becoming an important channel structure strategy for manufacturers. Owing to the development of economy and technology, consumer’s needs for product variety and customization increase such that product variety and customization are becoming important competing dimensions. We develop an RS model of a one-manufacturer and one-retailer two-echelon supply chain to investigate the interactions between product variety and channel structure strategy for a manufacturer in the case where the manufacturer sells a custom product via the direct channel. We also develop two alternative models to examine the robustness of the channel structure strategy to channel leadership and exogenization of product variety.In the basic model, namely the RS model, the retailer is the pricing leader and the manufacturer is the pricing follower. We give the equilibrium outcomes and profits in the single indirect and dual channel settings, and find that when the variety cost is sufficiently large, the integrated firm provides a smaller product variety in dual channels than in the single indirect channel; otherwise, the integrated firm provides a greater product variety in dual channels. The decentralization of the supply chain may invert the effect of channel structure on product variety. Unlike Chiang et al. (2003), adding the direct channel enhances the double marginalization effect due to customization in using the direct channel if the reservation price r is sufficiently low. When the variety cost is sufficiently high and the reservation price of the standard product is sufficiently low, the manufacturer would like to use dual channels. In addition, we find that the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels decreases with the unit production cost, the reservation price of the standard product, and the marginal selling cost in using the direct channel, while increases with the marginal selling cost of the retailer and the fit cost. The decentralization of the indirect channel may invert the channel structure strategy for the manufacturer if the variety cost is sufficiently low. We give the conditions under which the dual channels structure for the retailer dominates the single indirect channel structure.Comparing the MS model with the RS model, we find that in the single indirect channel setting, channel leadership (and hence sequence of decisions in the supply chain) plays an important role in determining product variety if and only if the variety cost is sufficiently low; and whether the retailer has an incentive to act as a pricing leader depends on whether the market is fully covered. The manufacturer has a stronger incentive to use dual channels under the RS model than the MS model if the variety cost is sufficiently large because adding the direct channel serves as a means for the manufacturer to strengthen its power over the retailer. In the exogenous variety model, we give the variety range over which the manufacturer would like to use dual channels and find that whether a greater product variety weakens the manufacturer’s motivation to use dual channels depends on the product variety and reservation price of the standard product. Product variety influences the channel structure strategy and the retailer prefers collaborating with the manufacturer in adding the direct channel only when the reservation price of the standard product is sufficiently high. We find that endogenizing product variety inverts the channel structure strategy of the manufacturer if the reservation price of the standard product and the variety cost are sufficiently low.In this paper we assume that the direct channel can customize the whole circular spatial market. In reality, the manufacturer may only customize a part of the market. Thus, considering the customization range is an interesting topic for future research (Dewan et al., 2003). We assume that the variety cost is independent of the demand for the standard product. Future research may relax this assumption to examine the robustness of the channel structure strategy to cost structure by making use of information technology.