@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A stochastic aggregate production planning model in a green supply chain: Considering flexible lead times, nonlinear purchase and shortage cost functions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Quantity discount is considered to encourage the producer to order more quantities.Interrelationship between lead time, transportation cost, and GHGs is considered.Demand uncertainty is assumed to follows a pre-specified distribution function.Shortages are penalized by a generic nonlinear multiple breakpoint function.The concepts of GHG emission and waste management are incorporated into the model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Aggregate production planning,Green principles,Quantity discount,Nonlinear shortage cost,Demand uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we develop a stochastic programming approach to solve a multi-period multi-product multi-site aggregate production planning problem in a green supply chain for a medium-term planning horizon under the assumption of demand uncertainty. The proposed model has the following features: (i) the majority of supply chain cost parameters are considered; (ii) quantity discounts to encourage the producer to order more from the suppliers in one period, instead of splitting the order into periodical small quantities, are considered; (iii) the interrelationship between lead time and transportation cost is considered, as well as that between lead time and greenhouse gas emission level; (iv) demand uncertainty is assumed to follow a pre-specified distribution function; (v) shortages are penalized by a general multiple breakpoint function, to persuade producers to reduce backorders as much as possible; (vi) some indicators of a green supply chain, such as greenhouse gas emissions and waste management are also incorporated into the model. The proposed model is first a nonlinear mixed integer programming which is converted into a linear one by applying some theoretical and numerical techniques. Due to the convexity of the model, the local solution obtained from linear programming solvers is also the global solution. Finally, a numerical example is presented to demonstrate the validity of the proposed model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Awareness of the environment has been increasing in the last few decades. More people are conscious of the world’s environmental problems such as global warming, toxic substance usage, and a decrease of non-renewable resources. In response to this threat, a number of organizations are applying ‘green’ principles, such as using environmentally friendly raw materials and recycled paper for packaging, and reducing the use of fossil fuels (Mirzapour Al-e-hashem et al., 2011c). These green principles have been expanded to many areas of work, including supply chains. Green Supply Chain Management (GSCM) has been emerging in the last few years (Markovitz-Somogyi et al., 2009). Adding the ‘green’ concept to the ‘supply chain’ concept creates a new paradigm where the supply chain will have a direct relation to the environment. This is interesting because historically, these two paradigms have been in head-on collision with each other (Srivastava, 2007). This idea covers every stage in manufacturing and in the life cycle of product, i.e. from product design to recycling (see for example Diabat and Govindan, 2011; Wang et al., 2011; Zhu and Sarkis, 2011; Eltayeb et al., 2011; Yeh and Chuang, 2011; Bai and Sarkis, 2010; Sheu, 2008; Kumar et al., 2012). Also, Min and Kim (2012) have presented a comprehensive review on green supply chain researches by studying more than five hundred papers.Green logistics as a sub set of green supply chain has been expanding in the last few years (Srivastava, 2007). One comprehensive literature review of studies on green logistic is Dekker et al. (2012). They state that respect to the environment, transportation is the most visible aspect of supply chains. They examine four choices with respect to transportation which are supported by Operations Research models, namely, mode choice (or modal split), use of intermodal transport, equipment choice and fuel choice. The former choice in transport is the mode of transportation (mode choice), viz. transport by plane, ship, truck, rail, barge or pipelines. Each mode has different characteristics in terms of costs, transit time, accessibility, and also different environmental performance. In present study we use this method to embed the environmental issue in our model.One of the most important questions in green logistics is how to identify preferred solutions balancing environmental and business concerns (Quariguasi Frota Neto et al., 2009). Quariguasi Frota Neto et al. (2009) have emphasized that Improving environmental quality comes at a cost, so the question is which trade-offs occur between the environmental impacts of an economic activity and its costs, and what are best solutions balancing ecological and economic concerns? The aim is to determine solutions in which environmental damage can only be decreased if costs are increased. These solutions are called eco-efficient. The idea of exploring best alternatives is based on Pareto-optimality (Huppes and Ishikawa, 2005).One of the well known subjects that could be addressed in GSCM is aggregate production planning (APP), an operational activity that draws up an aggregate plan for the production process, in advance of 3–18months, to give an idea to management as to what quantity of materials and other resources are to be procured and when, so that the total cost of operations of the organization is kept to the minimum over that period. Many researchers have focused on APP from several years ago (Shi and Haase, 1996) and numerous APP models with differing degrees of difficulty have been developed in the last decades. Since Holt et al. (1955) presented the approach for the first time; scholars have proposed numerous models to help solve APP problems, each with their own supporters and detractors. In a comprehensive study, Nam and Logendran (1992) reviewed APP models from 140 journal articles and 14 books, and classified them into optimal and near-optimal models. Hanssman and Hess (1960) proposed a model based on the linear programming approach using a linear cost function of the decision variables. Haehling (1970) extended the Hanssman and Hess (1960) model for multi-product, multi-stage production systems in which optimal disaggregation decisions can be made under capacity constraints. Masoud and Hwang (1980) presented three Multi Criteria Decision Making Methods (MCDMs): Goal Programming (GP), sequential multi-objective problem and the step method. These methods are applied to solve APP problems by maximizing profits, and minimizing changes in workforce levels, inventory investments and backorders. Goodman (1974) proposed a GP model which approximates the original nonlinear cost structure of Holt’s model by linear terms and solves it applying a variant of the simplex method. Baykasoglu (2001) has extended Masud and Hwang’s model with more constraints such as sub-contractor selection and setup times. The integration of APP problems with other planning problems has been considered, for instance scheduling problems (Buxey, 1993; Foote et al., 1988), manpower planning problems (Mazzola et al., 1998), long set up time problems (Porkka et al., 2003; Xue et al., 2011) and supply chain planning (Ramezanian et al., 2012; Jamalnia and Soukhakian, 2009; Mirzapour Al-e-hashem et al., 2012, Mirzapour Al-e-hashem et al., 2011a,b).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
