@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Vehicle routing to minimize time-dependent emissions in urban areas

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the impact of varying travel speeds and loads on emissions.We propose a way of keeping the load and time-dependent VRP tractable.We analyze how the structure of routes changes following varying speeds and loads.Comparison with traditional objectives shows the trade-off between emissions and costs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emissions,Vehicle routing,Green logistics,Load dependency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper focuses on the problem of minimizing CO2 emissions in the routing of vehicles in urban areas. While many authors have realized the importance of speed in minimizing emissions, most of the existing literature assumes that vehicles can travel at the emissions-minimizing speed on each arc in the road network. In urban areas, vehicles must travel at the speed of traffic, which is variable and time-dependent. The best routes also depend on the vehicle load. To solve the problem, we take advantage of previous work that transforms the stochastic shortest path subproblems into deterministic problems. While in general, these paths must be computed for each combination of start time and load, we introduce a result that identifies when the emissions-minimizing path between customers is the same for all loads. When this occurs, we can precompute the paths and store them in a lookup table which saves on runtime. To solve the routing problem, we adapt an existing tabu search algorithm. We test our approach on instances from a real road network dataset and 230 million speed observations. Experiments with different numbers of vehicles, vehicle weights, and pickup quantities demonstrate the value of our approach. We show that large savings in emissions can occur particularly in the suburbs, with heavier vehicles, and with heterogeneous pickup quantities as compared with routes created with more traditional objectives. We show that the savings in emissions are proportionally larger than the associated increases in duration, indicating improved emissions are achievable at a fairly low cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The reduction of emissions from heavy-duty trucks has become an important part of worldwide efforts to reduce CO2 emissions. As a result, as a way to reduce fuel usage and thus emissions, many delivery companies have reported on their efforts to lower the total number of miles traveled by their vehicles (Express, 2012; UPS, 2014). However, emissions are nonlinear in speed, yielding higher emissions at both low and high speeds (Demir, Bektas, & Laporte, 2011). Thus, focusing on distance alone does not necessarily minimize emissions. While many authors have realized the importance of speed in minimizing emissions, most of the existing literature assumes that vehicles can travel at the emissions-minimizing speed on each arc in the road network. Yet, in urban areas, vehicles must travel at the speed of traffic, which is both variable and time-dependent. Furthermore, because emissions are also a function of the load being carried by the truck, the order that customers are visited should also be considered.This paper focuses on the problem of minimizing expected CO2 emissions in the routing of a fleet of capacitated vehicles in an urban area. We assume that each vehicle will visit multiple customers over the course of a day, and the driver will not wait at any customer location. Each customer requires a pickup of a particular weight, and as a result, the load of the vehicle changes as pickups are made. Traveling between customers, the vehicle produces emissions. The expected emissions-minimized path between any two customers can vary due to the impact of time-dependent speeds as well as the load on the vehicle. As a result, the best path between each pair of customers cannot as a rule be precomputed as in most vehicle routing problems (VRP).To solve the problem, we adapt an existing local search procedure. The procedure is a tabu search heuristic that was originally developed for time-dependent vehicle routing problems. In our case, the procedure is adapted to include the computation of time-dependent, expected emissions-minimized paths between each pair of customers on the route. We introduce a result that allows us to precompute and store a large number of these paths. In the cases where we cannot precompute the path, we draw on previous work that demonstrates that such paths can be effectively determined by computing a time-dependent average emissions cost for each arc and solving the resulting time-dependent, deterministic minimum emissions cost path problem.This paper makes several important contributions to the literature. It is the first paper to consider the impact of traveling at the speed of traffic and the load on the vehicles in the minimization of emissions. We propose a clever technique to reduce the computational burden and investigate the question of when it is really important to incorporate the load of the vehicle into the optimization. We use instances derived from a real road network dataset and 230 million speed observations. We show that large savings in emissions can occur particularly in the suburbs, with heavier vehicles, and with heterogeneous pickup quantities as compared with routes created with more traditional objectives. We also show that the savings in emissions are proportionately larger than the associated increases in duration, indicating improved emissions may be achievable at a fairly low cost.The remainder of this paper is outlined as follows. In the next section, we review the existing literature. In Section 3, we present a model of the problem. Section 4 presents our solution approach, and Section 5 introduces our experimental design. We present computational results in Section 6 and provide conclusions in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we explore the minimization of expected emissions from vehicle routing in urban areas, where minimization of emissions will be one of the major challenges in the short- and mid-term future. A key challenge in the paper is the development of a computationally tractable way of considering detailed load information. Unlike in the case of traditional vehicle routing objectives, the presence of the load requires customer-to-customer expected time-dependent emissions-minimizing paths to be computed online. We introduce an analytical result that allows us to precompute the majority of such paths.Through our experiments, we identify that significant savings in emissions can be achieved when optimizing emissions for mixed customer instances, while inner city tours show significantly less improvements, mainly because routes are relatively short. We show that it is also more important to minimize emissions when trucks are heavier and can potentially handle more load. The most significant savings in emissions with single vehicles were noted for routes with heterogeneous loads. For heterogeneous loads, our solution framework shifts heavy pickups to the end of a route, ensuring that we carry most of the load over a short distance. In general, we find that savings in emissions can be found with relatively small increases in tour durations, indicating that big savings in emissions can be possible without large costs to companies. We also extend our results to multiple vehicles. We find large savings with mixed fleets since vehicle weights are a big driver in emissions. For the mixed fleet, we see particular savings with heterogeneous loads, especially when heavy customers are close to the depot. Our emissions-optimized solutions find that the heavy vehicle stays close to the depot using a short route to pick up the heavy customers.There exist a number of interesting avenues of future work. For one, this paper does not include the possibility that vehicles might wait at the depot or at customers for favorable road conditions. Adding waiting would change the objective, and, depending on the costs involved, may change the routes that are selected. Furthermore, it would be interesting to see how different emissions models impact the structure of resulting routes. In addition, an interesting path for future research would be to extend local search procedures such that deliveries can be handled as efficiently as pickups. So far, local-search based evaluation of a route for deliveries would lead to re-evaluation of costs for the whole route, which is computationally inefficient. Finally, the functions describing emissions are similar to those that describe fuel consumption. As a result, the methods discussed in this paper could be applied to routing problems that seek to incorporate the costs of fuel in urban areas with uncertain speeds.Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the the online version, at 10.1016/j.ejor.2015.11.034Supplementary Data S1Supplementary Raw Research Data. This is open data under the CC BY license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/