@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Maximizing system availability through joint decision on component redundancy and spares inventory

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study operational availability optimization for repairable k-out-of-n:G system.Component redundancy and spares quantities are determined simultaneously.Operational availability is relatively independent of parts availability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Repairable k-out-of-,n,:,G,system,Operational availability,Redundancy allocation,Spare parts logistics,Performance-based contracting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For a repairable k-out-of-n:Gsystem consisting of line-replaceable units, its operational availability depends on component reliability, its redundancy level, and spare parts availability. As a result, it is important to consider redundancy allocation and spare parts provisioning simultaneously in maximizing the system’s operational availability. In prior studies, however, these important aspects are often handled separately in the areas of reliability engineering and spare parts logistics. In this paper, we study a collection of operational availability maximization problems, in which the component redundancy and the spares stocking quantities are to be determined simultaneously under economic and physical constraints. To solve this type of problem, continuous-time Markov chain models are developed first for a single repairable k-out-of-n:Gsystem under different shut-off rules, and some important properties of the corresponding operational availability and spare parts availability are derived. Then, we extend the models to series systems consisting of multiple repairable k-out-of-n:Gsubsystems. The related optimization problems are reformulated as binary integer linear programs and solved using a branch-and-bound method. Numerical examples, including a real-world application of automatic test equipment, are presented to illustrate this integrated product-service solution and to offer valuable managerial insights.Automatic Test EquipmentContinuous OperationContinuous-Time Markov ChainFirst-Come, First ServedMulti-Echelon Technique for Recoverable Item ControlMean Down Time of the SystemMean Time Between Failures of the SystemOriginal Equipment ManufacturerOptimal Operational AvailabilityOptimal Parts AvailabilityPerformance-Based ContractingRequired Operational AvailabilityRequired Parts AvailabilitySuspended Animationnumber of subsystems in a series systemnumber of suspended components in subsystem lnumber of components in subsystem l (redundancy level)base-stock level for subsystem lfailure rate of the component in subsystem lreplenishment rate of spare parts for subsystem lrepair-by-replacement rate for subsystem l if a spare part is availablesteady-state probability for the case with i non-failed components and j on-hand spare partssteady-state probability for cases with i non-failed componentssteady-state probability for cases with j on-hand spare partsavailability of the overall systemavailability of subsystem lavailability of spare parts for subsystem lrequired parts availability level of subsystem lholding cost per unit time of a spare part for subsystem loperation cost per unit time of a component for subsystem lexpected total inventory cost per unit time for subsystem lexpected total operation cost per unit time for subsystem linventory and operation budget per unit time for the overall systemincomplete Gamma function∫z∞tα-1e-tdt

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Design for reliability and spare parts logistics are among the most important aspects in bringing the operational availability of a repairable system to a required level. The goal of reliability assignment is to determine component (or subsystem) reliability in order to meet the system reliability requirement. This may be achieved by investing more resources in product design and manufacturing. If the individual component reliability is difficult to achieve through engineering development, redundancy can be considered as a useful alternative. Various configurations, such as parallel system and k-out-of-n:Gsystem, are widely used in redundant designs. Depending on different needs, duplicated components can be configured in hot-standby (i.e., active-standby), warm-standby, or cold-standby mode. To optimize system reliability, the number of redundant units must be determined under economic and physical constraints. In addition to design for reliability, studies on spare parts logistics are concerned with the planning and operation of inventory systems that supply spare units upon request. In other words, reliability and redundancy allocations aim at increasing the system uptime, while spare parts logistics attempts to reduce the system downtime.To drive system operational availability, it is necessary to synthesize redundancy allocation and spare parts logistics under a unified decision-making framework. In the past, decisions on these aspects were usually made by manufacturers and end users independently. With the advent of product-service integration, there is a growing trend that the after-sales maintenance and support are fully integrated with the design and manufacturing process. Under this new business model, the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) makes the full commitment to the reliability performance over the product lifetime. This new reliability management approach is often called “total lifetime service agreements” in commercial airlines, or referred to as “performance-based contracting (PBC)” in the defense industry (Kim, Cohen, & Netessine, 2007). PBC is envisioned as a new service model that lowers the ownership cost while guaranteeing the system performance. The goal of PBC is to motivate the OEM to offer reliable and cost-effective products through design for reliability and responsive maintenance services. Hence, it is highly desirable to develop new analytical models and decision-support tools that aid product manufacturers in optimizing resource allocations in design, manufacturing, and after-sales support.In this paper, we explicitly integrate hot-standby redundancy and spares inventory to drive the operational availability of repairable systems. The goal is to maximize the system operational availability by determining the levels of component redundancy and base-stock inventory. This joint decision-making problem can be considered as an extension of reliability-redundancy allocation problems (Kuo & Wan, 2007) by incorporating spares inventory as a new dimension in decision making. On the other hand, this study also extends spare parts logistics models by incorporating the concept of design for reliability through active redundancy allocation. The contribution of this work is twofold: mathematical modeling and managerial insight. Methodologically, we make an early attempt to maximize the system operational availability by jointly optimizing the component redundancy and the spare parts stock. Moreover, the managerial insights gained from this study show that operational availability is relatively independent of parts availability when hot-standby redundancy is properly incorporated into the system. Such a joint decision-making issue has not been well studied in the areas of reliability engineering and operations management.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A review of related literature is provided in Section 2. Section 3 presents a detailed problem description and the basic assumptions. Section 4 provides the mathematical models for a repairable k-out-of-n:Gsystem and a series system consisting of multiple k-out-of-n:Gsubsystems. Section 5 is focused on the formulations for maximizing the operational availabilities of those repairable systems. Numerical examples, including a case study regarding automatic test equipment, are presented in Section 6 to demonstrate the applicability and performance of the proposed method. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper and discusses our future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes an integrated framework to maximize the k-out-of-n:G system availability by jointly allocating redundant components and spare parts under economic and physical constraints. CTMC models are developed to estimate the steady-state system operational availability at different redundancy and parts stocking levels. The models are further extended to series systems consisting of multiple k-out-of-n:G subsystems. Our study is among the early attempts to drive system availability through the joint allocation on hot-standby components and spare parts inventory. Three interesting findings are obtained. First, the system operational availability is always higher than or equal to the parts availability as long as the redundancy level is not below the sum of base-stock level and the minimum required working units within the system. Second, even if the parts availability descends, the system operational availability can be still increased because of the hot-standby operating mode. This is in contrast to the conventional belief that high operational availability is proportional to parts availability. Last, under the redundancy and inventory constraints, the gain of the parts availability by reducing the replenishment lead time depends on the joint consideration of the spare parts quantity and component redundancy levels.The CTMC models (Figs. 2 and 3) presented in this paper can be potentially extended to describe a special case involving dependent failures by incorporating state-dependent transition rates. Nevertheless, some challenging issues still remain open. For instance, constructing a general model that encompasses both zero and nonzero inventory cases would be quite useful. In addition, our model is applicable to capital-intensive industries where the owners strive to fully utilize their equipment. However, in some applications the load on individual equipment (e.g., peak-time generators) may vary dramatically over time. How to model and maximize the equipment availability and service performance under a time-varying load is another attractive topic. These research directions will be pursued in our future work.