@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multistage and multiple response optimization approach for serial manufacturing system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The MRO problem objective is defined by adaptive maximin desirability functions.Near-optimal solution search for the problem is done by ACOR and CACO-MDS.Approach considers interrelationship between stages and response correlation.Suitability of the approach is verified by using real life aluminum industry case.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Manufacturing,Multistage serial system,Multiple response optimization (MRO),Desirability function,Ant Colony Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A serial manufacturing system generally consists of multiple and different dedicated processing stages that are aligned sequentially to produce a specific end product. In such a system, the intermediate and end product quality generally varies due to setting of in-process variables at a specific stage and also due to interdependency between the stages. In addition, the output quality at each individual stage may be judged by multiple correlated end product characteristics (so-called ‘multiple responses’). Thus, achieving the optimal product quality, considering the setting conditions at multiple stages with multiple correlated responses at individual stage is a critical and difficult task for practitioners. The solution to such a problem necessitates building data driven empirical response function(s) at individual stage. These response function(s) may be nonlinear and multimodal in nature. Although extensive research works are reported for single-stage multiple response optimization (MRO) problems, there exist little evidence on work addressing multistage MRO problem with more than two sequential stages. This paper attempts to develop an efficient and simplified solution approach for a typical serial multistage MRO problem. The proposed approach integrates a modified desirability function and an ant colony-based metaheuristic search strategy to determine the best process setting conditions in serial multistage system. Usefulness of the approach is verified by using a real life case on serial multistage rolled aluminum sheet manufacturing process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Any product that is delivered to a customer (external or internal) is evaluated by considering multiple quality characteristics or responses. These responses are often referred to as critical-to-quality (CTQ) characteristics, and are measured in different measuring scales. The primary goal of any process improvement initiative is to determine the best process operating conditions that simultaneously optimize the desired multiple responses. The optimal condition for individual response rarely results in an overall best condition for multiple responses. The simultaneous optimization of correlated multiple responses is generally referred to as ‘multiple response optimization’ (MRO) (Khuri, 1996). The objective of a MRO problem is to determine the best feasible process setting conditions that leads to individual response closer to its target (nominal) value with minimal variability. These responses may have linear or nonlinear interaction(s), which essentially calls for compromise (trade-off) solution(s). Extensive research works are reported on single stage MRO problems. The primary strategy used by various researchers (Awad & Kovach, 2011; Derringer & Suich, 1980; Gomes, Paiva, Costa, Balestrassi, & Paiva, 2013; Khuri & Conlon, 1981; Pignatiello, 1993; Plante, 2001; Tong, Wang, & Chen, 2005) is to solve a MRO problem by reducing the problem dimensionality. These strategies basically convert the MRO problem into a single objective optimization problem by suitable mathematical transformation function(s).In the context of multistage MRO problems, multiple and different stages required to produce a product are considered simultaneously to determine the best processing condition. A mass manufacturing process generally consist of multiple stages or multistage process (Shi & Zhou, 2009; Yao & Gao, 2009). In a multistage process, each intermediate or final stage may have several response characteristics of interest. Response(s) or response characteristic(s) at the final stage are primarily influenced by stage operating conditions. They are also dependent on various input conditions and response characteristics of previous stage(s). In other words, any intermediate stage input conditions and response characteristic(s) can significantly influence the final stage product quality characteristics (Tagaras & Lee, 1996; Williams & Peters, 1989). Thus, it is assumed that the process performance at intermediate stage(s) has an influence (direct or indirect) on the final product quality (Zantek, Wright, & Plante, 2002). In addition, any deviation from the specified target value(s) of a response(s) in the intermediate stage may also directly or indirectly influence the response characteristic(s) of the subsequent stages. This results in interdependency between stages in a multistage manufacturing situation. It is to be noted that the response characteristics at the final stage of a multistage manufacturing process defines the end product quality characteristics.For a multistage MRO problem, sequential or isolated optimization of each stage response characteristics may not lead to final stage optimal solution. This is primarily due to interdependency that exists between various stages and also because of correlated nature of response characteristics. This calls for two major considerations in solving a multistage MRO problem. First, the stage-wise empirical process modeling approach must consider within stage input variables and also the relevant input variable(s) or response(s) from any other previous stage(s). Second, the optimization approach must simultaneously optimize the product quality characteristics and determine the overall best setting conditions for all the stages.In this paper, optimizing the final stage multiple responses (i.e. product quality characteristics) in a multistage manufacturing system is basically referred to as a multistage multiple response optimization (MMRO) problem. The dimensionality of the input space of a MMRO problem is always considered higher than a single stage MRO problem. The response variables at various stages of a MMRO problem can be correlated and constrained. Thus, the mathematical formulation of a MMRO problem must consider stage constraint(s) with correlated nature of responses. Thus the complexity of a MMRO problem is much higher than a typical single stage MRO problem. The problem complexity also varies depending on a number of constraint conditions and number of independent and dependent variables that exist for a specific problem. In addition, the response space generated by objective function may be highly nonlinear and multimodal by nature. There are also possibilities of several disjoint feasible operating regions, which results in multiple local optima in the response space (Carlyle, Montgomery, & Runger, 2000). There is no guarantee that any single optimization strategy will always reach the global optimal point. In addition, finding the global best solution and implementing that optimal solution may not be also economical or practically feasible. Thus, it is always necessary to suggest best possible near-optimal solution(s) considering both the feasibility and sensitivity from a set of given solutions. It is worth mentioning that the near-optimal solution(s) are not exact optimal. However, it generally provides better solution(s) than existing for complex multidimensional response optimization problem.A solution approach that considers interrelationship among stages, handles the correlation among the response characteristics, determines the feasibility and sensitivity of a solution seems to be lacking for a MMRO problem. In addition, there is little evidence of research articles dedicated to address a complex MMRO problem from the quality engineering perspective. In view of the given lacunae, a simplified solution approach focusing on mathematical formulation and optimization of MMRO problem is proposed in this paper. The proposed approach mathematically defines an objective function and its associated constraints using modified desirability functions and an adaptive penalty-based maximin desirability index function. The ant colony-based metaheuristic search strategy is selected as an optimization technique to determine the best setting conditions for a constrained MMRO problem. The overall objective of this paper is to verify a comprehensive and simplified solution approach for a MMRO problem in specific manufacturing process configuration. The adoptability of the approach is confirmed based on a real life multistage manufacturing case.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides related study on MMRO problem in a concise manner. Section 3 discusses various multistage process configurations, proposed problem formulation and optimization search strategy. Section 4 presents a multistage industrial case to verify the effectiveness of the MMRO solution approach. The conclusion follows in Section 5 citing possible avenues of future research directions in this field of study.The existing literature on multistage manufacturing process can be classified into two broad categories, viz. controlling and monitoring the multistage process, and quality oriented design optimization (Shi & Zhou, 2009). The literature related to quality oriented design optimization can be further classified into two sub categories. The first sub category is related to quality inspected strategy. The second sub category is related to the process parameter design and optimization. The goal of process parameter design and optimization is to determine the best process operating conditions so as to produce high quality product. The research papers that specifically focus on multistage process parameter design and optimization are discussed below.From the perspective of control, Niaki and Davoodi (2009) designed a multivariate multistage scheme to monitor and diagnose the possible causes of out-of-control signals. Their approach considers several autocorrelated stages and several correlated quality characteristics within a particular stage. First order Multivariate Autoregressive Model (MAR) is developed from multistage process data to incorporate correlation and autocorrelations within the stage and between the stages, respectively. Artificial neural network model is used to control and classify the magnitude of mean shifts from the MAR generated observations. The proposed approach is a process control scheme for multistage multiple response problem rather than an optimization approach.From the perspective of optimization, Jin and Shi (1999) develop a stage indexed state space model to incorporate each stage error variance in multistage systems with multiple responses. The state space model has a linear structure and considers variance propagation due to deviations from the targets. The proposed model provides useful insight on sources of variation affecting the product quality. Some other relevant literature in the context of variance propagation for multi stations discrete parts manufacturing processes (e.g. rigid-part assembly and compliant-part assembly) are discussed by Zhou, Huang, and Shi (2003) and Liu, Shi, and Hu (2009). The existing research related to stage indexed state space model mostly focuses on discrete parts manufacturing processes. However, these models do not consider nonlinear relationship(s) between the input and response variables (Shi & Zhou, 2009).Zantek et al. (2002) propose a systematic approach to measure the impact of previous stage variability on the subsequent stage(s) and also on final stage product quality in a correlated multistage manufacturing scenario. They also determine the amount of investment required for process quality improvement at each stage. The simultaneous equation model and least square estimation method are used to estimate model parameters and variance components. They have studied the deviation from target at each stage and developed a model to study the impact of such variation on the final stage product quality characteristics. Their propose approach identifies the sources of variation in product quality rather than process parameter optimization in different stages.Bowling, Khasawneh, Kaewkuekool, and Cho (2004) determine an optimal process target levels by employing Markovian properties in order to maximize the expected profit associated with a multi-stage serial production system. The lower and upper specification limits were considered to be given for each stage, and it is assumed that each quality characteristic is governed by a normal distribution. In addition, 100 percent inspection is needed along with expected relevant cost information (e.g. scrap, and rework) to optimize the expected profit and arrive at optimal process target values for each stage. They also show the sensitivity of scrap and rework cost on expected profit. The assumption of continuous production, implementation of 100 percent inspection, static cost information, and the shift in process mean from specified design target of quality characteristic(s) seems key limitations of the work.Mukherjee and Ray (2008) propose an integrated solution approach using multivariate regression, desirability function and metaheuristic strategy to solve a two-stage multiple response optimization problem. Multivariate regression models are used to predict the multiple output characteristics at each stage. The desirability function approach converts the multiple output characteristics to single aggregated objective function. Metaheuristic strategy is used to optimize the single objective function and determine near-optimal solution(s). Their validation study is restricted to a two-stage system. The proposed formulation approach may not be efficient for multistage manufacturing system with higher number of stages or with added stage constraints. In addition, the solution quality may also deteriorate when engineering tolerance limits of the responses are narrower (or tight) (Bera & Mukherjee, 2012a). There are also possibilities of model over-fitting due to consideration of common design matrix for predicting all responses at any particular stage.Kwak, Kim, and Lee (2010) propose a ‘multistage PRIM’ procedure for optimizing multistage manufacturing processes. They propose maximizing the performances at each stage sequentially starting from final stage and going backward to initial stage, considering the relationship between the stages. Their approach determines optimum input variable conditions without an explicit prediction model. Data mining techniques, viz. ‘patient rule induction method’ (PRIM) (Friedman & Fisher, 1999) is used to seek the sub-regions of the input variable space for which the performances of the response was considerably better than the entire region. The multistage PRIM can handle high dimensional input space and is less sensitive to data outliers. However, it relies on large data observations. In addition, the multistage PRIM is a black-box type approach, and does not provide deeper insight on the manufacturing process variables. It also needs verification of multimodality and solution stability.Literature review till date reveal very few research articles contributing to systematic solution approach for a typical constrained MMRO problem with more than two sequential stages. The approaches proposed by different authors also seem to be inefficient to determine acceptable solution(s) for more than two stages with given stage constraint(s) and between stage interactions. Foreseeing the need for such a research work, a solution approach is proposed for a MMRO problem with more than two sequential stages. The following section provides details on proposed problem formulation and optimization approach for the MMRO problem.In this section, the multistage process configuration, the mathematical problem formulation and the optimization search strategy are presented in details.Three major multistage process configurations generally exist based on the flow of conforming items (Mandroli, Shrivastava, & Ding, 2006). These configurations are: (i) serial/sequential processes, (ii) assembly/convergent processes, and (iii) non-serial processes. In a serial manufacturing process, the input material passes through successive different processing stages which are ordered and required to manufacture the final product. Examples of serial configuration include aluminum rolled sheet manufacturing and steel sheet manufacturing processes. In assembly /convergent processes, each manufacturing stage has at most one successor but many predecessor work stations. Examples of assembly/convergent processes are automotive car assembly, bike assembly and robot assembly processes. In case of non-serial processes, the input materials take one of several paths through a manufacturing process. In such a situation, certain stage(s) may be involved in joining the outputs of multiple stations produced in a preceding stage. The semiconductor manufacturing process may be a suitable example of such non-serial process configuration. Our scope of research is limited to serial manufacturing configuration. The next subsection discusses on the MMRO problem formulation approach for a serial manufacturing configuration.This section is divided into two subsections. The first subsection presents the schematic representation of inputs and responses of a multistage serial manufacturing configuration. The second subsection describes the problem formulation approach based on an adaptive penalty function.A schematic diagram of various inputs and responses of a typical multistage serial manufacturing process is shown in Fig. 1. In such process, each stage may have a single or multiple responses, which are measured in different measuring scale. The responses at any particular stage may be correlated, depending on the preceding stage response characteristic(s) and the input conditions of other previous stage(s). Notations required for the problem formulation and description are provided below:Important Notations:SMaximum number of stages.sth stage of operation, s = 1, 2, 3, … , SNumbers of response variables at sth stage.In-process input variables (within stage variables) at sth stage of operation.sth stage input variables which are from any other previous stage(s) input or response variables.Input variables at first stage operation.(s+1)thstage input variables which are actually response characteristics (Ys) of immediate preceding stage (s).Response characteristics values at sth stage of operation.Response of jth characteristic at sth stage of operation.Prediction functional between responses Ys and predictorsXsP,X(s−1)R,XsIat sth stage.Predicted jth response characteristic using functional relationship hsat sth stage of operation for j = 1, 2, . ., rs.Functional relationship to determine individual desirability value from predicted response characteristic,y^j(s).Desirability parameters or exponents for jth response characteristic at sth stage.Individual desirability measure of jth response characteristic at sth stage of operation, where 0 ≤ dj(s) ≤ 1 anddj(s)=g(y^j(s))Functional relationship to convert into stage desirability.Desirability index at sth stage of operation, whereDs=qs(dj(s)).Minimum desirability value that should be achieved at sth stage.The proposed problem formulation and solution approach uses modified desirability functions, an adaptive penalty function (Gen & Cheng, 1996) and a ‘maximin’ desirability index function (Kim & Lin, 2000). The modified desirability function transforms all the predicted responses to scale-free desirability values at each processing stage. The minimum predicted desirability value among all the responses in a particular stage is considered as stage desirability index. After computing the stage-wise desirability index, an adaptive penalty function-based maximin desirability index function is used to convert the stage-desirability indices to a process-desirability index.The expression for the modified desirability function is in line with Derringer and Suich (1980) desirability function for a specific type of desired response [so-called LTB (Larger-the-Better), STB (Smaller-the-Better), or NTB (Nominal-The-Best)]. The only difference is to set the desirability value to a very small positive number (ɛ), rather than forcing it to a zero, if the predicted response falls outside the specified tolerance. This provides the necessary flexibility to differentiate between feasible and infeasible solutions during an iterative metaheuristic search process and attempts to avoid loss of information near the search boundary. The expressions of a modified desirability function for STB and NTB type of response are provided in Eqs. 1 and 2.(1)dj(s)=g(y^j(s)(X))={1ify^j(s)(X)≤yj(s)min[yj(s)max−y^j(s)(X)yj(s)max−yj(s)min]t1j(s)ifyj(s)min<y^j(s)(X)<τj(s)ɛify^j(s)(X)≥yj(s)max}(2)dj(s)=g(y^j(s)(X))={ɛify^j(s)(X)<yj(s)minory^j(s)(X)>yj(s)max[y^j(s)(X)−yj(s)minτj(s)−yj(s)min]t1j(s)ifyj(s)min≤y^j(s)(X)≤τj(s)[yj(s)max−y^j(s)(X)yj(s)max−τj(s)]t2j(s)ifτj(s)<y^j(s)(X)≤yj(s)max}In the above equations, dj(s) is the desirability value for the jth response at sth stage. dj(s) always lies between ɛ and 1.y^j(s)(X),yj(s)minandyj(s)maxare predicted response value, lower and upper tolerance bound of jth response at sth stage, respectively. t1 j(s) and t2 j(s) are the exponential desirability parameters for desirability conversion of jth response at sth stage. τj(s) is the target value of the jth response at sth stage. ɛ is a small positive constant (10−4) selected for this study.The objective function [as shown in Eq. (3) below] of the MMRO problem combines the ‘maximin’ desirability index function with a variant of adaptive penalty function proposed by Gen and Cheng (1996). The proposed formulation approach sets the process-desirability index to a very small value for infeasible solution, but remains the same for a feasible solution. The proposed formulation approach is suitable for serial process configuration, and is an extension of the APF MAXIMIN formulation approach (Bera & Mukherjee, 2012a). Thus, the overall multistage MRO problem can be formulated as(3)Maximize[(Minimums(Ds))×(1−1S∑s=1S(vsVMax)κ)]subject to(4)vs=Max{0,λs−Ds}∀s=1(1)S(5)VMax=Maxs{ɛ1,vs}∀s=1(1)S(6)Ds=Minj{dj(s)}∀j=1(1)rs,(7)(XsP)min≤XsP≤(XsP)max∀s=1(1)S,(8)(XsI)min≤XsI≤(XsI)max∀s=1(1)S,where Dsrepresents the stage desirability index at sth stage. λs is the minimum stage-desirability value that should be achieved by sth stage. ɛ1 is a small positive constant (10−4) used to avoid zero division situation. κ is a penalty coefficient and its value is 1 or 2. Eq. (4) works as a stage constraint and measures the magnitude of violation of stage-desirability with respect to minimum preset value (λs). The strength of the penalty depends on the maximum violation. High value of stage desirability index indicates that predicted response values for that stage are more desirable towards their respective targets. The above formulation approach has the ability to handle correlation among the response characteristics at any processing stage due to adaptation of the ‘maximin’ approach. In addition, it has the flexibility to preset a minimum desirability value as a stage constraint, based on relative importance (if exist) at any particular stage. It is also assumed that the input and response space are continuous. The following subsection discusses on the MMRO optimization strategy.The mathematical formulations given in Eqs. (3)–(8) depict a multistage multiple response constraint optimization problem. There are several disjoint feasible operating regions with multimodal objective function. In such a situation, a suitable constraint handling metaheuristic technique is needed to determine approximate or best near-optimal solutions. The performance of simulated annealing and genetic algorithm is observed to be poor for a constrained MRO problem (Mukherjee, PhD thesis, 2007). The ant colony optimization (ACO) performs better than the genetic algorithm (GA) for constraint nonlinear optimization problem (Kumar & Reddy, 2006). Researchers also reported (Bera & Mukherjee, 2012b; Socha & Dorigo, 2008) that the ant colony-based optimization strategies have immense potential to determine the near-optimal solution for nonlinear multimodal single and multiple response functions.The ant colony optimization in real space (ACOR) (Socha & Dorigo, 2008) is a variant of continuous optimization strategy which uses gaussian kernel probability density function to generate incremental construction of solution. A solution archive table structure is used to store the search information and corresponding fitness values. The solutions in the archive table guide the ants to search the search space effectively. In addition, ACOR strategy has the capability to handle input space correlation structure. A continuous ant colony optimization, using Mahalanobis distance-based diversification scheme, so-called CACO-MDS (Bera & Mukherjee, 2012b), is a hybrid continuous ant colony-based optimization strategy in which both diversification and intensification scheme is equally emphasized during iterative search. In this strategy, Mahalanobis distance is used for diversification scheme to avoid premature convergence to local optima. It considers variance and covariance structure of input space during search iteration. Hence, it efficiently handles the correlated input space. Instigated by research findings reported by Bera and Mukherjee (2012b), ACOR and CACO-MDS is adapted as optimization strategies in this research for determining near-optimal solutions. A solution framework for MMRO problem is provided in Fig. 2. This framework includes modeling techniques, problem formulation approach, and optimal search techniques to determine the best operating conditions for all stages in a serial multistage manufacturing process.A real life case from a rolled aluminum sheet manufacturing industry, located in eastern India, is considered for verifying the proposed approach. The manufacturing process configuration is a typical multistage serial manufacturing system. The commercial name of manufactured product is ‘closure stock’. Closure stock is actually a rolled aluminum sheet which is specifically used to manufacture pilfer-proof caps and vial seals. Customer specifies the critical quality requirements of the closure stock in terms of thickness, ultimate tensile strength (UTS), earing percentage, and printable surface. The earing is the non-random distribution of crystals within the alloy that create crests or valleys during deep drawing operation. The manufacturing process of closure stock is divided into eight different stages. The four different responses (e.g. average thickness, UTS, 45° earing, and 90° earing) are considered as the final product quality characteristics of closure stock. The properties of final product depend upon input conditions at each stage and plastic flow of metal and alloy compositions. The objective of this case study is to attain best process operating conditions at various stages (hot rolling, cold rolling, and annealing processing stage), which minimizes the earing effect (both 45° earing and 90° earing) and optimizes other response characteristics. The objectives of this specific case study has been set after understanding the metallurgical and manufacturing aspect of different processing stages. The product thickness is a nominal-the-best (NTB) type of quality characteristic, ultimate tensile strength (UTS) is a larger-the-better (LTB) type and earing (both 45° earing and 90° earing) is smaller-the-better (STB) type of quality characteristic. It was also observed that a correlation exists between the response characteristics (shown in Table 1). Thus, this is considered as a typical case of simultaneously optimizing four different correlated response characteristics in a multistage serial manufacturing environment.This section is divided into four subsections. The first subsection describes in-process (within stage variable) and response variable at each stage. The second subsection discusses the prediction models and significant control variables at each stage. The 3rd sub-section reports the multistage problem formulation and near-optimal solutions. The 4th subsection provides the sensitivity analysis of solutions.The number of in-process variables and response characteristics at each stage of manufacturing process are given in Table 2. This table also shows the number of observations collected from manufacturing process at individual stages for a period of six months at different time points. The detailed description of in-process variables and corresponding response characteristic(s) at each stage has not been provided owing to the company's norm on data confidentiality.The raw material used to manufacture closure stock is aluminum billet. The chemical composition of billet is aluminum (98.5 percent), and six different alloy elements. These alloy elements play an important role to determine the mechanical properties and granular structure in different stages of rolling process. It is observed from Table 2 that 60 in-process variables are used in this manufacturing process. The raw material (i. e. aluminum billet) represented as initial stage (S0). Stage-4 (S4) and Stage-7 (S7) are two different heat treatment process, and known as inter annealing and final annealing, respectively. There were no readings (or inspection measure) taken on response characteristic(s) just after the annealing stages. All the others stages have at least one response characteristic and the final stage has four different product quality characteristics. However, the details in-process-variable settings on hot rolling pass are not available. Thus, preheating and hot rolling operations are combined and defined as stage-1 (S1) operation. No prediction model is developed in S1, S4, and S7. But the available information in S1, S4, and S7 are used to build the prediction model in the next consecutive stages. The prediction models are developed only for five different cold rolling stages (viz. S2, S3, S5, S6, and S8) based on availability of information. The next subsection presents the prediction models and the significant variables in each stage.The parametric regression modeling technique is used to predict the responses in the above mentioned five different stages. The best subset regression model is used to determine the best fitting model with available number of predictor variables. The best subset regression identifies the model which achieves best fit with as few predictors as possible. The subset models can estimate regression coefficients and predict responses with lesser variance than a full scale model considering all the predictors (Chatterjee & Hadi, 2012). Hocking (1976) defined a criteria for the best fitted model selection. This criteria also mentions that Mallow's CP (Mallows, 1973) should be less than or equal to the total number of parameters in the model including intercept term. A few input variables are deleted or converted to ratio scale variable during model building to overcome the multicollinearity effect.The initial set of input variables in each stage have been selected from the material science literatures (Aderibigle, Oluwole, Atanda, & Ogundare, 2006; Es-Said et al., 1994; Forouzan & Akbarzadeh, 2007; Jahazi & Goudarzi, 1997) and also based on discussion with process engineers. These material science literatures describe the effect of processing variables on mechanical properties and earing effect of aluminum alloy strip. Table 3below presents the significant variables and model adequacy measures for the thickness prediction model at stage S2, S3, S5, and S6 and four response characteristics (or quality characteristics) prediction models at final stage S8.Graphical plots of model adequacy such as normality of error terms, homogeneity of error variance, and error correlation are checked for each model and found to be satisfactory. It is also observed from all parameters estimate at various stages that 35 out of 60 in-process variables actually influence the multistage responses. The eight different fitted model equations are given below:The fitted thickness prediction model equation at S2 is expressed as:(9)y1(2)=−0.1762+0.1166*x(4,0)I−0.0827*x(6,0)I+0.5223*x(1,2)P−0.1090*x(2,2)P−0.0943*x(3,2)P+0.1496*x(6,2)P+0.6452*x(7,2)P,The fitted thickness prediction model equations at S3, S5, and S6 are expressed as:(10)y1(3)=−0.1860+0.2134*x(1,3)P+0.4868*x(1,3)R+0.0750*x(2,3)P+0.2191*x(6,3)P+0.3480*x(7,3)P+0.1054*x(8,3)P(11)y1(5)=−0.1423−0.0526*x(3,0)I+0.7861*x(1,5)R+0.0496*x(6,5)P+0.0523*x(7,5)P+0.0186*x(1,4)I(12)y1(6)=−0.5273−0.1396*x(1,0)I+0.0766*x(6,0)I+0.5171*x(1,6)R−0.1148*x(2,6)P−0.1556*x(3,6)P−0.5041*x(5,6)P+0.2301*x(7,6)P+0.1524*x(1,4)IThe fitted four response characteristics prediction model equations at S8 are expressed as(13)y1(8)=0.0871−0.1281*x(1,0)I−0.1546*x(4,0)I+0.1307*x(1,8)P+0.9371*x(1,8)R+0.1506*x(2,8)P+0.2108*x(3,8)P+0.2871*x(5,8)P+0.1514*x(7,8)P+0.1024*x(1,4)I,(14)y2(8)=−0.0626−0.1186*x(3,0)I−0.5077*x(1,1)P+0.4991*x(3,1)P−0.3508*x(0,1)d−0.1176*x(1,4)I−0.4589*x(2,7)P+0.3376*x(4,7)P+0.0976*x(2,0)Ix(5,0)I,(15)y3(8)=+0.1565+0.7555*x(1,0)I+0.7200*x(4,0)I−0.7984*x(1,1)P−0.6054*x(1,3)d+0.2662*x(6,8)d−0.5296*x(1,4)I−0.3861*x(4,7)P+0.2993*x(2,0)Ix(5,0)I,and(16)y4(8)=+0.0962−0.5197*x(4,0)I−0.4856*x(3,6)d+0.3990*x(4,7)P+0.3585*x(1,7)P+0.2697*x(3,7)P−0.1882*x(2,0)Ix(5,0)I.In the above equations, yj(s) is the jth response characteristic at stage s. The superscript I, P, R and d represent input variable from any other previous stage, in-process-variable, response characteristics, derived input variable based on response characteristics between two different stages, respectively.x(i,0)Irepresents the ith variable at initial stage (S0),x(i,s)Pis the ith in-process variable at stage s,x(j,s)Ris the input variable for stage s, and it is actually the jth response of the immediate preceding stage (stage s-1) andx(p,q)dis a derived variable based on response characteristic of stage p and stage q, and works as a input for stage s.The next subsection provides detail on problem formulation and near-optimal process settings for this multistage process.The type of response characteristic(s) at different stages are provided in Table 3. The modified desirability function is selected according to the type of response (given in Eqs. 1 and 2). The general mathematical formulation for multistage problem is the same as given in Section 3.2.2. The range of all input variables (XsPandXsI) is within as [−1, +1]. The specific notation and parameter values for multistage case are given below:Total number of stages =S=8.Stages considered for prediction model development are: s = 2, 3, 5, 6, and 8.Minimum desirability value that should be achieved in each stage is same, i.e.λs=λ=0.3.Penalty coefficient value orκ=2.ɛ1=10−4.Number of prediction equations for each stage =rs={1fors=2,3,5,64fors=8.dj(s)=g(y^j(s)(X))Individual desirability measure of jth response characteristic at sth stage andy^j(s)(X)is the prediction equation. t1 j(s), t2 j(s) are desirability parameters for modified desirability function at sth stage, which is considered as linear in this case for s = 2, 3, 5, 6, 8.The optimal search strategy used to determine the near-optimal solutions is either the ant colony optimization in real space (ACOR) or CACO-MDS. The intrinsic parameters selected for each strategy are provided in Bera and Mukherjee (2012b). MATLAB 7.1 programming environment is used to perform 30 different computational runs and near-optimal solutions are recorded for each search strategy. The initial start point for any computational run is generated based on time dependent random number seed. Table 4provides summary statistics of the predicted process-desirability index. The process-desirability index is the minimum value among all the stage-desirability indices. The parametric and the non-parametric comparison tests are used to determine the best performing search strategy in the MMRO problem. Table 5shows the comparison test results. The near-optimal solutions (in coded unit) consist of optimum operating conditions for the 35 significant variables identified in this case. The rest 25 variables can be set anywhere within their operating ranges considering cost. The stage-wise desirability indices using CACO-MDS strategy are also provided in Table 6.It is observed from Table 4 that the solution's standard deviation of process-desirability index for CACO-MDS is lower than ACOR. Thus, the CACO-MDS is much more consistent in providing a better solution quality. Table 5 also shows the descriptive statistics of process-desirability index for the two different optimization strategies selected for the multistage case. Table 5 also shows that the average value of predicted process-desirability index for CACO-MDS strategy is significantly higher than ACOR. This indicates that CACO-MDS can provide better solutions than ACOR for a typical serial multistage problem. However CACO-MDS strategy requires higher computational time than ACOR.Three different sets of standard process operating practices are considered to measure the existing process-desirability range. Table 7shows the stage-wise desirability indices and corresponding process-desirability index for those existing standard practices.It is evident from Table 7 that the process-desirability index (DProcess) lies within 0.2577–0.3213 based on existing practices. Thus, there is a significant chance for improvement using best feasible near-optimal solution. However, due to company's restriction, there is no scope for carrying out a confirmatory trial, and thus pointing to a limitation of this case study.Sensitivity analysis measures the fluctuation of product quality characteristics due to small changes in significant input variables. If the process-desirability index does not get impacted much by small changes in the setting of these variables, the solution point can be considered as robust. To measure the sensitivity of a particular solution, a spherical region is generated around the solution point (s1, s2, ...., sp) such that(17)∑i=1p(xi−si)2≤r2,where r is the radius of spherical region and its value lies between 0 and δ. Here, δ is positive real number usually smaller than 0.1 for the coded data set. xi is the ith element of the new point generated within the spherical region. In this study the value of δ is considered as 0.05 (i.e. 5 percent operating range fluctuation of input variables).To determine a robust solution(s) from 30 near-optimal solutions, sensitivity analysis is carried out for all 30 solution points obtained by CACO-MDS. The center of spherical region is the solution point obtained from any independent computational run. Each solution point consists of 35 significant variables (i.e. 35 elements vector). 5000 points are generated inside this spherical region to measure the range of process-desirability index. By using sensitivity analysis, four near-optimal solutions are identified as robust. Table 8provides the descriptive statistics of these robust solution points.It is evident from Table 8 that the solution number (or computational run number) 6, 13, 17, and 20 are robust solution points. Solution number 13 is the best solution among all the four robust solutions. However, the implementation feasibility needs to be verified in actual process environment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an adaptive penalty-based problem formulation approach is verified for a multistage serial process configuration. The optimization search strategies are variants of the ant colony-based search strategy (ACOR, and CACO-MDS) that attempt to determine near-optimal solution for MMRO problems with more than two sequential stages. The key contributions of this research work are as follows:(i)The response prediction models developed at each stage consider in-process variables (or within stage process variables) and relevant input or response variables from previous stage(s). Thus, interrelationships among the various stages are taken into consideration for the MMRO problem.The proposed problem formulation approach is based on simultaneous optimization of multiple quality characteristics, considering the interdependency between the stages and the correlation among the responses, and determining the overall best operating conditions for all the stages. In addition, there is a flexibility to preset a minimum desirability value as a stage constraint based on relative importance of a particular stage.An advantage of using the ant colony-based search strategy is to provide multiple near-optimal solutions for a multimodal response space. In addition, a viable approach for sensitivity analysis of the near-optimal solutions is also demonstrated in Section 4.4.The ant colony-based CACO-MDS optimization strategy is verified to be suitable for MMRO problem, which was earlier found suitable for only single stage MRO problem.A comprehensive solution framework for the MMRO problem is provided in Section 3.2.3. The framework consists of three main aspects of MMRO, viz. modeling technique, problem formulation, and optimal search strategy.However, there are certain limitations of the proposed solution approach. The proposed solution approach does not incorporate each stage error variance due to fluctuation of input variables in a multistage manufacturing process. The problem formulation approach does not consider estimated model parameter uncertainty. Thus, there seems a scope to develop a solution approach using Bayesian reliability concept, so as to provide robust optimal solution for the MMRO problem. The robust approach may consider model parameter uncertainty and also stage error variance. In addition, there is further scope to develop mathematical transformation function which may converts the multiple responses to single objective optimization function and also are robust with respect to its parameters. There is a need to determine optimal sample size at each stage (considering multistage situation) for empirical modeling, so as to improve the precision of model parameter estimate and prediction capability. This is another limitation of this study. A comparative study of the proposed approach with other robust solution approaches may provide further insight and new direction of research.