@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A MIP-based approach to solve the prize-collecting local access network design problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have addressed a new variant of the local access network design problem.The telecom company fixes a fraction of customer prizes that should be served.It is a matheuristic to decide the customers to serve and the network to build.The approach solves instances with up to 86,000 nodes and 116,000 edges.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Network loading,Local access,Prize-collecting,Matheuristic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new combinatorial optimization problem that can be used to model the deployment of broadband telecommunications systems in which optical fiber cables are installed between a central office and a number of end-customers. In this capacitated network design problem the installation of optical fiber cables with sufficient capacity is required to carry the traffic from the central office to the end-customers at minimum cost. In the situation motivating this research the network does not necessarily need to connect all customers (or at least not with the best available technology). Instead, some nodes are potential customers. The aim is to select the customers to be connected to the central server and to choose the cable capacities to establish these connections. The telecom company takes the strategic decision of fixing a percentage of customers that should be served, and aims for minimizing the total cost of the network providing this minimum service. For that reason the underlying problem is called the Prize-Collecting Local Access Network Design problem (PC-LAN).We propose a branch-and-cut approach for solving small instances. For large instances of practical importance, our approach turns into a mixed integer programming (MIP) based heuristic procedure which combines the cutting-plane algorithm with a multi-start heuristic algorithm. The multi-start heuristic algorithm starts with fractional values of the LP-solutions and creates feasible solutions that are later improved using a local improvement strategy.Computational experiments are conducted on small instances from the literature. In addition, we introduce a new benchmark set of real-world instances with up to 86,000 nodes, 116,000 edges and 1500 potential customers. Using our MIP-based approach we are able to solve most of the small instances to proven optimality. For more difficult instances, we are not only able to provide high-quality feasible solutions, but also to provide certificate on their quality by calculating lower bounds to the optimal solution values.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Providing future-proof broadband Internet connections is currently a major infrastructural issue worldwide. More and more information is shared across the Internet and demand for higher data rates increases with new services. The Digital Agenda for Europe1Digital Agenda (May 2010), http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/10/581.1of the European Commission stresses the importance of information and communications technologies and states that “Half of European productivity growth over the past 15years was already driven by information and communications technologies [...] and this trend is likely to accelerate.” It issues the goal of achieving “internet speeds of 30megabit per second or above for all European citizens, with half European households subscribing to connections of 100megabit per second or higher” by the year 2020. The German government decided to place strong emphasis on the expansion of broadband communications in one of its latest economic stimulus packages.2Breitbandstrategie der Bundesregierung (February 2009), http://www.zukunft-breitband.de/BBA/Navigation/Service/publikationen,sdid=290026.html.2The rather challenging aim, formulated in 2009, is to provide 75% of all households nationwide with 50megabit per second connections by the end of 2014. Reaching this goal is only possible by rolling-out the fiber-optic access networks on a broad scale.In telecommunication network planning, customer nodes are associated to physical locations representing buildings, business locations or single households. The following strategies (known under a common name FTTx) are used for the development of access networks:•Fiber-To-The-Curb (FTTC) (or Fiber-To-The-Node, FTTN): Part of the connection from central offices to customers consists of optical fibers, but end-transmission lines are still made of copper. Besides the fiber-optic connections that need to be established, also multiplexing devices have to be installed. These devices receive signals from multiple customers via copper connections and aggregate them on a high-speed fiber-optic line.Fiber-To-The-Building (FTTB): Optical fiber runs all the way to a building. Multiplexing devices (usually installed in the basement) aggregate signals from short-distance copper lines to the subscribers within the building onto a fiber-optic line.Fiber-To-The-Home (FTTH): Connection between subscribers and central offices runs completely over an optical fiber.Which strategy is employed in a particular case depends on various prerequisites. For instance, it depends on how densely the planning areas are populated (e.g., urban vs. rural areas).Many local telecommunication carriers are realizing FTTH or FTTB projects. Deutsche Telekom AG announced plans for the connection of thousands of households in ten German cities with FTTH. Simultaneously, FTTC solutions are realized by extending VDSL connections. The largest Austrian telecommunication provider, Telekom Austria Group, is going to invest one billion Euro in the modernization of the fixed net infrastructure.3Press release (July 3, 2009), http://www.telekomaustria.com/presse/news/2009/0703-telecommunication-infrastructure-en1.php.3The planning of such access networks is a highly complex task. Manual planning does not allow for finding provably close-to-optimal solutions. In the last years various uncapacitated optimization problems have been proposed in the context of FTTx planning (see, e.g. Arulselvan, Bley, Gollowitzer, Ljubić, & Maurer (2011), Leitner & Raidl (2011), Gollowitzer & Ljubić (2011), Gollowitzer, Gouveia, & Ljubić (2011)). These optimization problems are mainly concerned with the design of the underlying network topology, ignoring many hardware parameters. On a more detailed level, the following aspects have to be considered in addition: There are cost/capacity relations for various active and passive components, such as transponders, splitters, fibers and cables. There are overhead cost for trenching. Also existing infrastructure has to be taken into account. There are two possibilities to deploy fiber-optic access networks: customers might be connected via passive optical networks (PON) or via Point-to-point. In the first case, signals for up to 64 customers are transmitted on a single fiber and are split on the optical level somewhere between the central office and the customer. In the second case a unique fiber starting at the central office is dedicated to each customer.This paper deals with the detailed planning of point-to-point FTTH/FTTB telecommunication networks with a given coverage rateα, (0<α⩽1). This coverage rate is usually determined by a network carrier and represents the minimal fraction of potential customers that should be offered the service. Fig. 1shows two deployment scenarios for a real world instance with coverage rates of 0.6 and 0.9, respectively. Square nodes denote customers. The circle node denotes the central office r. The served customers are depicted with dark squares. Lines denote the denote installed connections in the solution.In the context of FTTH/FTTB the potential customers are particular physical locations. Three important features are associated to each potential customer. Firstly, the number of subscribers (e.g., apartments and/or offices) in the building. This is denoted as the customers prize. Secondly, the number of optical fibers required to connect this potential customer is called its demand. Thirdly, there is a setup cost of installing a suitable device at the customer location. The available hardware (e.g., splitter devices in case of FTTB) determines the demand and cost for each customer.For each customer selected for being served, there must be a fiber-optic line running to the central office. The company provides different types of cables. Each type of cable is characterized by two features. One is its capacity and represents the number of optical fibers. The other is its cost. For connecting two sites one may need several cables. Each combination of cables leads to a module with a given capacity and cost. The capacity of a module is simply the sum of the fibers included in the cables. The cost of a module is the sum of the cable costs plus the installation on the roads taking into account the length. The goal is to decide:•which subset of customers to connect so that at least a fraction ofαof the overall customers’ prizes is covered, andwhich modules should be installed along the edges so that the total demand for selected customers can be routed through the network at minimum cost.The fiber-optic lines that are necessary to connect a certain customer need not to run along the same single path through the network.In this work we study exact and heuristic approaches to this problem of practical relevance. We first propose a branch-and-cut approach that is capable of solving small instances. However, due to the complexity of the problem and size of the instances in real applications, it is difficult to establish algorithmic approaches that ensure global cost-minimal solutions. In this work we also propose a new MIP-based approach that is based on an interplay between the cutting plane approach and a multi-start heuristic. The multi-start heuristic starts with fractional values of the LP-solutions and creates feasible solutions that are improved using a local improvement strategy. We introduce a new benchmark set of real-world instances with up to 86,000 nodes, 116,000 edges and 1500 potential customers. For these instances our computational experiments show that the MIP-based approach outperforms the alternative approach of only using the multi-start heuristic without MIP information.A preliminary version of this paper was presented in the International Network Optimization Conference 2011 (Ljubić, Putz, & Salazar-González, 2011).We are given an undirected and connected graphG=(V,E)with a noder∈Vrepresenting the central office (or central server or access to the backbone network) and a set of potential customersK⊆V⧹{r}. To each potential customerk∈K, a positive demanddk, a positive prizepkand a positive setup costckare assigned. We denote byp0=α∑k∈Kpkthe minimum customer prize to collect. LetMebe the set of modules that can be installed on edgee∈E, each onem∈Meassociated with a positive capacityue,mand a costce,m. We assume that modules are sorted such thatue,m<ue,m+1. The optimization problem of our interest is the selection of the customers to be served, the single-source multiple-sink routing, and installation of at most one module on every edge. The connection from the central office to a customer can be seen as a flow that is allowed to split apart. Thus we are speaking of a bifurcated flow. As a result, an optimal solution of the problem is not necessarily a tree in the graph. Ifα=1, the problem is known as the Local Access Network Design Problem (LAN), or the Single Source Network Loading Problem (SSNLP). For0<α<1, we refer to this problem as the Prize-Collecting Local Access Network Design Problem (PC-LAN). Fig. 2depicts an example with an input graph and a solution of the PC-LAN instance withα=0.7. The graphG=(V,E)has 14 nodes. For each edge e the lengthleof e is the Euclidean distance. Solid lines represent modules withue,m=100andce,m=120le. Dashed lines represent the module withue,m=40andce,m=10le. Rectangle nodes are customers with their demandsdkwritten at the corresponding labels. Customer prizes and cost are defined aspk=dk,ck=dk/2, respectively. A coverage rate of 70% is requested, hencep0=0.7∑k∈Kdk=80.5. The served demand by the optimal solution in the figure is 85.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
