@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An aggressive reduction scheme for the simple plant location problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The simple plant location problem is a classical problem in OR.We present an aggressive reduction scheme for it.The reduction procedures are based on optimality arguments and linear programming.Typically over 98% of the variables are eliminated.This enables larger instances than ever before to be solved to proven optimality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Facility location,Combinatorial optimization,Integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pisinger et al. introduced the concept of ‘aggressive reduction’ for large-scale combinatorial optimization problems. The idea is to spend much time and effort in reducing the size of the instance, in the hope that the reduced instance will then be small enough to be solved by an exact algorithm.We present an aggressive reduction scheme for the ‘Simple Plant Location Problem’, which is a classical problem arising in logistics. The scheme involves four different reduction rules, along with lower- and upper-bounding procedures. The scheme turns out to be particularly effective for instances in which the facilities and clients correspond to points on the Euclidean plane.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Simple Plant Location Problem (SPLP), sometimes called the Uncapacitated Facility Location Problem or Uncapacitated Warehouse Location Problem, is a fundamental and much-studied problem in the Operational Research literature. A formal definition is as follows. We are given a set I of facilities and a set J of clients. For any i∈I, the fixed cost of opening facility i is fi. For any i∈I and any j∈J, the cost of serving client j from facility i is cij. The goal is to decide which facilities to open, and to assign each client to an open facility, at minimum cost.An excellent survey of the early work on the SPLP is given by Krarup and Pruzan (1983). In that survey, it is also formally proven that the SPLP is NP-hard, by reduction from the Set Covering Problem. More recent surveys on theory, algorithms and applications include Cornuéjols, Nemhauser, and Wolsey (1990), Labbé and Louveaux (1997), Labbé, Peeters, and Thisse (1995) and Verter (2011).Some instances of the SPLP arising in practice have hundreds or even thousands of clients. Moreover, instances with large numbers of facilities and clients arise if one takes a continuous location problem and then ‘discretises’ it, by modeling continuous regions (approximately) as sets of discrete points. This led us, in our former paper (Letchford & Miller, 2012), to devise fast heuristics and bounding procedures for large-scale instances. In this paper, we move on to consider how to solve such instances to proven optimality (or near-optimality).Pisinger, Rasmussen, and Sandvik (2007) introduced the concept of ‘aggressive reduction’ for large-scale combinatorial optimization problems. The idea is to spend much time and effort in reducing the size of the instance, using a suitable collection of variable-elimination tests. The hope is that the reduced instance will then be small enough to be solved by an exact algorithm.In this paper, we present an aggressive reduction scheme for the SPLP, which uses four different reduction procedures. The scheme turns out to be particularly effective when the facilities and clients correspond to points on the Euclidean plane, and the cost of assigning a client to a facility is proportional to the distance between them. Indeed, for this case, we are able to solve instances that are significantly larger than those previously solved in the literature.The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 is a brief literature review. In Section 3, we present two reduction procedures that are ‘bound free’, in the sense that no lower or upper bound is needed to apply them. In Section 4, we present some simple lower- and upper-bounding procedures, based on linear programming (LP). In Section 5, we present two more reduction procedures, that use the bounds in combination with LP duality. Extensive computational results are given in Section 6, and concluding remarks are given in Section 7.We assume throughout the paper that the fiand cijare positive integers. We also let m denote the number of facilities and n the number of clients.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
