@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stability and chaos in demand-based pricing under social interactions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The effectiveness of demand-based pricing under social interactions in moderating demand fluctuations is studied.Results show that the demand dynamics can exhibit chaos when social interactions are at work.Social interactions and customers’ forward-looking behavior may offset the intended effect of a demand-based pricing.Operational policies must be examined in the appropriate context, e.g., under the influence of social interactions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in service industries,Demand dynamics,Forward-looking,Social interaction,Chaos,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Demand-based pricing is often used to moderate demand fluctuations so as to level resource utilization and increase profitability. However, such pricing policies may not be effective when customers’ purchase decisions are influenced by social interactions. This paper investigates the demand dynamics, under a demand-based pricing policy, of a frequently purchased service when social interactions are at work. Customers are heterogeneous and adaptively forward-looking. Existing customers’ re-purchase decisions are based on adaptively formed price expectations and reservation prices. Potential customers are attracted through social interactions with existing customers. The demand process is characterized by a two-dimensional dynamical system. It is shown that the equilibrium demand can be unstable. For a given reservation price distribution, we first analyze the stability of the equilibrium demand under various scenarios of social interactions and customers’ adaptively forward-looking behavior, and then characterize their dynamics using the bifurcation plots, Lyapunov exponents and return maps. The results indicate that the demand process can be stable, periodic or chaotic. The study shows that the intended effect of a demand-based pricing policy may be offset by customers’ adaptively forward-looking behavior under the influence of social interactions. In fact, the interplay of these factors may even lead to chaotic demand dynamics. The result highlights the complex dynamics produced by a simple demand-price mechanism under social interactions. For a demand-based pricing strategy to be effective, companies must take social interactions into account.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The demand for services in industry sectors like energy, telecommunication, transportation, restaurants, theme parks, hotels, etc., often fluctuates following some peak-and-off-peak patterns. During peak periods, demand cannot be always met due to capacity constraints; while capacity may become excessive in off-peak periods. Indeed, demand fluctuations pose real challenges to service operations management. A typical strategy in practice to level the uneven demand is to adopt a peak/off-peak pricing policy or a so-called demand-based pricing policy. The trick is to shift some demand from peak periods to off-peak periods so as to level capacity utilization and increase profitability. Such pricing strategy was adopted, e.g., in electricity supply (Chen, Wu, & Fu, 2012), restaurant operations (Kimes & Wirtz, 2002), and transportation management (Hensher & Puckett, 2007), etc.From the perspective of capacity allocation and resource management, the effectiveness of such demand-based pricing policies can be critical to a firm’s competitiveness. From the perspective of customer service, such policies, if executed appropriately, can enhance a service provider’s reputation. However, in the age of social media (e.g., social networking sites, on-line virtual communities, and instant messengers, etc.), such policies must be tested or evaluated in the context of social interactions. Pioneered by Becker (1974), social interactions are defined as “particular forms of externalities, in which the actions of a reference group act on an individual’s preferences” (Scheinkman, 2004). Customers’ purchase decisions and future consumption intentions do not only depend on the service prices, but also on factors such as price expectations, reservation prices, and the influences from others through social interactions.11For instance, surveys reveal that 81percent US respondents indicated posts from their friends directly influenced their purchase decisions; see Forbes, 7 May 2012, “Are Brands Wielding More Influence In Social Media Than We Thought?”, available at http://www.forbes.com/sites/marketshare/2012/05/07/are-brands-wielding-more-influence-in-social-media-than-we-thought/.For frequently purchased services, customers’ purchase decisions may be always made due to forward-looking propensities. Specifically, before making purchase decisions, customers have price expectations and reservation prices. Customers’ forward-looking behavior has been widely studied and empirically tested, for example, documented in Nevo, Turner, and Williams (2015), subscribers are forward-looking in consuming the residential broadband service, which is charged by the usage-based pricing policy. Social interactions with others may influence customers’ price expectations and reservation prices thus purchase decisions. This is especially true for new customers who have had no prior experiences for reference. Such customer behavioral factors taking effect during social interactions can potentially induce variability and unpredictability to the demand process, to the extent of chaos, leading to a complex dynamical service system. When a demand-based pricing policy is implemented in such situations, the goal of leveling demand may not be achieved as intended.The purpose of this study is to investigate the impact of social interactions on the effectiveness of demand-based pricing policies in service operations. We focus on the stability and chaotic behavior of the demand process in a service system. Customers are assumed to be heterogeneous and adaptively forward-looking in terms of their reservation prices when making purchase decisions. We divide customers into two separate groups, namely existing customers who have purchase experiences from the service system that influence their price expectations and reservation prices, and potential customers who are attracted to the service company due to social interactions with existing customers. We model the demand process by a two-dimensional dynamical system. Applying chaos theories to a complex dynamical system, we analyze the impact of these behavioral factors on the demand dynamics. We first solve the equilibrium of the system and then characterize its stability through the Jacobian matrix valued at the equilibrium point. Based on a specific reservation price distribution function, we analyze the dynamics of the demand process under various scenarios of social interactions and customers’ forward-looking behavior. Bifurcation plots, Lyapunov exponents, and return maps are used to characterize the dynamic patterns of the system. It is demonstrated that the demand process can be stable, periodic or even chaotic due to social interactions, and their interplay with customers’ adaptively forward-looking behavior. When the system becomes chaotic, the effectiveness of a demand-based pricing policy in moderating demand fluctuations may be compromised. The result highlights the need to appropriately consider the context in which an operational policy is implemented.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the literature review. Section 3 presents the demand dynamical model with heterogeneous and adaptively forward-looking customers in the context of social interactions. In Section 4, we analyze the dynamic behavior of the demand process by simulating various scenarios of social interactions, followed by discussions and managerial implications. Section 5 concludes the paper with future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
