@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The bullwhip effect: Progress, trends and directions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bullwhip research is categorised into empirical, experimental, and analytical approachesAssumptions and validity of bullwhip models are examinedTypical elements, demand, forecasts, delays, policies and coordination are identifiedWe highlight emerging trends and future bullwhip research opportunities

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bullwhip effect,Supply chain management,Literature review,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The bullwhip effect refers to the phenomenon where order variability increases as the orders move upstream in the supply chain. This paper provides a review of the bullwhip literature which adopts empirical, experimental and analytical methodologies. Early econometric evidence of bullwhip is highlighted. Findings from empirical and experimental research are compared with analytical and simulation results. Assumptions and approximations for modelling the bullwhip effect in terms of demand, forecast, delay, replenishment policy, and coordination strategy are considered. We identify recent research trends and future research directions concerned with supply chain structure, product type, price, competition and sustainability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The bullwhip effect is one of the most popular and celebrated concepts in the operations management/research field. The term ‘bullwhip’ was coined to describe the effect by which slow moving consumer demand creates large swings in production for the suppliers at the other end of the supply chain. This is analogous to the handle of the bullwhip causing a loud crack at the popper. The bullwhip effect is sometimes referred to as ‘demand amplification’, ‘variance amplification’ or the ‘Forrester effect’. This effect becomes significant when the cost from fluctuations in production/ordering outweighs the cost of holding inventory. Over the years, evidence has suggested that bullwhip costs play a pivotal role in some businesses. Bullwhip costs can be associated with setting up and shutting down machines, idling and overtime in the workload, hiring and firing of the workforce, excessive upstream inventory, difficulty in forecasting and scheduling, systems nervousness, and poor supplier/customer relationships, amongst other consequences.The bullwhip effect also has a close link with the philosophy of lean production (Ohno, 1988). Mura—the waste of unevenness—is the failure to smooth demand and is recognised as the root cause of both Muda (the seven lean wastes) and Muri (the waste of overburden). Indeed Ohno (1988) discusses the benefits of bullwhip avoidance:“The slower but consistent tortoise causes less waste and is much more desirable than the speedy hare that races ahead and then stops occasionally to doze. The Toyota Production System can be realized only when all the workers become tortoises.”Since the 1990s, a large amount of literature on the bullwhip effect and its various proofs, interpretations, and remedies has emerged and continues to grow. A search in the Web of Science with the keyword ‘bullwhip effect’ returns 582 papers, highlighting a strong academic interest. This review summarises the achievements and findings of the past 20 years regarding the bullwhip effect and identifies possible future research directions. However, we do not confine our review solely to this 20-year interval, since much research on the macroeconomic, microeconomic and operational levels have a longer history and we include older contributions when they provide important contextual information.Due to the various orientations and disciplines of research papers under this topic, a statistical systematic review is not appropriate. Rather, this review is narrative in nature as this allows more flexibility. We started collecting papers with a keyword search from the databases of Web of Science, EBSCO, and ScienceDirect. We have searched with the keywords ‘bullwhip effect’, ‘demand amplification’ and ‘variance amplification’ in the title, abstract and keyword sections. We also conducted a careful citation search both prospectively and retrospectively. This led to 455 papers being reviewed and over 150 articles being cited in this paper. Certainly, the page limitation has restricted us from citing all the papers we collected. However we have tried to include all the papers that are both relevant and significant. We have attempted to be as inclusive as possible but we are aware that we may have missed some important contributions on the topic. For the sake of readability and succinctness, we have avoided deep technical details. However, we do discuss issues such as assumptions and cost criteria since they are an essential basis for critical evaluation.Several reviews have been devoted to the bullwhip effect. For example, Geary, Disney, and Towill (2006) classified five routes to increase our knowledge of bullwhip effect and 10 principles to reduce it. Miragliotta (2006) reviewed bullwhip research in three categories; empirical assessment, causes, and remedies, and then proposed a new taxonomy to model this problem. Giard and Sali (2013) categorised 53 bullwhip papers within 13 coordinates, including modelling approaches, demand models, measures, and causes. Other reviews are more conceptually oriented, attempting to offer a new perspective on bullwhip (Towill, Zhou, & Disney, 2007).Some reviews are not solely confined to the bullwhip effect, but also cover other supply chain modelling issues (Beamon, 1998; Min & Zhou, 2002; Sarimveis, Patrinos, Tarantilis, & Kiranoudis, 2008). These papers assess general supply chain modelling methods, in which most bullwhip models have been categorised as stochastic analytical/simulation models. The bullwhip effect has also been frequently mentioned in review papers dedicated to other topics, such as information sharing (Sahin & Robinson, 2002) and reverse logistics (Govindan, Soleimani, & Kannan, 2014). As a result of this review, we identify research trends which require innovative models for bullwhip effect and we propose possible directions for future research.The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we provide background information; a brief research history of the bullwhip effect, costs that are typically considered to be relevant to bullwhip, and bullwhip measures. In Section 3 we critically review research based on empirical and experimental methodologies. Bullwhip modelling specifics are dealt with in Section 4. Section 5 concludes and proposes future research directions by identifying a number of trends in bullwhip research that have emerged during recent years.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
