@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The role of fairness in competitive supply chain relationships: An experimental study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The applicability of profit-maximizing predictions of supply chain contracting games.The dynamic behavior in the presence of competition at the supplier level.Supply chain members do not fully exploit their strategic advantages.The significant role of fairness in competitive supply chain relationships.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Fairness,Competitive supply chain,Wholesale-price contract,Behavioral operations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper examines whether the conclusions of standard supply-chain models carry over to repeated supply-chain relationships. The past models assume profit-maximizing agents in one-shot games. In these games, an essential unresolved issue concerns which parties in the supply chain have greater power to extract a larger share of supply chain profit: the manufacturer or the retailer. In particular, we consider a two-manufacturer/one-retailer supply chain over repeated periods of interaction. We find that the experimental results are closest to a symmetric outcomes hypothesis: the supply chain members tend to choose similar margin levels and profits tend to be more fairly divided than non-cooperative, game-theoretic, supply-chain models predict. Individual supply chain member's behavior shows evidence of fairness concerns for supply chain members. These results indicate the significant role of fairness in competitive supply chain relationships, even in a scenario that is designed to favor one supply chain member over the others.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the evolution of distribution methods in recent decades, practitioners and academics are studying supply chain relationships assuming various theoretical forms of channel power relations. For example, following a standard structure, supply chain contracting models assume leader–follower behavior with the supplier acting as leader and the retailer as follower (e.g., Aust & Buscher, 2012; Chen et al., 2012; Choi, 1991; Coughlan, 1985; He, Prasad, & Sethi, 2009; Hsieh, Wu, & Huang, 2008; Huang & Li, 2001; Lau, Lau, & Zhou, 2006; Lee & Staelin, 1997; McGuire & Staelin, 1983; Spengler, 1950; Yao & Liu, 2005). An alternate form of leader–follower relationship involves the retailer playing the role of leader (e.g., Aust & Buscher, 2012; Choi, 1991; Lau et al., 2006; Lee & Staelin, 1997); this formulation reflects the growing belief among practitioners that retailers are gaining power in the supply chain. In addition, several papers have considered a more symmetrical relationship between suppliers and retailers (e.g., Aust & Buscher, 2012; Choi, 1991; Huang & Li, 2001; Jeuland & Shugan, 1983; Lau et al., 2006; Lee & Staelin, 1997; Yao & Liu, 2005). An essential unresolved issue concerns which parties in the supply chain have greater power to extract a larger share of supply chain profit: the manufacturer or the retailer. All these models, however, have limitations as to how adequately they can capture channel power relations.The above models of supply channel relationships assume two things: (1) they are one-shot games (some involving a sequence of two stages played once) and (2) supply chain members’ behavior is entirely profit-maximizing. In this paper, we study a supply chain experiment that considers empirical challenges to these two assumptions.A challenge to the first assumption is that the models (Manufacturer Stackelberg Leadership, Retailer Stackelberg Leadership, Vertical Nash, Collusion, etc.) generally are intended to describe business situations that involve repeated interactions in real applications. In such repeated contexts, it is natural to allow competitive dynamics to come into play – particularly since the actions taken in the previous period provide a natural focal or reference point that may anchor and influence subsequent play. Such competitive dynamics can induce a player to strategically cooperate with rivals in repeated interactions (e.g., Dreber, Fudenberg, & Rand, 2014; Fischbacher, Gächter, & Quercia, 2012; Sonnemans, Schram, & Offerman, 1999) or to behave in what amounts to a cooperative fashion when they take into consideration future interactions (Reuben & Suetens, 2012).A challenge to the second assumption is that players interacting over time may also come to consider their own outcomes in relation to the outcomes of the other players. In particular, an important related behavioral theory with dynamic (as well as static) implications arises from considerations of perceptions of fairness in previous periods (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler, 1986; Rabin, 1993). In fact, cross-sectional survey research in the past three decades has shown that fairness considerations among channel members play a significant role in channel relationships (e.g., Anderson & Weitz, 1992; Frazier, 1983; Heide & John, 1988; Kumar, 1996; Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995; Li, Karande, & Zhou, 2009), though it is unknown the extent to which fairness concerns influence channel power relations. Furthermore, the experimental economics literature has challenged the equilibrium predictions that assume profit-maximization behavior by showing extensive evidence on the importance of fairness in explaining negotiations behavior. Until recently, however, economics-based theoretical research on supply chain relationships has mostly disregarded fairness as a factor. A notable exception consists of Cui, Raju, and Zhang (2007), who consider the implications of incorporating fairness into supply chain research in a simple single-manufacturer/single-retailer dyad. Caliskan-Demirag, Chen, and Li (2010) extend the results of Cui et al. (2007) to nonlinear demand functions. And recently, Du, Nie, Chu, and Yu (2014) incorporate supply chain member's preferences of reciprocity into a dyadic channel.Only a few studies, however, have examined the role of fairness in an experimental context by investigating the extent to which fairness model specifications describe supply chain members’ behavior. Loch and Wu (2008), for example, study the role of social preferences in the context of repeated interactions between one supplier and one retailer and find that supply chain members consistently deviate from profit maximizing behavior, which suggests cooperation between members over time. Ho and Su (2009) and Ho, Su, and Wu (2014) examine peer-induced fairness concerns and distributional fairness concerns in the one-supplier/two-retailer setting. However, no study has examined the impact of fairness in supply chain relationships in the presence of competition between suppliers. We accordingly study the applicability of profit-maximizing predictions, as compared to competing models, when there are repeated interactions in the context of two suppliers and one retailer.The current paper complements previous experimental oligopoly game literature by examining the implications of fairness among supply chain participants with repeated interactions. This builds on past work that examines simultaneous and sequential quantity and price competition, dynamics and convergence in oligopolistic markets, and collusion (summarized effectively in an extensive overview of recent oligopoly experiments by Potters & Suetens, 2013). This past work includes the role of repeated interaction in quantity and price competition (e.g., Brandts & Guillen, 2007), game dynamics (e.g., Davis, 2011; Huck, Normann, & Oechssler, 2002), and tacit collusion (e.g., Bruttel, 2009; Hampton & Sherstyuk, 2012), but it does not consider fairness.Overall, the intended contribution of the current paper is to add to the empirical work on supply chain relationships by providing laboratory experiments designed to examine (1) the dynamic behavior in a repeated interaction context in the presence of competition at the supplier level and (2) the applicability of profit-maximizing predictions of supply chain contracting games as compared to fairness models. In our experiments, we particularly consider the supply chain structure considered by Choi (1991) involving two manufactures selling through a common retailer.We begin by reviewing the one-shot game supply-chain model of Choi (1991) in which two manufacturers sell through a common retailer. In this context, we also introduce a formulation of fairness theory suggested by Fehr and Schmidt (1999).Following Choi (1991), the two-manufacturer/one-retailer model can be described as follows. Suppose there are downward sloping demand functions:(1)qi=a−bpi+γpj,i,j=1,2,i≠j,a>0,b>γ>0,where qiis the demand for brand i at retail price pi(given that the retail price of the other brand j is pj) and γ describes the degree of substitutability between the two products (Choi, 1991; Ingene & Parry, 1995; Jeuland & Shugan, 1988; McGuire & Staelin, 1983). When γ = 0, the model represents two (independent) single-manufacturer/single-retailer bilateral monopoly channels. It is also assumed that the own-price effect exceeds the cross-price effect (so that b >γ).The profit functions for manufacturer 1, manufacturer 2, and the retailer, respectively, are(2)ΠM1=(w1−cm1)q1,ΠM2=(w2−cm2)q2,andΠR=∑i=12(mi−cri)qi≡∑i=12ΠRi;where wiis manufacturer i's wholesale price, miis the retail margin on product i (wheremi≡pi−wi, the retail price less the wholesale price),cmiis manufacturer i's variable cost of producing its product, andcriis the retailer's handling cost for product i. In this notation,ΠRirepresents the retailer's profit from product i andΠMirepresents manufacturer i’s profit (manufacturer i is the producer of product i). Equilibrium wholesale prices and retail margins (w1, w2, m1, and m2) for a single-period game are calculated by maximizing the three profit functions in Eq. (2).A different sequence of optimization calculations is used to compute three of the competing profit-maximizing equilibrium predictions (see Choi, 1991). Manufacturer Stackelberg leadership involves the manufacturers simultaneously choosing w1 and w2 in Stage 1 and the retailer choosing m1 and m2 in Stage 2. Retailer Stackelberg leadership involves the retailer choosing m1 and m2 in Stage 1 and the manufacturers choosing w1 and w2 in Stage 2. The Vertical Nash game involves the manufacturers and retailer all simultaneously setting w1, w2, m1, and m2 in a single stage.Fig. 1, for the simplifying case of no cross-price effects (γ = 0), describes the possible equilibrium concepts for a single-period game, such as Manufacturer Stackelberg (MS), Retail Stackelberg (RS), and Vertical Nash (VN). The equilibrium outcomes for these three single-period games provide a starting point for describing what can happen in alternate contexts, including multi-period, repeated games.In the left-hand panel of Fig. 1, the VN equilibrium lies at the intersection of the reaction functions (first-order conditions) of one manufacturer and the retailer. The MS equilibrium lies at the point on the retailer's reaction function that provides the highest manufacturer profit (similarly, the RS equilibrium lies at the point on the manufacturer's reaction function that provides the highest retailer profit).The right-hand panel of Fig. 1 depicts the retail and manufacturer profits for the MS, RS, and VN cases. The retailer profit is typically greatest under RS and lowest under MS, and manufacturer profit is the reverse. Consequently, each supply chain member has a direct incentive to become a leader (Choi, 1991; Lee & Staelin, 1997).In addition, we consider the Collusive Channel Optimum, Symmetric Collusion, and Symmetric Pricing as alternative outcomes. The Collusive Channel Optimum consists of any wholesale price and retail margin that, when combined, equal the retail price that a vertically integrated monopoly would charge. The Collusive Channel Optimum points are associated with the maximum possible level of channel profits, and the associated retail prices are lower than the prices for MS, RS, and VN. These points are also Pareto optimal, and descriptions of negotiations with binding contracts often assume such Pareto optimal outcomes. The Symmetric Collusion point is the particular Collusive Channel Optimum that delivers equal profit per product to the three players. This will arise from the Nash Bargaining solution in cooperative game theory (Corfman & Gupta, 1993; Nash, 1950). More generally the set of Symmetric Pricing outcomes (equal margins net of costs) will serve as a bench-mark for fairness concerns.We observe that, when γ > 0, the equilibrium wholesale prices, retail margins, and profits under RS, VN, and MS for both Products 1 and 2 will be shifted upwards relative to what is shown in Fig. 1. The resulting distribution of channel profits is more favorable to the retailer. The exact equilibrium points are shown later in the paper (see Fig. 4).In an infinitely repeated game, according to the folk-theorem (see Fudenberg & Tirole, 1991, chapter 5), all profit combinations in the triangular region of the right-hand panel of Fig. 1 can be supported in each period as profit-maximizing (subgame perfect) equilibrium outcomes. In a finitely repeated game, it is less recognized that the Manufacturer Stackelberg (MS) outcome in each period is the unique profit-maximizing (subgame perfect Nash) equilibrium outcome. Formally, this latter outcome is our maintained prediction because our experiments use a finite-move game in which the two manufacturers move first.22Although our formal prediction is the MS outcome, we think it is desirable to explore empirical regularities of how the supply chain structure in the paper influences human decision-making. Thus, we wish to know empirical regularities of whether the repeated-interaction setting generates outcomes closer to the predicted outcome or those of several competing theories of one-shot interaction.RS and VN are two alternative profit-maximizing predictions. RS is an interesting alternative hypothesis because the presence of two manufacturers would seem to give the retailer the opportunity to take a price leadership role by “playing” the manufacturers off against each other.In the past two decades, economists have incorporated fairness into game-theoretic modeling (e.g., Bolton & Ockenfels, 2000; Levine, 1998; Rabin, 1993) to explain anomalous behavior observed in the experimental literature. Fehr and Schmidt (1999), in particular, propose a fairness model that assumes that competing firms/agents/players dislike outcomes that are inequitable to any player (henceforth, F&S model). Accordingly, players care about what others get and show some increase in utility when players get the same payoff. The utility function of the F&S model is given by(3)u1(Π1,Π2)=Π1−αmax((Π2−Π1),0)−βmax((Π1−Π2),0),where α is associated with the utility loss from an inequitable profit allocation that is disadvantageous to the subject in question (envy; i.e., the utility penalty for a “disadvantageous inequality”) and with β associated with the utility loss from an inequitable profit allocation that is advantageous to the subject in question (guilt; the utility penalty for an “advantageous inequality”). Generally, one expects α > β.In this paper, we adopt the F&S approach together with other potentially relevant considerations that we draw from the literature. If fairness effects are present in players’ utilities (as in Eq. (3)), then, when inequitable outcomes arise in one period of a game, we expect players to take action to yield more equitable outcomes in subsequent periods. In particular, following Normann, Requate, and Waichman (2014), we consider whether the players adjust their decision variables in the current period based on the decisions variables and outcomes from the previous period, according to the following equations.33It is expected that players’ choices are dependent on the game history in repeated games (e.g., Bottazzi and Devetag, 2007; Brown and Rosenthal, 1990). However, the most influential information is the last period interaction in many experimental markets. For example, Kruse et al. (1994) find that most sellers adjust their prices to a price prediction based on the rival's last period price but do not adjust them to the once-lagged prediction in their oligopoly market game. Furthermore, Zwick and Rapoport (2002) confirm that the behavior of subjects is significantly influenced by the results of their decision in the most recent iteration of the game, which indicates adaptive behavior, in their market entry game. This approach is also consistent with recent work by Normann et al. (2014).Manufacturers:(4)wit−wit−1=βMi,0+βMi,1(rMit−1−wit−1)+βMi,2(wjt−1−wit−1)+βMi,3(mit−1−wit−1)+βMi,4max[(ΠMjt−1−ΠMit−1),0]+βMi,5max[(ΠMit−1−ΠMjt−1),0]+βMi,6max[(ΠRit−1−ΠMit−1),0]+βMi,7max[(ΠMit−1−ΠRit−1),0]+βMi,8JPMMit+βMi,9SpitefulMit+βMi,10InformationMi+βMi,11CostMi+∑jβMi,j,12GroupMi,j+ɛMitRetailer:(5)mit−mit−1=βRi,0+βRi,1(rRit−1−mit−1)+βRi,3(wit−1−mit−1)+βRi,6max[(ΠMit−1−ΠRit−1),0]+βRi,7max[(ΠRit−1−ΠMit−1),0]+βRi,8JPMRit+βRi,9SpitefulRit+βRi,10InformationRi+βRi,11CostRi+∑jβRi,j,12GroupRi,j+ɛRitWe interpret the coefficients in these equations as follows. The subscript i = 1 or 2 describes Product 1 and 2. Manufacturer 1 makes Product 1; Manufacturer 2 makes Product 2. The round number is given by the time subscript,t=1,…30.The subscript Miapplies to the manufacturer of product i, and the subscript Riapplies to retailer variables for product i, and the subscript j = 1, … , 19 describes the associated group (where the 20th group's effect is subsumed in the intercept).The coefficient β., 1 describes a player's best response adjustment to the prices in the previous round chosen by other players. The best responses are defined asrMit−1(mit−1,w−it−1,m−it−1)≡argmaxwi{((wi+mit−1)−cmi)qi+((w−it−1+m−it−1)−cm−i)q−i}for manufacturers andrRit−1(wit−1)≡argmaxmi{((mi+wit−1)−cri)qi+((w−it−1+m−it−1)−c−i)q−i}for the retailer, respectively, where –i2 when i = 1 and –i1 when i = 2.The coefficient β., 2 describes what can be called a manufacturer's imitation adjustment relative to the other manufacturer (j). Imitation refers to a manufacturer trying to choose the same price as the competing manufacturer. Similarly, the coefficient β., 3 indicates a manufacturer's (retailer's) imitation adjustment relative to the counterpart retailer (manufacturer).The coefficients(βMi,4)βMi,5indicate a manufacturer's reaction to (dis)advantageous inequality relative to the other manufacturer. We expect  β4 < 0  and  β5 > 0. Thus, for example, when a manufacturer earns lower profits than the competing manufacturer, the manufacturer would like to acquire more equitable profits by reducing its price in the next period, but when a manufacturer earns higher relative profits, the manufacturer does the opposite. Similarly, the coefficients (β., 6) β., 7 indicate a player's reaction to (dis)advantageous inequality relative to the channel retailer (i.e., between a manufacturer and the retailer for a product).Regarding these latter coefficients, one should recognize the following caveat. Even if the coefficients in the disadvantageous and advantageous inequalities are significant and in the expected directions, this is not indicative of players’ motivations for why they make such adjustments to move toward more equitable outcomes. In repeated games, instrumental reciprocity (i.e., a strategy in which a forward-looking, self-interested person sacrifices his short-term payoffs in an effort to increase his long-run payoffs) and intrinsic reciprocity (i.e., a person's willingness to sacrifice his own payoffs in order either to increase a kind opponent's payoff or to decrease an unkind opponent's payoff) could both be sources of cooperation (e.g., Sobel, 2005). Thus, the repeated context applied in this paper is not able to identify whether a decision is motivated by selfish or other-regarding preferences (e.g., Fehr & Krajbich, 2014).The dummy variable JPM (Joint Profit Maximization) indicates that a channel counterpart's net unit margin is equal to the symmetric channel collusive margin (i.e., between $11 and $12) in the previous round, which is associated with the maximum possible level of channel profits. In the symmetric treatments 1 and 2, the margin is $11.78 for all channel participants for both products, whereas, in the asymmetric treatment 3, the margins are $11.28 (Product 1) an $11.78 (Product 2), respectively.The dummy variable Spiteful indicates that a player's price decision (i.e., choice of margin) is so high that it hurts all players since its own net margin exceeds the channel collusive-level for the full retail price, which is $33.57 in Treatments 1 and 2 and $34.56 (Product 1) and $33.56 (product 2) in Treatment 3, respectively. That is, the Spiteful variable is an indicator that one of the competitors is picking a net margin that is so aggressively high that the total retail price will be forced to exceed the channel collusive-level if the competitor's channel partner choses any net margin in excess of zero. The variables JPM and Spiteful follow Normann et al. (2014), and are included in part for comparative purposes (see this source for further motivation for these variables).The dummy variables Information and Cost indicate the Incomplete Information (Treatment 2) and Asymmetric Cost (Treatment 3) treatments, respectively (we motivate these two treatments in Section 3.3 of the “Experimental Method” described below). Finally, we add a dummy variable for each group of three participants (two manufacturers and one retailer) playing the game for thirty rounds. Note that we have 20 groups for each of the three treatment conditions, but one group for each treatment condition does not have a dummy variable and constitutes the base case, subsumed in the intercept. We, thus, havej=1,…,19group dummies for each of the three treatment conditions. We now turn to the three treatment conditions used in our experiments.180 MBA and undergraduate business students from a large university in North America participated in a session that lasted about 90 minutes. Subjects were recruited through advertisements and class announcements. In return for participating, subjects were given class credit, a fixed payment of $5, and a further payment contingent upon performance.44In an experiment about quantity discount contracts in a distribution channel, Lim and Ho (2007) compared the decisions and outcomes of the experiment involving less-experienced undergraduates with those involving more-experienced MBA students who are ten years older on average and have more decision-making experience in the business world compared to the undergraduate subjects. They also compared the low-stake size and the high-stake size by doubling the stake size. Interestingly, they found that experience and stake size have little or no effect on the results. In addition, the authors found that student subjects were highly motivated to make the best possible decision in order to earn higher monetary payoffs in a similar experiment involving a one-manufacturer/one-retailer channel, which is consistent with the motivation of real-world channel players.In our experiments subjects were randomly divided into groups of three players (taking the roles of two manufacturers and a retailer). Each group engaged in thirty rounds of interaction. We had 20 groups for each treatment condition. We ran a total of 22 sessions with an average of 2.73 groups per session, or equivalently 8.91 participants per session. As shown in Fig. 2, each round had three steps reflecting the institutional reality of the sequence of the game.In the first step, Manufacturer 1 chooses w1, and Manufacturer 2 chooses w2. In the second step, the retailer chooses gross margins m1 and m2 for the two products. In the third step, market demands for the two products, q1 and q2, and each player's profits are realized (according to Eq. (2)).Our experimental procedure began by giving subjects’ detailed instructions and a quiz (see the online Appendix) in a computer laboratory. The quiz consisted of ten questions to ascertain that the instructions were understood, and subjects were awarded 10 cents for each correct answer.55The average quiz score was 8.73/10, which indicated that players understood the game well, even before playing the practice rounds.Subjects then played at a computer terminal with a randomized, anonymous partner for seven ‘practice’ rounds. No compensation was provided for practice rounds. The parameters of the model were then changed and each subject was randomly reassigned to a different partner but each subject's role was not changed. Subjects then engaged in 30 rounds of play and subject fees were earned based on the game profits earned. Any form of communication to learn with whom they were interacting was not possible. Subjects then filled out a survey about the strategies they applied in the game (see the online Appendix). They were then paid subject fees in private, and debriefed. Our payment formula was as follows: each subject was paid $5.00 automatically, plus the quiz payment (maximum of $1.00), plus $0.50 times his/her profits divided by the doubled collusive profit per round. Thus, if a player earned an equal share of the collusive profit in a round, the player would earn $.50 that round. Adding these three components together, the average actual payment for all runs of the experiments was $17.91.The manufacturers and the retailer computer screens in steps 1 and 2 are shown in Fig. 3. In the example of this figure, both manufactures chose their own wholesale prices in Round 7 to be $20.00 respectively. The retailer received those prices and then selected retail gross margins of $15.00 and $17.00, respectively, for Products 1 and 2 in Round 7. (Note that, before making a final decision, the retailer sees a calculation of the retail prices and net margins associated with its gross margin selections in the upper right hand corner. A small traffic signal image shows a yellow light until the player confirms, “OK.”). All players see a running tally of market outcomes for the last five rounds of play including wholesale prices, retail margins, retail prices, quantities demanded, and profits accruing to them.In addition to a base condition, we also consider the impact of two variables—information and production costs—on supply chain relationships in our experiments.Concerning the former variable, we manipulate the information environment concerning both costs and profits. This manipulation builds on Chu and Messinger (1997) who examine the impact of market information acquisition on the distribution of channel profits. They find that improved information about demand always results in greater absolute profits. Desiraju and Moorthy (1997) also show that performance requirements on price and service improve channel performance when the retailer is better informed about demand conditions than the manufacturer. In exit surveys in pilot runs, we also found that participants felt that knowledge of competitors’ costs and profits could be particularly interesting. Accordingly, we predict that total channel profits will be higher under full information about competitor's costs and profits due to the informed channel member's ability to “fine tune” prices in response to changes of demand conditions. We also predict that there will be greater dispersion in outcomes across participants because there is more guesswork under incomplete information. Thus, this manipulation enables us to investigate the role of information in achieving fair supply chain relationships.Concerning the latter variable, we manipulate the production cost differences between manufacturers in order to examine whether firms exploit cost advantages or cope with cost disadvantages through pricing. Choi (1991) argued that a low-cost manufacturer benefits not only from a larger contribution margin, but also from a larger market share due to the lower price. But while the manufacturers compete to sell more of their respective products by transferring part of the cost savings to wholesale prices, the common retailer lacks an incentive to reduce its margins. We therefore predict that asymmetric production costs yield higher net prices and profits for the low-cost product, for both the manufacturer and the retailer, than for the high cost product (as compared to the case of symmetric production costs). We also predict that the retailer's benefit is greater than the manufacturers’ from asymmetric production costs. In addition, this manipulation enables us to examine an impact of the asymmetric structure on fairness concerns.To examine these predictions we consider three conditions: Full Information with No Production Cost Differences, Incomplete Cost and Profit Information, and Production Cost Differences.66We choose not to do Treatment 4 (interaction effect) because we think it is important to examine the effect of information separately from the effect of the asymmetric production costs.The demand and cost parameters used in the experiments are shown in Table 1.77To provide external validity, players are not told the parameters of the demand function under which they are operating, but must infer the demand relation through the evolving history of play.In the full information with no production cost differences condition (Treatment 1), the computer screens inform the players of the pricing decisions, costs, and profits of the other players (all players know their own pricing decisions, costs, and profits, of course). In particular, each manufacturer is informed of the competing manufacturer's wholesale price decisions, production cost, and profit, and the retailer's margin decisions, handling cost, and profit; and the retailer is informed of both manufacturers’ wholesale price decisions, production costs, and profits.In the incomplete cost and profit information condition (Treatment 2), all parameters are the same as in Treatment 1—the only difference is that the players do not know (and the game screens do not show) the costs and profits of the other players. In particular, manufacturer i knows its own wholesale price, production cost (cmi), and profits, but not the other manufacturer's wholesale price, production cost, and profit, or the retailer's handling costs and profit. The retailer knows its handling costs (cr1andcr2), and profits (for both products), but not the production costs and profit of either manufacturer. All players know the retail prices of both products.In the asymmetric production costs condition (Treatment 3), we setcm1=10andcm2=8, leaving the other parameters and information availability the same as in Treatment 1.In sum, the first factor is related to the market information level shown during the experiments. The second factor is related to the parameter values in calculating demands and profits.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
