@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The decoy effect in relative performance evaluation and the debiasing role of DEA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the decoy effect in the context of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA).It is shown that relative performance evaluation is prone to this kind of bias.Adding DEA scores to the choice set proves to be an effective debiasing procedure.Adding information about slacks also reduces the decoy effect in the experiment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioral OR,Decoy effect,Data Envelopment Analysis,Debiasing procedure,Performance measurement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is overwhelming evidence that performance ratings and evaluations are context dependent. A special case of such context effects is the decoy effect, which implies that the inclusion of a dominated alternative can influence the preference for non-dominated alternatives. Adapting the well-known experimental setting from the area of consumer behavior to the performance evaluation context of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), an experiment was conducted. The results show that adding a dominated decision making unit (DMU) to the set of DMUs augments the attractiveness of certain dominating DMUs and that DEA efficiency scores discriminating between efficient and inefficient DMUs serve as an appropriate debiasing procedure. The mention of the existence of slacks for distinguishing between strong and weak efficient DMUs also contributes to reducing the decoy effect, but it is also associated to other unexpected effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite being described as a discipline aiming at facilitating decision making, operations research (OR) has largely omitted behavioral issues. Most recently, this deficit has been addressed by Hämäläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013). They comprehensively discuss the high potential of behavioral OR for advancing the practical benefit of normative OR methods and propose nine topics for a respective research agenda. The present paper refers particularly to the topic of behavioral/cognitive aspects, since it stresses performance evaluation biases related to the so-called decoy effect.The decoy effect is a special kind of context effect, which refers to the influence that contextual variables have on decision making. Overwhelming evidence exists demonstrating that context is likely to influence performance evaluation (see, e.g., Damisch, Mussweiler, & Plessner, 2006; Page & Page, 2010). For example, evaluators’ preferences are biased not only by the past performance of the decision making unit (DMU), but also by the performance of other DMUs under analysis. With regard to the latter aspect, the decoy effect implies that the inclusion of a dominated alternative – the decoy – can influence the choice between the non-dominated alternatives. Concretely, the probability of preferring the target alternative, which is the non-dominated option that is most similar to the decoy, may increase. The existence of this effect has repeatedly been confirmed by research on consumer behavior, showing that customers tend to prefer the target alternative (Ariely, 2009; Huber, Payne, & Puto, 1982; Wedell & Pettibone, 1996).The research settings used for studying consumer behavior strongly resemble relative performance evaluation cases where alternatives are compared on a utility function level. Furthermore, these research settings are constructed in a way that they differentiate between non-dominated (i.e., efficient) and dominated (i.e., inefficient) units like in the context of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Against this background, two questions arise: (i) does the decoy effect also occur in cases where the relative performance of alternatives is evaluated, and (ii) to what extent can the application of DEA – namely the incorporation of respective efficiency scores and the mention of existing slacks – act as a debiasing tool?To shed light on these questions, we conducted a vignette-based experiment with bachelor students taking management control and business accounting courses. For analyzing whether relative performance evaluation may also be affected by a decoy effect, the well-known experimental setting from the area of consumer behavior was adapted to the performance context. The results show that adding a dominated DMU to the set of DMUs augments the attractiveness of the target DMU. Therefore, a decoy effect can be observed when DMUs are compared against each other.In a second step, the role of reporting DEA results as a debiasing procedure for the identified decoy effect was considered. Participants in the corresponding treatments were provided with additional information about DEA efficiency scores and slacks. The results indicate that the scores discriminating between efficient and inefficient DMUs can significantly reduce the decoy effect in a relative performance evaluation context. The mention of the existence of slacks for distinguishing between strong and weak efficient DMUs also contributes to avoiding the decoy effect, but it is associated to unexpected effects, such as the increment of the proportion of participants choosing the dominated alternative as the best performing one.An additional experiment was conducted to evaluate whether this unexpected effect was due to a negative formulation of the meaning of the slacks. The results show that a positive explanation of the slacks does not affect the percentage of participants considering the dominated DMU as the best performing one. This suggests that further research for understanding the interpretation and use of the slacks information should be conducted.The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 depicts the theoretical background of our research, outlining the decoy effect in choice tasks as well as the basic aspects of relative performance evaluation with DEA. The hypotheses are derived in Section 3, and the method to investigate these hypotheses is described in Section 4. Section 5 presents the results of the study, addressing the decoy effect on the one side and the potential of DEA as a debiasing mechanism on the other side. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
