@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impacts of knowledge on online brand success: an agent-based model for online market share enhancement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose an agent-based model based on optimal pricing mechanism and industry data.Replicate the evolution process of market for multiple brands competing online.Results of the proposed agent-based model match the actual online market data.Find how knowledge impacts market share of multiple brands in s-commerce.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-commerce,Diffusion dynamics,Agent-based model,Knowledge,e-WOM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The dynamics of brands diffusion emerge partly from heterogeneous consumers’ interaction in social e-commerce and this social interaction influences adoption decisions. The agent-based simulation is a methodology that is well suited for modeling collective diffusion dynamics. Using optimal pricing mechanism and industry data, we introduce an agent-based model to replicate the evolution process of market share for multiple brands competing online. The proposed model helps understand the role of knowledge in the diffusion of competitive brands. It shows that when multiple brands face online competition, innovativeness, brand image, self-perceived utility and electronic word of mouth (e-WOM) all have significant effect on online shoppers’ decisions and have a bearing on brands’ market performance. Consumers often derive their value (utility) of a brand based on price, quality, rating, etc. When consumers rely more on self-perceived utility, e-WOM has more positive effects on market share. Depending on whether a firm's competitive advantage is in innovation, price, web content, or use of social media, different online strategies should be employed for different brands to achieve market success.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online review and social network are a daily routine for many web users. Sharing and inquiring product information online becomes an essential step in purchase decision-making. Through social media, social e-commerce (s-commerce) participants interact and contribute to the online buying and selling of products and services (Kim & Park, 2013). For example, members of Pinterest (https://www.pinterest.com/) and Fandongxi (http://www.fandongxi.com/) often browse and exchange information with other members interested in the same product or service. Stelzner (2013) reports that 86 percent of marketers consider social media vital for their business. The ascent of s-commerce has given rise to electronic word of mouth (e-WOM), which has significant influence on firm performance.Brand competition becomes increasingly intense due to the transparency of brand information. Researchers have applied the innovation diffusion model to study product diffusion. For example, the classic Bass model has famously described the aggregate effects of external natural growth and internal factors influencing the diffusion process (Bass, 1969). Drawing upon the Bass model, Dewan, Ganley, and Kraemer (2010) and Yu, Wang, and Zhang (2003) broaden the diffusion model to include price, advertising, and market characteristics. However, all these models assume that the consumers are homogenous, except for personal preferences.Most simulation-based approaches extend the classical Bass model and complement its weakness. They can take into account the interactions between individual consumers within a social network. However, few simulation studies have focused on multi-brand online competition and diffusion; and no researchers have validated such a simulation model with actual online market data. We develop an agent-based simulation model to study diffusion and online brand competition, and perform validation for the proposed model using an industrial data set.We assume consumers’ purchasing decision is influenced by their knowledge about the brand, which includes innovativeness, impression of the brand, self-perceived brand utility from web content, and e-WOM from social media (network externalities), etc. Chenavaz (2012)believes the demand of goods or service is a function of price and quality, while innovation is the main determinant of price.There are two types of word-of-mouths (WOM) in diffusion process. One is the online customer review system, the most powerful channel to generate online WOM (Dellarocas, 2003). The other is created by consumers using the social media. There has been a growing interest in examining the relationship between product sales and consumer reviews (Dellarocas, Zhang, & Awad, 2007; Duan, Gu, & Whinston, 2008; Forman, Ghose, & Wiesenfeld, 2008), in which perceived value through price is as important as perceived quality and service of product in influencing the purchase decision (Li & Hitt, 2010). In this research, instead of examining how price affects review, we examine the relationship between price and brand rating. On the other hand, network externalities suggest that consumption utility of one user in the network depends on the number of other users of the same or compatible product or service. The utility may increase with the number of actual buyers in the network (Katz & Shapiro, 1985).Social media is such a platform that consumers could create and share product or service information and purchasing experience through network or mobile equipment. It is thus an important marketing tool for sales promotion in e-commerce. Stelzner (2013) finds 88 percent of marketers want to know the most effective social tactics and the best ways to engage shoppers via social media. In our study, we examine the effect of electronic word of mouth (e-WOM) on diffusion among consumers in social media.We first develop a pricing model to determine the optimal price. Next, an agent-based model is developed incorporating the optimal price (derived from real data by the proposed revenue model) and four other factors: innovativeness, image (impression of prior market share), self-perceived utility (customer perceived value of an online brand based on price, rating, quality, etc.), and e-WOM in social media. Through agent-based simulation experiments, we address the following research questions:(1)How does innovativeness affect a brand's market performance?How does brand’ image impact market share?How do the self-perceived utility and perceived e-WOM impact market share?The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature and positions our research. In Section 3, we develop a revenue model to derive the optimal brand price. Section 4 incorporates optimal prices of different brands in the simulation model and replicates heterogeneous agents’ purchase decision making process. In Section 5, we conduct experiments on various scenarios to validate the model, and to develop insights into the effect of parameter changes on system performance. Conclusions and managerial implications are given in Section 6. Section 7 highlights the directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
