@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hedge fund systemic risk signals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We estimate dynamic conditional correlations for filtered returns, betas, common factors.We realise an early warning system for hedge funds using regression trees approach.Correlations are the leading indicators for predicting hedge fund worst returns.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hedge funds,Dynamic conditional correlations,Time-varying beta,Regression trees,Early warning system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we realise an early warning system for hedge funds based on specific red flags that help detect the symptoms of impending extreme negative returns and the contagion effect. To do this we use regression tree analysis to identify a series of splitting rules that act as risk signals. The empirical findings presented herein prove that contagion, crowded trades, leverage commonality and liquidity concerns are the leading indicators for predicting worst returns. We not only provide a variable selection among potential predictors, but also assign specific risk thresholds for the selected key indicators at which the vulnerability of hedge funds becomes systemically relevant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we realise an early warning system (EWS) for the extreme negative returns of hedge funds based on specific red flags that help detect the symptoms of risky situations that may result in large-scale crises. The key concept of our work conceives excess correlation as the major symptom of contagion. Thus, following Boyson, Stahel, and Stulz (2010), we inspect hedge fund filtered returns (asset pricing model residuals) in order to reduce the possibility that we attribute to contagion commonality in returns due to exposure to common risk factors. We also rely on Boyson et al. (2010) to define hedge fund extreme negative returns, which are identified as the returns that fall in the bottom 10% of a hedge fund style’s monthly returns, and contagion, which is defined as the number of other hedge fund styles that have a worst return in the same month.To realise the EWS for hedge funds we rely on regression tree (RT) analysis. We develop a risk monitoring system in the spirit of the signal approach (Manasse & Roubini, 2009), which is based on specific splitting threshold values associated with the selected explanatory variables that help detect potential abnormalities in the form of worst hedge fund returns. Our paper is related to Savona (2014), since we use the three-equation system introduced in such an article to estimate the Bayesian time-varying CAPM beta model. However, while Savona (2014) explore how and why the systematic risk exposures of the major hedge fund strategies vary over time, based upon some exogenous variables that hedge fund managers are assumed to use in changing their trading strategies, here the research question is different as well as the methodological innovation. In this paper we focus on time-varying correlations, which are estimated following Alexander (2002), together with other leading indicators for predicting hedge fund worst returns. The main objective is to realise a system of rules of thumb to capture situations of extreme risk, and to do this we implement a novel regression tree algorithm introduced in Vezzoli and Stone (2007) which is well suited to inspect panel data structures. To our knowledge, this is the first study that uses RT to examine systemic risk in hedge funds.Using data from the CSFB/Tremont indices over the period from January 1994 to September 2008, we find that contagion, crowded trades and leverage commonality are the most important leading indicators of worst hedge fund returns. Furthermore, market and funding liquidity concerns together increase the risk for hedge funds, since risky clusters are signalled when credit spread widens and funds tend to de-leverage. A clinical study of the reasons for the LTCM collapse occurred in 1998 and sub-prime crisis in terms of worst returns suffered by hedge funds suggests that, on one hand, the LTCM collapse was mainly due to extreme commonality in leverage dynamics and higher leverage level, whereas, on the other, the sub-prime crisis was caused by crowded trades together with a substantial drop in leverage commonality due to strong de-leveraging.The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature to our work. Section 3 presents the methodology, while the dataset used in the paper is discussed in Section 4. Section 5 reports the empirical results and Section 6 concludes.Our work is related to several large bodies of work that focus on correlation as the major indicator of systemic risk. Firstly, our paper is complementary to Stein (2009), who emphasises the role of the comovements induced by both the crowded trade and the leverage effects, thus suggesting a way to explore systemic risk that is economically consistent with the new literature on liquidity spirals (Brunnermeier & Pedersen, 2009) and studies of leveraged arbitrageurs (Morris & Shin, 2004; Shleifer & Vishny, 1997). Following this line of reasoning, other papers that explore how hedge funds comove together, especially in times of stress, are complementary to our study. Billio, Getmansky, Lo, and Pelizzon (2012) use correlation to capture the degree of connectivity among financial institutions and its impact in terms of contagion, spillover effects and joint crashes. Boyson et al. (2010) focus on clustering worst returns and, based upon the arguments developed in Bekaert, Harvey, and Ng (2005), define hedge fund contagion as the “correlation over and above what one would expect from economic fundamentals”. In their view, the clustering of worst returns is conceived as a form of excess correlation, which in turn results in contagion or interdependencies (Forbes & Rigobon, 2002).1Forbes and Rigobon (2002) define significant increases in cross-market comovements as contagion, while continued high levels of correlations are defined as interdependence.1Adrian (2007) relies on hedge fund return correlation to proxy for similarities in hedge fund strategies, which is assumed to be a key determinant of the risk of the entire hedge fund industry.All these studies point to correlation as a measure of connectivity among hedge funds. However, correlation by itself does not necessarily imply systemic risk, since it may reflect common membership and style affiliations, i.e. common risk factor exposure. For this reason, to inspect systemic risk among hedge funds we filter their monthly returns, namely we remove common variation in fund returns using a new asset pricing model that has recently proven to be effective to describe the time-varying risk exposure of hedge funds.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
