@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A review of trade credit literature: Opportunities for research in operations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We provide an integrative review of the existing literature of trade credit in the interface of operations and finance.We analyze in detail four literature areas: trade credit motives, order quantity decisions, credit term decisions and settlement period decisions.The main findings of the literature review is that trade credit increases the economic order quantity and could serve as a buyer–supplier coordination mechanism.We derive a detailed agenda for future research around two core themes: opportunities arising from inside operations management and opportunities arising from outside operations management.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Trade credit,Permissible delay in payment,Interface operations and finance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Trade credit arises when a buyer delays payment for purchased goods or services. Its nature has predominantly been an area of inquiry for researchers from the disciplines of finance, marketing, and economics but it has received relatively little attention in other domains. In our article, we provide an integrative review of the existing literature and discuss conflicting study outcomes. We organize the relevant literature into seven areas of inquiry and analyze four in detail: trade credit motives, order quantity decisions, credit term decisions, and settlement period decisions. Additionally, we derive a detailed agenda for future research in these areas.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Trade credit is a regular component of market transactions and constitutes a major source of short-term financing. Estimates suggest that more than 80% of business-to-business transactions in the United Kingdom (UK) are made on credit (Wilson & Summers, 2002), while about 80% of United States (US) firms offer their products on trade credit (Tirole, 2006). Large, non-financial businesses in the US generate 15% of their financing from accounts payable and small businesses rely even more on it (Elliehausen & Wolken, 1993; OECD, 2006). Internationally, these levels can be even higher and trade credit exceeds, by far, short-term bank credit (De Blasio, 2005; Rajan & Zingales, 1995). The average level of trade credit in use, however, varies significantly from country to country. A comparison of accounting data of industrialized nations shows that median accounts receivable range from 13% to 40% of sales and, with the exception of Italy, are relatively stable over time (Fig. 1). Similarly, trade credit varies from industry to industry. US data suggest that relative accounts receivable increase in the distance to the end-consumer (Fig. 2). While accounts receivable tend to exceed accounts payable in most sectors, the retail sector is a notable exception; this is most likely due to the proximity to end-consumers. Ng, Smith, and Smith (1999) find that credit terms show high variation between industries but low variation within them. The degree of within-variation seems to differ from industry to industry, at least as indicated by actual payment delays (Seifert & Seifert, 2011). In this study, one of the roughly 30 managers interviewed stated: “When we began [our project] last year, we discovered that we had over 1000 different credit terms globally!” Thus, in some industries firms seem to vary credit terms from customer to customer (Wilson & Summers, 2002).Such a widespread phenomenon of varied credit terms is likely to raise questions. Its existence is already perplexing. Why do suppliers offer credit when there are specialized financial intermediaries? If trade credit is cheaper than bank credit, the question is how do suppliers generate the competitive advantage? If bank credit is cheaper than trade credit, then why do banks ignore the opportunity? Additional questions revolve around the practical management of trade credit. How do firms set credit policies and which credit policies are optimal? While generous credit terms might spur sales, the additional working capital and bad debts may outweigh the benefits. At what point in time is it optimal to pay? Although late payment might entail additional interest costs, reduced inventory costs might outweigh these financial drawbacks.The wide range of these potential questions has led researchers from various domains to analyze trade credit. While finance scholars have contributed the most to the research, trade credit has also received considerable attention in the literature of economics and marketing. Researchers from other domains, however, have provided relatively little input. This is especially remarkable for operations management since financial flows are considered a key element of purchasing and supply chain management (Mentzer, 2001). Recognizing this deficit, a growing number of operations management researchers have begun to investigate the interface between operations and finance (Birge, Kouvelis, & Seppi, 2007; Protopappa-Sieke & Seifert, 2010; Kouvelis & Zhao, 2011; Gupta & Dutta, 2011). The aim of this article is to support this investigation by providing researchers who wish to contribute to this field with (1) an integrative review of the existing literature and (2) a tabulation of untapped areas for future research.The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the search strategies and classification methods. Section 3 reviews trade credit works from the finance and operations management literature. Section 4 discusses avenues for further research. Section 5 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
