@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using a partially observable Markov chain model to assess colonoscopy screening strategies – A cohort study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It is difficult to assess the cost-effectiveness of colonoscopy screening.We developed a partially observable Markov chain model for the assessment.We designed a Bayesian-based belief update procedure.We assessed observation-based strategies to demonstrate our method’s applicability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical decision making,Cancer screening,Colorectal cancer natural history,Partially observable Markov chain,Cost-effectiveness analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is notoriously hard to combat for its high incidence and mortality rates. However, with improved screening technology and better understanding of disease pathways, CRC is more likely to be detected at early stage and thus more likely to be cured. Among the available screening methods, colonoscopy is most commonly used in the U.S. because of its capability of visualizing the entire colon and removing the polyps it detected. The current national guideline for colonoscopy screening recommends an observation-based screening strategy. Nevertheless, there is scant research studying the cost-effectiveness of the recommended observation-based strategy and its variants. In this paper, we describe a partially observable Markov chain (POMC) model which allows us to assess the cost-effectiveness of both fixed-interval and observation-based colonoscopy screening strategies. In our model, we consider detailed adenomatous polyp states and estimate state transition probabilities based on longitudinal clinical data from a specific population cohort. We conduct a comprehensive numerical study which investigates several key factors in screening strategy design, including screening frequency, initial screening age, screening end age, and screening compliance rate. We also conduct sensitivity analyses on the cost and quality of life parameters. Our numerical result demonstrates the usability of our model in assessing colonoscopy screening strategies with consideration of partial observation of true health states. This research facilitates future design of better colonoscopy screening strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Colorectal cancer (CRC) ranks third in incidence among cancer diseases and second in cancer-related death in the U.S. (Jemal, Bray, & Center, 2011). Nonetheless, CRC is often cured if detected early, e.g., the 5-year survival rate for localized CRC is 90% while the survival rate is only 12% if the cancer has spread to distant locations (Howlader et al., 2012). However, there are often no symptoms when CRC is in its early stages. Fortunately, with improved fiber optic technology, enhanced understanding of CRC natural history, and more intelligent screening strategies, it is increasingly possible to detect polyps including precancerous adenomas early, predict their progression accurately, and thus reduce CRC incidence and mortality. Furthermore, slow precancerous adenoma progression allows intelligent application of screening to detect and remove adenomas before they become cancerous.Colonoscopy is the most accurate CRC screening test as it provides a visual diagnosis of the entire colon and rectum. It can detect precancerous adenomas and remove them immediately before they become cancerous. This adenoma removal procedure, also called polypectomy, can significantly reduce patients’ cancer risks. The American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) recommendations imply that colonoscopy is the preferred cancer screening method (Rex et al., 2009). The ACG further suggests that other cancer detection tests are less preferred but should be offered to patients who decline colonoscopy. In addition to colonoscopy, several CRC screening methods are currently used in practice. These include fecal testing for occult blood (i.e., g-FOBT, FIT, and i-FOBT), fecal DNA testing, flexible sigmoidoscopy, and computed tomographic colonography (virtual colonoscopy). Guidelines from the U.S. Multisociety Task Force (Levin et al., 2008) and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2008) recommend some of the above alternative screening methods that are less invasive and less expensive than colonoscopy. However, these methods are only good at detecting preclinical cancer but not adenomas. Hence, their value is only significant in low risk populations. Therefore, our main objective is assessing colonoscopy screening strategies using an innovative mathematical model.We consider two classes of colonoscopy screening strategies: fixed-interval screening strategy and observation-based screening strategy. With a fixed-interval screening strategy, patients are recommended to take the screening tests in a fixed time interval regardless of their cancer risks. An observation-based screening strategy, however, specifies the timing of the next screening based on the previous screening result. Intuitively, a well designed observation-based screening strategy should be more desirable than a fixed-interval screening strategy since it determines screening intervals based on an individual’s cancer risk rather than treating all patients the same. Thus, designing a good observation-based screening strategy is an important research question.We develop a discrete-time partially observable Markov chain (POMC) model with a detailed description of precancerous adenoma states and a set of age-dependent transition probabilities estimated from a large longitudinal clinical data set for a specific population cohort. Traditionally, Markov models are used to represent the transitions among the true adenoma states. However, the true adenoma states can rarely be observed with complete accuracy due to limitations of the technology and insufficient experience of the practitioner who performs the test. For example, based on Rex et al. (1997), only about 70% of small adenomas (size less than 5mm) are detected by a single colonoscopy. Thus, we use belief states to capture the likelihood of each true state being occupied. We update the belief states in a Bayesian manner based on the latest colonoscopy findings and the disease progression, i.e., natural history. By using a detailed description of precancerous adenoma states, the state space of our POMC model becomes much larger compared to the existing Markov models in the literature. Furthermore, by incorporating incomplete adenoma detection and removal, optimization of screening strategies with the POMC model becomes extremely challenging computationally. Therefore, we focus on assessing the cost-effectiveness of the screening strategies and investigating the effects of several key factors in the strategy design, including screening frequency, initial screening age, screening end age, and partial compliance to screening tests.Our work is among the first that applies POMC modeling to assess colonoscopy screening strategies. Our main contributions are twofold. First, we incorporate inaccurate observations of health states and update the belief state based on the colonoscopy test results in a Bayesian manner. Such incorporation of partial observability has not been seen in the literature of economic analysis for CRC screening. Second, we conduct comprehensive cost-effectiveness assessment and compare fixed-interval and observation-based colonoscopy screening strategies. Although our results may lack generalization because our parameter estimations are based on a specific population cohort, the modeling framework is valuable and can be easily adapted to assess colonoscopy screening strategies for any other cohort once its clinical data is available.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section ‘Literature review’, we provide literature review on both well-accepted and recent economic studies and decision models on CRC screening strategy design. In section ‘Model development’, we present our POMC model and describe the belief update and outcome measures. In section ‘Parameter estimation and experiment design’, we describe our data sources, parameter estimation, and experimental design. We report numerical studies with a baseline case study and several sensitivity analyses in section ‘Numerical results’. Conclusions and future research directions are presented in section ‘Conclusions and future work’.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we develop a POMC model with detailed precancerous adenoma state description and demonstrate its applicability in evaluating the cost-effectiveness of various colonoscopy screening strategies. Our natural history model is calibrated and validated using a large longitudinal clinical data set from a specific population cohort. The intelligent design of the belief state update procedure enables our model to accommodate partial observation of patients’ health states and inaccuracy of colonoscopy screening and adenoma removal, which differentiates our model from most traditional Markov models. Through a comprehensive literature review of CRC screening models, we clearly identify our main contributions to the current literature. Methodologically, our model is the first POMC model analyzing cost-effectiveness of CRC screening strategies; and practically, we evaluate several observation-based colonoscopy screening strategies, which provides the possibility of improving the current colonoscopy screening guideline when general population data is available.Our numerical studies show that the current screening guideline and its variations are cost-effective compared to the no screening strategy for our studied population cohort. In addition, we observe that varying the screening interval is influential on the cost-effectiveness, especially when varying the interval for observation group 2 (1–2 non-advanced adenomas). Our experimental results also suggest that using a larger interval for group 2 (e.g., 10years) is likely to be more cost-effective than the current recommendation. Finally, our study indicates that special attention should be given to the estimation of the screening compliance rate and screening cost when assessing the cost-effectiveness of colonoscopy screening strategies.There are three limitations in this paper. First, our numerical results and recommendations are not generalizable because we estimated our parameters based on a specific population cohort. However, the qualitative conclusions drawn from our model are consistent with those from other models. Second, our model does not incorporate other CRC risk factors such as gender, race, and CRC family history, which are likely to affect the CRC disease dynamics. Finally, we cannot efficiently optimize the strategy design, which requires the application of stochastic optimization, e.g., approximate dynamic programming. Our objective in this paper is to provide a POMC-based framework for more detailed modeling of colonoscopy screening interventions and thus open up many possibilities to the research community in applying POMC models to assess colonoscopy screening strategies with or without combination of other screening methods. A minor limitation is that it is impossible to determine the correlation coefficients within each group of model parameters and between different groups in the probabilistic sensitivity analysis. This limitation may decrease the value of the probabilistic sensitivity analysis.In the future, we plan to address the above limitations by calibrating our POMC model with clinical data from additional and larger cohorts and incorporating additional CRC risk factors into our model. In addition, we plan to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of CRC screening methods other than colonoscopy. We also plan to develop a stochastic optimization method to efficiently select promising CRC screening strategies. Finally, since correlations are unknown, one should judiciously apply the conclusions drawn from our probabilistic sensitivity analysis.