@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Value of information in portfolio selection, with a Taiwan stock market application illustration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presents a methodology for computing the value of perfect expected return information in portfolio selection.The information is then a key reference point for judging how much to spend on research.In a developing economy such as Taiwan, the value of information is very high.For the required computations, this paper demonstrates a procedure that compares favorably to Cplex.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Efficient points,Portfolio selection,Value of information,Piecewise linear paths,Parametric quadratic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite many proposed alternatives, the predominant model in portfolio selection is still mean–variance. However, the main weakness of the mean–variance model is in the specification of the expected returns of the individual securities involved. If this process is not accurate, the allocations of capital to the different securities will in almost all certainty be incorrect. If, however, this process can be made accurate, then correct allocations can be made, and the additional expected return following from this is the value of information. This paper thus proposes a methodology to calculate the value of information. A related idea of a level of disappointment is also shown. How value of information calculations can be important in helping a mutual fund settle on how much to set aside for research is discussed in reference to a Taiwan Stock Exchange illustrative application in which the value of information appears to be substantial. Heavy use is made of parametric quadratic programming to keep computation times down for the methodology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of portfolio selection – on how to invest a sum of money across a series of assets for optimal return – continues to be a challenge, as it always has been ever since there has been accumulated wealth in the world. Let there be a beginning of a holding period and an end of the holding period. Also, let ribe the return on asset i over the holding period, and wibe the proportion of initial capital invested in asset i at the beginning of the holding period, and held in asset i throughout the holding period. With the goal being to maximize end of period wealth, and with constraints in canonical form, the problem of portfolio selection is(1)maxrp=∑i=1nriwis.t.∑i=1nwi=1wi≥0foralliwhere rpis the return on one’s capital over the holding period, n is the number of securities eligible for inclusion in a portfolio, and the sum-to-one constraint along with the nonnegativity restrictions define the feasible region in decision space. In the model, rpis portfolio return, and with the wiweights arranged in the form ofw=(w1,…,wn),w is called a fund allocation vector.The problem looks innocuous enough, as it appears to be a linear programming problem, which in fact it is, except for the objective function. The difficulty in the objective function is that the ri, the returns of the individual securities over the holding period, are random variables, and hence rpis a random variable. Portfolio selection is thus the problem of maximizing the random variable of portfolio return – but to do so it is necessary to make decisions on the wiat the beginning of the holding period based upon the values of the rithat are not known until the end of the holding period. This makes Model (1) a stochastic programming problem. In this form, the problem of portfolio selection has been much discussed and analyzed. Thousands of papers have been written on the problem as the basic model can take on many related forms.As defined by Caballero, Cerdá, Muñoz, Rey, and Stancu-Minasian (2001), if in a programming problem some of the parameters take unknown values at the time of making a decision, and these parameters are random variables, then the problem is a stochastic programming problem. Stochastic programming problems are notoriously difficult to solve, and solution methods are usually developed based upon the type of problem being considered (Beraldi, Violi, & Simone, 2011; Shapiro & Philpott, 2007). One often contemplated approach is to employ interpretations and assumptions so as to strive for an equivalent deterministic formulation that can be solved in a reasonably straightforward fashion.Through reasoning such as overviewed in many places as in Huang and Litzenberger (1988), it is generally accepted that investors are expected utility maximizers. Under this assumption, and where U is the investor’s utility function, Model (1) can be rewritten equivalently as(2)maxE[U(rp)]s.t.∑i=1nwi=1wi≥0foralliAn advantage of Model (2) is that all random variables have been cleared from the formulation. With investors assumed to possess declining marginal utility, U is at least known to be concave and increasing.Two schools of thought have evolved on how to address Model (2) with its expected utility objective function. One is to try to acquire enough information about the decision maker’s preferences to enable the creation of an optimization problem that can be solved directly for an optimal portfolio. The “safety first” strategy of Roy (1952) is an example of this approach. More recent examples involving a range of techniques, although in the multi-criteria arena, can be found, for instance, in Ballestero and Romero (1996), Arenas Parra, Bilbao Terol, and Rodríguez Uría (2001), Bilbao-Terol, Pérez-Gladish, Arenas-Parra, and Rodríguez-Uría (2006), Abdelaziz, Aouni, and El-Fayedh (2007), Fang, Lai, and Wang (2008), and Aouni, Colapinto, and La Torre (2014). But these techniques are difficult because the setting up of the optimization problem generally requires more knowledge about the optimal solution to be found than is possible beforehand. The other school of thought involves parameterizing U and then attempting to solve Model (2) for all unknown values of U’s parameter(s).Now, if U is quadratic, which is a common assumption in portfolio selection, there is only one parameter, and it is not difficult to show, as in many places including Steuer, Qi, and Hirschberger (2007), that E[U(rp)] is a function of the mean and variance of rpin the form of(3)E(rp)−1tV(rp)where t is a risk tolerance parameter. With (3) concave and increasing, all potentially optimizing solutions of Model (2), with (3) substituted for E[U(rp)], can be obtained by computing all efficient (E, V) mean–variance combinations that occur in the following two-objective program:(4)maxE=E(rp)minV=V(rp)s.t.∑i=1nwi=1wi≥0foralliRecognizing that the two objectives are to be optimized simultaneously, an (E, V) combination is efficient if and only if it is not possible to improve one of the criteria without deteriorating the other. Putting (4) into practice, we have(5)maxE=∑i=1nμiwiminV=∑i=1n∑j=1nwiσijwjs.t.∑i=1nwi=1wi≥0foralliwhere μiis the expected return of the ith security (that is, of the rirandom variable), σiiis the variance of ri, and the σij, i ≠ j, are the covariances of the random variables riand rjover the holding period. In bi-criterion format, this is the famous mean–variance model of Markowitz (1952), and as prescribed by Markowitz, the approach is as follows:1.Specify Model (5) with all of its required μi, σiiand σijvalues.Solve Model (5) for all efficient (E, V) combinations and the fund allocation solution vector w, as a function of V, pertaining to them. Methods for doing this go back to Markowitz (1956).Display the efficient (E, V) combinations in the form of a graph, called the efficient frontier.Have the investor select from the efficient frontier his or her most preferred (E, V) combination.For this (E, V) combination, retrieve from the w of Step 2 the specific portfolio composition corresponding to the V of the selected (E, V) combination. Provided all has been carried out accurately, this then is the investor’s optimal portfolio.As seen, the efficient frontier is central to the approach. This is because the efficient frontier displays precisely all efficient (E, V) combinations. That is, if a particular fund allocation vector can potentially be an optimal solution of Model (2), its (E, V) combination will be on the efficient frontier, and conversely, if a particular fund allocation vector cannot be an optimal solution of Model (2), its (E, V) combination will not be on the efficient frontier.The success of Markowitz’s mean–variance approach is often attributed to its mathematical tractability, but there are other reasons. One is that the approach allows different investors to have different optimal portfolios. Another is that, because one’s optimal portfolio is usually only recognized as such after seeing that everything else is worse, the approach’s efficient frontier lets one see the “everything else.” However, a caveat comes with the approach.While the evolution of Model (5) represents considerable achievement with regard to theory, the model is in fact a monster with regard to its demands for data. That is, for an upcoming holding period, the model needs n expected returns, n variances, and(n2−n)/2covariances. This is a lot of information, and there may be no good way to get all of it. Hence there is a legitimate worry that errors in the values used for at least some of these quantities will propagate through Model (5) and affect the resulting “optimal” solution.Fortunately, the σiiand the σijdo not create any especial difficulties as they are readily estimated from historical data and tend to be stable from holding period to holding period. However, as brought into sharp relief by Best and Grauer (1991), the μiare a different story. Not only are the μilacking in the persistence of the variances and covariances (see DeMiguel & Nogales, 2009; Kan & Smith, 2008; Siegal & Woodgate, 2007), but as shown in Chopra and Ziemba (1993), at a risk tolerance of 50, errors in the μiare about 11 more serious than errors of the same relative size in the variances,11According to Chopra and Ziemba (1993, p.10), most large institutional investors have risk tolerances in the 40–60 range.and about twice that factor with regard to errors of the same relative size in the covariances, with the “times factor” becoming larger as risk tolerance increases. Thus, because of the lessened effect of errors in the variances and covariances, and because errors in the variances and covariance are likely to be of smaller relative sizes than in the expected returns, the implication for research, as pointed out by Chopra and Ziemba (1993), is that first emphasis is to be placed on the expected returns and that is done in this paper.As a result, we will be comparing two situations. In the first we assume the default case in which the investor has no particular information about the individual security expected returns for the upcoming holding period and is forced to utilize mean returns derived from historical data when setting the μiin Step 1 of the Markowitz approach. Following through on the remaining steps of the Markowitz approach, the investor is ultimately guided to a specific fund allocation vector in Step 5. After implementing the specific fund allocation vector only to find out that the actual returns for the holding period differ from the mean returns, the investor then realizes that the portfolio return for the holding period is onlyE˜(whereE˜is the dot product of the vector of actual returns and the specific fund allocation vector).The other situation imagines that the investor is able to come into possession of a forecast for the upcoming period so that the values entered for the μiin Step 1 of the Markowitz approach are the returns that will actually occur over the holding period. In this case, guided by the Markowitz approach, the investor will wind up in Step 5 with a fund allocation vector that is optimal for the problem (because of the exact match between the actual security returns and those forecasted). In this case let us say that the portfolio return isE^(whereE^is the dot product of the vector of actual returns and the optimal fund allocation vector). Thus, the difference between the two portfolio returns (i.e., the difference betweenE^andE˜) is the value of information (Copeland & Weston, 1983) which can assist investors in deciding whether more μiinformation beyond the historical should be sought and at what expenditure.This paper thus proposes a methodology for conducting value of information calculations in portfolio selection. In Section 2 the idea of an efficient frontier is reviewed. In Section 3 a two-security example along with graphs, similar to as in Markowitz (1959, pp. 83–86) and Frances and Archer (1971, pp. 62–70), is provided for initial illustration purposes. Section 4 comments in more detail about the value of information. Section 5 extends the concepts of the paper to n assets. Section 6 illustrates an application drawn from the Taiwan Stock Exchange, and Section 7 provides a discussion of it. Section 8 describes the strategy of parametric quadratic programming that is used to carry out the computations of the paper, and Section 9 closes the paper with concluding remarks.Consider n assets whose upcoming holding period returnsr1,…,rnare described by a probability density function with mean vectorμ=(μ1,…,μn)and covariance matrixΣ=∥σij∥.There are two main ways in which to express the bi-objective formulation of Model (5) in the form of a single-objective program so as to compute the efficient frontier. One is to solve for the value E that maximizes expected portfolio return for a given upper bound on portfolio return variance (i.e., risk) V as in(6)E=max∑i=1nμiwis.t.∑i=1n∑j=1nwiσijwj≤V∑i=1nwi=1wi≥0foralliModel (6) is a quadratically constrained program due to the wiσijwjterms in the variance constraint. Actually, Model (6) is a very intuitive way of modeling a portfolio problem as many clients have risk levels they do not wish to violate. Various second-order cone solvers (as in Cplex (2013)) can be applied to Model (6), so solutions to the formulation are always within reach this way. By utilizing various V-values to compute their corresponding E-values, the locus of all (E, V) combinations obtained yields the efficient frontier of the problem and the wi-values of all points along the efficient frontier enable the specification of the fund allocation solution vector w as a function of V.The other way of expressing Model (5) in the form of a single-objective program is to find the value of V that minimizes portfolio return variance for a given lower bound on expected portfolio return E as in(7)V=min∑i=1n∑j=1nwiσijwjs.t.∑i=1nμiwi≥E∑i=1nwi=1wi≥0foralliBy utilizing various E-values to compute their corresponding V-values, the locus of all (E, V) combinations obtained also gives the same efficient frontier of the portfolio problem. Since Model (7) is a quadratic program, for which it is generally easier to find solvers, it is often used to find the efficient frontier. In this study, however, Model (6) is used, because it shows the expected portfolio return at each specific level of risk, which is more meaningful in expressing the value of information.Assume two risky assets whose historical holding period returns r1 and r2 are believed to be described by the bivariate distribution whose mean vector is (8, 6) and whose covariance matrix has elementsσ11=0.75,σ22=0.48,andσ12=0. Utilizing this information in Model (6) gives us in the default situation the following formulation:(8)E=max8w1+6w2s.t.0.75w12+0.48w22≤Vw1+w2=1w1,w2≥0Fig. 1shows the feasible region in decision space of this problem, which is the intersection of an ellipse (with its interior points) and the straight line ofw1+w2=1in the first quadrant. For V in Model (8) equal to 0.2927, or 36/123 to be exact, there is only one point C = (0.3902, 0.6098), or (48/123, 75/123) to be precise, in the feasible region. For this V, point C is then the fund allocation vector that solves (8) whose expected portfolio returnE=6.7805,or 834/123 to be exact.The problem is obviously infeasible when the risk level is less than 0.2927. As risk V increases, the ellipse expands, and the feasible region extends from point C towards points A and D along the linew1+w2=1. The largest feasible region is the whole line segment AD which occurs when portfolio risk reaches 0.75. Since μ1 > μ2 in this example, the fund allocation vector that solves Model (8) is always at the lower endpoint of the portion of AD that is feasible, regardless of the value of V. A simple mathematical derivation produces, as a function of V, the optimal fund allocation solution vectorw*and associated expected portfolio return E as follows:(9)w*=(0.96+4.92V−1.44,1.5−4.92V−1.44)2.46E=8.34+4.92V−1.441.23for V ∈ [0.2927, 0.75]. The efficient frontier of this model, since the individual security expected returns come from historical data, is indicated by the curve labeled “E, Historical” in Fig. 2. Starting from the smallest attainable risk level of 0.2927, expected portfolio return increases from 6.7805, at a decreasing rate, to 8 (not shown) where the risk level is 0.75.Now, suppose someone comes to you, claiming that he is a financial guru, and that he can give you an expected return vector, designatedμ^,to be used in place ofμin Model (6) for the model to yield an optimal fund allocation vectorw^*for the upcoming holding period. You are interested in this vector of expected returns in order to determine how much it might be worth to you. Actually, the bestμ^to be used in this situation is the vector of returns that will actually occur in the upcoming holding period. This would represent the outer limit on forecasting ability as no forecast can be better than that.If in our example the guru tells youμ^=(8,6),this information has no value at all because this is the vector, from historical data, that you would be using by default if you had no information. However, if the guru tells youμ^=(6.8,7),this information has value because with it one can find his or her optimal fund allocation vector (different from the default case).By applying Model (8), withμ^=(6.8,7)instead ofμ=(8,6),one obtains, as a function of V, the optimal fund allocation solution vectorw^*and associated portfolio returnE^as follows:(10)w^*=(0.96−4.92V−1.44,1.5+4.92V−1.44)2.46E^=8.514+0.14.92V−1.441.23for V ∈ [0.2927, 0.48]. Here, the efficient frontier of Model (8), but withμ^,is drawn in Fig. 3and labeled “E^,True”. This is because, withμ^being the ultimate forecast, “E^,True” is the true efficient frontier, but this curve would not be known without the guru.Recall from Eq. (9) thatw*=((0.96+4.92V−1.44)/2.46,(1.5−4.92V−1.44)/2.46). This is the fund allocation solution vector resulting fromμ=(8,6). But sinceμ=(8,6)is incorrect,w*will not produce as high a portfolio return (for a given V) asw^*does when using theμ^=(6.8,7)given by the guru. Thus, when substitutingw*into the true objective function “max6.8w1+7w2”, we then obtain, as a function of V, the portfolio return ofE˜,where(11)E˜=8.514−0.14.92V−1.441.23for V ∈ [0.2927, 0.48]. Plotting (11) as a function of V produces in Fig. 3 the dashed curve labeled “E˜,Resulting”. Without the guru, this curve would not be known either, but it describes reality if the investor uses historical data rather than the guru’sμ^.Recapping, what we have thus far is this. An investor (could be a mutual fund, pension fund, hedge fund) agrees to take on a level of risk not to exceed V in the upcoming holding period. If the investor utilizes the guru’sμ^vector, then the investor will implementw^*from Eq. (10) and achieve the portfolio return of the point corresponding to V on “E^,True”. If, however, the investor chooses to turn down the guru’sμ^and go with historical data, then the investor will implementw*from Eq. (9), which in general will be incorrect, and only wind up with the portfolio return of the point corresponding to V on “E˜,Resulting”, with the difference between these two curves being the value of information.The difference between the true portfolio return and the resulting portfolio return,I=E^−E˜,is the loss due to making an incorrect decision, which is also the value of the information provided by the guru. At the smallest risk level ofV=0.2927,where there is only one point in the feasible region, one will not make a wrong decision, so the loss due to making a wrong decision there is zero, and the corresponding value of information is also zero. Therefore, if one is paranoid about making a wrong decision, the investor should choose the portfolio of lowest risk, as no mistake can be made there. But as risk increases, the loss due to making a wrong decision, or the value of information, characteristically22In more complex problems, increases in the value of information may not be strictly monotonic with V as there may be subintervals of V (seen later) in which the value of information decreases slightly before resuming its typically increasing trend.increases. In the example the value of information is given byI=E^−E˜=0.24.92V−1.44/1.23which yields a minimum value of zero atV=0.2927,a maximum value of 0.1561 atV=0.48,and an overall average over the V-range of “E^,True” ofI¯=10.48−0.2927∫0.29270.48(0.24.92V−1.44/1.23)dV=0.1041Being under the illusion in the default case that the investor’s expected portfolio return is given by the point corresponding to V on “E, Historical”, only to find out in reality that one’s portfolio return is given by the point corresponding to V on “E˜,Resulting”, the vertical distance between these two points in terms of expected return would be the investor’s level of disappointment. That is, when applying the incorrect fund allocation vectorw*,you are expecting a portfolio return ofμTw*=E=(8.34+4.92V−1.44)/1.23. But sinceμ^=(6.8,7),your resulting portfolio return isμ^Tw*=E˜=(8.514−0.14.92V−1.44)/1.23. The difference between E andE˜,designated D, shows the level of your disappointment. This value varies with the level of risk. In the example, the level of disappointment is given byD=E−E˜=(−0.174+1.14.92V−1.44)/1.23Note that D can be negative, indicating that your portfolio return is more than your erroneous expectation. For example, atV=0.2927,the most risk averse case, the level of disappointment isD=6.7805−6.9220=−0.1415, which is the most negative one. The curves E andE˜intersect atV=0.2978. If for some reason being disappointed is to be avoided, an investor would then wish to choose a risk level between 0.2927 and 0.2978 in this problem.The two-asset example can be generalized to n assets. Let us first consider the default case in which theμ-vector of Model (6) is composed of mean returns obtained from historical data. In this model, the fund allocation solution vector isw*and this causes the investor to believe that his expected portfolio return is given byμTw*. Whilew*,whenn=2,is the straight line in decision space that runs from the point of minimum variance to the point33We are assuming here that the two points of this sentence are each unique.that maximizes∑i=1nμiwi,when n ≥ 3, the line running between the two points is no longer in general a single straight line. It is in general a piecewise linear path, or in other words, a connected path of linear line segments. It is noted that the points along the path at which one segment connects to another are called “turning points” as the path changes direction at these points. How a piecewise linear path comes about is described as follows.In Model (6), the constraint∑i=1n∑j=1nwiσijwj≤Vdefines an ellipsoid in n-dimensional space. Its intersection with the hyperplane∑i=1nwi=1is another ellipsoid, but in(n−1)-dimensional space. At the smallest attainable risk level, the(n−1)-dimensional ellipsoid degenerates to one point, its center. Starting at this point, the ellipsoid expands with risk level V. Since the objective function is linear, the fund allocation solution vectorw*starts out on a ray emanating from the point of minimum variance as whenn=2,but before getting too far will likely hit a wi≥ 0 constraint. As long as the objective function of Model (6) can increase,w*will follow the constraint. Then maybe another such constraint is encountered, andw*will follow it as long as it is possible to increase the value of the objective function. The process continues in this way, withw*in effect zigzagging through the feasible region, until the point that maximizes the objective function of Model (6) is reached.Now when the guru-supplied objective function coefficient vectorμ^is utilized, Model (6) becomes Model (12)(12)E^=max∑i=1nμi^wis.t.∑i=1n∑j=1nwiσijwj≤V∑i=1nwi=1wi≥0foralliwhere the fund allocation solution vector that solves Model (12) as a function of V, following earlier notation, is denotedw^*. But because Model (6) has objective function coefficient vectorμ, and Model (12) has objective function coefficient vectorμ^,assumingμ≠μ^,w^*will head away from the point of minimum variance in a different direction and encounter constraints differently thanw*in search of the point that maximizes over V the value of Model (12)’s objective function∑i=1nμi^wi. Thus, with the two vectors generally becoming further apart as V increases, the value of information,I=∑i=1nμi^(wi^*−wi*),typically increases, but of course there can be, as alluded to in footnote2, intervals of V along which I decreases due to differences between the piecewise linear paths ofw*andw^*.The level of disappointment is the difference between the expected portfolio return calculated from historical data,∑i=1nμiwi*,and the portfolio return∑i=1nμi^wi*experienced by the investor in reality, which can be expressed as∑i=1n(μi−μ^i)wi*. While the(μi−μ^i)are constants as a function of V, the weighted sum∑i=1n(μi−μ^i)wi*is not, and can easily be increasing along one of the linear segments ofw*and decreasing along the next. Thus it cannot be predicted what a given level of disappointment curve will do at a given point and depends upon the problem.For then=2illustrative problem of Sections 3 and 4, all can be carried out manually and shown graphically. But when, as discussed in Section 5, a problem involves more than two securities and perhaps takes on additional constraints, the path in decision space that corresponds to the problem’s efficient frontier will in almost all certainty be more complicated. When this is the case, access to tools like Matlab (2013) and mathematical programming software become necessary .In this section, to demonstrate the concepts of the paper on a larger problem, a real problem from an emerging market, in which the path is indeed piecewise linear and price volatility can cause the value of information to be high, is taken from the Taiwan Stock Exchange.Taiwan is a newly industrialized country, and its rapid economic development starting in the 1990s won it the title of one of “The Four Dragons of Asia”. Established in 1960, the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TSE) is in charge of the listing and trading of securities. Currently, there are over 800 companies on the TSE. Because data on Taiwan stocks are required for the problem being set up, Thomson Reuters Datastream is used as our data source. But for countries other than the U.S. and Canada, Datastream is only complete from 1988 onward. Selecting only Taiwanese stocks that are complete since 1988, this then allows us to draw annual return data for our experiments from the period January 1, 1989 to December 31, 2014. While there are 44 such stocks, two are dropped (China General Plastics and Namchow Chemical) because of outlier price behavior. If anything, the dropping of the two securities only causes the results of our problem to be less pronounced than if they were included.The 42 remaining companies, as listed in Table 1, are all in traditional industries, such as textiles, foods, cement, plastics, construction, pulp, and so on. Now, assume that you are the manager of a $2 billion Taiwanese mutual fund and that the 42 stocks of Table 1 constitute your approved list of securities for investment. You of course do not have to invest in them all, but you cannot go outside of the list.Because how much to set aside for research is always a difficult decision, suppose that, with regard to the 42 securities, you wish to determine what your fund’s value of information was last year (for 2014). In other words, you wish to determine how much money you would have left on the table had you used historical means for the expected returns in Model (6) versus a guru-suppliedμ^as the objective function coefficient vector in Model (12).To determine this, imagine yourself back at January 1, 2014, and that you would like to use all 25 years of previous historical data for computing the mean returns of the 42 securities and the covariance matrixΣassociated with these securities over the period. This gives us the 25-year mean returns and standard deviations (covariances not shown) listed in columns two and three of Table 1.Solving Model (6) for many values of V produces the Historical efficient frontier labeled as such in Fig. 4(a). Despite the fact that variance is used in Model (6), and also in Model (12), observe that standard deviation is on the horizontal axis. This is normal. While theory and computation are typically conducted in terms of variance, results in portfolio analysis are commonly displayed in terms of standard deviation for greater interpretability. We follow this practice from this point on in this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The problem of portfolio selection can be viewed as the problem of determining the optimal proportions of capital to invest in a set of assets for the purpose of either maximizing expected return for a given upper bound on risk, or minimizing risk for a given lower bound on expected return. However, accurate estimates of individual asset expected returns, the procuring of which generally poses a considerable challenge, are crucial to the process of properly obtaining these proportions. With investors having to commonly proceed with estimates that are not fully accurate, the purpose of the paper is to examine in detail what happens inside of a portfolio selection problem when this is the case. This causes the paper to focus on the concept of the value of information and to introduce the concept of levels of disappointment. Just as Markowitz (1952), Frances and Archer (1971), and others have used small numerical/graphical examples to illuminate their discussions in portfolio selection, we have used an example in the same style to illustrate our work in portfolio selection. In our work with the value of information and levels of disappointment, there are two major findings.First, the value of information, which is zero at the lowest attainable risk level, generally increases to high levels with risk thereafter. The value of information is of course a key reference point in helping an investor judge how much to spend on research. Second, different from the value of information, the level of disappointment at the lowest attainable risk level is not necessarily zero. It can be positive or even negative, indicating that an expected return higher than anticipated can be experienced.The whole idea is applied to a case from the Taiwan stock market. An interesting result is that an investor will earn over the long haul what is expected, as indicated by a value around zero for the level of disappointment, but there can be severe differences year to year. What is important and attractive is that an investor could earn on average 20 or more extra percentage points of return per year if sufficient information is provided. Such is quite possibly true about other developing markets, which deserve further research. Possible extensions to the work of this paper that could be interesting would be to apply the methodology to problems with semi-continuous variables (Calvo, Ivorra, & Liern, 2011) and to models with additional objectives as the topic of multiple criteria portfolio management has been attracting increasing attention (Xidonas, Mavrotas, Krintas, Psarras, & Zopounidis, 2012).