@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Risk shaping in production planning problem with pricing under random yield

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presented a risk shaping model for production planning problem under random yield.Used Conditional Value-at-Risk as the risk measure.Developed an efficient solution method for the presented nonconvex model.The presented model can incorporate risk thresholds of decision makers.The presented model can be used for obtaining efficient frontiers.Characterized the set of saddle points by KKT conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk management,Coherent risk measures,Conditional value at risk,Random yield,Risk shaping,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we address a basic production planning problem with price dependent demand and stochastic yield of production. We use price and target quantity as decision variables to control the risk of low production yield. The value of risk control becomes more important especially for products with short life cycle where high losses are unbearable in the short run. In this cases, optimization of a solely scalar function of profit is not sufficient to control the risk. We apply Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) measure to model the risk preferences of the producer. The producer is interested in shaping the risk by bounding from below the means of α-tail distributions of profit for different values of α. The resulting model is nonconvex. We propose an efficient solution algorithm and present a sufficient optimality condition.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper, we consider production planning problem under random yield for a risk averse decision maker. In our setting, a producer sets price before the realization of yield. This is a common practice for products with long production cycle such as vaccines and electronic chips. Both of them also have random yield. The yield of production of a variety of products is random in different industries ranging from agricultural to manufacturing. This could be as a result of such different factors as production process, the quality of raw materials, or natural phenomena. Random yield is also present in procurement from suppliers either due to supply disruptions or their products not meeting quality standards. Random yield imposes high risk on producers. Therefore, controlling the risk in advance is of high value for them.Nowadays, one important feature of many products is their short life cycle. This could be due to fast technological changes, such as in the case of semiconductors, or perishability and large inventory cost, such as in the case of biological and agricultural products. Therefore, it is unreasonable to use criterion like the expectation of profit to compare different policies. The expectation specifically is equal to the average long term profits and gives decisions which are optimal on average. Whereas products with short life cycle do not have opportunity to be sold in the long-run. Furthermore, it is possible that a few successive run of large losses, for example due to low demand, makes it impossible for a firm to stay in the market. Therefore, considering other measures other than mean becomes necessary.Risk is an important factor in decision making of many industries. Risk sources are diverse and include any phenomenon that can not be predicted with certainty. Phenomena such as natural disasters, change of regulations, strikes, terrorist attacks and a lot more. Risk can not be defined without associating it with an attribute which is important for the decision maker. For example, for a firm, profit is an important attribute. Moreover, risk associated with profit can not be described just by one number such as variance, mean, quantile and etc. That is the very reason that in financial markets a lot of measures are used to make decision as to whether or not one portfolio is better than another. Perhaps the best way to describe the risk is to use the probability distribution of its associated attribute. We can not claim that probability distribution exactly describes the risk but it is at least our subjective description of the risk. So if we accept the distribution as the description of the risk, the next step is to compare distributions associated with alternatives (actions, policies or strategies) to find the best alternative. For example, consider profit as our desired attribute. Under different policies the distribution function of profit changes accordingly. One important question arises in this situation as to how to compare distributions. It depends on what aspects of the risk is more important to us. We know that the distribution function has all information about the risk associated with profit, but we need to know how to measure one aspect using the distribution function. If we use several measures, it is probable that at the end we can not come up with a single best distribution. Therefore, we usually use a few measures. In the case of one measure, we obtain complete order of distributions. In this paper, we deviate from usual practice in inventory problems and use more than one risk measure to compare distribution functions in a relatively easy but fundamental problem setting. For more study on risk notion, the reader may refer to Arrow (1971); Kahneman and Tversky (1979); Machina (1987).The expected utility criterion is usually used for modeling the risk aversion of a decision maker but there are serious pitfalls associated with this measure in practical decision making. First, and most importantly, it is hard to elicit utility function of a rational decision maker. Second, the utility values are not sensible in practice. One can compare several alternatives based on expected utility, but can hardly tell exactly how much one is better than another. The utility theory as a general descriptive model of behavior has long shown its weaknesses (e.g., Refer to Kahneman & Tversky (1979)). However, it is a sensible model for description of rational behavior or in other words as a normative model.In this paper, we use a risk measure called Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR). This risk measure has been popularized by Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000, 2002). Its popularity comes from its convexity property and its relation to Value-at-risk (VaR), a widely used risk measure in finance. Moreover, CVaR is in the class of coherent risk measures (Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, & Heath (1999)). CVaR simply computes the conditional mean of the100(1−α)percent of worst-case values of a continuous random variable X. Furthermore it is consistent with first and second order stochastic dominance. Since the introduction of coherent risk measures, a lot of variant classes of risk measures have been introduced for one-period decision problems (see e.g., Föllmer and Schied (2002), Rockafellar, Uryasev, and Zabarankin (2006); Ben-Tal and Teboulle (2007)).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the relevant literature. In Section 3 we study production planning problem under yield uncertainty. We use CVaR measure to control the risk of large loss at different risk aversion levels. Since, the constrained problem is nonconvex, we propose an efficient algorithm for finding local maxima based on envelope theorems. Finally, in Section 4, we provide a sufficient optimality theorem based on duality theory. It can assure the global optimality of the obtained solution from the proposed algorithm given some conditions are satisfied.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
