@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reverse supply chain coordination by revenue sharing contract: A case for the personal computers industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed an analytical model for the two- and three-echelon reverse supply chain.Defined the PC recycling supply chain as foundation for generating the analytical model.Analyzed the model behavior and profit implications by the applicability of a numerical example.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reverse supply chain co-ordination,Revenue sharing contract,End-of-life product,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Products that are not recycled at the end of their life increasingly damage the environment. In a collection – remanufacturing scheme, these end-of-life products can generate new profits. Designed on the personal computers industry, this study defines an analytical model used to explore the implications of recycling on the reverse supply chain from an efficiency perspective for all participants in the process. The cases considered for analysis are the two- and three-echelon supply chains, where we first look at the decentralized reverse setting followed by the coordinated setting through implementation of revenue sharing contract. We define customer willingness to return obsolete units as a function of the discount offered by the retailer in exchange for recycling devices with a remanufacturing value. The results show that performance measures and total supply chain profits improve through coordination with revenue sharing contracts on both two- and three-echelon reverse supply chains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Customers’ attention to environmental issues, business’ adaptation to the competitive market, and an increasingly controlled legislation all play a central role in the way businesses are created and managed in the global market. To meet these requirements, companies increasingly focus on developing sustainability practices and on creating reverse supply chains in order to recapture value and to provide methods of proper disposal. A series of mechanisms have been identified that coordinate the forward supply chain. To a great extent, many of these mechanisms – contracts, information technology, information sharing, and joint decision-making – can be applied to coordinate the reverse supply chain as well. Among these coordination mechanisms, contracts are tools designed to facilitate interaction between disparate members of the supply chain and to motivate participants to behave in the best interests of a supply network (maximization of total supply chain profit). By specifying parameters such as quality, deadlines, and other similar incentives, the introduction of contracts, as a coordination mechanism, provides protection to members against individual free riding (Cachon, 2003).While many studies have analyzed the behavior of the forward supply chain under contractual terms, it is of interest to observe the applicability and implications of these contracts on the reverse supply chain, which has limited analysis at present. The main area in practical research is on the coordination of reverse supply chains represented by e-waste and electronics recycling. Practical examples in the industry are found in Toktay et al. (2000) with a focus on Kodak single use cameras and inventory control, Kumar et al. (2002) on Hewlett Packard printer division showing that product returns can be a profitable business, Guide et al. (2003) on the mobile phone industry that considers acquisition management’s impact on realized profit, Nagurney and Toyasaki (2005) on the management of e-waste and recycling, and Bai (2009) with a focus on cartridge recycling and revenue sharing contract in two-echelon supply chains.Looking at the global electronics market, there is one particular industry where reverse supply chains are being created and coordinated among businesses and where little attention has been addressed in literature, namely the personal computers (PC) industry. PCs are a commodity in the developed countries with a lifespan of 2–5years. As a consequence, and for economic benefits, the industry receives increased consideration at all levels, from the government and PC manufacturers to individual PC users.According to the industry and centered on the available reverse supply chains, the recycled products take various paths. Based on its functionality state, a PC can enter one of the four channels presented in Fig. 1.Devices that are no longer useful for the owner can be offered for resale in the secondhand PC market or through internet auctions (eBay). There are some original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) such as Dell Computers and Apple Inc. who collect old products when a customer purchases a new product, thus providing the opportunity for exchange. Others (Hewlett–Packard) offer a coupon for further purchases or free services in exchange for a used PC: hence, take back. Finally, if the devices are of no further use, they are separated into component parts and recycled to enter new production systems: scrapping. According to the particular country’s legislation, recycling channels can be under state control (California), under the manufacturer’s responsibility (United States), or with diverse responsibility known as free market system (Europe).Based on Fig. 1, it is relevant for the contracting literature to conduct an analysis of the supply chain under the situation where old products return to the OMG for recapturing value, refurbishing, and reselling on the market. Therefore, attention in this study is directed on the take back channel under the assumption that for each recycled PC with remanufacturing value, OMG offers the final customer a discount for a new purchase in the form of coupon to be used with its retailers.As a new contribution to the existing literature, the intention of this article is to propose an analytical model to observe the implications of coordination by contracts on the two-echelon and three-echelon reverse supply chain and on the profit of the supply chain members. Correspondingly, the main objectives of the research are to:–Identify appropriate coordination contracts to be analyzed given the situation described in Section 1.Define the PC recycling supply chain, to be the foundation for generating the analytical model.Design specific profit functions of the supply chain members (two-echelon and three-echelon reverse supply chains).Derive and find limitations for the decision variables considered for profit evaluation.Observe model behavior and profit implications by the applicability of a numerical example.The study was solely conducted through desk research with the proposed analytical model being verified through applicability on a numerical example and by means of Excel computations.The article is structured as follows: Section 2 looks at the literature review on coordination contracts applied on forward and reverse supply chains; Section 3 presents the analytical model; Section 4 defines a numerical example and a discussion based on results, and the general conclusions and model drawbacks, along with suggestions for further research, are presented in Section 5.Optimal supply chain performance can be achieved if participants in the cooperative game coordinate their efforts and use contractual incentives so that all participants’ objectives are aligned with the objectives of the supply chain (Cachon, 2003). These incentives are imposed by the implementation of coordination contracts such as wholesale price, buy back, revenue sharing, quantity flexibility, sales rebate, and quantity discount. General approaches to these coordination contracts can be found in Malone and Crowston (1994) and Cachon (2003, 2004). Recent reviews of coordination contracts and contracting literature on the forward supply chain are available in Albrecht (2010) and Höhn (2010).Regarding performance improvement brought to the supply chain by coordination contracts, some studies were conducted to analyze coordination contracts by comparison. Gerchak and Wang (2004) analyze revenue sharing contracts versus wholesale price contracts. Cachon and Lariviere (2005) and Wang et al. (2007) look at performance improvement brought by buy back and revenue sharing contracts, while Höhn (2010) studies the implementation of buy back and quantity flexibility contracts. With a focus on wholesale price, buyback, revenue sharing, and quantity flexibility settings, Arshinder et al. (2009) offers a performance measure evaluation with regard to a decentralized setting within two-level supply chains. Under the consideration of three-level supply chains, Arshinder et al. (2009a) presents an evaluation of wholesale price, buy back, and quantity flexibility in relation to the decentralized case and in terms of performance measures improvement. Kannan et al. (2012) investigates a series on contracts applied on the two-echelon supply chain and indicates that revenue-sharing contracts offer the highest profit margins for the manufacturer.Based on these studies, it was observed that a revenue sharing contract performs very well in terms of profit improvement under coordination and brings the highest benefit to the manufacturer. For this reason, we direct our attention to the literature that addresses coordination by implementation of a revenue sharing contract.There are numerous studies focusing on revenue sharing analysis on the forward two-echelon supply chains. Some recent studies that investigated the behavior of revenue sharing under specific settings are presented by Kunter (2012) with a focus on consumer demand simultaneously affected by price and non-price variables, Krishnan and Winter (2011) on a dynamic incentive model under competition, and Wang et al. (2008) on the implications of fuzzy variables, while Cachon and Lariviere (2005) look at contract strengths and limitations, and Giannoccaro and Pontrandolfo (2009) examine the negotiation approach.Referring to the multi-echelon setting, Van der Rhee et al. (2010) studies advantages that all pairs of adjacent entities have under revenue sharing and stochastic demand in a linear supply chain, Ji et al. (2007) analyzes a three-stage supply chain and cost structure implications on the total profit, and Giannoccaro and Pontrandolfo (2004) look at the contract parameters in a three-echelon supply chain under both decentralized and centralized settings. Chen (2006) looks at the free riding problem under the consideration of productive effort, risk aversion, and incentive intensity.With respect to coordinating contracts with applicability on reverse supply chains, some studies were conducted to meet supply chain coordination objectives (cost and risk reduction and/or profit maximization) but they did not particularly focus on coordination contracts. Among the incentives used to coordinate the reverse supply chain, a deposit refund with impact on quality, quantity, and timing of the returns seem the most preferred approach among researchers. Some of the studies that focus on these considerations may be found in Palmer and Walls (1997), Guide and Jayaraman (2000), and Savaskan and Wassenhove (2006). Furthermore, Guide and Wassenhove (2001) developed a framework with the scope of analyzing returns brought by remanufacturing, Dobos and Richter (2004) investigate supply chain implications of buyback costs in a production-recycling system, and Mostard and Teunter (2006) analyze newsboy problem with resalable returns. Atasu and Subramaniyan (2012) looks at the implications of collective and individual producer responsibility on product recovery and profits and on consumer surplus in the presence of competition; Ferguson et al. (2006) looks at supply chain profit improvement as a consequence of reducing the number of false failure returns and using a target rebate contract approach.A particular approach to coordination contracts is presented by Shi and Bian (2009); it analyzes the aspects of revenue sharing and quantity discount contracts in a two-echelon closed loop supply chain and reveals that by contract implementation and elimination of double marginalization, the closed loop supply chain achieves coordination. Another recent study conducted by Wang (2009) shows that coordination can be broken by various events. In this aspect, the author proposes an adjusted revenue sharing contract with anti-disruption ability as an optimal strategy for the closed loop supply chain. Other studies that analyze revenue sharing contracts on the two-echelon supply chain within the reverse logistics setting include Shi and Bian (2011) on closed loop with government subsidy and Xiao et al. (2011) on the remanufacturing problem under product quality.Although some attempts were made on developing recycling models for coordinating the two-echelon supply chains – with contracts – within different industries, limited research was undertaken on studying these implications within the coordination of multi-echelon reverse supply chains, i.e., Cai (2011) and Yi and Wang (2011).Based on (1) the revenue sharing contract offering the highest benefit to the manufacturer on the forward supply chain setting (Kannan et al., 2012), (2) the limited contracting literature on the reverse logistics, and (3) the increasing attention addressed to the PC industry, it is perceived as essential to conduct a study that addresses the take back return path of PCs with remanufacturing value under two- and three-echelon supply chains. In Section 3 we propose an analytical model to accommodate these criteria and to derive the corresponding profit functions for each of the participants among the reverse supply chain activities.Obsolete PC devices that are not resold in the secondhand market, exchanged, or scrapped enter the take back path for remanufacturing purposes. In creating the model we assume that the recycling process takes place through a closed loop supply chain where the goods return to the manufacturer using the same distribution chain similar to the one used to sell goods, the forward supply chain, as visualized in Fig. 2.Using a drop-off collection mode (Atasu and Souza, 2011), the retailer collects PC’s from users and sends them down the supply chain. The distributor receives the PCs from the retailer and forwards them to the manufacturer who, in turn, refurbishes and sells them. The refurbished devices are to be sold through different supply chains via Internet pages or through a manufacturer’s own retail stores.The analytical model was designed using an event sequence scheme. To address the objectives of this paper, we introduce parameters taken into consideration along with their representative notations and model simplifying assumptions. Based on this, we generate the expressions for profit functions for the members of the two- and three-echelon reverse supply chains. In both cases we first look at the decentralized case followed by the coordinated case under a revenue sharing contract, as visualized in Fig. 3.Under the decentralized case scenario, the retailer acts in his own interest so that his own profit is maximized, disregarding other members of the reverse supply chain. He collects PCs with remanufacturing value and, in return, offers the customer an optimal discount for further purchases. The devices are sold for a wholesale price, higher than the discount offered to the customer, down the supply chain. In the three-echelon supply chain, the distributor buys the devices from the retailer and sells them to the manufacturer.Coordination by a revenue sharing contract implies that the retailer collects devices with remanufacturing value and offers an optimal discount to the customer so that the total supply chain profit is maximized. Contrary to the decentralized case, under coordination, the retailer is acting for the benefit of the entire supply chain and not for maximizing his own profit. Collected devices are shipped down the supply chain for a recycling fee lower than the wholesale price applied in the decentralized case.Under both decentralized and coordinated cases, the PCs are subject to inspection with the retailer. At the manufacturers’ site, the devices undergo a second inspection where the devices that do not meet remanufacturing standards are disposed of (Fig. 2). After a re-manufacturing process, the PCs are sold and returns are generated. With a revenue sharing contract the benefit is shared with other members of the supply chain.After specifying the profit functions, the next sequence involves model testing, where a numerical example is applied to evaluate the implications on the profit functions under the decentralized case and under coordination by the revenue sharing contract.The recycling system presented in Fig. 2 includes multiple participants at each level of the supply chain. To proceed with the analytical model, we propose two simplified supply chains consisting of one retailer and one PC manufacturer for the two-echelon reverse chain and of one retailer, one distributor, and one PC manufacturer for the three-echelon reverse chain, as visualized in Fig. 4. With regard to the two-echelon supply chain, the collected devices are transferred directly from retailer to manufacturer; there are no intermediaries. In the three-echelon supply chain, the distributor is an active member in the chain, adding margin in the decentralized case and taking a fraction of the revenue in the coordinated setting.Following the analytical model and the proposed simplified supply chains, we first introduce simplifying notations and the decision variables considered in generating the profit functions and the assumptions behind the model, followed by the profit representations in the second part of Section 3.1.The terms used to generate profit functions and their representative simplifying notations for all supply chain members are as follows:The retailer (R):•W: customers’ willingness to return used PCs expressed as function of the discount value offered by the retailer (dc): W=f(dc) where 0<f(dc)<1;E: the number of eligible units for return (the number of units that have the potential to enter the take back path – as fraction of total sales);wr: the recycling fee received by the retailer from the distributor/manufacturer for each unit with remanufacturing value;cri: inspection cost at retailer;ϑ: acceptance rate at retailer (as fraction of E);crh: handling cost at the retailer (including storage cost);crs: shipping cost from retailer to distributor (three-echelon).The distributor (D) – for three-echelon consideration only:•wd: recycling fee received by the distributor from the manufacturer for each unit with remanufacturing value;cdh: handling cost at distributor;cds: shipping cost from distributor to manufacturer.The manufacturer (M):•Q: sales quantity of new devices realized by the retailer during one period (considered for computation of E);ω: recovery rate (the percentage of devices that can enter the remanufacturing process as part of ϑ);P: selling price of refurbished devices;cmf: refurbishing/remanufacturing cost;cmi: inspection/sorting cost;cmd: disposal cost for devices not selected for refurbishment;cd: recycling fee to distributor (two-echelon only).Decision variables for the decentralized case:•dcr: optimal discount offered to the customer by the retailer in exchange for recycling units with remanufacturing value (non-coordination).Decision variables for the revenue sharing case:•dcC: optimal discount offered to the customer by the retailer for recycling devices with remanufacturing value (coordination);α: fraction of the total revenue allocated to the manufacturer;β: fraction of the total revenue allocated to the distributor (three-echelon only);γ: fraction of the total revenue allocated to the retailer (three-echelon only) and with α+β+γ=1;wr′: discounted recycling fee received by the retailer from the distributor/manufacturer andwr′⩽wr;wd′: discounted recycling fee received by the distributor from the manufacturer andwd′⩽wd(three-echelon only).In creating the model, we have defined and considered the following assumptions:–The time frame considered is one planning horizon with only one return shipment made by each member.The quantity to be shipped is subject to inspection, and only units that qualify for reuse are accepted by the retailer; in return for recycling these units, the user is offered a discount for future purchases.The manufacturer has unlimited capacity to refurbish all recycled devices.All devices refurbished by the manufacturer are sold.Under revenue sharing consideration, the revenue generated at the manufacturers is shared by all members.Following the analytical model described in this section along with notations, decision variables, and simplifying assumptions, we design the profit formulas of the reverse supply chain members for two-echelon and three-echelon settings.(a)Decentralized caseThe profit functions of the manufacturer and the retailer are:•Manufacturer’s profit=Sales revenue – Recycling fee paid to the retailer – Remanufacturing cost – Disposal cost – Inspection/Sorting cost – Contribution cost to distributor•Retailer’s profit=Recycling fee received from manufacturer – Discount offered to the customer – Inspection cost – Handling cost – Shipping cost to manufacturerBy replacing the willingness to return with its equivalent linear function, making the derivative of retailer’s profit according to dcand equaling the equation to zero, the optimal discount to be offered to the customer can be expressed as presented below.Retailer’s profit based on linear willingness to return is:(4)PrD=wrQdcdcmaxϑ-Qdc2dcmaxϑ-criQdcdcmax-crhQdcdcmaxϑ-crsQdcdcmaxϑThe derived optimal customer discount formula for the decentralized reverse supply chain is:(5)dcr=wr-crh-crs-ric/ϑ2(b) Coordination by revenue sharing contractIn the coordinated case, the discount offered to the customer maximizes the entire supply chain profit (unlike the decentralized case where only the retailer’s profit ix maximized). The optimal discount to be offered to the customer can be derived from total supply chain profit (PSCC=Pm+Pr) following the same procedure as in the decentralized case.(6)PSCC=PωQdcdcmaxϑ-cmfωQdcdcmaxϑ-cmd(1-ω)Qdcdcmaxϑ-cmiQdcdcmaxϑ-cdQdcdcmaxϑ-Qdc2dcmaxϑ-criQdcdcmax-crhQdcdcmaxϑ-crsQdcdcmaxϑThe derived optimal customer discount equation for the coordinated reverse supply chain is:(7)dcC=Pω-cmfω-cmd(1-ω)-cmi-cd-crh-crs-cri/ϑ2The profit functions of the manufacturer and the retailer under coordination by revenue sharing contract are:•Manufacturer’s profit=Share of sales revenue – Discounted recycling fee paid to the retailer – Remanufacturing cost – Disposal cost – Inspection/Sorting cost – Distributor fee•Retailer’s profit=Share of sales revenue realized by manufacturer+Discounted recycling fee received from manufacturer – Discount offered to the customer – Inspection cost – Handling cost – Shipping cost to manufacturerBy extrapolation of the shared surplus, the optimal fraction of the revenue is:(11)α=αmax-S2αmax(PωQWCϑ)From Eq. (10) it can be observed that the fraction of the revenue α has a direct, linear relation with the discounted recycling fee charged by the retailerwr′. The higher the recycling fee charged by the retailer, the higher the share retained by the manufacturer from the total revenue.(a)Decentralized caseThe profit functions of the three-echelon reverse supply chain members in the decentralized case are:•Manufacturer’s profit=Sales revenue – Recycling fee paid to distributor – Remanufacturing cost – Disposal cost – Inspection/Sorting cost•Distributor’s profit=Recycling fee received from manufacturer – Recycling fee paid to the retailer – Handling cost – Shipping cost to manufacturer•Retailer’s profit=Recycling fee received from distributor – Discount offered to the customer – Inspection cost – Handling cost – Shipping cost to distributorSimilar to the two-echelon setting, when the supply chain is not coordinated the retailer tries to maximize his own profit. From Eq. (14) we can derive the optimal discount to be offered by retailer to the customer. The discount takes the same optimal value as presented in Eq. (5):dcr=wr-crh-crs-cri/ϑ2.(b) Coordination by revenue-sharing contractIn the coordinated three-echelon setting, the discount offered to the customer maximizes the entire supply chain profit. The optimal discount formula can be derived from total supply chain profit by following the same procedure as that used for the two-echelon setting.Total supply chain profit isPSCC=Pm+Pd+Prand, under linear distribution of the willingness to return, it takes the form:(15)PSCC=PωQdcdcmaxϑ-cmfωQdcdcmaxϑ-cmd(1-ω)Qdcdcmaxϑ-cmiQdcdcmaxϑ-cdhQdcdcmaxϑ-cdsQdcdcmaxϑ-Qdc2dcmaxϑ-criQdcdcmax-crhQdcdcmaxϑ-crsQdcdcmaxϑThe derived optimal customer discount formula for the coordinated reverse supply chain is:(16)dcC=Pω-cmfω-cmd(1-ω)-cmi-cdh-cds-crh-crs-cri/ϑ2Under the revenue sharing contract, revenue generated by the manufacturer is to be shared among supply chain members. In this paper, revenue shares are allocated on a spanning approach (Van der Rhee et al., 2010) where each member of the chain takes a fraction of the revenue realized by the manufacturer (as opposed to a pair-wise approach where the distributor is allocated a fraction of the revenue generated by the manufacturer and shares it with the retailer).The representative profit functions of the members are:•Manufacturer’s profit=Share of sales revenue – Discounted recycling fee paid to the retailer – Inspection/Sorting cost – Remanufacturing cost – Disposal cost – Distributor’s fee•Distributor’s profit=Share of sales revenue realized by manufacturer+Discounted recycling fee received from the manufacturer – Discounted recycling fee paid to the retailer – Handling cost – Shipping cost to manufacturer•Retailer’s profit=Share of sales revenue realized by manufacturer+Recycling fee received from the manufacturer – Discount offered to the customer – Inspection cost – Handling cost – Shipping cost to distributorUnder similar consideration of each member gaining more from cooperation and equal share of cooperative supply chain surplus, the optimum extrapolated revenue share fractions are:(20)α=αmax-2S3αmax(PωQWCϑ)(21)β=βmin+S3αmax(PωQWCϑ)(22)γ=γmin+S3αmax(PωQWCϑ)where–From(23)PdRS≥PdD→β≥(WC-W)(cdh+cds)-WC(wd′-wr′)+W(wd-wr)PωWC=βminFrom(24)PrRS≥PrD→γ≥(WC-W)(crh+crs+cri/ϑ-WC(wr′-dcC)-W(wr-dc)PωWC=γminAnd fromα+β+γ=1→αmax=1-βmin-γmin.The behavior of the analytical model proposed in this section for the decentralized and for coordination by revenue sharing cases – for both two-echelon and three-echelon supply chains – is observed by applying a numerical example, presented in detail in Section 4.For the numerical example we consider the case of Apple Inc. At present, Apple Inc. collects used devices from customers in return for a coupon to be used to purchase another Apple product directly from the Apple website or from Apple retail stores. In this section we extend and accommodate the current Apple Inc. procedure to fit the model proposed in Section 3.Under the above considerations and based on the actual sales generated by Apple, in the first quarter of 2011, of 4.13 million Macs3Source: Apple First Quarter Results extracted from http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2011/01/18results.html.3and an average retail price per unit of 997 EUR (1408 USD),4Source: http://news.cnet.com/8301-13579_3-10149060-37.html.4the data used in this numerical example represents estimations of what real data might indicate. After the introduction of the input data, we proceed to present and to discuss the results.The data used for validation of the analytical model in thousands units (TU) and in thousand monetary units (TMU) are presented in Table 1.Regarding the decision variables, the values resulted from Excel computations for maximum supply chain profit and a fair benefit sharing are as presented in Table 2. The optimal discount values were obtained by applying Eqs. (5), (7), and (16) to the numerical data. In the same manner, Eqs. (11) and (20-22) were applied to obtain shares of the revenue for the manufacturer, distributor, and retailer, where it is observed that the manufacturer retains the highest fraction of the total supply chain profit under both two- and three-echelon settings. In our example, the discounted recycling fees received by the distributor and by the retailer under coordination are considered to be 33% of the given total recycling fee of 0.35 TU and respectively 0.30 TU. This percentage is generally agreed through negotiation between the partners.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study is the first to direct attention towards the analysis of the supply chain performance measures under coordination by revenue sharing contract on the three-echelon reverse supply chain. The paper proposes an analytical model to support its objectives related to both centralized and decentralized cases in two respective three-echelon reverse supply chains. An examination of the PC industry’s take back/drop-off collection mode, the two-stage (retailer–manufacturer) and three stage (retailer–distributor–manufacturer) reverse supply chains, where each member is constrained to perform the following activities was investigated: the retailer inspects the devices to be refurbished, collects and stores accepted devices for a predefined period of time, and ships them to the downstream supply chain; the distributor is responsible to retrieve the devices from the retailer and to send them to the manufacturer; the manufacturer inspects and sorts the devices for remanufacturing and, if necessary, for proper disposal. Further, the revenue generated at manufacturer from the sale of refurbished PCs is shared with the other members of the supply chain under the coordination by revenue sharing contract. Based on benefits and costs associated with each activity and on the simplifying assumptions, the profit functions and decision variables have been defined for both the decentralized and coordinated cases.The proposed model has been tested by applicability on a numerical example. The results establish that supply chain coordination does improve performance measures of participants under the cooperative game and increases total supply chain profit. Further:–Significant returns are realized for all supply chain members given the optimal discount offered to the customer and the retained fractions of the revenue.In both supply chain settings, performance improves from the decentralized case to coordination by the revenue sharing case. The introduction of the distributor into the setting affects the profit of the manufacturer such that, under the three-echelon setting, he shares the revenue with two participants, as opposed to sharing it with only one participant in the two-echelon setting. Yet, under current globalized markets the distributor is a key player in the supply chain as he takes on the role of collecting devices from multiple retailers and shipping them to the manufacturer.The presented model performs well under current setting and offers a positive outcome. However, the model is limited by the assumptions made in designing the supply chain settings and profit formulas. The constraints imposed by the model can be relaxed to same degree, and seen from a theoretical standpoint, the model is open for further research and development. In this respect, some of the suggestions to be considered are:–As this research focuses on the reverse chain within a closed loop setting, possible extensions can be done by incorporating the forward supply chain into the analysis or by considering open loop supply chains and 3PRL.Consideration of the ‘PC manufacturer – Component providers’ link included in Fig. 2. Some of the topics to be covered here are: the impact on the bottom line of the component provider, the implications of having new parts incorporated in refurbished products or component provider’s role in assisting in the refurbishing process.The revenue generated is shared based on a spinning approach. The results can be also computed to reflect the implications of a pairwise revenue sharing approach.As this research is solely based on desk research, more realistic results can be obtained by field research (i.e., a survey used to determine a user’s willingness to return, based on different retailer discount ranges or on the use of a numerical example with input data collected from the industry).Consideration of the pick-up, collection mode or the approach of the stochastic collection mode.Consideration of the closed-loop supply chain for selling the refurbished devices. Would this cannibalize sales of new products?Some interesting questions to be tackled include: How does a zero value of the discount offered by retailer to customer affect a customer’s willingness to return (linear/non-linear function) and what implication does this have on individual and total supply chain profits? How should the manufacturer increase the number of collected devices to generate profitable returns? Does the willingness to return increase because owning a PC has become a commodity?Related to contracting literature, the model can be further extended to incorporate different coordination contracts or models and parallel analysis in performance improvement terms between revenue sharing and other proposed models.In addition to the above mentioned practical, economical, and theoretical implications, the research also triggers attention on the social implications PC manufacturing and PC recycling have on the industry. For good functioning of the supply chain, better efforts must be made to establish well-grounded reverse logistics, to increase awareness, and to educate the final customer about PC recycling. in the long run, this approach would generate new challenges for the involved parties, new functional positions within the recovery operations area, and would ultimately reduce the environmental impact.