@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact of cost uncertainty on pricing decisions under risk aversion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identify the root causes of cost uncertainty in service.We investigate the impact of cost and demand uncertainties on pricing decisions under risk aversion.Cost uncertainty increases price, whereas demand uncertainty reduces it.We establish an optimal cost contingency policy under a sequential service engagement process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pricing,Service,Cost uncertainty,Risk aversion,Cost contingency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies cost uncertainty in services. Despite the fact that the service sector has become the largest component of gross domestic products in most developed economies, cost uncertainty and its impact on pricing decisions have not received much attention in the literature. In this paper, we first identify the root causes of cost uncertainty in services. Using the distinctive characteristics of services defined in the literature, we show why cost uncertainty, which has been widely neglected in the manufacturing dominated literature, is pervasive in services. Next, we investigate how cost uncertainty affects a risk-averse service provider’s pricing decisions in a make-to-order setting. Using the expected utility theory framework, we show that cost uncertainty increases the optimal price, whereas demand uncertainty reduces it. As a result of the countervailing impacts, the optimal price under risk aversion may be larger or smaller than the optimal risk-neutral price. Next, we study the problem of optimizing cost contingency in service contract pricing. We show that the optimal cost contingency decreases as the profit of the contract increases even when the utility function exhibits an increasing absolute risk aversion. Finally, we introduce various strategies to mitigate the risk of cost uncertainty observed in practice, and propose new research problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When engaging on a service contract, service providers are uncertain about the cost of delivering the service. For example, consider a software development service provider that bids for an application development project. In the software development outsourcing industry, fixed-price contract, under which a buyer pay a fixed fee to a service provider, is one of the most common forms of contracts (Gopal, Sivaramakrishnan, Krishnan, & Mukhopadhyay 2003). To offer a fixed-price contract for the software development project, the service provider first estimates the labor and other costs to develop the application, and determines the price based on this estimate. The total labor hours required to complete the project, which determine the actual cost of the service, are difficult to estimate in advance. In software development projects, project requirements involve significant uncertainties, which often cause cost overruns (Kraut & Streeter 1995). Anecdotal examples from other service industries such as the business process outsourcing industry and the construction service industry also highlight the significance of cost uncertainty in services. (Flyvbjerg, Holm, & Blomberg et al. 2014; Buhl 2004).Cost uncertainty yields a substantial risk in service profitability, and thus has a huge impact on the service provider’s pricing and contracting decisions. Despite its importance, cost uncertainty has not received much attention in the pricing and contracting literature. This oversight is in a sharp contrast to demand uncertainty, which has been studied extensively (see, e.g., Özer & Phillips 2010). As Shoemaker and Mattila (2009) pointed out, most existing pricing frameworks were developed in the context of consumer goods. Karmarkar and Pitbladdo (1995) argue that the very nature of service markets depends on distinctive characteristics of services. Hence, the existing pricing frameworks cannot properly address the problem of service pricing. The service sector now accounts for about 80 percent of the United States economy (New York Times 2010). Thus, cost uncertainty and its impact on pricing decisions are important subjects to explore.In this paper, we first introduce cost uncertainty in services. The characteristics of services have been well explored in the literature. We show how each of the defining characteristics of services yields cost uncertainty, which also explains why cost uncertainty does not usually arise in manufacturing. Next, we investigate the impact of cost uncertainty on pricing decisions made by a risk-averse service provider in a make-to-order setting. In our model, the service provider starts delivering the service after the demand is realized, and thus quantity (production) decisions are made trivially. Using the expected utility theory framework, we model the problem of pricing under cost and demand uncertainties, and show how the two sources of uncertainty affect the optimal pricing decision. Next, we study the problem of optimizing cost contingency in service contract pricing. We show how the properties of the potential contract affect the optimal cost contingency. Finally, we introduce various strategies that service providers employ in practice to mitigate the risk of cost uncertainty, and propose new research problems.This paper is closely related to the literature on pricing under demand uncertainty and risk aversion. In the economics and operations literature, how a seller’s risk aversion and demand uncertainty affect pricing decisions has captured some attention (e.g., Leland 1972, Agrawal & Seshadri 2000, Colombo & Labrecciosa 2012, Rubio-Herrero, Baykal-Gürsoy, & Jaśkiewicz 2015). This literature, however, consistently assumes that cost is certain (or zero), and hence the impact of cost uncertainty has not been explored. The impact of risk aversion and demand uncertainty on the optimal inventory (production) decisions has been studied extensively in the operations literature (see, e.g., Ahmed, Çakmak, & Shapiro 2007, Wang, Webster, & Suresh 2009, Choi & Ruszczyński 2011). This stream of work, however, considers neither the pricing decision nor the uncertainty in cost. We contribute to the literature by introducing cost uncertainty in services, and investigating its impact on pricing decisions under risk aversion.The pricing literature has shown that the impact of demand uncertainty on the optimal pricing decision sharply depends on the demand uncertainty model (Agrawal & Seshadri 2000, Xu, Chen, & Xu 2010). Hence, we solve the problem under three different demand uncertainty models: valuation uncertainty, additive demand uncertainty, and multiplicative demand uncertainty. We show that under all demand uncertainty models, cost uncertainty consistently increases the optimal price, whereas the impact of demand uncertainty varies depending on the model. We defer all proofs to the appendix.In this section, we explore what makes service costs uncertain. As we discussed in the previous section, cost uncertainty has been neglected in the manufacturing centered pricing literature. This oversight implies that the causes of cost uncertainty are closely related to distinctive characteristics of service. The characteristics of service have been well studied in the literature. As summarized by Sampson and Froehle (2006), there are five defining characteristics of service: intangibility, heterogeneity, simultaneity, perishability, and customer participation. Among the five, all but perishability contribute cost uncertainty in service. In this section, we discuss how the four remaining characteristics yields cost uncertainty.The most important characteristic of service that causes cost uncertainty is simultaneity. Simultaneity of service refers to the fact that services are produced and consumed at the same time. The consumption of service can only occur after the service provider and the buyer agree on the payment for the service. Hence, simultaneity implies that the timing of sales precedes the timing of production. For example, consulting projects begin after clients sign on contracts, and lawyers start providing legal services after clients sign on retainer agreements. In contrast, in most markets of consumer goods, manufacturers produce goods first, and consumers buy completed products from retailers. In other words, in manufacturing the timing of production usually precedes the timing of sales.The cost of a service involves significant uncertainties until the service is fully delivered. For example, the time to complete a service job such as cleaning a house or repairing a car is uncertain until the job is finished. In the IT outsourcing service industry, service providers often deliver services using globally distributed delivery centers (Zarrella 2010). In this case, the currency and inflation rates of the countries at which delivery centers are located also contribute to cost uncertainty.The point of production completion is the time when cost uncertainty is fully resolved. Similarly, the point of sales is the time when demand uncertainty is realized. Customers make purchasing decisions based on prices, which means that pricing decisions are made before the point of sales. Hence, as shown in Fig. 1the fact that delivery follows sales implies that service providers make pricing decisions in the presence of cost uncertainty. Off-shore production is also common in manufacturing, which implies that production cost in manufacturing can be also uncertain. However, because production precedes sales in manufacturing, cost uncertainty is fully resolved before consumers make purchasing decisions for manufactured goods.The second characteristic of service that yields cost uncertainty is intangibility. The price of a manufactured good is not always determined after production is fully completed. For example, computer manufacturers may adopt assemble-to-order strategies under which final assembly of products is done after customers place their orders (Oh, Sourirajan, & Ettl 2014a). In other words, pricing decisions for manufactured goods can also be made before the production is completed, i.e., under cost uncertainty. However, even in such cases, the degree of cost uncertainty faced by manufacturers is minor compared to that faced by service providers. The production cost of manufactured goods is highly dependent on tangible objects such as raw material costs and component costs. Such costs are relatively easy to quantify and predict. In contrast, service costs critically depend on intangible objects such as skill and knowledge levels of workers and their productivity. These key determinants of service costs are difficult to measure, and highly variable. The productivity of a worker changes daily and the skill level improves over time yet at variable rates. Hence, estimating service costs is much more challenging than estimating production costs.The third characteristic of service that yields cost uncertainty is heterogeneity. In manufacturing, most goods are produced via mass production, and the production processes are highly automated. Hence, there is a minor variability in the production costs of the same product. In contrast, every service is custom because service production is fundamentally driven by customers’ inputs (Spohrer, Maglio, Bailey, & Gruhl 2007, Roels 2014). Thus, delivery costs of the same type of services are all different.When estimating the cost of an IT outsourcing service contract, one can use the realized costs of similar contracts as inputs for a prediction model. However, because every customer’s needs and business environments are different, such an estimation involves significant uncertainties (Blomberg et al. 2014). In software development services, customer specific needs are known to cause significant variations in costs (Dibbern, Winkler, & Heinzl 2008).The fourth characteristic of service that yields cost uncertainty is customer participation. In collaborative services such as consulting, financial planning, and IT outsourcing services, the buyer provides direct inputs such as labor to the production of the service, i.e., the service is co-produced by the service provider and the buyer (Roels, Karmarkar, & Carr 2010). In such cases, the outcome of the service depends on both the provider and buyer’s efforts, i.e., costs. Hence, the amount of efforts that the service provider needs to allocate to accomplish the goal of a service project depends on the efforts of the buyer. From the service provider’s perspective, this dependency yields cost uncertainty.In the previous section, we explored why costs are uncertain when making pricing decisions for a service. In this section, we investigate the impact of cost uncertainty on a risk-averse service provider’s pricing decisions in the make-to-order setting. It has been shown in the literature that the impact of demand uncertainty on pricing decisions sharply depends on the demand model (e.g., Leland 1972, Agrawal & Seshadri 2000, Xu et al. 2010, Colombo & Labrecciosa 2012). For example, under the additive demand uncertainty model, the optimal price for a risk-averse newsvendor is smaller than the optimal risk-neutral price, whereas the opposite is true under the multiplicative demand uncertainty model (Agrawal & Seshadri 2000). Hence, we study the problem of pricing under cost and demand uncertainties with three demand uncertainty models. In the first model, the service provider sells a service project to a single buyer whose valuation for the project is uncertain. In other words, demand uncertainty stems from the uncertainty in the single buyer’s valuation. In the second model, demand uncertainty is additive to the expected demand function, and in the third model demand uncertainty is multiplicative to the expected demand function.Consider a service provider that determines the price of a service, p. The demand for the service, D(p), is a random function of the price. We will specify this demand function for each of the three cases shortly. The unit cost of the service, c, is uncertain to the service provider when making the pricing decision. We assume that c and D(p) are independent. For the sake of generality, we do not make any further assumptions on c such as its support or distribution function. In Section 6, we briefly discuss the impact of a fixed cost. The service provider starts delivering the service after the demand is realized, i.e., makes-to-order, and thus the quantity decision is made trivially. Under this setting, the service provider’s profit is given asΠ(p)=(p−c)D(p). We denote the price that maximizes the service provider’s expected profitE[Π(p)]=E[(p−c)D(p)]by pn, and call it the optimal risk-neutral price.The service provider has a utility function U(·), which is a concave and strictly increasing function and satisfiesU(0)=0. The concavity of the utility function implies that the service provider is averse to risk. Service providers’ risk aversion is well documented (Gopal et al. 2003, Chen & Bharadwaj 2009). The service provider’s objective is to maximize the expected utilityE[U(Π(p))]=E[U((p−c)D(p))].We denote the optimal price that maximizes the expected utility by p*.We first consider the case in which the service provider faces an uncertain valuation of one potential buyer. Suppose that the service provider bids for a service job such as designing a web page or translating a document in online service markets such as oDesk and Elance. The buyer of the service has a reservation price, i.e., valuation, v for the service, which is private information. The buyer accepts the service provider’s offer if v is greater than p. In this case, the demand for the service is given asD(p)=1(v≥p). We denote the p.d.f. of v by f(·), and the c.d.f. of v by F(·). We assume that v has an increasing failure rate, i.e.,f(·)1−F(·)is a strictly increasing function. Commonly used random variables such as normal, logistic, and uniform random variables satisfy this condition. This condition ensures that the first-order necessary condition is sufficient for the optimality. Colombo and Labrecciosa (2012) also consider the same demand model although cost is assumed to be zero in their study.By considering only one of the two sources of uncertainties, we first show their individual impacts on the optimal price.Theorem 11.Ifc=E[c]with probability one, p* ≤ pn.Ifv=E[v]with probability one, p* ≥ pn. More specifically,p*=max{E[v],p^}andpn=max{E[v],E[c]},wherep^≥E[c]is the unique p that satisfiesE[U(p−c)]=U(0).Part 1 of Theorem 1 shows that when the cost is certain, the optimal price is smaller than the optimal risk-neutral price. This result implies that the uncertainty in the buyer’s valuation leads the firm to set the price lower than the profit maximizing price. This result is consistent with the result of Colombo and Labrecciosa (2012). Similarly, part 2 of Theorem 1 implies that cost uncertainty leads the firm to set the price higher than the profit maximizing price. When the firm knows the buyer’s valuation with certainty, the expected profit maximizing pricing strategy has a simple threshold structure. If the buyer’s valuation is greater than the expected cost, i.e., E[v] ≥ E[c], it is optimal to increase the price up to the highest level that the customer is willing to pay, i.e.,pn=E[v]. Otherwise, the firm can only lose money by selling the service, and thuspn=E[c],which means no sales. Under risk aversion, this pricing strategy does not maximize the expected utility. Even when the service provider sells the service at a higher price than the expected cost, there is a positive probability that the firm’s profit is negative. The optimal pricing strategy has the same threshold structure as the profit maximizing strategy except that the firm only sells the price if the valuation is greater than a thresholdp^,which satisfiesp^>E[c].Theorem 1 also implies that cost and valuation uncertainties have countervailing impacts on the optimal price. Valuation uncertainty reduces the optimal price, whereas cost uncertainty increases it. When both uncertainties exist, the order between the optimal price and the optimal risk-neutral price is ambiguous. Depending on the degree of the two sources of uncertainties, the optimal price may be greater or smaller than the risk-neutral price. We show this result by adopting a specific utility function and cost uncertainty model.Theorem 2Suppose thatU(x)=1−exp(−αx)and that c is normally distributed. Then the following properties hold:1.p*increases as Var(c) increases.For each α, there exists a unique Var(c) under whichp*=pn.We use this specific utility function and make the normality assumption for the sake of analytic convenience, but the property would continue to hold under other model settings. The coefficient of absolute risk aversion−U′′(x)U′(x)is a widely used measure of the degree of risk aversion (Schoemaker 1982). WhenU(x)=1−exp(−αx),the coefficient of absolute risk aversion is given as−U′′(x)U′(x)=α. The theorem shows that for a given level of risk aversion, there is a unique degree of cost uncertainty with which the optimal price coincides with the optimal risk-neutral price. If the cost is less uncertain than this threshold, the optimal price is smaller than the optimal risk-neutral price, and otherwise the opposite is true.In practice, firms often add a buffer called cost contingency to the cost estimate when developing a service delivery plan (Councill et al. 2009). One may conjecture based on the observation that the optimal price of a service under cost uncertainty and risk aversion may be larger than the profit maximizing price. However, as our analysis shows, due to demand uncertainty the optimal price can also be smaller than the profit maximizing price.Next, we consider the demand model of the following form:D(p)=d(p)+ξ,where d(p) is a deterministic function and ξ is a random variable. Due to its simplicity, this additive demand uncertainty model is widely used in the literature. Without loss of generality, we assume thatE[ξ]=0. Hence, d(p) indicates the expected demand. We assume that d(p) is continuously differentiable, bounded, concave and strictly decreasing in p, and that the expected profit pd(p) is concave in p. These regularity conditions are widely used in the literature to avoid technical complications (see, e.g., Federgruen & Heching 1999, Agrawal & Seshadri 2000, Maglaras & Meissner 2006). More specifically, these conditions assure that the first-order necessary condition is sufficient for the optimality.Under this demand model, the optimal risk-neutral price is the solution of the following first-order condition:(1)pd′(p)−E[c]d′(p)+d(p)=0.As the price increases marginally, the demand decreases by−d′(p),which results in the profit loss of−(p−c)d′(p). At the same time, because of the increased profit margin, the profit increases by d(p). The optimal risk-neutral price balances this trade-off.We next derive the optimality condition under risk-aversion, and discuss how it differs from (1).Lemma 1The optimal price is the solution of the following equation:(2)pd′(p)−(E[c]+Cov(c,U′(Π(p)))E[U′(Π(p))])d′(p)+d(p)+Cov(ξ,U′(Π(p)))E[U′(Π(p))]=0.We haveCov(c,U′(Π(p)))E[U′(Π(p))]≥0andCov(ξ,U′(Π(p)))E[U′(Π(p))]≤0.The optimality condition (2) is the same as (1) except thatCov(c,U′(Π(p)))E[U′(Π(p))]is added to the expected cost E[c], and thatCov(ξ,U′(Π(p)))E[U′(Π(p))]is added to the expected demand d(p). Note thatCov(c,U′(Π(p)))E[U′(Π(p))]=0when the cost is certain or the service provider is risk-neutral. Hence,E[c]+Cov(c,U′(Π))E[U′(Π)]can be seen as the risk-adjusted expected cost. Similarly,d(p)+Cov(ξ,U′(Π))E[U′(Π)]can be seen as the risk-adjusted expected demand. The lemma shows that the risk-adjusted expected cost is greater than the expected cost, and the risk-adjusted expected demand is smaller than the expected demand. In other words, cost uncertainty leads the firm to overestimate cost, and additive demand uncertainty leads the firm to underestimate demand.The distortion in the estimation has the following impact on the optimal price.Theorem 31.Ifξ=0with probability one, p* ≥ pn.Ifc=E[c]with probability one, p* ≤ pn.Part 1 of the theorem implies that cost uncertainty makes the service provider set a higher price than the profit maximizing price. The uncertainty in cost leads the service provider to overestimate it, which results in an overpricing of the service. In contrast, the uncertainty in demand leads the service provider to underestimate the demand, which results in an underpricing of the service as shown in part 2 of the theorem. Similar to the uncertain valuation case in the previous subsection, when both demand and cost are uncertain, the optimal price can be either greater or smaller than the optimal risk-neutral price depending on the relative strengths of the two uncertainties.Finally, we consider the multiplicative demand uncertainty model, which is another commonly used demand uncertainty model. The demand function has the following form:D(p)=ϵd(p),where ϵ is a random variable that satisfiesE[ϵ]=1and ϵ > 0 with probability one. We assume that the expected demand d(p) satisfies the same regularity conditions as in the additive uncertainty case.The optimal risk-neutral price is the same as in the additive demand uncertainty case, i.e., the solution for (1). The following lemma shows how the optimality condition for p* changes in the multiplicative uncertainty case.Lemma 2The optimal price is the solution for the following equation:(3)pd′(p)−(E[c]+Cov(c,ϵU′(Π(p)))E[ϵU′(Π(p))])d′(p)+d(p)=0.We haveCov(c,ϵU′(Π(p)))E[ϵU′(Π(p))]≥0.As in the additive demand uncertainty case, the risk-adjusted expected costE[c]+Cov(c,ϵU′(Π(p)))E[ϵU′(Π(p))]is greater than the expected cost. However, the expected demand in (3) is the same as that in the risk-neutral case, which implies that multiplicative demand uncertainty does not distort the demand estimation of the risk-averse service provider.Using the optimality condition, we can show how cost and demand uncertainties affect the optimal price in the multiplicative uncertainty case.Theorem 41.Ifϵ=1with probability one p* ≥ pn.Ifc=E[c]with probability onep*=pn.p* ≥ pn.When the demand is certain, cost uncertainty distorts the optimal price upwards as in the two previous cases as shown in part 1. However, when the cost is certain, multiplicative demand uncertainty has no impact on the optimal price as shown in part 2 of the theorem.In the multiplicative uncertainty case, the service provider’s profitϵ(p−E[c])d(p)is proportional to ϵ. In other words, the value of ϵ scales the service provider’s revenue and cost to the same degree. For every ϵ, the unique maximizer of(p−E[c])d(p)also maximizes the firm’s ex-post utility. If the ex-post optimal price is the same for every ϵ, it clearly is ex-ante optimal. Because the maximizer of(p−E[c])d(p)is pn, we have thatp*=pn.Agrawal and Seshadri (2000) show a different result from ours. They show that a risk-averse newsvendor sets the price higher than the profit maximizing price under multiplicative demand uncertainty. The difference is generated by the timing of the production decision. In our problem, the service provider makes the quantity decision after the demand uncertainty is realized, and thus the quantity can simply be set at D(p). In contrast, in the problem of Agrawal and Seshadri (2000) the decision maker makes pricing and production decisions at the same time. The optimal production quantity of their problem is smaller than the profit maximizing quantity. Because the production quantity is reduced, the decision maker also increases price to reduce demand accordingly.When both multiplicative demand uncertainty and cost uncertainty are present, the optimal price is larger than the optimal risk-neutral price as shown in part 3 of Theorem 4. The result highlights that additive and multiplicative demand uncertainties have clearly different impacts on the service provider’s pricing decision. Additive demand uncertainty reduces the optimal price, whereas multiplicative demand uncertainty has no direct impact on the optimal price.Before proceeding to the next subsection, we summarize the results of this section: (i) cost uncertainty always increases the optimal price, (ii) valuation uncertainty reduces the optimal price, (iii) additive demand uncertainty reduces the optimal price, and (iv) multiplicative demand uncertainty does not directly affect the optimal price.In the cases of valuation uncertainty and additive demand uncertainty, demand and cost uncertainties have countervailing impacts on the optimal price. Given the fact that service providers always face demand uncertainties when making pricing decisions, this observation implies that cost uncertainty may help set the price closer to the profit maximizing level. One may argue based on this observation that cost uncertainty is beneficial for service providers. However, cost uncertainty creates significant risks in service providers’ profits. As noted by Gopal et al. (2003), the uncertainty in service costs leaves significant financial burdens to small service firms. Adding cost contingency to cost estimates is one way to mitigate the risk of cost uncertainty. In the next section, we study the problem of optimizing cost contingency using the expected utility theory framework, and discuss the implication on the cost contingency rules observed in practice.When a large service enterprise agrees on a new service contract with a client, the engagement process consists of solution design, quality assurance, and pricing phases (Councill et al. 2009, Oh, Strong, Chandra, & Blomberg 2014b). During the solution design phase, technical solution architects develop a service delivery plan and estimate the cost of the service. During the quality assurance phase, risk assessment experts quantify the risk level of the potential contract based on the uncertainties residing in the delivery plan, and add a cost contingency on the cost estimation. During the pricing phase, pricers and sales representatives determine the price of the contract based on the contingency added cost (Councill et al. 2009, Guven et al. 2014). The cost contingency helps reduce the probability of cost overruns in the service delivery. The same practice is also observed in the construction service industry (Thompson & Perry 1992).The existing research on cost contingency focuses on the method of predicting uncertain project costs, and the method to determine the amount of cost contingency to control the probability and impact of cost overruns below a desired level (see, e.g., Touran 2003, Chou 2011). This stream of research, however, does not take demand uncertainty into consideration. Our analysis in the previous section highlights that both demand and cost uncertainties cause risks, and thus affect the optimal pricing decision. Hence, when determining the cost contingency, the joint impact of cost and demand uncertainties needs to be considered. We study cost contingency in consideration of the two sources of uncertainty.In practice, cost estimation, risk assessment, and pricing decisions are often made by different teams using independent tools and methods in large service enterprises (Councill et al. 2009, Guven et al. 2014, Oh et al. 2014b). Using the expected utility theory framework, we study the problem of optimizing cost contingency under a sequential process of service engagements. Theorem 2 implies that the cost contingency should increase as the degree of cost uncertainty increases. We further this result by investigating the impact of other characteristics of the potential contract on the optimal cost contingency.We revisit the pricing problem under valuation uncertainty studied in Section 3.1. Suppose that a service provider bids for a service project with an uncertain cost c. The buyer’s valuation for the project is v, which is uncertain to the service provider. We denote the p.d.f. and c.d.f. of v by f(·) and F(·), and assume that v has an increasing failure rate. The service provider offers the service at a fixed price p. The service provider’s profit is given asΠ(p,c)=(p−c)1(v≥p),and the optimal price that maximizes the service provider’s expected utility is given asp*=argmaxpE[U(Π(p,c))]. For the sake of brevity, we limit the focus of this section to the cases in which the optimal price satisfies Prob(v ≥ p*) ≠ 0. If this condition does not hold, it is optimal not to engage on the service contract.With this model setting, we next describe the service contract engagement process. During the solution design phase, the service provider first develops a project plan, and estimates the cost of the project E[c]. Next, the service provider assesses the risk of the project, and adds a cost contingencycc^to the expected cost. Then by taking the contingency added costE[c]+cc^as the deterministic contract cost, the service provider determines the price that maximizes the expected utilityE[U(Π(p,E[c]+cc^))]. Hence, for the cost contingencycc^to ensure the optimal pricing decision, it needs to satisfy the following equation:(4)argmaxpEv,c[U(Π(p,c))]=argmaxpEv[U(Π(p,E[c]+cc^))].We denote the solution for (4) bycc^*and call it the optimal cost contingency.It is important to note that the optimal cost contingency does not necessarily imply thatE[U(Π(p*,c))]=E[U(Π(p*,E[c]+cc^*))],which in turn implies thatE[U(p*−c)]=U(p*−E[c]−cc^*)when c and v are independent. That is, the deterministic profitp*−E[c]−cc^*is not the certainty equivalent of the actual profit of the contractp*−c. We define the certainty equivalent of the cost contingency, or in short the certainty equivalent, as the deterministic quantityce^that satisfies(5)Ev,c[U(p*−c)]=Ev[U(p*−E[c]−ce^)],and denote it byce^*. The certainty equivalent indicates the amount of additional cost that the service provider is willing to spend to remove the uncertainty in cost upon signing the contract.The inconsistency betweencc^*andce^*is caused by demand uncertainty. As shown in the previous section demand and cost uncertainties jointly affect the optimal pricing decision. Hence, when determining the cost contingency, the service provider needs to take into consideration the interaction between the two. The certainty equivalentce^*does not reflect this joint impact. The following theorem explains this discrepancy in a transparent way. A utility function U(x) is called to have a decreasing (resp., increasing) absolute risk aversion if the coefficient of absolute risk aversion−U′′(x)U′(x)is decreasing (resp., increasing) in x.Theorem 51.If U(·) has a decreasing absolute risk aversion,cc^*≥ce^*.If U(·) has an increasing absolute risk aversion,cc^*≤ce^*.The amount of cost buffer should depend on the degree of the service provider’s risk aversion. Note that the degree of the service provider’s risk aversion may change as the profit level of the contract changes. For example, the service provider may care less about cost uncertainty if the expected profit of the contract is larger. The monotonicity of the absolute risk aversion describes such changes in the degree of risk aversion. If the utility function has a decreasing absolute risk aversion, then the service provider becomes less averse to risk as the profit of the contract increases, and the opposite is true if the utility function has an increasing absolute risk aversion.Before the service contract is signed, i.e., when demand (valuation) is uncertain, the expected profit of the contract is given as(p−E[c])Prob(v≥p),which is the multiplication of the sales probability Prob(v ≥ p) and the expected profit of the contract after signingp−E[c]. Because the service provider makes the pricing decision before contract signing, the optimal cost contingencycc^*is based on the service provider’s risk aversion at the profit level of(p−E[c])Prob(v≥p). In contrast, by the definition of the certainty equivalence in (5),ce^*is based on the service provider’s degree of risk aversion at the profit level ofp−E[c],i.e., the expected profit after contract signing. Note thatp−E[c]≥(p−E[c])Prob(v≥p). Hence, if the service provider has a decreasing absolute risk aversion,ce^*is based on an underestimation of the risk aversion, which implies thatcc^*≥ce^*. The opposite is true if the service provider has an increasing risk aversion.Before discussing comparative statics of the optimal cost contingencycc^*,we first show how the certainty equivalentce^*changes as E[v] and E[c] change.Theorem 61.If U(·) has a decreasing absolute risk aversion,ce^*decreases in E[v], and increases in E[c].If U(·) has an increasing absolute risk aversion,ce^*increases in E[v], and decreases in E[c].The profit of the contract increases as the buyer’s valuation for the contract increases. Hence, if the service provider has a decreasing absolute risk aversion, the certainty equivalent of cost uncertainty decreases as E[v] increases, and the opposite is true if the service provider has an increasing absolute risk aversion. Similarly, the profit of the contract decreases as the expected cost E[c] increases. Thus, the certainty equivalent changes in the opposite direction as E[c] increases.Next we discuss whether the optimal cost contingencycc^*shows similar comparative statics asce^*. Unfortunately, the monotonicity of the absolute risk aversion is not sufficient to establish the monotone properties ofcc^*. In order to obtain sufficient conditions that assure monotone properties ofcc^*,one needs to make certain assumptions on the fourth-order derivative of the utility function. Instead of making such arbitrary assumptions, we consider widely used utility functions in the literature and show how the optimal cost contingencycc^*changes in E[v] and E[c].Theorem 7Suppose that the utility function and the cost distribution takes one of the following forms:1.U(x)=log(x+1).U(x)=x−λx2for some λ > 0.U(x)=1+βx−exp(−αx)for some β ≥ 0 and α > 0, and c is normally distributed.U(x)=1−βx−exp(−αx)for some β > 0 and α > 0, and c is normally distributed. Then,ce^*decreases in E[v] and increases in E[c].Note that the first and third utility functions have a decreasing absolute risk aversion (constant absolute risk aversion whenβ=0in the third utility function), and the other two utility functions have an increasing absolute risk aversion. Unlike the monotone property ofce^*,which shows sharply different results depending on the monotonicity of the absolute risk aversion, the monotone property of the optimal cost contingencycc^*shows consistent results. That is, the optimal cost contingency decreases as the buyer’s valuation increases, and it decreases as the expected cost decreases regardless whether the service provider’s aversion to risk increases or decreases in profit.In the presence of demand uncertainty, the service provider faces the risk of losing the potential deal. The cost of losing the deal is greater when the profit of the contract is larger. Hence, as the profit of the contract increases, the service provider optimally reduces the amount of cost contingency to increase the chance of getting the deal signed. In practice, service firms often adopt a practice of determining the cost contingency based only the project cost and its uncertainty (Touran 2003, Chou 2011), not based on the profit of the project. Our analysis shows that such a practice may result in overpricing. Service firms need to adopt policy that requires a smaller amount of cost contingency as the potential profit of the contract increases.Cost uncertainty can cause a considerable financial risk to service providers. The total contract price of a large IT outsourcing service can be multi-billion dollars (Spohrer et al. 2007). In such large service contracts, underestimated costs can easily result in multi-million dollar losses. Thus effectively managing the risk of cost uncertainty is an important problem for service providers. Adding a cost contingency in a fixed price contract studied in the previous section is one such risk management strategy. In this section, we discuss other risk mitigation strategies observed in practice, and propose new research problems.Investing in accurate requirements definition and project planning is a straightforward way to reduce the uncertainty in cost. Proposal development for a service contract involves requirements gathering, solution design, and pricing tasks (Blomberg et al. 2014). Requirements gathering refers to the activities to learn the client’s needs and their environments. Uncertainty in requirements is known to be one of the main sources of cost uncertainty in service contracts (Gopal et al. 2003). By collecting more information from the client and by developing the project plan at a finer level, service providers can reduce the degree of the cost uncertainty.However, gathering more information and developing a more detailed project plan come with a cost. They require more labor time, which means a higher cost for proposal development. The delay in proposal development also reduces the chance of winning the deal (Councill et al. 2009). Hence, service providers need to optimize the investment in cost estimation in consideration of these trade-offs. The problem of dynamically optimizing the investment in cost estimation (or proposal development) is an optimal stopping problem.The two most prevalent forms of service contracts are fixed-price contract and time-and-materials contract (Gopal et al. 2003). In online service markets such as oDesk and Elancer, service providers can choose between these two options when making an offer for a job. Under a fixed price contract, the buyer pays the service provider a fixed fee regardless of the cost, which implies that the service provider takes the full risk of cost uncertainty. In contrast, under a time-and-materials contract, the price of the service is proportional to the time that the service provider spends, i.e., cost, which implies that the buyer takes the full risk of cost uncertainty. These two forms of service contracts can thus be seen as the two extreme forms of contracts in terms of risk sharing.Anecdotal evidence supports that not only service providers but also service buyers are averse to risk (Gopal et al. 2003, Chen & Bharadwaj 2009). In the legal service industry, in which time-and-materials contracts have been prevalent, clients are increasingly demanding fixed-price contracts (Economist 2008). Service buyers’ risk aversion implies that they are less willing to accept a contract if their payments involve a higher level of uncertainty.Given that both service providers and buyers are averse to risks, the optimal form of service contracts may be a hybrid form, which consists of a fixed price and a variable price. Chen and Bharadwaj (2009) discuss that service providers often add various additional provisions to fixed-price contracts. Such additional provisions can be seen as variable prices that reduce service providers’ risk levels. The less risk that a service provider takes, its utility after contract signing gets larger, but the probability that the buyer signs on the contract gets smaller. Under this trade-off, service providers need to determine how to optimally distribute the risk of cost uncertainty between the two parties.Outcome-based pricing, under which the price of a service depends on the business outcome of the service, is gaining its popularity in various service sectors (e.g., Economist 2009, Economic Times 2013). For example, advertising service providers offer a contract with an outcome-based price under which the payments depend on the metrics that quantify the effectiveness of advertisement campaigns (Economist 2009). Roels et al. (2010) show that such outcome-based pricing is effective when both the service provider and the buyer’s efforts are equally important for the outcome of the service.From the risk perspective, outcome-based pricing significantly lowers the risk of service buyers because the price of a service, i.e., cost for buyers, is positively correlated with the value of the service. However, outcome-based pricing may substantially increase service providers’ risk levels. Under outcome-based pricing, service providers are uncertain not only about the cost, but also about the price, which is not necessarily correlated with the cost. In consideration of such risks, the optimal choice of the contract form may not always follow the prediction of Roels et al. (2010).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
