@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An analytical framework for supply network risk propagation: A Bayesian network approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Bayesian network model of risk propagation in a supply network is developed.The inter-dependencies and connectedness of various risks are modeled.A framework of measures is derived from this model.Simulation study demonstrates how the measures are used in a supply network setting.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk analysis,Risk management,Supply chain management,Networks,Uncertainty modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There are numerous examples of supply chain disruptions that have occurred which have had devastating impacts not only on a single firm but also on various other firms in the supply network. We utilize a Bayesian Network (BN) approach and develop a model of risk propagation in a supply network. The model takes into account the inter-dependencies among different risks, as well as the idiosyncrasies of a supply chain network structure. Specific risk measures are derived from this model and a simulation study is utilized to illustrate how these measures can be used in a supply chain setting.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In 2002, West Coast port employers shut down docks from San Diego all the way up to Seattle as a result of a labor dispute with the ship workers union. The result was delayed cargo for thousands of retailers and manufacturers which, consequently, rendered importers and exporters in fear of long reaching ripple effects to their businesses (Machalaba and Kim, 2002). There are numerous other examples of supply chain disruptions that have occurred which have had devastating impacts not only on a single firm but also on various others in the supply network (Olson and Wu, 2011). Further, it has been suggested that, “Supply chain disruptions and the associated operational and financial risks represent the most pressing concern facing firms that compete in today’s global marketplace” (Craighead, Blackhurst, Rungtusanatham, and Handfield, 2007). Consequently, an important question is: how do the set of risks in a firm’s supply chain relate to each other and subsequently propagate throughout the supply chain in the case of a disruption? A motivating force to this question is that supply chains can be more appropriately viewed as networks (Carnovale and Yeniyurt, 2014; Lambert, Cooper, and Pagh, 1998). As supply networks become increasingly global, not only will their networks grow in length but the level of complexity involved in managing them also grows accordingly. As firms increase the size and complexity of their supply networks the risk of disruption can increase (Blackhurst, Dunn, and Craighead, 2011; Choi and Krause, 2006). Disruptions have cascading effects that can have far reaching impacts on the supply network such as labor disputes leading to operational inefficiency and high turnover rates (Jiang, Baker, and Frazier, 2009). These can lead to impediments to the provision of products and services to end consumers (Zsidisin, 2003). In addition, risky supply chains have been shown to lead to abnormally negative returns on the focal firm’s stock (Hendricks and Singhal, 2005). While research has primarily viewed risk as either logistical or operational, our research abstracts out and rests within the domain of supply chain management taking a network-based perspective (Lambert et al., 1998). It has been suggested that tools need to be developed to measure the relationships, between and among, as well as the propagation of risk (Vakharia and Yenipazarli, 2008). Many frameworks have looked at risk management from a macro perspective and have the common procedure of risk identification, risk assessment, and the development of strategies to mitigate them (Altay and Green, 2006; Kleindorfer and Saad, 2005). These frameworks implicitly require reliable measures of risk. However, existing measurement models only result in local optimality and fall short on the consideration of the structure of the supply network, the effects of propagated risk, and the risk’s implicit casual structure within the supply network. The main objective of this paper is to introduce a framework of measures for risk and risk propagation in supply networks. We utilize a Bayesian Network (BN) approach and develop a model of risk propagation in a supply network. The model takes into account the inter-dependencies among different risks, as well as the idiosyncrasies of a supply chain network structure. Specific risk measures are derived from this model and a simulation study is utilized to illustrate how these measures can be used in a supply chain setting. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. We first review the extant literature on supply chain risk management (SCRM) as well as current measurement models. We give a brief review on Bayesian networks and their role in supply chain and risk management. We then construct our model and formulate various measures for risk and risk propagation in supply networks. Utilizing a simulation study, we demonstrate how our model can be used to measure supply chain risk. Finally, we provide the limitations and future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The primary goal of this paper was to introduce a framework to measure risk propagation in a supply network. As indicated previously, previous models of supply chain risk have either been specific to a particular problem or lacked a set of standard measures to be used for other scenarios. Many had disregarded the structure of the network itself. Also lacking was the measurement of risk propagation through a network. We argue that Bayesian networks lend themselves as a natural fit for the goal of measuring risks within a supply chain. If constructed according to the structure of the supply network, Bayesian networks represent a snapshot of a firms supply chain risk profile. The measures we developed as a result of the construction of the risk graph are general enough to adapt to nearly any situation involving a consequence to a particular event happening. These need not be solely financial loss but can be easily extended to other measures of loss such as damage to the environment, characteristics of the underlying supply network, economical measures of loss, psychological measures and so on. Furthermore, our measures can be used to solve for global optimality using previous models such as newsvendor and other inventory models (Eeckhoudt et al., 1995; Kass and Raftery, 1995; Lai, Debo, and Sycara, 2009), transportation problems involving risk (Erkut and Verter, 1998), network configuration and facility location (Blackhurst et al., 2011; Kulkarni, Magazine, and Raturi, 2004) and many more (Vakharia and Yenipazarli, 2008). They also could be used to develop mitigation and contingency plans that will increase a supply chain’s resiliency efforts (Hu, Gurnani, and Wang, 2013) by performing scenario analysis and integrating our measures in existing petri-net models (Wu et al., 2007; Zegordi and Davarzani, 2012). While we strongly advance the idea that our model is a solution to the problem of measuring risk in a supply network as well as its propagated effects, we must be weary of the limitations. First, the assumptions we have placed on the model are very specific and only account for a limited number of simple supply networks. Future work would be to loosen the assumptions and develop extensions on our model to solve the issues with the restrictive assumptions. Second, our measures are based heavily on the expectation operator, which for large networks could be computationally burdensome. Appropriate heuristics may need to be developed to solve these issues. The measures are also reliant on probabilistic inference, which itself becomes NP-Hard when the network grows beyond a certain point, however, there exist many algorithms to efficiently perform inference.While these limitations are restrictive, we must note that our proposed model has potential for many future research topics. Now that we have developed a model for measuring risks it is important to see the effects on current operational and logistical problems that were previously solved for locally optimal solutions. Additionally, given that our model is based on BN, we can query the network with simple or even complex problems. Such an ability allows for scenario analysis to be more prudently taken. Risk management strategies and contingency plans can also be developed around these measures since the underlying model allows for complex queries to be posed. Also of importance is the structure of the risk graph itself which is heavily reliant on the construction of a Bayesian network, and if the distributions are represented by the beta distributions, the networks have an ability to learn. Such flexibility allows for reduced effort in risk analysis and if implemented correctly can lead to a live “snapshot” of the firm’s risk profile, which itself may lend to information as to where the risk will next spread.Other measures can be further developed such as the aforementioned diagnostic measures. Rather than discovering how risky a location is within a supply network, it may be of interest to see the causes of a particular risk that had been observed. Also of importance to note is that our model assumes binary events: either the event happened or it failed to occur. An interesting extension would be to use continuous or discrete distributions in order to gauge to what extent can the risk occur.