@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Risk analysis in port competition for containerized imports

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A stochastic network-flow model was developed to analyze container flows.It includes inter-port, intermodal and inter-route competition, and congestion.Uncertainty impacts the variability in container flows, which reflect market volatility or rick.It measures risk as the spread and variability of distribution of container volume through port.Shipment variability has implications for port management, shippers, and railways.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics,Stochastic model,Container,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A number of factors are causing changes in container logistics, particularly for imports into the United States. These include growth and volatility in demands, expansion of new routes (Panama Canal and Northwest Passage), and development of new ports (Prince Rupert and ports on the Mexican west coast). Uncertainty is a major factor confronting logistics for container shipping. A stochastic network-flow model is developed in this study to analyze risk in port throughput as a result of randomness in critical variables in the logistics system for container imports into the United States. The results illustrate the stochastic distribution of container shipments at ports and routes serving the U.S. container market. The derived distributions for port throughput have important implications for port management.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shipping by containers has transformed global trade and has been more of a driver to globalization than all trade agreements during the previous 50 years (The Economist, 2013). A number of factors are causing major changes in the logistics of container imports, including growth in demands which are subject to uncertainty, expansion of routes (Panama Canal and Northwest Passage11Despite earlier concerns of not being viable, traffic is increasing on the Northern Sea Route (The Economist, 2012b). In part this is being driven by global warming which is opening the route between Asia and Europe, and in 2012 the number of transits has increased from 4 in 2010 to 46 in 2012 (Cockerham, 2012). This is benefiting from the changing energy trade resulting in part from expansion in the Russian territories shipping Arctic oil and gas to China. Putin has vowed to turn the Northern Sea Route to be one of the world's “key trade routes of international significance in scale.”), development of new ports (Prince Rupert and ports on the Mexican west coast), and larger ships requiring deeper drafts to be competitive. All of these lead to potential changes in container flows to the U.S. market. Of particular importance is congestion. Allegedly, “less than half of all container vessels arrive in port on schedule” (Bloomberg, 2011, p. 82). And these concerns continue in 2015 with extreme congestion at west coast ports and some shipments being diverted to other ports and routes (Buck, 2015). The Economist (2012a) elaborated on the forthcoming, prospective inter-port competition within the United States as a result of the expanded Panama Canal. Dredging at Eastern ports is being done to accommodate larger ships as well as the anticipated diversion from west-coast ports to serve the eastern and interior markets. The U.S. Army Corp of Engineers (ACE) estimates that U.S. ports are spending $6–8 billion a year in federal, local and private money to modernize and there are 17 port projects being studied for improvements. However Federal policies for port expansion are complicated and dated and concern exists as the United States is “the only industrialized country on the planet that does not have a comprehensive freight strategy” (Holywell, 2012 quoting Robert Puentes). This inter-port competition to expand has been characterized as an “uncoordinated arms race between ports for maritime supremacy” (Chapman, 2012).A high degree of risk exists for ports, railroads and managers of logistics about container shipping. Most important are the randomness in container demands, fuel costs, ship-lease rates, rail rates, etc. In addition, there are stochastic constraints in port throughput and rail capacity. These factors impact the spatial distribution of container flows. The purpose of this study is to analyze risk for port throughput and rail shipping as a result of the randomness of critical variables in the logistics system for container imports into the United States.22The model was of container imports. Exports of containers are relevant but were not possible because of data limitations. Modeling both imports and exports simultaneously is compounded in that there is an imbalance between volumes of exports and imports (e.g., in recent years 67–70 percent of the container trade is for imports, and in the major gateways, imports are 75–80 percent). This imbalance precludes use of any form of equality constraints for imports and exports which would otherwise be an important feature of port flows. This is left as an area of further study. The impacts of not considering exports of containers were accommodated by adjusting port container throughput for the amount of container imports only.A stochastic network flow model for container imports is specified to evaluate these impacts. The model is based on cost minimization and solved using stochastic techniques to measure risks and to analyze the impacts of structural changes.Other studies have analyzed container shipping. These have several focus areas including infrastructure planning (Lloyd's List DCN, 2009), port expansion (Harrison, Figliozzi, & Walton, 2000; Mercator Transport Group, 2005; Maloni & Jackson 2005a, 2005b among others), port pricing (Bennathan & Walters, 1979; Meersman, Van de Voorde, & Vanelslander, 2003), costs and economies of size (Cullinane & Khanna, 1999; Gao, 1994; Harrison & Figliozzi, 2001; Lim, 1998), and inter-port competition (Bennathan & Walters, 1979; Blonigen & Wilson, 2006, 2008; Ng, 2006; Veldman & Buckmann, 2003; Weigmans, Van Der Hoest, & Notteboom, 2008).Spatial competition of container shipments has been analyzed in fewer studies (Koiser, 2004; Leachman, 2008; Luo, 2007; Luo & Grigalunas, 2003). Notteboom (2006) evaluated the effect of delays on shipping logistics. Rodriguez-Alvarez, Tovar, and Wall (2011) indicated that port-terminal costs are impacted by demand uncertainty. Impacts of congestion on spatial and inter-port competition were analyzed by Maguire, Ivey, Lipinski, and Golias (2010) and Ilmer (2010). Crainic (2000, 2002) and Crainic and Kim (2007, chap. 8) discussed the interpretation of congestion in the context of network design and network-flow models. Asteris (2009) used discreet event simulation to analyze container flows to the United Kingdom through the English Channel. DeVuyst, Wilson, and Dahl, (2009) analyzed the spatial distribution for grain shipments using a global-chance constraint specification. Wilson, Dahl, and Taylor (2011) included delay functions in a multi-commodity spatial-optimization model. Separate delay costs were used for each Reach (or section) on the Mississippi River system.Several studies analyze supply-chain problems. Santoso, Ahmed, Goetschalckx, and Shapiro (2005) used the sample average approximation scheme to solve a large-scale stochastic supply chain network problem under uncertainty. Martel and Klibi (2012) created a risk model by generating plausible future scenarios to evaluate and design supply chain networks under uncertainty. Sox and Ishfag (2012) developed multiple-allocation p-hub median approach to integrate with a queuing model of hub operations. Leachman (2008) and Jula and Leachman (2011a, 2011b) used mixed-integer programming models to determine the least-cost supply chain for an importer of containerized products to U.S. regional distribution centers. Their focus was on location decisions and included logistical costs and strategies, including inventory levels, costs, lead times, etc., as well as risk-pooling strategies. Capacity constraints and congestion were not part of the model, and some of the shipping channels were pre-determined, although these areas were suggested for future research. Leachman and Jula (2011, 2012) also analyzed congestion for west-coast imports of containers by estimating dwell times for ports and railways, including these figures in their logistical model for importers’ location decisions.The model developed in this paper extends these studies in a number of ways and contributes to the literature in several respects. First, it measures variability of factors that cause risk in the supply chain for containers. Second, it quantifies risks related to port throughput. Finally, the results of the stochastic network-flow model are used to compare risk in port throughput under different simulations regarding new ports and routes.A stochastic network-flow model for containerized imports from northeast Asia and Europe to the United States is specified. The model includes ocean and rail shipping, and ports (U.S., Canadian, and Mexican ports) to meet the spatial distribution of demands, subject to nodal, arc, and related intermodal facility constraints. Fig. 1illustrates the network for container imports to U.S. markets. Volumes handled by ports are affected by many factors, including demand, transportation cost, port and route congestion, etc. Some of these are stochastic and endogenous to our analysis. The logic is to model container flows through the logistics network, e.g., port and route, whereby container flows are determined by costs, technical restrictions, and other relationships under a stochastic environment. Simulation procedures were used along with optimization to derive the distributions of container volume handled by ports and routes under different scenarios. Ultimately, these distributions are used as a measure of risk for port management.Cost elements in the model include ocean and rail shipping costs as well as the costs related to handling and congestion (see Table 1). Ocean shipping costs for different vessel sizes are included as vessel-strings which allow calls at multiple ports. Congestion costs at ports are derived using queuing theory, are nonlinear, and are determined endogenously. Because the cost function for waiting time has a nonlinear property which is difficult to solve, we employ a piece-wise-linearity technique. The model determines the optimal ship size, route, port, and interior rail route to meet the spatially distributed demands. Logistical parameters specified as random include ocean and rail shipping costs, and port and railroad corridor throughput capacities, in addition container demand at U.S. markets, defined as BEAs (Economic Areas by the Bureau of Economic Analysis).The objective function is defined below, Table 1 defines the elements of the objective function and the Appendix provides details about variable definitions, sets, parameters, and constraint descriptions:(1)Minimizetotalcost=∑i=1n=10costitemiwhere cost itemi(i = 1, 2, …, 10) are described algebraically in Table 1. The objective minimizes the total transportation costs of water and railroad modes, congestion and handling cost at ports, and related logistical costs under stochastic scenarios. The model was iterated N = 5000 times which enables us to describe the distribution of container flows at each node. Each scenario (iteration) implicitly had the same probability. Simulation details are described in Section 4.4.Parameters within ≪ ≫ denote various cost structures corresponding to TEU (twenty-foot equivalent unit) volume. Shipments via the Panama Canal include transit fees. Greater vessel costs are included for shipments through the Northwest Passage due to lower ship speeds for about 1000 miles for shipments through this route (Carmel, 2009; Wilson, Fan, & Dahl, 2010b).33Cockerham (2012) more recently indicated distances between Europe and Asia can be 40 percent shorter than southern routes, thereby lowering shipping costs. These would be offset in part by greater operating costs due to reduced speeds and/or required ice-breaking escorts on some portions of the route for some periods of the year.Terms 8, 9 and 10 in Table 1 comprise a “two-piece” term which assigns a penalty cost of zero for shipments equal to or below the predefined capacity and a higher penalty cost for shipments exceeding that capacity. The seventh to the tenth terms use the notation specified in AMPL (A Modeling Language for Mathematical Programming, Fourer, Gay, and Kernighan, 2003) to represent piecewise-linearities in the model because there is no standard way to describe piecewise-linear functions in algebraic notation.The model was solved using stochastic parameters described in Section 4.4. Briefly, Monte Carlo was used to generate solutions from the distributions for the random variables (e.g., demand at BEAs is specified as normally distributed, and capacity constraints are assumed uniformly distributed, etc.). This is equivalent to iteratively solving the deterministic network model numerous times. Each iteration represents a possible combination of stochastic scenarios. This procedure allows us to estimate the distribution of outputs (container flows and rail shipments) under numerous possible combinations.The decision variable,anp_Vvπefs,defines the number of different-sized container ships serving trade routes or strings, including the Transpacific-West Coast, Panama Canal-East/Gulf Coast, Northwest Passage-East Coast, and Transatlantic-East/Gulf Coast. Variablespjfsis the total TEUs shipped through ports that are imported from northeast Asia and Europe, which affect waiting time at a port, because, with TEU volume approaches for port-handling capacity, waiting times increase significantly. The variablessut_Rjordfs,sut_Tjortdfs,sct_Rjrbdfs, andsmt_Rjrbdfsrepresent the number of TEUs shipped from U.S. (single and multiline rail moves), Canadian, and Mexican ports to U.S. BEAs. Variablesuo_Posandurt_Pordsdefine the total TEUs shipped over U.S. railways from a port to final BEA destination. Penalty costs apply when the total volume exceeds capacity. Variableanp_Tsspecifies the TEU volume via the Panama Canal.Container demand is specified at each BEA and is derived using data from the Public Use Waybill file (U.S. Surface Transportation Board, 2006–2007), theJournal of Commerce (2003–2007), and the U.S. Maritime Administration (2009). Container demands from northeast Asia and Europe are specified individually and are not allowed to substitute for each other. Hong Kong and Rotterdam are specified as origins for container imports from northeast Asia and Europe, respectively. Geographic Information System (GIS) data for ports, intermodal terminal facilities, and rail networks are from the National Transportation Atlas Database (U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2008).44By now, some of this data is dated. However, much of the data used in this model becomes available only after a significant lag. At the time the analysis was conducted, all the data was the most recent available. The implications of this are mitigated somewhat that in most cases we used distributions instead of absolute values, which captures the range or possible outcomes.There are a total of 31 ports in the model, including 5 in Canada and 3 in Mexico that were incorporated for evaluation and sensitivities. Two international trade lanes are specified: Northeast Asia-United States and Europe-United States. The former includes three logistical channels: Transpacific to West Coast North America, through the Panama Canal to Gulf/East Coast ports, and through the Northwest Passage to the East Coast. The international trade lanes are further subdivided into strings which comprise a sequence of vessel calls at North American seaports.Rail rates were derived from the Public Use Waybill (U.S. Transportation Surface Board, 2006–2007). Ocean shipping costs were derived from the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) Vessel Cost Model (Army Corps of Engineers, 2009) which was modified by including economic speeds and by substituting time charter rates for ownership costs and was extended to larger ship capacities. A fitted relationship between time charter rates and ship capacity (TEUs) was used to generate time charter rates for various ship capacities in the ACE (2009) model and to extend to larger ship sizes. Costs were estimated for days in-port and at-sea. Days at-sea was determined by a vessel's voyage distance and economic speed. Economic speeds (Army Corps of Engineers, 2007) are used for a vessel's daily at-sea cost estimation and to calculate the days needed for each route.A point-to-point distance matrix for ocean strings was derived from Army Corps of Engineers (2007). Distances between ports was calculated using ArcGIS Network Analyst using GIS data from National Transportation Atlas Database (NTAD) 2006 (U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2008) and international distances were from Dataloy Systems (2009).Port throughput capacity was estimated from a queuing model, referred to as a G/G/m queuing system, i.e., assuming general distributed inter-arrival time and m multi-containership berths with general distribution process times. Port configuration parameters, including berth number and length, draft, cranes, etc., are based on data from port websites and are supplemented with data from the Port and Terminals Guide (2007–2008) and Drewry Shipping Consultants, Ltd (2009). Arriving ships are assumed to be accommodated at each berth. Simulations were conducted to estimate the relationship between port capacity and average waiting time (Wilson, Fan, & Dahl, 2010a).Water depth and maximum-size container vessels that ports can accommodate are specified based on the current port configurations (Port and Terminals Guide, 2007–2008 and port websites). Container ships with capacities up to 4400 TEU and 12,000 TEU are defined as capacity restrictions through the Panama Canal before and after canal expansion, respectively. Ocean carriers are assumed to operate as vessel strings and under vessel-sharing agreements. Handling charges at ports were assumed to be $285/TEU, adjusted for the differences in port tariffs for wharfage costs by port which were based on previous/concurrent studies (Gnanalingam & Datuk, 2009). Table 2 summarizes these data sources.Variables and constraints treated as random include BEA demands, ocean-vessel costs, railroads’ shipping rates, and port and railroad throughput capacity. Each is briefly discussed.Time-series procedures are used to capture correlations amongst BEA demands. Interdependence of the time series is evaluated using the “prewhitened” series, i.e., by transforming the series to white noise by applying a suitable autoregressive and moving average process (ARMA) or a seasonal autoregressive and moving average process (SARIMA). The sample cross-correlations (lag h greater than 0) lie within the bound ± 1.96n−1/2 (where n is sample size), suggesting that the two residual series (and, hence, the two stationary series) are uncorrelated. This treatment implies that demand volatility varies by BEA and that spatial demands are affected by other exogenous variables, including income, population, and other industry variables. In addition, demand volatility varies by BEA. Simulated results using time series show that most true values of demand for U.S. interior markets fall within about ±15 percent of the predicted values. To represent random container demand, we use the 2007 volume as a base; the range is specified as ±15 percent and is assumed to be independent amongst BEAs and normally distributed.Ocean shipping costs were specified as random and determined, in part, by the randomness of fuel and trip-lease rates. Daily vessel cost was a function of speed, vessel size, and Heavy Viscosity Oil price (HVO), Marine Diesel Oil price (MDO), and the charter-lease rate. The sets of variables, HVO, MDO price, and charter rates, were random and impacted the distributions for ocean shipping costs. Vessel costs were stochastic to account for these random input variables. Charter rates and oil prices were treated as random, and HVO and MDO were correlated. Data for these variables were from Clarkson Research Services (2009) and were used to determine the distributions and correlations for these random variables.Trip-lease rates were also treated as random. To capture these fees, a relationship is estimated for the average daily charter rates by ship capacity for 2007 where daily charter rates (103.83TEU0.6925) were multiplied by a random, shifting parameter (0.74, 1.26). This range covers the range of daily hire-rate relationships for 2007. These are used as random inputs for the ACE container vessel cost model. Ultimately, the stochastic daily vessel costs are a cost input for the optimization model.To capture intermodal correlations between vessel costs and rail shipping rates, we included HVO, MDO oil price, and charter-lease rates in the econometric model for railroad rates. Annual data (1996–2007) for these variables were from Clarkson Research Services (2009) and the Public Use Waybill file (U.S. Surface Transportation Board, 2006–2007). There were 1439 observations, and R2 was 0.79; interactive terms were statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Ultimately, MDO was treated as random to capture factors that affect vessel costs and railroad shipping rates.Throughput capacities for imported TEUs were stochastic due to handling restrictions, depending on total import and export TEUs which are uncertain. For this reason, the capacity available for imported containers was stochastic and was derived as total throughput less non-import TEUs. Time series analysis was applied to simulated non-import TEU volumes at the major ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, and the results showed that the true value fell within the prediction interval at ±10 percent of the forecasted value. We used this range and assumed a uniform distribution to derive non-import TEUs at major U.S. ports.Rail-route capacities are complex and are influenced by many factors, including track configuration, speed limit, control system, side spacing, crossover spacing, and other operating characteristics (National Cooperative Highway Research Program [NCHRP] report 399, 1998). The results from Cambridge Systematics, Inc. (2007, pp. 4–8, 4–10) show that railway corridors in the west are more congested than in the east and that some segments are operating near or at capacity. We specify railway capacity for those congested corridors as uniformly distributed within the range of ±10 percent around the volume of current observed shipments.Simulation procedures were used to solve the network-flow problem under uncertainty. Decisions variables of interest were shipments by route (international and domestic), and volumes shipped through each port and rail-network. Each decision variable was a random vector affected by parameters in the stochastic simulation. A complete list of decision variables and parameters are in the Appendix. The cost per TEU was derived using vessel costs divided by the capacity measured as TEUs. This assumes the vessel is fully loaded. The integer for vessel is relaxed to avoid increasing solution complexity associated with decision variables that are integer (in terms of results, this is a near inconsequential issue).Some realizations of uncertain parameters may be violated on some constraints. In order to ensure a feasible solution, we used “soft” constraints in place of “hard” constraints, and we imposed a piecewise-linear “penalty cost” for the objective function. The port-capacity constraint was specified with a queuing function. As capacity utilization approaches one, the waiting time and costs became very large, and are non-linear. The “soft” constraint was for a congestion cost equal to the cost when utilization is at 95 percent. Because estimation of railway capacity, delay slope, and congestion is a complex process, we added two-piece terms to the soft-railway capacity restriction. Specifically, we assigned a penalty cost to shipments exceeding the predefined railway capacity.The following terms were included in the objective function (1) to represent a piecewise-linear cost function:∑(fj)∈H≪{n∈(1…Nfj)−1}QLimfjns;{n∈Nfj}QCostfjns≫spjfs;∑o∈O≪RCapOos;0,PCosto≫uo_Pos;∑(ord)∈Γrl≪URCapRords;0,PCostord≫urt_Pords;≪PNCap;0,PNCost≫anp_TsThe following equations (defined and specified in detail in the Appendix) represented the “soft” constraint property:(2)∑v∈V(e)∑πef∈ΠEF∑{i:(i,j)∈LF(πef)}anpvπefijs−∑v∈V(e)∑πef∈ΠEF∑{k:(j,k)∈LF(πef)}anpvπefjks=spjfs(f,j)∈H,s∈S(3)∑f∈F∑{(jrd):(jord)∈Γr}sut_Rjordfs+∑f∈F∑{(jrtd):(jortd)∈Γt}sut_Tjortdfs=uo_Poso∈O,s∈S(4)∑f∈F∑{j:(jord)∈Γr}sut_Rjordfs=urt_Pords(o,r,d)∈Γrl,s∈S(5)∑v∈V(e)∑πea∈ΠEAanpvπeaijs=anp_Tss∈SConstraint (2) specified the total inbound TEUs by vessels at a port. Constraint (3) defined the total TEUs outbound by railroads from a port. Eq. (4) specified the total TEUs shipped on railroad corridors, and constraint (5) was the total TEUs via the Panama Canal.The stochastic variables aretreated independently, except vessel costs and rail rates (both affected by MDO oil price). Random parameters are drawn from the underlying distributions specified above using a random number generator. Specifically, Monte Carlo procedures were used to generate these distributions. Each iteration represents a possible combination of stochastic parameters and the model was iterated 5000 times. There was no significant improvement in the solution after 4000 and convergence was attained within 5000 iterations. Hence, the results were based on 5000 iterations. This procedure is equivalent to solving a deterministic problem under various scenarios. The model is iterated N times, and the results are used to derive a distribution for the output values. More details on this approach are contained in Wilson, Fan, and Dahl (2010a).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
