@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wholesale price rebate vs. capacity expansion: The optimal strategy for seasonal products in a supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study a manufacturer sells a seasonal product through a retailer to the market.The manufacturer uses two strategies: wholesale price rebate or capacity expansion.The manufacturer can offer the retailer a subsidy for taking away the inventories.The manufacturer can raise the capacity to aggregate the production.The supply chain can achieve a win–win situation and both parties are better off.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Seasonal product,Capacity expansion,Wholesale price rebate,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a supply chain in which one manufacturer sells a seasonal product to the end market through a retailer. Faced with uncertain market demand and limited capacity, the manufacturer can maximize its profits by adopting one of two strategies, namely, wholesale price rebate or capacity expansion. In the former, the manufacturer provides the retailer with a discount for accepting early delivery in an earlier period. In the latter, the production capacity of the manufacturer in the second period can be raised so that production is delayed until in the period close to the selling season to avoid holding costs. Our research shows that the best strategy for the manufacturer is determined by three driving forces: the unit cost of holding inventory for the manufacturer, the unit cost of holding inventory for the retailer, and the unit cost of capacity expansion. When the single period capacity is low, adopting the capacity expansion strategy dominates as both parties can improve their profits compared to the wholesale price rebate strategy. When the single period capacity is high, on the other hand, the equilibrium outcome is the wholesale price rebate strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a supply chain, manufacturers and retailers always seek to match supply with demand through production planning and demand management. For seasonal products, in particular, members of the supply chain need better strategies for coordinating supply and demand. For example, air conditioner manufacturers that face high demand during the summer may not fully respond to orders from their downstream partners because of a significantly long leadtime of production. Hence, manufacturers generally shift a proportion of their production to earlier periods and store produced goods in the warehouse to satisfy peak-season demand. This production movement indirectly heaps inventory holding pressure onto the manufacturers. A similar phenomenon also occurs within the fashion apparel industry in which retailers usually place a single order with their manufacturers because of offshore production, making replenishment difficult to arrange. Faced with these situations, manufacturers may adopt a variety of strategies to alleviate the pressure of product shortage and to foster supply chain efficiency.To mitigate the risk of production shortage, manufacturers can initiate production at earlier periods and encourage retailers to hold these items. In pursuit of this goal, an incentive should be offered to the retailers to compensate for the costs of storing these items. One commonly used strategy is the wholesale price rebate. A notable example dates back to 1994 when Gree, China’s largest air conditioner manufacturer, faced a situation where almost all the retailers ordered items close to the peak season. To tackle this issue, Gree came up with a new pricing policy, the off-peak season rebate. To wit, if the retailer was willing to take delivery of the air conditioners during the off-peak season, Gree provided a price discount. This strategy successfully filled the spare capacity of Gree’s production in the off-peak season and reduced the possibility of product shortage in the peak season.Another strategy manufacturers may adopt in response to peak season demand is to use a temporary workforce or equipment or to implement workforce overtime to increase capacity. Practical applications of this strategy are widely observed in both manufacturing and service industries, such as automobile and tourism sectors (Chopra and Meindl, 2009). These examples identify an intrinsic rationale through which the manufacturers or service providers adjust their capacity during the peak season to further avoid shortage loss. Although the capacity expansion is an additional expense for manufacturers, aggregating production close to the peak season not only reduces setup costs, but also increases the flexibility of matching demand orders.In this paper, we consider a two-echelon supply chain in which a manufacturer sells a seasonal product to the end market through a retailer. On one hand, the retailer faces a fully competitive market wherein the retail price is exogenously determined and the only decision the retailer can make is the order quantity. The manufacturer, on the other hand, is able to allocate production across two time periods. To mitigate the pressure of holding inventories, the manufacturer should postpone the production to the period close to the selling season and set up the production line in an earlier period only if the order exceeds the capacity of a single period, which is called basic strategy. In addition, we further investigate two strategies of the manufacturer:•Wholesale price rebate strategy: the manufacturer offers subsidies to the retailer for taking delivery in the earlier period.Capacity expansion strategy: the production capacity of the manufacturer is expanded in the second period.We characterize the optimal decisions of the manufacturer and the retailer in each strategy and compare the profits of both parties to a situation where the basic strategy is adopted. To gain additional managerial insights, we assume the market demand follows a uniform distribution, and conditions are provided to obtain the manufacturer’s preferred strategy. Our results reveal that when single period capacity is sufficiently high, the manufacturer tends to adopt the wholesale price rebate strategy and associated order quantity of the retailer is also larger under the strategy. This is due to the fact that under the wholesale price rebate strategy, the manufacturer raises the wholesale price charged to the retailer to a high level and the retailer gains more profits when the order quantity exceeds the single period capacity. This high wholesale price decision combined with a rebate to the retailer leads to a high order quantity accordingly. This effect diminishes as the single period capacity is low and in this case the equilibrium outcome moves to the capacity expansion strategy. Also, our numerical study shows that among the three strategies, both parties are better off by implementing the capacity expansion strategy compared to the basic strategy. On the other hand, the manufacturer can improve its profit under the wholesale price rebate strategy but the retailer is worse off even though a compensation is offered by the manufacturer under this strategy.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a survey of relevant literature. Sections 3 and 4 describe our models and derive analytical results, respectively. In Sections 5 and 6, we demonstrate the results when the demand follows a specific distribution and implement the numerical study. A discussion of the results is included in Section 7. All proofs are relegated to Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
