@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Take back costs and product durability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider the impact of take backs on a firm’s product durability decision.Leasing provides a durability incentive for positive (and zero) take back costs.If take back costs decrease in durability, selling can raise surplus (versus leasing).Optimal product durability may decrease as a firm’s take back fraction increases.Recycling requirements tied to product return volume can yield higher durability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Durability,Take-backs,Obsolescence,Production,Pricing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) initiatives may require a manufacturer to be responsible in the future for taking back the products it produces today. A ramification of EPR is that take back costs may influence firms’ decisions regarding product durability. In the absence of EPR, prior literature has shown that a firm may intentionally lower durability, yielding planned obsolescence. We use a two period model to examine the impact of take back costs on a manufacturer’s product durability and pricing decisions, under both selling and leasing scenarios. We show that compared to selling, leasing provides a greater incentive to raise durability, thus extending a classic insight to a setting with product take backs. Interestingly, we also show that it is possible for the optimal product durability to decrease if the stipulated take back fraction increases. In such situations, were the take back fraction tied to durability rather than a fixed fraction, we demonstrate durability can increase. We explore the impact of take backs on profits and surplus by alternatively considering products for which take back costs are either increasing or decreasing functions of durability. When increasing durability implies higher take back costs, our results demonstrate that leasing can increase durability, profits, and surplus significantly compared to selling. In contrast, when increasing durability implies a lower take back cost, there is a built-in incentive for the firm to increase durability, which can make selling more efficient (i.e., surplus enhancing) than leasing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Classic examples of products with limited longevity and durability, such as Gillette razor blades and the Ingersoll dollar watches, now date back over a century. In the example of light bulbs, manufacturers including General Electric and Philips were accused in the late 1930s of collaborating to limit the planned life span of bulb filaments (Wells, 2002). In his seminal 1972 paper, Ronald Coase argued that a highly durable product is problematic for a seller because (rational) consumers will anticipate future price drops, thus eroding the firm’s ability to set a high (profitable) price for its product. The incentive to limit a product’s lifespan (planned obsolescence) and thus create future sales opportunities remains as relevant for companies today as it was a century ago. Hindle (2008) states that because product durability may impact both manufacturing costs and future sales, “firms have found that they need to plan for those products’ obsolescence more carefully,” and Basulto (2012) suggests that prominent firms such as Apple have embraced planned obsolescence as a business strategy.While planned obsolescence is now a well-recognized business strategy, it is falling under harsh criticism due to the environmental impact of low durability products. In this paper we ask the following questions: What if a monopolist internalized the cost of taking back its products at the end of their useful life? Under what circumstances will this lead to increased durability? Will leasing provide a higher incentive for increased durability compared to selling? We leverage the classic two-period durable goods framework (Bulow, 1986) as the basis of our model but include a take back cost function that relates to the firm’s durability decision. We analyze and contrast both selling and leasing scenarios under both increasing and decreasing take back cost functions. To our knowledge no prior work has investigated a seller’s durability decision in conjunction with take back costs.Firms are increasingly being forced to internalize the cost of their short life-cycle products, due to the significant amount of waste they generate. In the case of consumer electronics, for example, the U.S.-based Electronics Take Back Coalition reports that the U.S. scraps about 400million products per year, with more than 80% going to landfills and incinerators. Examining refrigerators sales, Nicol and Thompson (2007) report that fifty million units are sent for disposal each year in North America and Europe, representing 1% of the municipal waste stream. Such waste has led to so-called Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) legislation, which makes manufacturers increasingly responsible for reclaiming and disposing of their end-of-life products. EPR-related legislation is being instituted by several countries and by many states in the U.S. For example, at the current time in the U.S., 25 states have passed legislation mandating e-waste recycling programs; all but two of these states (California and Utah) place the burden directly on producers. Europe and Japan have instituted similar laws. In Europe, under the WEEE (European Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive), producers are responsible for take backs of electronics manufactured after August 2005. In Ireland, for example, WEEE regulations define a Visible Environmental Management Cost (vEMC) that producers can add to retail prices; those regulations stipulate2Source: http://www.citizensinformation.i.e./en/environment/waste_management_and_recycling/.2: “A notice must be clearly visible where the electrical items are sold stating that ‘The prices of these items include contributions to a producer recycling fund to ensure that waste electrical and electronic equipment is collected and recycled in a responsible manner.”’ Recognizing the significance of evolving EPR legislation, many prominent firms have proactively initiated take back programs, including Electrolux, Dell, Samsung, Sony Ericsson, Fujitsu-Siemens, and Philips (Esenduran & Kemahlioglu-Ziya, 2011; Özdemir, Denizel, & Guide, 2012).Take back programs naturally imply a cost to a firm relating to the reclamation and reprocessing of its products. Part of that take back cost may include an incentive to end-consumers to facilitate the return of the product to the producer.3When consumers lease instead of buy a product, the customer is required to return the product to the firm at the end of the lease period and thus no incentive may be needed. Similarly, in markets where consumers face strict recycling rules (e.g., Europe), firms may not need to provide end users with incentives to return expired products.3The costs implied to manufacturers from EPR initiatives are well recognized and have been addressed in prior research (e.g., (Eichner & Runkel, 2003, 2005 Zuidwijk and Krikke 2008, Atasu, Van Wassenhove, & Sarvary, 2009, Plambeck and Subramanian, Gupta, & Talbot, 2009; Subramanian et al., 2009; Esenduran & Kemahlioglu-Ziya, 2011; Özdemir et al., 2012), Atasu & van Wassenhove, 2012). In this paper we focus on the impact of take back costs on a monopolist’s endogenous durability decision. Take back costs may depend on durability for a variety of reasons. For example, Atasu and van Wassenhove (2012) state “Take-back laws can influence the design for reuse, recyclability and durability…[and] can potentially extend the life cycle of products and reduce product returns.” Eichner and Runkel (2003) suggest that durability is often achieved by making a product heavier (e.g., designing a car tire with a more robust casing and tread), but heavier products may be more expensive to take back because: (i) more material needs to be recycled or (ii) transportation is costlier. Similarly, durability often significantly depends on the type of materials used (e.g., metal versus plastic), and the material may have recycling cost repercussions.With durability as an endogenous variable, we analyze both selling and leasing scenarios. We consider leasing for several reasons. Firstly, contrasting selling and leasing is a central issue in the durable goods literature and thus by considering both we are able to relate our work to prior literature. Moreover, leasing is prominent in the auto industry and in other markets. For example, IBM and HP offer hardware leases, and Interface Inc. offers carpets with its Evergreen Lease, a program designed to take back used carpet at lease end. We also analyze leasing due to the fact that it is often viewed as a greener alternative to selling (Intlekofer, Bras, & Ferguson, 2010, and Agrawal, Ferguson, Toktay, & Thomas, 2012). Agrawal et al. (2012) contrast leasing and selling, assuming durability is exogenous and independent from the product’s take back costs. They derive conditions under which leasing can be less green than selling. Goering (2010) shows that a monopolist seller is more likely to engage in corporate social responsibility related activities (including, but not limited to, product take backs) than would be a leasing firm. In contrast with these papers, we consider durability as an endogenous decision variable. We also demonstrate that leasing may not always be an efficient (surplus enhancing) alternative to selling.We build upon the classic two-period framework of Bulow (1982, 1986), who showed that to support ongoing sales a seller has an incentive to reduce product durability. Our model differs by considering: (i) an explicit take back cost function, (ii) a non-zero product durability in the second period and therefore second-period costs that relate to durability, and (iii) time discounting. Other papers in the durable goods literature have examined optimal durability choice under selling and leasing, (e.g., Desai & Purohit, 1999; Hendel & Lizzeri, 2002; Desai, Koenigsberg, & Purohit, 2007; Goering, 2008; Hung-Ken & Chu, 2008; Bhaskaran & Gilbert, 2005; Bhaskaran & Gilbert, 2009; Xiong, Yan, Fernandes, Xiong, & Guo, 2012) but have not considered the issue of take backs. Eichner and Runkel (2003) permitted a weight-based relationship between durability and recyclability, but focused on determining optimal durability and recyclability levels for an economy as a whole. Runkel (2003) also related the durability decision to disposal costs, but considered only leasing.We contribute to the literature by permitting durability-dependent take back costs when analyzing a firm’s durability, pricing, and production quantity decisions—as well as related profitability and surplus issues. We begin by interpreting the first order conditions for both selling and leasing using marginal analysis and then employ comparative statics to examine the sensitivity of the optimal first and second period quantities to durability. This also allows us to contrast the optimal durability decision under selling and leasing and derive conditions under which the classic result suggesting higher durability under leasing (compared to selling) will hold. Furthermore, we analytically explore the effect of increasing the fixed take back fraction (i.e., the percentage of its output the firm must recycle) on optimal durability and provide a necessary and sufficient condition under which a higher take back fraction increases durability. To explore this further, and to contrast profit and surplus under selling and leasing, we employ a series of computational experiments. We demonstrate that, when take back costs are decreasing in durability, selling can yield higher total surplus than leasing; thus, interestingly, leasing is not necessarily more efficient, even though it may induce higher durability.By considering both increasing and decreasing take back cost functions, we also illustrate the disadvantage of a one-size-fits-all approach to take back legislation. Specifically, we show that in settings where durability increases take back costs, it is possible for the optimal product durability to decrease as a legislated take back fraction increases. We also consider whether this undesirable outcome can be avoided by linking the legislated take back fraction to the firm’s endogenous durability decision. We find that when take back costs are increasing in durability, a durability-dependent take back cost fraction can indeed not only induce higher durability, but can also increase surplus and profits significantly.Finally, we examine the alternative scenarios of the firm being responsible for taking back all of its products or only its failed products at the end of the second period, and find that only with increasing take back costs does the latter case increase durability. Overall, our results demonstrate the importance of considering whether take back costs are increasing or decreasing in durability. We find that legislation that does not carefully account for the nature of take back costs can have the unwanted effect of decreasing not only durability but possibly even surplus and profits.The paper proceeds as follows. In Section ‘Assumptions and model’, we introduce our model and contrast the selling and leasing cases. In Section ‘Take back fractions and durability choice’ we discuss the relationship between the take back fraction and optimal durability. In Section ‘Sensitivity analysis and numeric results’, we use computational results to further investigate the relationship between take backs and optimal durability, along with profit and surplus implications. Section ‘Summary and conclusions’ summarizes our findings and concludes the paper.Optimal durability is a central question in our work as well as in the durable goods literature. Waldman (2003) provides a thorough overview of this literature and identifies the analysis of optimal durability as one of three major contributions of the durable-goods research. A key question regarding durability choice is under what conditions a firm has an incentive to reduce durability, as highlighted by early seminal papers by Swan (1970, 1972). Bulow’s (1986) two-period framework captures several key challenges facing the monopolist: (1) product life is finite (abstracted as two periods), (2) consumers purchasing later in the product lifecycle have a shorter horizon to use the product and thus a lower willingness to pay than “early adopter” first-period consumers, (3) products sold in the first period that remain in the second period may effectively compete (e.g., via a perfect second-hand market) with the firm’s second period output, and (4) forward-looking consumers can anticipate a second period price drop, which in turn restricts first period pricing. Bulow (1986) showed that the firm’s inability to credibly commit to its second period production volume imposes a constraint on the seller’s objective function, thus reducing profits and the optimal product durability. This commitment problem (first highlighted by Coase (1972)) occurs under selling, but under a leasing scenario the firm’s strategy is “time consistent” and thus the commitment issue does not arise.In this paper we likewise analyze the pricing and durability decisions via a deterministic two-period framework. Like Bulow (1986), we apply the framework to a monopolist setting—therefore different findings may apply in competitive contexts. In addition to explicitly considering take back costs in the objective function, two key differentiating aspects of our model are that we consider a non-zero product durability in the second period (implying second-period costs which depend on durability) and time discounting. We next define our specific model assumptions and notation.We denote the production quantity in period i as qi, i={1,2}; see Table 1for a summary of notation. Given that the product has limited durability, and letting δ (with 0⩽δ⩽1) denote the fraction of output that does not fail in the first period, a quantity δq1 survives to the second period. Period two is defined as end-of-life for the product; the product has no subsequent value. We follow the approach of constructing the market price in each period via single period implicit rental price functions (Bulow, 1986, Goering, 2008), denoted as fi(q), i={1,2}, which are positive and decreasing in quantity and assumed twice continuously differentiable. Including a per-period discount factor r (where 0<r⩽1), the first period market price is thus f1(q1)+rδf2(δq1+q2). The second period market price is f2(δq1+q2), where the term δq1 reflects the first period output that survives into the second period. Note that the first period market price incorporates the second period market price, but is discounted by r and weighted by δ because, assuming a perfect second-hand market, first period customers gain the (discounted) second period value f2(δq1+q2) for the fraction δ of their purchased units that survive past the first period. Thus, the present value of the firm’s revenue is q1(f1 (q1)+rδf2(δq1+q2))+q2f2(δq1+q2)=f1 (q1)+r(δq1+q2)f2(δq1+q2). Next, we consider the firm’s costs and expand upon the traditional framework to capture the effects of take backs.We assume that the firm is responsible, either by choice (e.g., sustainability or marketing objectives) or due to legislation, for taking back a fraction θi, i={1,2}, of failed units in period i. Fixed take back fractions have been implemented in some industries. For example, Zuidwijk and Krikke (2008) and Atasu et al. (2009) mention that the European WEEE directive sets take back targets of 70–80% for the recycling of consumer electronics. In contrast with remanufacturing literature (e.g., Heese, Cattani, Ferrer, Gilland, & Roth, 2005; Atasu, Guide, & Van Wassenhove, 2008; Atasu, Sarvary, & Van Wassenhove, 2008; Ferrer & Swaminathan, 2010), which considers the reselling of reclaimed products, in our framework products are taken back for recycling or disposal and thus not resold.We denote the firm’s per-unit production and take back costs in period i, respectively, as the functions ki(δ) and ti(δ), which depend on the durability δ. Both functions are assumed to be twice continuously differentiable. In his book titled “Design for the environment”, Fiksel (2009), referring primarily to manufacturing costs, notes “there is usually a trade-off between product cost and durability.” Take back costs may depend on durability due to a more durable product being heavier—using more material—or employing different materials (Eichner & Runkel, 2003). While our mathematical analysis can apply for both positive and negative take back costs, we typically consider take back costs to be positive because for most products the process of reclaiming materials is significantly more expensive than the value of the reclaimed material (Klausner & Hendrickson, 2000).Given a period 1 quantity q1, production costs are q1k1 (δ), i.e., linear in q1. The associated take back costs are spread over both periods, accounting for the expected (1−δ)q1 units that fail at the end of period 1, and the δ(1−δ)q1 units that fail at the end of period two. Thus, the period-ending take back costs associated with q1 for periods 1 and 2 are (1−δ)θ1t1(δ)q1 and δ(1−δ)θ2t2(δ)q1, respectively. We denote the total costs attributable to quantity q1 as c1(q1,δ)=q1(k1 (δ)+r(1−δ)θ1t1(δ)+r2δ(1−δ)θ2t2(δ)). Similarly, the total costs attributable to production quantity q2 in the second period are c2(q2,δ)=q2(k2 (δ)+r(1−δ)θ2t2(δ)).These definitions for c1(q1,δ) and c2(q2,δ) assume that at the end of period 2, only failed units are disposed of. Alternatively, we could assume the firm reclaims some fraction θ2 of all extant units at the end of period two (recall that the product has no value at the end of period two). In that case, the last terms in the cost expressions c1(q1,δ) and c2 (q2,δ) above would beq1(r2δθ2t2(δ))and q2(rθ2t2(δ)), respectively. Our results in this section and Section ‘Take back fractions and durability choice’ will apply to both alternatives, as our analyses require only that c1(q1,δ) and c2(q2,δ) be twice continuously differentiable. In Section ‘Sensitivity analysis and numeric results’, we revisit these two alternative assumptions within our numerical results.The seller’s discounted present value of profit across both periods, π(q1,q2,δ), is:(1)π(q1,q2,δ)=q1f1(q1)+r(δq1+q2)f2(δq1+q2)-c1(q1,δ)-rc2(q2,δ)In the classic durable-goods framework introduced by Bulow (1986), the firm changes its product durability to zero in the second period without negative consequences. Bulow thus used a simpler, durability-independent second period cost function c2(q2). In practice, however, switching to lower durability would likely imply higher (fixed) design costs and take back costs as well, due to essentially needing to produce and reclaim two distinct products. Therefore, rather than assume the firm in the second period switches to a product with zero durability, we assume that the firm’s durability choice δ persists across the two periods and hence the second period cost retains its dependence on δ. Furthermore, we introduce the discount factor r because the product lifespan could be lengthy for some products (e.g., refrigerators, tires).To address the time inconsistency issue introduced earlier, let us first consider the firm’s profit objective that applies at the beginning of the second period, for an already-specified first period quantity q1. Denoting second period profits as π2, the second period problem is:(2)max{q2⩾0}π2=q2f2(δq1+q2)-c2(q2,δ)The revenue term δq1f2(δq1+q2) within π(q1,q2,δ), representing the value of surviving δq1 units at the beginning of the second period, does not appear in π2 because once the second period arrives the value change corresponding to the δq1 units is borne by consumers, not the firm. Because the term δq1f2(δq1+q2) is declining in q2 (the market price f2(·) is decreasing in quantity) but does not appear in π2, we know that in the second period (when objective π2 applies), the seller faces a lesser penalty associated with increasing q2. As a result, the optimal second period quantity q2 will be larger for π2 (“flooding the market”) than for the initial profit function π(q1,q2, δ)–for a more detailed discussion see Waldman (2003). The fact that the seller’s optimal choices for q2 implied by problems (1) and (2) are inconsistent is the classic time inconsistency issue. In contrast, a leasing firm continues to own and extract revenues from the surviving δq1 units in period 2, and therefore the term δq1f2(δq1+q2) remains pertinent for the lessor in the second period and the time inconsistency issue does not arise.Lemma 1 provides the first and second order conditions for the seller’s second period problem. Throughout our analyses we focus on cases with non-zero order quantities and so we exclude the caseq2∗=0.Lemma 1If2f2′(δq1+q2)+q2f2″(δq1+q2)-c2″<0then π2is concave in q2and there is a uniqueq2∗satisfying(3)f2(δq1+q2)+q2f2′(δq1+q2)=∂c2(q2,δ)/∂q2.Recognizing that the seller’s choice of q2 will ultimately stem from the solution to π2, rational consumers anticipate the firm’s incentive to flood the market in period two. Therefore, Eq. (3) becomes a constraint on the seller’s period one problem:(4)max{q1⩾0,1⩾δ⩾0}πq1,q2∗,δsuchthat:f2δq1+q2∗+q2∗df2(δq1+q2)/dq2q2=q2∗=∂c2(q2,δ)/∂q2q2=q2∗The seller’s problem is thus a two-variable problem in q1 and δ, withq2∗defined implicitly via Eq. (3). We next examine the behavior of the seller’s optimal quantity choiceq2∗with respect to changes in first period production or durability. Henceforth, we refer to the concavity of π2 with respect to q2, i.e.,π2″<0, as the period two concavity (PTC) condition.Lemma 2Given the PTC condition (i.e.,π2″<0), the signs ofdq2∗/dδand ofdq2∗/dq1reflect the signs of ∂2π2/(∂δ)(∂q2) and ∂2π2/(∂q1)(∂q2), respectively.Recall thatq2∗is a function of both q1 and δ, but the arguments are omitted for notational convenience. Sinceq2∗is an implicit function of q1 and δ, defined by the solution to the first order conditions in Eq. (3), we can apply the implicit function theorem to evaluatedq2∗/dδ=-∂2π2/(∂δ)(∂q2)∂2π2/(∂2q2)anddq2∗/dq1=-∂2π2/(∂q1)(∂q2)∂2π2/(∂2q2). Since from the PTC condition∂2π2/(∂2q2)=π2″=2f2′+q2f2″-c2″<0, the result follows. □Thus, for well-behaved concave π2 exhibiting negative cross derivatives (avoiding “saddle” conditions), quantity and durability choices that lead to greater product carryover into the second period—via higher q1 or durability δ—cause the seller to reduce its second period production quantityq2∗. This does not imply, however, that the overall second period market quantity decreases. To the contrary, we next identify the general conditions under which the total second period quantityδq1+q2∗will be increasing even ifq2∗decreases.Corollary 3Given the PTC condition and for c2(q2,δ) convex in q2,dδq1+q2∗/dq1⩾0, andd(δq1+q2∗)/dδ⩾0if and only iff2′-c2″⩾(1/q1)∂2c2(q2,δ)/(∂δ)(∂q2).See Appendix. □Bulow (1986) also found that the firm’s optimal second-period quantityδq1+q2∗is generally increasing with respect to changes in either q1 or δ. Rather than assume c2(q2,δ) is convex, as in Corollary 3, Bulow argued that the differencef2′-c2″will be negative when the (negative) slope of the marginal revenue curve is steeper than the slope of the marginal cost curve, which he referred to as the “normal case” for the firm. Our model requires not simplyf2′-c2″to be negative, but ratherf2′-c2″⩾(1/q1)∂2c2(q2,δ)/(∂δ)(∂q2). While this change is somewhat more restrictive, the magnitude of the right hand side cross-derivative is dampened by the fact that the quantity q1 is generally greater than one. We will subsequently use Corollary 3 to interpret the first order optimality conditions for the seller’s profit-maximizing problem (Eq. (4)). Next, in Proposition 4, we provide those conditions, excluding boundary solutions withq1∗=0and δ∗=0.Proposition 4Consider the seller’s profit maximizing problem in Eq.(4). Given the PTC condition andq2∗satisfying Eq.(3), the first order conditions for q1and δ imply respectively:(5)c1′-rδc2′=∂(q1f1)∂q1+r(δq1)f2′dδq1+q2∗d(q1),and(6)∂(c1+rc2)∂δ-rq1c2′=r(δq1)f2′dδq1+q2∗d(δ)See Appendix. □The left-hand side (LHS) of each of the first order conditions (5) and (6) reflect marginal costs associated with increasing q1 and δ, respectively, whereas the right hand side (RHS) of each expresses marginal revenue changes. On the LHS of (5), we have the marginal first period production costc1′adjusted by a savings ofrδc2′because a unit increase in q1 provides a second period production cost savings due to the (anticipated) δ units that will survive. On the RHS of (5), the first term represents the marginal first period revenue stemming from the implicit rental price f1, when increasing q1. But, increasing q1 also implies a lower second period rental price f2, which the second RHS term captures. Specifically, for the expected δq1 units that survive into the second period, the price drop isf2′d′δq1+q2∗/d(q1). We can likewise interpret the first order condition (6) associated with changing the durability δ. The LHS of (6) shows that increasing the durability δ causes an increase to production costs in both periods, but with a cost-savings adjustment term due to reducing production needs in period two. Specifically, that adjustment term shows that a unit increase in δ provides q1 units in period two, thus saving the (discounted) marginal production costrc2′. The RHS for (6) is analogous to that of (5) but lacks the (positive) first period revenue term ∂(q1f1)/∂q1, because increasing δ does not impact the first-period implicit rental price f1.Recall that we treat the derivative termsdδq1+q2∗—with respect to either q1 or δ—in the RHS of (5) and (6) as positive, assuming Corollary 3 holds. Therefore, becausef2′is negative, the productf2′dδq1+q2∗reflects a revenue decrease adjustment, suggesting a lower durability choice in the absence of these terms. In the next subsection, we will show that the analogous optimality conditions under leasing lack this revenue adjustment.The leasing case considers the alternative of consumers acquiring the firm’s product for a single period at a time. A consumer who purchases the product in period 1 may derive two periods of use, but a consumer who leases the product in period 1 allows the firm to reclaim the product at the end of that period. Given that the product has no value beyond the second period, a lease beginning in the second period is equivalent to a second period purchase—i.e., both yield one period of use for the consumer. The structure of the firm’s decision problem under leasing mirrors the selling problem but with one important exception: constraint (3), which resulted from the firm’s time inconsistency, no longer applies. Under leasing, the firm has no incentive to renege on consumers by altering its q2 decision. Therefore, the lessor’s problem is:(7)maxq1,q2⩾0,1⩾δ⩾0π(q1,q2,δ)=q1f1(q1)+r(δq1+q2)f2(δq1+q2)-c1(q1,δ)-rc2(q2,δ)We next establish the first order conditions under leasing.Proposition 5Consider the two-period profit function in expression(7). The first order conditions for q1, δ, and q2, imply respectively:(8)c1′-rδc2′=∂(q1f1)∂q1,(9)∂(c1+rc2)∂δ=rq1c2′,and(10)c2′=f2(δq1+q2)+(δq1+q2)f2′.The first order conditions with respect to the profit expression yield:∂π(q1,q2,δ)∂q1=f1(q1)+q1∂f1(q1)∂q1+rδf2(δq1+q2)+r(δq1+q2)δ∂f2(x)∂(x)x=δq1+q2-∂c1(q1,δ)∂q1∂π(q1,q2,δ)∂δ=rq1f2(δq1+q2)+r(δq1+q2)q1∂f2(x)∂(x)x=δq1+q2-∂c1(q1,δ)∂δ-r∂c2(q2,δ)∂δ∂π(q1,q2,δ)∂q2=rf2(δq1+q2)+(δq1+q2)∂f2(x)∂(x)x=δq1+q2-∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2Considering the last equality, the condition ∂π(q1,q2,δ)/∂q2=0 impliesf2(δq1+q2)=∂c2(q2,δ)/∂q2-(δq1+q2)[∂f2(x)/∂x|x=δq1+q2]and thus Eq. (10). Substituting f2(δq1+q2) from above,∂π(q1,q2,δ)∂q1=f1(q1)+q1∂f1(q1)∂q1+rδ∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2-∂c1(q1,δ)∂q1, and∂π(q1,q2,δ)∂δ=rq1∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2-∂c1(q1,δ)∂δ-r∂c2(q2,δ)∂δ. These two conditions reduce tof1+q1f1′+rδc2′-c1′=0and∂c1(q1,δ)/∂δ+r∂c2(q2,δ)/∂δ-rq1c2′=0, yielding (8) and (9). □To directly compare the selling and leasing solutions, we assume equivalent take back costs for both scenarios. Contrasting (9) and (10) with (5) and (6), we see that under leasing the RHS price-drop adjustment terms do not appear. Recall that the productf2′dδq1+q2∗will be positive assuming Corollary 3 holds, and so, becausef2′is negative, the resulting revenue adjustments on the RHS of (5) and (6) are negative. Since the RHS of (9) and (10) express marginal gains, under leasing the marginal gains associated with increasing either q1 and δ are larger than under selling. Previously, Bulow (1986) highlighted that we should generally expect product durability to be higher under leasing. Our model extends that of Bulow to consider take back costs, time discounting, and non-zero second period durability, and we find the same insight applies: a monopolist seller has lower incentive, due to the negative RHS adjustment terms in first-order conditions (5) and (6), to increase durability. In our computational results in Section ‘Sensitivity analysis and numeric results’, we verify that selling generally yields lower durability than leasing, yet we will also show that the resulting social surplus may be higher. We next focus on understanding how changing the firm’s take back fraction will impact the optimal durability choice.Take back costs impose a penalty on lower durability products. Therefore, as we explore in this section, take back legislation can potentially encourage a seller to increase durability and thus counteract the incentive to lower product durability which resulted from the time inconsistency issue. One way legislators may influence a seller’s durability decision is via the take back fractions θ1 and θ2. For analytic tractability, we assume θ2=1 (i.e., the firm must reclaim all its failed products in the second period) and we consider the impact of a more lenient θ1<1 policy in the current (first) period. For clarity of exposition, we extend the explicit arguments shown for the cost function c1 (·) to include θ1. The following proposition provides a necessary and sufficient condition under which optimal product durability will be increasing in the take back fraction θ1.Proposition 6If the PTC condition holds and the seller’s profit functionπq1,q2∗,δis locally concave around its optimal durability δ∗, then for a constant take back fraction θ1<1 we have dδ∗/dθ1>0 if and only if ∂2c1(q1,δ,θ1)/∂θ1∂δ<0.See Appendix. □Although Proposition 6 was derived for the selling case, we can show that the same result (i.e., optimal durability increasing in θ1) applies under leasing as well. Thus, the sign of dδ∗/dθ1 (whether selling or leasing) hinges upon the sign of the cross derivative ∂2c1(q1,δ,θ1)/∂θ1∂δ, which can be positive or negative. For example, recalling from Section ‘Assumptions and model’ the cost function c1(q1,δ)=q1(k1(δ)+r(1−δ)θ1t1 (δ)+r2δ(1−δ)θ2t2(δ)), we see that the sign of ∂2c1(q1,δ,θ1)/∂θ1∂δ depends on the interplay between the production cost k1(δ) and the take back cost t1(δ).Let us first consider decreasing take back costs. As an example of a product for which a more durable design could yield lower take back costs, consider a laptop computer. Laptop manufacturers are increasingly using metals such as magnesium and aluminum as casing materials in lieu of plastic cases. At an increase in production cost, these metals yield a more durable product that also has more recycling value, thus decreasing take back costs. Because durability oppositely affects production and take back costs in this example, increasing δ can cause c1(·) to either increase or decrease. The cross derivative ∂2c1(q1,δ,θ1)/∂ θ1∂δ is equal to-q1rt1(δ)+(1-δ)q1rt1′(δ). Sincet1′(δ)is negative, the cross derivative is negative. Thus, when take back costs decrease with durability, dδ∗/dθ1>0, so as the take back fraction θ1 increases, durability will increase.Next we examine a case where durability increases take back costs, as with rechargeable batteries. Relative to Li-Ion type batteries, NiMH batteries are less costly to recycle but are also less durable.4Batteries in a Portable World—A Handbook on Rechargeable Batteries for Non-Engineers, 3rd edition, Isidor Buchanan.4With increasing take back costs in δ, the cross derivative ∂2c1(q1,δ,θ1)/∂ θ1∂δ can be positive or negative, depending on the magnitude of the (positive) termt1′(δ)relative to −q1rt1(δ). Thus, interestingly, we find dδ∗/dθ1 can be negative, implying that as the take back fraction θ1 increases, the firm optimally decreases its product durability. Naturally, the reaction of lowering product durability (i.e., dδ∗/dθ1<0) as the take back fraction increases would be viewed as unfortunate if the goal of the take back initiative was to encourage a more durable product. One way to address this challenge is to consider a take back fraction that depends on durability. Take back legislation that encourages higher durability by linking a firm’s recycling requirements to the volume of its returned products (thus linking take back costs to durability) is an idea that has been espoused by industry practitioners, as highlighted in this statement by a group of industry and NGOs (reference: cleanproduction.org, March 2, 2007): “Costs to producers based on return share... provides an incentive to design for durability.” We explore this further in Section ‘Fixed or durability-dependent take back fraction’.In this section we use computational experiments to further investigate the issue of durability choice, with related profit and consumer surplus implications. We assume a linear price function fi(q)=a−bq, for i∈{1,2}, with a and b positive scalars. We also assume equal first and second period take back costs denoted by t(δ). From Section ‘Assumptions and model’, recall the first and second period costs arec1(q1,δ)=q1(k1(δ)+r(1-δ)θ1t1(δ)+r2δ(1-δ)θ2t2(δ))and c2(q2,δ)=q2(k2(δ)+r(1−δ)θ2t2(δ)). We set f1(q)=f2(q)=100−q, k1(δ)=20+δ and k2 (δ)=10; these assumptions extend a similar example in Bulow (1986). We consider two cases for θ1: (i) θ1=1, and (ii) θ1=1−δ. We assume θ2=1 and r=0.8. Using these baseline parameter values, we employ the take back cost function t(δ)=t1(δ)=t2(δ)=1±tδ, with t⩾0. The case t(δ)=1+tδ reflects take back costs that are an increasing function of the product durability; the case t(δ)=1−tδ reflects take back costs that are decreasing in durability. We refer to these options, respectively, as the increasing and decreasing take back cost cases.5For the decreasing case t(δ)=1−tδ, it is possible for the function to take on negative values. The take back function having negative value would reflect a negative recycling cost for the product; i.e., that the cost of taking back the product is less than its residual value—perhaps due to containing valuable materials or components.5In the ensuing results, we vary both the parameter t and consider both the increasing and decreasing take back cost cases.In Fig. 1(a and b) we see how the optimum durability values for selling and leasing change as we increase the take back cost parameter t. As per the discussion following Proposition 5, the incentive to increase durability is lower under selling than leasing, and so we expect the highest optimal durability values to coincide with leasing. Fig. 1 illustrates that intuition, as the durability values for leasing are at 1, whereas the durability values for selling are lower. It is not true that a leasing firm always has an optimal durability of 100%, however. For example, Fig. 2shows how the results in Fig. 1(b) change if we employ k1(δ)=5+δ rather than k1 (δ)=20+δ.Beyond the leasing firm setting a higher durability, we know from our analysis in Section ‘Assumptions and model’ that leasing also generally increases profit. (Recall that the seller’s inability to commit effectively implies a constraint on its problem.) Higher product durability and profitability might seem to suggest that the leasing firm should generate higher overall surplus. However, that is not necessarily the case, because the leasing firm restricts its output in the second period (Lemma 2)—which reduces surplus. Interestingly, we find that by producing more in the second period, the selling firm may increase societal surplus relative to a leasing firm, despite earning lower profits. For example, Table 2explores the details corresponding to the case with t=0.4 in Fig. 1(a and b). The optimal values in Table 2 show that under both the increasing and decreasing take back cost cases, leasing yields higher durability and profits, yet by heavily restricting second period output q2, the resulting societal surplus lies slightly below the surplus under selling.When assessing total surplus, we assume consistently across the selling and leasing cases that take back costs are incurred (with proper time discounting) in the period a product fails. In other words, although the product is produced and has market value only during the first two periods, it may not be disposed of until some time period in the future. Mathematically, because failures can occur even beyond period two (e.g., a product from period 1 is returned for recycling in period 3 with probability δ2(1−δ)), to account for potential failures in periods 3, 4,…, ∞, an infinite series results. The net present value of take back costs from period 3 onward when evaluating total surplus is therefore given by the expression[r3δ(δq1+q2)(1-δ)t(δ)]/(1-rδ). This expression is absent from the surplus calculation if no take backs apply past period 2, which corresponds to the alternative scenario we introduced in Section ‘Defining revenue’ under which the firm takes back all of its products at the end of period 2; we explore that scenario further in Section ‘Taking back all versus failed-only units’.We next explore the effect of fixed and durability dependent take back fractions. We will show that a durability dependent take back percentage not only can provide a seller with an incentive to increase durability, but that profit and surplus can increase as well. To highlight this possibility, we employ t(δ)=0.5+tδ rather than t(δ)=1+tδ and hold the other parameters at their baseline values. Fig. 3shows the seller’s optimal durability choice with increasing take back costs for various values of the slope parameter t, for various fixed take back fractions θ1={0.4,0.6,0.8,1}, and for the alternative θ1 (δ)=1−δ. For this increasing take back cost case, we see the optimal durability raises as the fixed take back fraction increases (recall we addressed this in Proposition 6). We also see that the durability-dependent fraction θ1(δ)=1−δ yields higher durability. For a high δ∗ the corresponding take back rate θ1(δ∗)=1−δ∗ is low, but from an environmental perspective a high δ∗ can yield less waste overall because the net recycling amount depends on the product δ·θ1(δ) (i.e., since of the fraction δ of failed units, the firm recycles a percentage θ1 (δ)). As Fiksel (2009) notes, increasing product durability is “one of the most direct ways to improve environmental performance because it decreases the average life-cycle resource consumption per product use.”For the same set of scenarios, Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) show that the durability-dependent take back rate also performs well in terms of profits and surplus. We see in Fig. 4(a) that only when the firm is given a sufficiently low fixed take back fraction, such as 40% in Fig. 4(a), is the firm more profitable than when facing the θ1 (δ)=1−δ incentive. And, the θ1(δ)=1−δ incentive results in consistently higher surplus. This incentive thus makes possible the triple benefit of higher durability (Fig. 3), profits, and surplus. Although Figs. 3 and 4 suggest that the durability dependent fraction is beneficial for increasing take back costs, our numerical experiments with decreasing take back costs did not show such an advantage. Therefore, whether take back costs are increasing or decreasing in durability is an important consideration when designing EPR legislation.We conclude by revisiting the assumption, highlighted in Section ‘Assumptions and model’, that the firm is responsible in periods 1 and 2 for recycling a specific fraction of failed units only. Given that the product has no value at the end of the second period, we could alternatively assume that even non-failed units will be disposed of at the end of period two. If legislation required the firm to recycle a fraction of all extant units at the end of the second period—rather than just a fraction of failed units—then the take back fraction θ2 applies to all first period output that survives into period two, i.e., (1−δ)q1, and all second period output q2, implying that c1(q1,δ)=q1(k1(δ)+r(1−δ)θ1t1(δ)+r2δθ2t2(δ)) and c2(q2,δ)=q2(k2(δ)+rθ2t2(δ)). We refer to this as the full take back alternative. We noted in Section ‘Defining revenue’ that this change in assumption does not impact our analytic results in Sections ‘Assumptions and model and Take back fractions and durability choice’, where we employ the general cost functions c1(q1,δ) and c2(q2,δ). Of course, provided take back costs are positive, the firm’s profits will be lower under the full take backs alternative given the increased recycling burden. Moreover, the implied level of the firm’s optimal durability will change. Intuitively, if the firm must recycle a fixed fraction of all its output at the end of period 2, naturally there is some loss in the firm’s incentive to make product more durable. Therefore, we should not necessarily expect to see higher optimal durability under legislation requiring full take backs.Fig. 5(a and b) illustrates for t(δ)=1±tδ the change in optimal durability for the standard versus full take backs alternatives, using our baseline parameter values with θ1=1. Fig. 5(a) shows that requiring a firm to take back more of its product, as in the full take back cost case, does not induce the firm to choose a higher (optimal) durability. In contrast, in Fig. 5(b) we do see a small rise in durability values under the full take backs alternative. That rise occurs because when the firm is responsible for all its output, the per-unit take back cost becomes of greater significance, and when take back costs are decreasing in durability, a higher durability yields a lower take back cost.We have analyzed the impact of take backs on a firm’s durability and pricing decisions. Distinguishing characteristics of our two period model are that we permit durability-dependent costs in both periods and we explicitly address the impact of take back costs. By contrasting the first-order optimality conditions for a leasing versus selling firm, we show that selling generally results in less incentive to increase product durability. As a result, there is a durability gap between the selling and leasing outcomes, a finding consistent with prior literature that did not consider take back costs (Propositions 4 and 5 and Figs. 1 and 2). Interestingly, we also find (Table 2) that although selling induces lower durability, it can imply higher surplus.In order to better understand how take backs influence the firm’s durability choice, we investigated how the legislated take back fraction might reduce (or exacerbate) the durability gap between selling and leasing. We considered two types of product take-back rates: (i) a fixed percentage and (ii) a percentage that relates to the rate of product failures (which is directly tied to product durability). For the case of a fixed take back percentage, we derived the condition under which the optimal durability decision will increase (or decrease) as the legislated fixed take back percentage increases (Proposition 6). The fact that the firm’s optimal durability may actually decrease if the legislated take back percentage rises should give policymakers pause for thought. Fortunately, we also demonstrated (Figs. 3 and 4) that relative to a fixed take back rate, in some cases a durability-dependent rate can induce not only higher durability but also higher profits and consumer surplus as well—so-called triple bottom line benefits.We have also investigated the impact of requiring that a firm reclaim, at the end of the second period, a (fixed) percentage of all its output versus a percentage of only failed products (Fig. 5). The former option places a heavier recycling burden on the firm while the latter creates some incentive for the firm to increase durability. Yet, if take back costs decrease in durability we find that a heavier recycling burden may induce a net increase in durability. Overall, as was the case when contrasting a fixed and a durability dependent take back fraction, we demonstrate that the impact of stipulating take backs of all output versus only failed units depends on whether there exists an increasing or decreasing relationship between take back costs and the product durability.In summary, we find that product take backs have the potential to lessen the durability gap that exists between selling and leasing, by raising the seller’s durability choice. This work clearly demonstrates that EPR initiatives should be tailored to fit the structure of firms’ take-back costs, since otherwise the seller’s optimal durability may decrease in response to an increase in its take back responsibility. One potential direction for future work in this area would be to consider issues surrounding competition among firms, and perhaps the potential for competing firms to establish a collaborative recycling program.Proof of Corollary 3Recall thatq2∗is an implicit function of q1 and δ, defined by the solution to the first order conditions in Eq.(3).Thus, we apply the implicit function theorem to evaluatedq2∗/dδ=-∂2π2/(∂δ)(∂q2)∂2π2/(∂2q2)anddq2∗/dq1=-∂2π2(∂δ)(∂q1)∂2π2/(∂2q1).Given π2 from Eq.(2) we have∂2π2∂δ∂q2=q1∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2+q2∂2f2(x)∂2xx=δq1+q2-∂2c2(q2,δ)(∂δ)(∂q2), and∂2π2(∂q1)(∂q2)=δ∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2+q2∂2f2(x)∂2xx=δq1+q2.The partial derivative of the common denominator in the two expressions is∂2π2/(∂2q2)=π2″=2f2′+q2f2″-c2″. We thus getdq2∗dδ=-q1f2′+q2f2″+∂2c2(q2,δ)/(∂δ)(∂q2)2f2′+q2f2″-c2″, anddq2∗dq1=-δf2′+q2f2″2f2′+q2f2″-c2″. Substituting the two expressions into, respectively,dδq1+q2∗q1d(δ)=1+1q1dq2∗dδanddδq1+q2∗δd(q1)=1+1δdq2∗dq1, yieldsdδq1+q2∗q1d(δ)=f2′-c2″+(1/q1)∂2c2(q2,δ)/((∂δ)(∂q2))2f2′+q2f2″-c2″anddδq1+q2∗δd(q1)=f2′-c2″2f2′+q2f2″-c2″. From the PTC condition,π2″=2f2′+q2f2″-c2″<0. Thus, the sign of both expressions in question will be opposite to the signs of their numerators, as their denominators are negative. By assumption, c2 is convex in q2, thusf2′-c2″is negative, and so the numeratorf2′-c2″+(1/q1)∂2[c2(q2,δ)]/(∂δ)(∂q2)<0if and only iff2′-c2″>(1/q1)∂2[c2(q2,δ)]/(∂δ)(∂q2). □Given condition2f2′(δq1+q2)+q2f2″(δq1+q2)-c2″<0from Lemma 1, there is a unique optimalq2∗⩾0satisfying Eq. (3). Recall thatq2∗is an implicit function of δ and q1. Given aq2∗satisfying Eq. (3), the firm maximizes (over q1 and δ) the unconstrained profit functionπq1,q2∗,δ=q1f1(q1)+rδq1+q2∗f2δq1+q2∗-c1(q1,δ)-rc2q2∗,δ. Thus, the firm must set the following derivatives to zero:∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂q1=f1(q1)+q1∂f1(q1)∂q1+rδ+dq2∗dq1f2δq1+q2∗+rδq1+q2∗df2δq1+q2∗dq1-∂c1(q1,δ)∂q1-rdq2∗dq1∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2q2=q2∗,and∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂δ=rq1+dq2∗dδf2δq1+q2∗+rδq1+q2∗df2δq1+q2∗dδ-∂c1(q1,δ)∂δ-rdq2∗dδ∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2q2=q2∗-r∂c2q2∗,δ∂δ.Observe thatdf2δq1+q2∗/dq1=δ+dq2∗/dq1∂f2(x)/∂xx=δq1+q2∗and thatdf2(δq1+q2∗)/dδ=q1+dq2∗/dδ∂f2(x)/∂xx=δq1+q2∗. Moreover, observe from Eq. (3) thatf2δq1+q2∗=∂c2(q2,δ)/∂q2q2=q2∗-q2∗∂f2(x)/∂(x)x=δq1+q2∗. Making these substitutions yields:∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂q1=f1(q1)+q1∂f1(q1)∂q1+rδ∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2q2=q2∗-rδ+dq2∗dq1q2∗∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2∗+rδq1+q2∗δ+dq2∗dq1∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2∗-∂c1(q1,δ)∂q1∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂δ=rq1∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2q2=q2∗-rq1+dq2∗dδq2∗∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2∗+rδq1+q2∗q1+dq2∗dδ∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2∗-∂c1(q1,δ)∂δ-r∂c2(q2∗,δ)∂δSimplifying the above expressions and employing our condensed notation in Table 1, we have:∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂q1=f1(q1)+q1∂f1(q1)∂q1+rδ∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2q2=q2∗+rδq1δ+dq2∗dq1∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2∗-∂c1(q1,δ)∂q1=f1+q1f1′+rδc2′+rδq1δ+dq2∗dq1f2′-c1′∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂δ=rq1∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2q2=q2∗+rδq1q1+dq2∗dδ∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2∗-∂c1(q1,δ)∂δ-r∂c2q2∗,δ∂δ=rq1c2′+rδq1q1+dq2∗dδf2′-∂c1∂δ-r∂c2∂δRecognizing thatdδq1+q2∗/dq1=δ+d(q2∗)/dq1anddδq1+q2∗/dδ=q1+d(q2∗)/dδ, and setting∂πq1,q2∗,δ/∂q1=0and∂πq1,q2∗,δ/∂δ=0, yields the desired result. □The optimal durability δ∗ is an implicit function defined by the first-order condition∂πq1,q2∗,δ/∂δ=0. The implicit function theorem yieldsdδ∗/dθ1=-∂2πq1,q2∗,δ/(∂θ1)(∂δ)∂2πq1,q2∗,δ/(∂2δ). Since the denominator of this expression is negative around δ∗ by our assumption of local concavity, the sign of dδ∗/dθ1 will match the sign of ∂2π/(∂θ1)(∂ δ). Since c1(q1,δ1) is also a function of θ1, employing the notation c1(q1,δ,θ1) within the expression fordπq1,q2∗,δ/dδfrom the proof of Proposition 4, we have∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂δ=rq1∂c2(q2,δ)∂q2q2=q2∗+rδq1q1+dq2∗dδ∂f2(x)∂xx=δq1+q2∗-∂c1(q1,δ,θ1)∂δ-r∂c2q2∗,δ∂δ. Therefore,∂∂θ1∂πq1,q2∗,δ∂δ=∂∂θ1-∂c1(q1,δ,θ1)∂δ. □

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
