@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Allocation of risk capital on an internal market

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an internal sequential auction for the allocation of risk capital.The allocation is optimal if division managers have no diverging interests.With empire-building preferences, agency costs are offset by auction proceeds.Depending on the model parameters, total agency costs can become negative.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finance,OR in banking,Risk management,Auctions/bidding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose an allocation process for economic risk capital using an internal sequential auction in which investment allowances are based on marginal risk contributions. Division managers have incentive to give truthful bids because of bonus payments, which are linear in the division’s profit and linked to the auction bids. With our model, the auction process reaches an equilibrium identical to the optimal allocation if division managers have no diverging interests. When division managers do have diverging preferences in terms of empire building, headquarters faces a trade-off between incurring opportunity costs for achieving a suboptimal allocation and bonus costs paid to division managers to overcome their diverging interests. However, bonus costs are partially offset by proceeds from the auction. Depending on the model parameters, total agency costs can become negative. We show that for large values of new risk capital to be allocated, headquarters can always choose a level of bonus payments so that total costs are negative.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The efficient allocation of limited resources is a key problem for a firm’s central management. Academic literature has dealt with the issue of asymmetric information and diverging interests by analyzing this principal-agent relationship and providing strategies for headquarters to optimize the allocation.1Among these strategies are a number of mechanisms that are relatively easy to implement, e.g., via transfer prices (Harris, Kriebel, & Raviv, 1982), via a budget with the possibility of an ex-post increase (Harris & Raviv, 1996; Harris & Raviv, 1998), and, more recently, via a dynamic spending account with a threshold division of authority (Malenko, 2012).1However, these strategies require independent investment opportunities among the divisions and do not work when they are interconnected. In this paper, we consider the allocation of risk capital, a problem that exhibits this interconnection among divisional investment opportunities.The risk policy of many firms is based on maximum risk-bearing capacity. Banks are required by regulatory constraints to limit risk in their business. In addition to such external restrictions, internal concerns about the ability and willingness of banks to take risks lead to a policy that limits the total risk in terms of a maximum tolerated loss level. To avoid bankruptcy, this maximum tolerated loss level must be underlaid with risk capital.When a firm undertakes a new project, that endeavor will usually increase the firm’s overall risk, which implies the consumption of risk capital. If the aggregated consumption of several potential projects would exceed the available risk capital, the firm must then select the most valuable projects, taking into consideration both expected returns and required risk capital.We look at a firm with centralized headquarters and a number of decentralized divisions led by division managers. Headquarters’ task is to optimally allocate risk capital to the divisions. In contrast to the problem of allocating financial funds, risk capital, seen as a risk-bearing capacity, is not additive among the divisions. Instead, the well-known benefits of diversification reduce total risk (and thus, required risk capital) at the corporate level, compared to the sum of divisional risks. As a consequence, the consumption of risk capital for one division depends on the investments of the other divisions. This interconnection makes the allocation of risk capital different from other allocation problems discussed in the literature.Most common in practice for the risk-capital-allocation process is central budgeting. Headquarters equips the decentralized divisions with a capital budget, which can be seen as a risk limit the division must not exceed. The problem with this approach lies in the information asymmetry between headquarters and the division managers. Information about the value-adding abilities of the divisions is held by the division managers, who know their particular business better than headquarters does.An alternative to such central budgeting would be an allocation based on an internal market mechanism. Because markets in an economy have proven to be successful institutions for efficiently allocating resources, it is promising to “bring the power of free enterprise”2Halal, Geranmayeh, and Pourdehnad (1993).2into the hierarchically organized firm. A number of organizations have adopted this idea and implemented an internal market for various goods, such as production capacity, computing power, or conference rooms.3See Baiman, Fischer, Rajan, and Saouma (2007).3In this paper, we apply this idea for the allocation of risk capital. Within such an internal market, the divisions compete for risk capital by demanding this limited resource at headquarters. They submit bids for risk capital to headquarters, and those divisions giving the highest bids receive the largest amounts of allocated capital.We develop an auction design which addresses the particular challenges of risk capital allocation. First, according to interdependencies between the divisions, the consumptions of risk capital are in general not additive. This means that because of diversification effects, the required risk capital of the firm as a whole will usually be less than the sum of risk capital consumptions of the divisions, calculated alone. To exhaust the total available risk capital, we base the required risk capital for the divisions on their contribution to overall risk, rather than on stand-alone risk. Second, because a change in the level of investment by a single division can directly impact the risk contributions of all other divisions, the available risk capital is not auctioned all-at-once, but instead, sequentially. Third, headquarters must establish incentives for the division managers to give reasonable bids according to an accurate estimation of their own value-adding ability. This is achieved with profit-based compensation which depends linearly on the division’s performance and is measured relative to the bid the division has placed in the risk capital auction. Thus, the bonus payment is a fraction of the division profit minus the price paid for the risk capital within the auction.In addition to asymmetric information, there need to exist diverging interests of divisional managers and headquarters to create an agency situation which requires a sophisticated allocation mechanism. In the absence of diverging interests, headquarters could simply ask the divisional managers to reveal their private information, and managers would have no incentive to lie. We justify the need for a decentralized allocation process by the preference of divisional managers for larger amounts of capital under their control (“empire building”).Before concentrating on this actual agency situation, we first show the effectiveness of the auction-based solution in the absence of empire building. Under mild conditions, the allocation through the internal auction is identical to the first-best solution without asymmetry of information between headquarters and divisional managers. The solution is nonetheless costly for headquarters, as it involves the payments of bonuses to divisional managers, which diminishes headquarters’ overall profit.When we introduce divisional empire building, two things happen. First, the resulting allocation is no longer optimal, as divisional managers display bidding behavior in the auction that reflects their objective of increasing the amount of capital under their control. This sub-optimal allocation results in a decrease in total profits for headquarters, which can be seen as opportunity costs induced by the agency relation. Second, as more capital under control increases divisional managers’ utilities, they are willing to place higher bids within the auction. As the price paid in the auction is deducted from the bonus payments, higher bids mean lower net bonus payments. The utility of capital under control can offset the utility of bonus payments, so that managers may be willing to receive negative bonus payments in exchange for increasing their empire. The saving of bonus payments results in an increase in total profits for headquarters. We show that the saving of bonus payments may be larger than the opportunity costs in some situations. This means that total agency costs may be negative. The total profit of the firm may accordingly be larger in an agency situation than it would be otherwise.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 relates the paper to three major strands of literature: intrafirm resource allocation, internal capital markets, and risk budgeting. The model setup is outlined in Section 3,, together with the solution in the case of symmetric information as a benchmark. Section 4 analyzes the allocation based on the internal auction with asymmetric information, but without diverging interests. The general situation with asymmetric information and diverging interests is analyzed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper.The literature dealing with divisionalized firms was pioneered by Hirshleifer (1957). He analyzes the situation of a firm division that internally supplies an intermediate commodity to other divisions. Introducing the idea of transfer prices, he shows that defining the transfer price as the marginal production costs of the supplying division leads to optimal decisions. Harris et al. (1982) are the first to develop a model based on asymmetric information and incentive problems. They consider a firm with headquarters, one internal intermediate supplier, and a number of divisions that use the intermediate commodity. The information asymmetry is resolved using a transfer pricing system. The general idea is very similar to the incentive scheme in our model, in the sense that the cost of the resource allocated to the division manager at the chosen transfer price is deducted from the manager’s compensation. Bernardo, Cai, and Luo (2004) build on these lines, presenting a model for the allocation of capital in the presence of an agency conflict. They derive an optimal managerial compensation contract, which offers greater performance pay and a lower salary when managers report a higher quality project.4Bernardo et al. (2004) explicitly model two divisions. Other papers dealing with the agency conflict between headquarters and managers in the single division case are Harris and Raviv (1996), Harris and Raviv (1998), Bernardo, Cai, and Luo (2001).4The idea of auctioning internal resources is already mentioned by Harris et al. (1982), although they do not explain it in detail. Baiman et al. (2007) pick up the idea, analyzing an internal auction of an indivisible auxiliary good. Following their model, we consider the auctioning of a resource by headquarters to divisions on the same hierarchical level, although our model setup differs by capturing the specific features of risk capital as the auctioned resource.Another strand of literature that this paper draws upon deals with “internal capital markets”. In this context, the terminus “market” is not understood in its literal sense, that is, as a free market place where division managers compete for financial resources, but rather as any internal reallocation method maintained by headquarters. In general, the internal capital markets literature analyzes the efficiency of the internal allocation method in various ways, for example, in the presence of information asymmetries, compared to external markets on which the division raises funds outside the company, etc. Gertner, Scharfstein, and Stein (1994) emphasize that control rights are the key difference between an external and internal supplier of capital. Stein (1997) presents a model in which headquarters actively makes use of these control rights in shifting funds from one division to another. In his model, headquarters is able to acquire (possibly noisy) information about the division returns. Because headquarters bases the decision on this information, the paper does not focus on the agency conflict between headquarters (as the principal) and division managers, but instead on the conflict between headquarters (as the agent) and investors.Scharfstein and Stein (2000) consider a two-tier agency situation with outside investors, corporate headquarters, and divisional managers. The basic conflict arises from private benefits of assets under the purview of both divisional managers and headquarters. The idea of empire building used by Scharfstein and Stein (2000) was previously brought up by Stulz (1990), Li and Li (1996). In contrast to Stein (1997), and in line with our model, Scharfstein and Stein (2000) assume continuous investment opportunities. Inderst and Laux (2005) also consider continuous investment opportunities and private managerial benefits of assets under control. Furthermore, they explicitly model divisional managers’ incentives, assuming risk-neutral agents. The basic model features, specifically, is, continuous investment opportunities and empire-building, risk-neutral agents, are also found in De Motta (2003). His model exhibits further similarities to our approach, namely normally distributed cash flows and explicit incentive payments.Our paper differs from the internal capital markets literature in two respects. First, we consider an actual market mechanism (an auction), and second, we model the allocation of risk capital with the problem of interconnection among the divisions. Instead of concentrating solely on the allocation of funds, we also focus on the riskiness of investments and the required capital which serves as a buffer for potential losses. Perold (2005), building on Merton and Perold (1993), emphasizes the two functions of capital, funding and risk-bearing. Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, and Heath (1999) consider the risk of a project as the additionally required capital to make the project “acceptable.” The idea of acceptable projects is also found in approaches calculating hurdle rates for the required return relative to the risk of a project. Froot and Stein (1998) are the first to address the interdependency among divisions and the impact of this on hurdle rates. They derive a two-factor model, in which the required return of a division depends on the covariance to the market and on the covariance to the overall firm portfolio. In terms of measuring and allocating risk capital, Merton and Perold (1993) point out that because of the interdependencies among divisions, risk capital is not additive across the divisions. They make an argument for marginal risk contributions. Denault (2001), Kalkbrener (2005) carry out axiomatic approaches for allocation schemes. However, these approaches do not consider the agency problem. Therefore, the allocation schemes are suited for an ex-post perspective of the problem, allocating the cost of risk capital to the divisions for the purpose of performance measurement. The same holds for the work of Homburg and Scherpereel (2008), who analyze the fairness of various allocation schemes for the cost of risk capital.The only paper of which we are aware that deals with the ex-ante allocation of risk capital, accounting both for asymmetry of information and the non-additivity of risk capital, is Stoughton and Zechner (2007). In their model, division managers choose a level of risk for their investment. As with our model, overall risk is bound by the amount of available risk capital. Division managers have private information about the return function, and they receive linear incentives, minus the cost of allocated capital. Stoughton and Zechner (2007) develop optimal incentive contracts that incentivize the division manager to truthfully report their private information to headquarters.Our paper differs from Stoughton and Zechner (2007) in the way it treats the agency problem. In contrast to their model, we explicitly consider diverging interest in terms of divisional empire building and so consider an actual agency situation. We then analyze how the power of markets can be used to allocate risk capital within the firm. The idea of an internal market for risk capital has been stressed by Saita (1999). However, it remains only a note in his paper, lacking any detailed analysis. Such an analysis of an internal auction of risk capital is the primary purpose of this paper.There are n decentralized divisions, each of which is responsible for one business segment. These segments could be activities in different regions, in different branches in the case of a diversified firm, or different trading desks, in the case of a bank. The investment volume viof each division results in a random division profit πi(vi). We consider one period of investment and make the following assumptions concerning information about returns:Assumption 1The decentralized divisions have unique private information about the expected profit Eπi(vi) of their business.The expected profits Eπi(vi) are linear in the investment volume vi, i.e., Eπi(vi)=μiviwith the expected return μi.Hence, the uncertain division profits can be defined in terms of stochastic division returns Xiwith expectation μi=EXi, which describe the profit per one unit of investment volume: πi(vi)=viXi.Assumption 3The returns Xiare multivariate normally distributed with the positive definite covariance matrix Σ.The entries of the covariance matrix are denoted σij=ρijσiσj, where σiis the standard deviation of the return of division i, and ρijis the correlation coefficient between divisions i and j.Assumption 4The covariance matrix Σ is commonly known as public information to headquarters, as well as to the decentralized divisions.The private information (Assumption 1), together with the empire-building assumption (see Assumption 8, below), is crucial for the agency relationship between headquarters and the decentralized divisions.Linear returns (Assumption 2) connote no restrictions in the scalability of the businesses. This assumption deviates from most other models, for example, those of Froot and Stein (1998), Stoughton and Zechner (2007), which assume a concave return function. Our model is based on the most elementary return function to keep the study analytically simple. The normality of returns (Assumption 3) also serves to keep the model analytically tractable.The common information about covariances (Assumption 4) bears discussion. If we consider the divisions as regional or sectoral branches of the firm, a well-founded estimation of correlations among the divisions can be based on historical data, such as corresponding stock indices. Regarding the risk level of each division, we assume that headquarters can observe this value. It is reasonable that, in contrast to the expected return, headquarters has the ability to monitor the division risk, at least from an ex-post perspective. The same assumption is implicitly inherent to the model of Stoughton and Zechner (2007).5In line with most approaches in the literature, we assume that the distributional properties of divisional returns are known and that there are no unknown risk factors. This is surely an idealized assumption. In practice, headquarters could account for such uncertainties by retaining a certain amount of total risk capital as an additional buffer.5The assumptions concerning the target of a firm’s headquarters and the definition of risk capital are as follows:Assumption 5The overall goal of headquarters is to maximize economic value added (EVA), subject to a risk constraint.The risk constraint is defined by a risk measure, which must not exceed the available risk capital C. This amount of risk capital is fixed. The risk measure is defined as the value-at-risk of the total firm portfolio,VaR(P)=VaR∑i=1nviXi.The decentralized divisions must provide their businesses with risk capital. The amount of risk capital required for one division is represented by its risk contribution RCito total firm risk. Risk contribution is defined by the marginal risk measure with respect to the portfolio,6To calculate the risk contributions, each division must report its investment volume to headquarters. As this information is easily verifiable, the reports can be assumed to be reliable. Given that the covariance matrix is public information, headquarters can calculate all risk contributions at any time.6(1)RCi=MRP(viXi)=∂VaR(P)∂vivi.The EVA principle is also followed by Stoughton and Zechner (2007). Basically, EVA is defined as the expected profit minus the cost of capital. With a fixed equity capital C, the required amount of debt financing is∑ivi-C. If kEdenotes the cost of equity capital, and kDthe cost of debt capital, then(2)EVA=∑i=1nμivi-kD∑i=1nvi-C-kEC=∑i=1n(μi-kD)vi-(kE-kD)C.For the remainder of the paper we will assume that kD=0. This means no loss of generality because all results remain when μiis interpreted as the division’s expected excess return over kD. As a consequence, the EVA criterion is equivalent to optimizing the expected profit of the total firm portfolio,∑iμivi, as the cost of capital, kEC, is fixed.It is standard practice within the banking industry to define headquarters’ risk constraint according to a value-at-risk criterion (Assumption 6). Likewise, within the non-financial sector, its equivalent in terms of cash flow, cash-flow-at-risk, is gaining more and more importance.7See Andrén, Jankensgard, and Oxelheim (2005), Stein, Usher, LaGattuta, and Youngen (2001).7According to the normality of returns, the value-at-risk is a linear function of the total firm portfolio standard deviation σP, that is, VaR(P)=z·σPwith z depending on the chosen confidence level.8This statement holds if the value-at-risk is calculated with respect to the expected value, that is, as the maximum negative deviation from the expected value with the chosen confidence level. See Stoughton and Zechner (2007), p. 318.8Hence, the value-at-risk criterion is equivalent to a restriction on the standard deviation.The definition of the risk contribution (Assumption 7) is the Euler allocation.9See Tasche (2008). The risk contribution is the impact of an infinitesimal change in divisional investment on overall risk, scaled by the size of the division. By means of this definition, it implicitly captures all risk factors of individual divisions (that might be different for different managers).9Its foundation lies in the classical capital asset pricing model, where systematic risk is measured by the covariance, which is equivalent to the Euler allocation of total portfolio variance. In general, the Euler allocation can be derived from different axiomatic approaches, such as Denault (2001) or Kalkbrener (2005). Essentially, the marginal risk measure fulfills the requirement for capital allocation that the single risk contributions add up to total risk10See Litterman (1997) in the case of the standard deviation as the risk measure. The equation holds for any risk measure which is differentiable and positively homogeneous, i.e., R(hX)=h R(X)∀h>0, which is a corollary of Euler’s theorem on the representation of positively homogeneous functions. See Tasche (2006).10:(3)∑i=1nMRP(viXi)=VaR(P).Harris et al. (1982) emphasize that two aspects are important to the allocation problem. In addition to the asymmetry in information (Assumption 1), the divergence in interests is also essential. If division managers are not following their own divergent goals, headquarters can simply ask the division managers to reveal their private information, knowing that the managers would have no incentive to lie. Managers, however, see personal benefits in allocated risk capital, as they are able to enlarge their power and sphere of influence. Such empire-building behavior biases the divisional managers towards reporting too high estimates of their expected returns to headquarters. We model managers’ preference for empire building by introducing a non-monetary component as part of managers’ utility:Assumption 8Managers’ utility increases with the business volume under their control, vi. The increase is linear with an individual preference coefficient ηi.The interpretation of the coefficient is that one dollar of personal income is equivalent to ηidollars under control. Such a linear preference for empire building is very common in the literature, for example in Scharfstein and Stein (2000), Matsusaka and Nanda (2002), De Motta (2003), Inderst and Laux (2005).To incentivize division managers to conform to headquarters’ goals, a bonus scheme is introduced. Both the realized division profit and the required risk capital influence the compensation of the division managers:Assumption 9The managers receive a bonus payment as a fraction γ>0 of their realized profit:(4)bi(vi)=γviXi.The proportional costs for risk capital are deducted from the managers’ compensation. They are defined as the fraction γ of the risk contribution, multiplied by a price p:(5)ci(vi)=γpRCi=γpMRP(viXi).The price will result from the demand of all divisions at the internal auction. Within the auction setup, the price can vary as units of risk capital are auctioned sequentially.Accordingly, the reward function for a division manager is given by(6)ri(vi)=γviXi-γpMRP(viXi),which can be seen as an add-onto a fixed salary.The bonus payment according to Assumption 9 is purely linear in the division’s profit. Jensen (2003) points out the benefits of linear compensation schemes. He argues that target negotiations and target-oriented pay for performance are costly and counter-productive, while linear bonus payments prevent managers from lying and gaming. In our setting, no time- or productivity-consuming negotiations are necessary, as division managers can set their own target in terms of the accepted price of risk capital. Once the price is paid, the compensation is independent of any target, as postulated by Jensen (2003).Assumption 10 punishes the division manager for taking risks. The size of that financial punishment is proportional to the risk contribution of the division. Given that this risk contribution also depends upon the actions of other divisions which are outside the manager’s sphere, Saita (2007) instead favors a stand-alone risk measure in the context of division performance measurement. However, the use of risk contributions is crucial to headquarters’ allocation goals. Saita (2007) endorses the use of risk contributions if correlations among the divisions are stable over time, since in this case, managers can more easily verify the calculation of risk contributions and will thus more likely accept such a compensation scheme.Regarding managers’ risk preferences, we make:Assumption 11Division managers are risk neutral.Risk neutrality is in line with a number of related papers, including Harris et al. (1982), Harris and Raviv (1996), Harris and Raviv (1998),ernardo et al. (2001), De Motta (2003), Bernardo et al. (2004), Inderst and Laux (2005), Stoughton and Zechner (2007).According to these assumptions, the division manager aims to maximize expected utility, given by the sum of the expected reward for performance and utility for empire building11The expected reward (neglecting utility for empire building) is closely related to the widespread RAROC/RORAC paradigm (Uyemura, Kantor, & Pettit, 1996; Zaik, Walter, Kelling, & James, 1996). If risk-adjusted capital is defined proportionally to the risk contribution of the asset to the portfolio,RORACi∼viμiRCi=viμiMRP(viXi)=μiMRP(Xi),then the expected reward is positive if and only if the corresponding RORAC is greater than a hurdle rate related to the internal capital price:γviμi-pMRP(viXi)>0⇔μi>pMRP(Xi)⇔μiMRP(Xi)>p..11(7)E[ui(vi)]=E[ri(vi)]+viηi=γ[viμi-pMRP(viXi)]+viηi.The crucial point of the target function is that it depends upon the actions of other managers, actions, which result in the constitution of the portfolio P. The analysis of this interdependence and its consequences will be presented in Section 4.As a benchmark, we derive the optimal solution for the situation in which headquarters is fully informed about the expected returns. Headquarters would seek to solve the optimization problem(8)∑i=1nviμi=μTv⟶Max!,where v=(vi)i=1,…, ndenotes the vector of investment volumes and μ=(μi)i=1,…, nthe vector of expected returns, subject to the risk constraint(9)VaR(P)=zvTΣv⩽C⇔vTΣv⩽(C/z)2.Using the Lagrange function,(10)L(v)=μTv-λ(vTΣv-(C/z)2),the first-order condition is(11)∂L∂v=μ-2λΣv=!0,which yields(12)v=12λΣ-1μ.The Lagrangian multiplier λ can be deduced using the risk constraint in equation form,(13)14λ2μTΣ-1ΣΣ-1μ=(C/z)2,yielding(14)λ=zμTΣ-1μ2C.This leads to the optimum(15)v=CΣ-1μzμTΣ-1μ.We now turn to the case of asymmetric information, which headquarters tries to solve by means of an auction. In this section, as a second benchmark, we still maintain a situation where division managers have no diverging interests by letting the empire preference parameters ηi=0 for all managers i. This restriction allows us to highlight the auction mechanism and to derive an optimum solution. In Section 5 we will consider the general case with η⩾0.The capital allocation process is based on an internal auction, whereby headquarters sells risk capital to the divisions. Basically, we deal with the auction of a single, divisible good.12In this sense, the situation is similar to the auction of US Treasury bills. In the case of Treasury bills, the auction participants usually consider the good for resale and so their valuations are similar (Das & Sundaram, 1997). In contrast, the situation considered here is different: The divisions are the final consumer of the risk capital, and their valuation depends heavily upon their investment opportunities (i.e., their expected returns μi), and the correlation of their business to the total firm portfolio (defined via the covariance matrix Σ).12Theoretically, the total available risk capital could be sold within a singular auction, whereby all units are sold at one go.13Such an auction of shares has already been proposed by Wilson (1979). See Back and Zender (1993) for the auction of US Treasury bills.13In a singular auction, each division must quote bids for separate units of capital, for example, a bid for one unit, a bid for two units, and so on. But because of the dependence of a division’s risk contribution on the total firm portfolio, a singular auction of the available risk capital is not feasible. The value of the second unit for a division does not solely depend upon whether or not it has received the first unit, but also upon who has received the first unit. Therefore, a bid for more than one unit is not practicable.Instead, a sequential auction, in which units of risk capital are sold one-at-a-time is preferable.14See the books of Krishna (2009) or Milgrom (2004) for an overview on the theory of sequential auctions. Most contributions in this area, however, focus on the case where each bidder demands only a single unit of the auctioned good, a situation which substantially differs from the auction of risk capital.14For each unit auctioned, the auction winner is announced publicly, which makes it possible to base bids for the next unit to be auctioned on this information.Within each single unit auction, a sealed-bid, second-price Vickrey auction is conducted. The highest bid wins, but the winner only has to pay the second-highest bid. Vickrey (1961) has shown that this design causes bidders to give truthful bids.With the sequential allocation, the problem arises that the risk contributions change during the auction and allocation process. A division which has bought an amount of risk capital to conduct a favorable investment might see itself confronted with a higher risk contribution after other divisions alter their investment volumes. Based on this new risk contribution, it might not have quoted the bid for the capital. For example, a division with an expected return of μi=5% invests an amount of vi=20, which leads to a risk contribution of RCi=0.2. The division buys the corresponding risk capital at a price of p=4, which yields a positive expected reward of γ[20·0.05−4·0.2]=0.2γ>0. But after the actions of other divisions, the risk contribution might have increased to 0.3, which now yields a negative expected reward of γ[20·0.05−4·0.3]=−0.2γ<0. Therefore, we propose a setup based on investment allowances for a unit of risk capital. Allowances are frozen once the unit has been sold to a division. If division i wanted to increase its investment volume by an (infinitesimally small) unit, it would require an additional amount of ∂VaR(P)/∂viunits of risk capital. Equivalently, for one unit of risk capital, it receives the investment allowance of(16)ai=1∂VaR(P)∂vi.Headquarters announces these allowances for each division. Once a division has bought an investment allowance, the corresponding charge for risk capital is fixed, and is independent of future actions of other divisions. In the auction of the next unit of risk capital, new risk contributions and investment allowances for all divisions are calculated by headquarters based on the sum of all previously bought allowances.Letv0=vi0i=1,…,ndenote the initial investment vector before the auction starts (which can be 0 if a completely new allocation is considered). LetC0=zv0TΣv0denote the initially exploited amount of risk capital. Furthermore, letaimdenote the capital allowances for division i within the m-th auction of a single unit of risk capital. Then, we define recursively for m>0,(17)vim=vim-1+aim-1I{divisionihaswonthem-1stauction}as the investment volume of division i after the auction of m units risk capital. I· denotes the indicator function.For the m+1st auction, risk contributions and capital allowances are calculated according to (16) with an effective firm portfolio Pmbased on the investment volumesvim,(18)Pm=∑i=1nvimXi.Now bids at the internal auction for the m+1st unit of risk capital have to be placed. To calculate the capital allowance for division i, its marginal risk contribution with respect to investment is15See the Supplementary appendix for the derivation.15(19)∂VaR(Pm)∂vim=∂∂vimzVar(Pm)=zCov(Xi,Pm)Var(Pm)=zρiPmσi,leading to a capital allowance of(20)aim=Var(Pm)zCov(Xi,Pm)=1zρiPmσi.(We useCov(Xi,Pm)=ρiPmσiσPmwithρiPmbeing the correlation coefficient between division i and the overall firm portfolio.) If the division buys one additional unit of risk capital at a price p, the division manager is charged an amount of γp, but also increases his expected bonus payment because of the increased investment allowance. The change in his overall expected reward is(21)Ebivim+aim-Ebivim-γp=γμiaim-γp=γμiaim-p.Therefore, the maximum price which division i would be willing to pay is(22)pim=μiaim=μiVar(Pm)zCov(Xi,Pm)=μizρi,Pmσi.The design of the Vickrey auction lets the manager rationally bid this maximum price, as, in the case of a win, he only has to pay the second-highest price. Thus, the division with the highest maximum price wins the auction.For the following theoretical analysis, we consider the parameter m to be continuous, that is, infinitesimally small amounts of risk capital are auctioned sequentially.16The parameter m refers to the amount of risk capital auctioned. For simplicity, we will refer to this parameter as “auction time” where appropriate. Thus, at auction time m, m out of C−C0 units risk capital are already auctioned.16To get an understanding of the auction process, we first look at the two-divisions case. Without loss of generality, letp10>p20, in other words, Division 1 wins the first auction. The investment volume of Division 1 increases at the ratea1m. This leads to a change in the maximum prices as17See the Supplementary appendix for the derivation of the following equations.17(23)dp1m=∂p1m∂v1ma1mdm=μ1zρ1Pm2-1ρ1Pm2σPma1mdm⩽0,and(24)dp2m=∂p2m∂v1ma1mdm=μ2zCov(X2,Pm)ρ1Pm-ρ12ρ2Pmσ1a1mdm.In essence, there are two possible devolutions of the two prices and thus the capital allocation. First, the maximum price of Division 1 could remain higher than that of Division 2 until infinity. This would lead to consecutive wins by Division 1 in all auctions and a unilateral increase of its investment volumev1m. Or, second, at some finite auction time, the two maximum prices would become equal.In the first case, whenv1mtends to infinity, the overall firm portfolio converges to a portfolio where only Division 1 is present. In this case, the correlationρ1Pmtends to 1, and the correlationρ2Pmtends to ρ12. Hence, the limit maximum prices are(25)p1∞=limv1m→∞p1m=limv1m→∞μ1zρ1Pmσ1=μ1zσ1,and(26)p2∞=limv1m→∞p2m=limv1m→∞μ2zρ2,Pσ2=μ2zρ12σ2.The situation in which Division 1 wins all auctions occurs ifp1∞⩾p2∞. Otherwise, that is, if(27)p1∞<p2∞⇔μ1zVar(X1)<μ2Var(X1)zCov(X1,X2)⇔μ1σ1<μ2ρ12σ2,the second situation occurs. This means there is a finite auction time m∗ where the two maximum prices are equal, i.e.,p1m∗=p2m∗. Condition (27) means that both divisions were in the firm portfolio under symmetric information.18Division 1 is in the portfolio regardless. For Division 2 to be also in the portfolio, according to (15), the second component of the vector Σ−1μ must be positive. Using the inversion formula of a 2×2 matrix, this is the case if and only if-ρ12σ1σ2μ1+σ12μ2>0⇔σ1μ2>ρ12σ2μ1⇔μ1σ1<μ2ρ12σ2.18In this case, once the auction time m∗ is reached, the price equilibrium19In the following, we refer to the situation in which all maximum prices are equal as the “price equilibrium”. It is an equilibrium in the sense that no bilateral trade of risk capital between two divisions would occur (if free trading between divisions were possible), as all divisions have identical maximum prices.19remains stable; if one division receives a capital allowance, its maximum price decreases while that of the other division increases, so the latter receives the next capital allowances until the maximum prices are again equal, and vice versa. In continuous auction time, deviations between the prices remain infinitesimally small, so the maximum prices remain virtually equal.Equal maximum prices mean that, according to (22), the relation(28)μ1Cov(X1,Pm)=μ2Cov(X2,Pm)remains valid, which is the case if the portfolioPm=v1mX1+v2mX2grows uniformly, i.e., if the relation of investment volumes,v1m/v2m, remains unchanged. Once the price equilibrium is reached, new investment allowances are distributed by the same ratio. To express this distribution formally, investment allowances are multiplied by a factorλim, which is 1 if only one division receives a capital allowance, but is smaller than 1 if capital allowances must be shared.20By definingλ1m=v1mμ1v1mμ1+v2mμ2andλ2m=v2mμ2v1mμ1+v2mμ2,the factors keep the ratio of investment volumes constant: Ifp1m=p2m,a1mλ1ma2mλ2m=p1mμ1v1mμ1v1mμ1+v2mμ2p2mμ2v2mμ2v1mμ1+v2mμ2=v1mv2m.Note that these factors only fulfill the purpose of keeping the continuous-time formalism consistent. As discussed, any other distribution of capital allowances in the case of equal maximum prices would be immediately corrected.20We now extend the considerations to the general case with n divisions. Let(29)Im=i:pim⩾pjm∀j≠idenote the set containing the indices of the divisions having the highest maximum price at auction time m, that is, winning this auction. (via this definition,Imcontains more than one index if the maximum prices of several divisions are identical.) The development of the investment vector is described by the following dynamics:(30)dvim=λimaimI{i∈Im}dm,where the factorsλimensure that investment allowances are distributed in such a way that equal maximum prices of different divisions remain equal.21When the maximum prices are not all equal, the calculation of these factors is more complicated. If all maximum prices are equal, analogously to the two-division case,λim=vimμi∑j=1nvjmμj.21Investment allowances are driven by the maximum prices, which evolve via(31)dpim=∑j∈Im∂pim∂vjmdvjm,where22For a derivation of the respective equations see the Supplementary appendix, where, without loss of generality, i=1 and j=2.22(32)∂pim∂vim=μiz·ρiPm2-1ρiPm2σPm⩽0,and(33)∂pim∂vjm=μizCov(Xi,Pm)ρjPm-ρijρiPmσj.Analogous to the two-division case, the maximum price of a divisioni∈Im, (an auction winner), decreases. The auction reaches a price equilibrium when all maximum prices are identical,(34)p∗=μizρiPmσi=μjzρjPmσj∀i,j.The price equilibrium condition (34) can be expressed as(35)μi=p∗zρiPmσi=p∗zVarPCov(Xi,P)∀i.As Cov (Xi, P)=(Σv)i, in matrix notation, this is equivalent to(36)μ-p∗zVarPΣv=0.SubstitutingC=zVarP, the allocation in the price equilibrium reads(37)v∗=Cp∗z2Σ-1μ.The price equilibrium is reached if in this allocation all investment volumes are positive, that is, Σ−1μ>0. In this case, for all divisions there will be an auction in which the division receives new risk capital; otherwise, its relative weight tends to 0.To solve for the equilibrium price, we insert the allocation (37) into the overall risk constraint (9), vTΣv=(C/z)2, yielding(38)C2(p∗)2z4μTΣ-1μ=C2z2⇒p∗=z-1μTΣ-1μ.So finally,(39)v∗=CΣ-1μzμTΣ-1μ.Compared to the first-best solution (15), the allocation is identical. With the described auction process, the optimal allocation can be achieved. However, one restriction holds: Within the auction process, divisions only increase their investment volume; there is no way to reduce the risk capital of a division. Thus, if the initial investment volume of a division is already higher than it should be in the optimal allocation (39), this optimal allocation will not be reached.In summary, we have:Proposition 1IfΣ-1μ>0,the auction reaches a price equilibrium, provided that the amount of risk capital is sufficiently high. With a fixed amount C, the corresponding allocation is given byv∗=CΣ-1μzμTΣ-1μ.This price equilibrium is reached ifv0⩽v∗.The corresponding allocation is optimal, that is, it is identical to the first-best allocation in the case of symmetric information.This result highlights the fact that with the proposed auction design, the information problem can be solved. The crucial point within the mechanism is the structure of bonus payments, ensuring that division managers give truthful bids according to their private knowledge. Basically, the bonus plan must meet two criteria. First, bonus payments are linear in the division’s profit, meaning that division managers participate in both profits and losses. Second, bonus payments are linked to the bids in the auction, so that division managers are evaluated based upon their own benchmark.However, until now we have not yet considered the actual agency situation with diverging interests of divisional managers and headquarters, as we have assumed ηi=0 for all managers i. In the following section, we will explicitly introduce the preference for empire building into our model (ηi>0).As discussed, a decentralized allocation process is only necessary when division managers have diverging interests that make them unwilling to reveal their private information. Diverging interests are considered as empire-building preferences. Other things equal, managers prefer more capital under their control. This preference is modeled according to Assumption 8 with empire preference parameters ηi⩾0.Receiving an investment allowanceaimat a price p yields a change in expected utility given by a monetary component defined by net expected bonus payments,γμiaim-p, as in Eq. (21), plus a non-monetary component for the increase of the empire, defined byηiaim:(40)γμiaim-p+ηiaim=γμi+ηiγaim-p.The structure of this equation is equivalent to the original Eq. (21), with μireplaced by μi+ηi/γ. The maximum prices of the division managers are(41)pim=μi+ηiγaim.Hence, the course of the auction is equal to the benchmark situation, but with biased expected returns. The bias increases with a higher preference for empire building, ηi, and with a lower value of monetary incentives, γ. The resulting solution in the price equilibrium is obtained by inserting the biased expected returnsμ̃=μ+η/γin the benchmark solution (39)23According to Proposition 1, the equilibrium is reached if Σ−1(μ+η/γ)>0.23:(42)ṽ∗=CΣ-1μ̃zμ̃TΣ-1μ̃.By choosing a larger value of γ, headquarters is able to reduce the bias, driving the allocation towards the optimum. However, larger values of γ mean larger bonus payments, which reduce the net profit of the firm.Headquarters faces two sources of costs: bonus costs for paying bonuses to division managers, and opportunity costs for not achieving the optimal allocation, and thus making less profit. Bonus costs are, however, partially offset by the proceeds from auctioning risk capital, as the prices bid in the auction are deducted from expected bonus payments.24In the following, we skip the attribute “expected”, instead simply referring to “bonus payments” and “bonus costs”, although these payments and costs are actually stochastic.24As a crucial observation, these proceeds can even exceed bonus payments. Consider a situation in which the two highest maximum prices of division managers are identical,pim=pjm. Such a situation can be reached very quickly—in the price equilibrium, by definition all maximum prices are identical. According to the Vickrey auction, the auction price is the second-highest bid price, and thus, also coincides with these maximum prices. If division i receives the respective investment allowanceaim, the increase in the bonus payment isγμiaim, but the price paid in the auction isγ(μi+ηi/γ)aim=γμiaim+ηiaim. Hence, the net effect of bonus costs is-ηiaim<0. The reasoning for this observation is that if division managers have preferences for empire building, meaning that their utility increases with the amount of capital under their control, they are willing to pay for a larger empire. According to Assumption 8, one dollar of personal income is equivalent to ηidollars in their empire. Thus, division managers are willing to pay up toηiaimdollars to headquarters for receiving an additional investment allowance ofaim.25Besides pure preference for power and control, managing larger investments can also bolster a manager’s reputation, and thus, his job market value and future salary.25In the Vickrey auction, headquarters can exploit this maximum amount if the two highest bids are identical.In general, the two highest bids are not identical. The net bonus costs, BC, are the bonus payments to division managers, BP, minus the proceeds of the auction, auction income AI. Accordingly, marginal net bonus costs (with respect to auction time) are the increase in bonus payments to the auction winner, divisioniˆ, minus the auction price for the investment allowance, defined by the maximum price of all divisionsj≠iˆ:(43)dBCmdm=dBPmdm+dAImdm=γμiˆaiˆm-γqm,where qmis the Vickrey price at auction time m,(44)qm=maxj≠iˆpjm.When the price equilibrium is reached, marginal net bonus costs are constant and negative26See the Supplementary appendix for a derivation.26:(45)dBC∗dC=-μ̃TΣ-1ηzμ̃TΣ-1μ̃.Total gross bonus payments are given by(46)BP=γμTṽC,whereṽCdenotes the resulting investment vector in the presence of empire preferences (compared to the benchmark case vC). In the equilibrium, gross bonus payments are explicitly defined by inserting the solutionṽ∗according to (42):(47)BP∗=γCμTΣ-1μ̃zμ̃TΣ-1μ̃.Total auction income is the integral of the auction price qm, where auction time m runs from 0 to the total amount of capital to be auctioned, C−C0:(48)AI=γ∫0C-C0qmdm.Besides bonus costs, the second type of costs are opportunity costs, OC, which are given by the difference in expected profit with and without diverging interests:(49)OC=μT(vC-ṽC).When the price equilibrium is reached, opportunity costs are explicitly given by considering the difference in the investment vector v∗ according to (39) andṽ∗according to (42):(50)OC∗=CμTΣ-1μzμTΣ-1μ-CμTΣ-1μ̃zμ̃TΣ-1μ̃=CμTΣ-1zμμTΣ-1μ-μ̃μ̃TΣ-1μ̃.In the price equilibrium, opportunity costs are linear in the amount of risk capital, C. This means that marginal opportunity costs per unit of risk capital are constant.Summing marginal net bonus costs and marginal opportunity costs in the equilibrium, marginal total costs are also constant:(51)d(BC+OC)dC=μTΣ-1zμμTΣ-1μ-μ̃μ̃TΣ-1μ̃-μ̃TΣ-1ηzμ̃TΣ-1μ̃.When marginal total costs are constant for C⩾C∗, for very large amounts of risk capital (C→∞), relative total costs (BC∗+OC∗)/C converge against this constant. It thus depends on the constant whether total costs can become negative. Headquarters can influence the constant by the choice of the participation parameter γ. When γ increases, marginal equilibrium opportunity costs tend to 0, whereas marginal equilibrium bonus costs tend to-μTΣ-1η/(zμTΣ-1μ)<0, asμ̃tends to μ. Accordingly, by a sufficiently large choice of γ,27This sufficiently large γ can be greater than 1. This counterintuitive choice of γ, where gross bonus payments exceed total firm profits, makes sense when gross bonus payments are offset by auction income and net bonus payments are negative.27headquarters can drive total costs below 0 when total risk capital tends to infinity.In summary, we have:Proposition 2When the auction reaches a price equilibrium,28For the argumentation to hold, the price equilibrium must be reached both with and without actual empire-building preferences, i.e., Σ−1μ>0 and Σ−1(μ+η/γ)>0.28marginal total costs in the price equilibrium are constantd(BC+OC)dC=μTΣ-1zμμTΣ-1μ-μ̃μ̃TΣ-1μ̃-μ̃TΣ-1ηzμ̃TΣ-1μ̃.For C→∞, relative total costs converge to this constant. With a sufficiently large γ, this constant is negative.□Fig. 1shows the relative costs, BC/C and OC/C, per unit of risk capital, depending on the total amount of risk capital, for the four-division example already presented in Section 4, with preference parameters η1=0.05%, η2=0.06%, η3=0.04%, and η4=0.07%. For very small values of new risk capital to be auctioned (C−C0), opportunity costs are 0, as the winner of the very first round of auctions is the same division, with or without preferences for empire building.29This is not necessarily so. One can think of situations, where without empire-building preferences, Division 1 wins the first auction against Division 2, asp10>p20, but due to strong empire-building preferences of Division 2, the relation is turned around when these preferences are taken into account. In these cases, opportunity costs are greater than 0 even for very small amounts of risk capital.29But if total risk capital increases, the maximum price of the next division reaches the maximum price of the first winning division at a suboptimal auction time, according to diverging preferences. As a consequence, the first winning division is either under- or over-represented in the resulting firm portfolio. Relative opportunity costs further increase with the amount of risk capital until this amount is large enough so that both with and without diverging preferences, the price equilibrium is reached. As discussed, from this point on, relative opportunity costs remain constant.30Note that the curvature of the opportunity cost function exhibits discontinuities, which occur when another division receives the first units of capital. That is, the slope of the curve makes a jump when either the set of divisions in the optimal portfolio (without empire-building preferences) or in the actual portfolio (with empire-building preferences) gets a new member. These jumps are most pronounced when the sets are small (in particular, when the optimal portfolio gets the second member while the actual portfolio is still sticking to the first member only or vice versa), as the relative importance of the new member is large in these cases, while they are merely visible when the sets become larger.30Relative bonus costs monotonically decrease with the total amount of risk capital. Initially, bonus costs occur for the performance of the divisions based on their initial investments before the auction of new risk capital starts. In the beginning of the auction process, one division successively wins the first units of capital, while the maximum prices of the other divisions, and thus the Vickrey price, increase. Accordingly, marginal auction income increases, and thus, marginal net bonus costs decrease. As discussed, marginal net bonus costs are negative when the maximum prices of at least two divisions are equal. When the price equilibrium is reached, marginal net bonus costs remain constantly negative.Regarding the choice of the participation parameter γ, Fig. 1 shows the trade-off between opportunity costs and risk costs. For small values of γ, opportunity costs are high, while bonus costs are low. For large values of γ, opportunity costs are low, and bonus costs are initially high. However, net bonus costs decrease with the amount of auctioned risk capital and become negative for larger values of γ, as well. That means, when the total amount of risk capital is relatively large, a larger choice of γ leads to lower costs.Fig. 2shows the relative total costs with respect to the parameter γ for different amounts of new risk capital C−C0 to be auctioned. For each amount of risk capital, costs first sharply decrease with γ, then reach a minimum and tend to increase again afterwards, but with a smaller slope than within the decrease. For larger amounts of risk capital, the minimum costs are lower, and the optimal choice for γ is larger. The reason is that for larger amounts of risk capital, the auction remains in the price equilibrium for a long time, in which marginal opportunity costs are constant and marginal net bonus costs are negative. In the numerical example, minimum costs are negative when total risk capital exceeds an amount of approximately 100.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
