@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of an undisclosed regular price and a positive leadtime in a presale mechanism

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The positive leadtime can have significant effects on the manufacturer’s policy, and customer behaviors in the presaleThe optimal discount rate should be over 50 percentThe manufacturer can benefit from the price mechanism

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk managment,Leadtime,Presale,Price,Information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A presale program is popular with manufacturers who wish to reduce the risk posed by uncertain demands. We introduce a new price mechanism in which the manufacturer during the presale period does not disclose the exact regular price in the sale period although it is guaranteed to customers to be higher than the presale price. As positive leadtime is much overlooked in presale models, we analyze the rationality of including one. The numerical results in this paper show that both the specific price mechanism and the positive leadtime have significant effects on the manufacturer’s policy (production quantity, presale price, regular price), the expected profit, and customer behaviors. The optimal discount rate should be greater than 50 percent. This conclusion is consistent with existing results of surveys on saturation points. The manufacturer can take advantage of the latest information on demand gathered in the presale period to update their policy and increase their expected profit.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Customers can buy a product from a manufacturer at the regular price in the sales period. They can also order the product at a known presale price (a discounted price) in advance. We study the optimal production quantity, presale price, and regular price for the manufacturer if customers in the presale period do not know the future regular price, except that it will not be less than the presale price. As leadtime (production time) is important, it is also considered in this paper. This study is motivated by real cases and the weaknesses related to the leadtime in the existing models.The presale program is slightly different to the advance booking discount program, in which customers know both the discounted price and the regular price. Nevertheless, we may say that the advance booking discount program is a special case of the presale program.In this paper, two different price mechanisms base on two real cases in which the manufacturer discloses or does not disclose the exact regular price together with the presale price. The first case is that in 2013, Wing Wah Cake Shop, a well-known food company in Hong Kong, disclosed all prices on rice dumplings, which are traditional Chinese food for the annual Dragon Boat Festival, before May 1. (In 2013 the festival fell on June 12.) The presale price of each type of rice dumpling is 88.89 percent of its regular price, and the regular price is 90 percent of the reference price (Table 1). The company seems very confident on its prices and/or other competitive advantages. It, however, faces the high risk of losing its market if competitors provide products at lower prices. This may be the reason why some manufacturers prefer to disclose presale prices and reference prices (not regular prices) in the beginning. The second case is that in 2007, Maxim’s Catering Limited, a well-known food and beverage company in Hong Kong, began to accept advance orders for moon cakes, which are traditional Chinese food for the annual Mid-Autumn Festival, from the end of June. (The festival fell in September in 2007.) The presale prices were discounted prices of “reference prices”, as in Table 2. A “reference price” is not a regular price, but an upper limit of the regular price. When the manufacturer in the presale period does not disclose the exact regular price, some customers may order the product in advance for fear of uncertain higher prices in the future.Furthermore, a positive leadtime is a key reason for a seller to apply the presale program or the advance booking discount program. However, the existing models of the advance booking discount program either exclude a positive leadtime or have unreasonable assumptions. Fig. 1shows one example, in which products are unavailable during the leadtime interval in the sales period because the manufacturer orders materials at the end of the presale period.Thus, a positive leadtime was introduced into our presale models to deal with problems in older models, and our numerical results support its introduction. In this paper, customer’s sensitivity function is a linear function, and the demand follows a uniform distribution. Then, the expected profit is discussed under four situations: (1) known regular price and zero leadtime; (2) undisclosed regular price and zero leadtime; (3) known regular price and positive leadtime; (4) undisclosed regular price and positive leadtime.The remainder of this paper contains eight sections. Section 2 reviews literature. Section 3 introduces the basic model with a known regular price and zero leadtime. Section 4 extends the model to one with an undisclosed regular price, and Section 5 extends it to one with a positive leadtime. Then, Section 6 considers an undisclosed regular price and a positive leadtime together. Numerical experiments are described in Section 7. Section 8 discusses the influence of the latest demand information on the manufacturer’s policy. Section 9 contains discussions and future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper studied several presale mechanism for a manufacturer. Manufacturers often provide a lower price in the presale period, but some manufacturers like to post the regular price in the sales period at the beginning as the others does not. Since the leadtime makes the analysis complex, many models about advance booking assumed that the leadtime was zero. To show the effects of a positive leadtime and an undisclosed regular prices on the performance and policy of a manufacturer, we assumed the demand at two possible levels (i.e. high level and low level) to keep the difficulty acceptable. Then, the results from numerical experiments supported the hypothesis that both a positive leadtime and an undisclosed regular price are important factors to be considered in implementing a presale program.According to the results, in practice, a manufacturer not only follows the regular procedure to estimate the demand distribution, but also needs to study the customer’s psychological threshold of the discount rate. Then, the manufacturer may consider whether to disclose the regular price at the beginning of the presale period. The production leadtime cannot be ignored in the decision process. After observing the demand in the early stage, the manufacturer needs to update the decision if it is possible.When the presale period or the production leadtime is long, the manufacturer may produce in batches in the process to match demand and reduce the risk. Then, one interesting problem is to consider multiple chances for the manufacturer to order materials.The demand with two possible levels is just a simplification of reality, and it is a limitation of this research. If the real demand had several levels, it can be reasonable to believe that the results would be no much difference. However, the real demand distribution may follow uniform distribution, normal distribution, or another one. Thus, further validation work is necessary.Our models assume that the aggregate demand r(p) D is independent of the presale price xp. If the aggregate demand depends on both of the presale price and the regular price, the results are no difference such as the optimal discount rate is always greater than12(Appendix G shows the details).Moreover, this paper supposed that the manufacturer knows the customer’s psychological threshold of the discount rate. If customers knew that the manufacturer has considered the psychological threshold when making decisions, they might have different reactions, and the manufacturer in turn might have to make some changes. The manufacturer or customers may use game theory as a tool to play this complete/incomplete information game.Finally, an interesting issue is that a manufacturer can integrate his/her experience with our models and results to generate strategies in practice. It is possible for industry and academia to achieve a win–win situation by cooperation. For example, the discount level is less than 50 percent according to real cases and our models. This result may be an inevitability instead of a possibility if our models have captured the main features of real cases. If yes, what exactly are the features?