@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
“Time-to-profit scorecards for revolving credit”

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Time-to-profit is modelled for credit acceptance of revolving credit.Time effect on hazard of being profitable is investigated through survival models.The linear hazard model outperformed other time dependent models.Time-to-profit scorecards outperformed OLS scorecards as of portfolio returns.Predicting time-to-profit can be used to determine credit programme sustainability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk management,Time-to-profit,Profit scoring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper defines and models time-to-profit for the first time for credit acceptance decisions within the context of revolving credit. This requires the definition of a time-related event: A customer is profitable when monthly cumulative return is at least one (i.e. cumulative profits cover the outstanding balance). Time-to-profit scorecards were produced for a data set of revolving credit from a Colombian lending institution which included socio-demographic and first purchase individual characteristics. Results show that it is possible to obtain good classification accuracy and improve portfolio returns which are continuous by definition through the use of survival models for binary events (i.e. either being profitable or not). It is also shown how predicting time-to-profit can be used for investment planning purposes of credit programmes. It is possible to identify the earliest point in time in which a customer is profitable and hence, generates internal (organic) funds for a credit programme to continue growing and become sustainable. For survival models the effect of segmentation on loan duration was explored. Results were similar in terms of classification accuracy and identifying organic growth opportunities. In particular, loan duration and credit limit usage have a significant economic impact on time-to-profit. This paper confirms that high risk credit programmes can be profitable at different points in time depending on loan duration. Furthermore, existing customers may provide internal funds for the credit programme to continue growing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Granting consumer credit is traditionally based on modelling the probability that a potential borrower will default within a specified period of time. Since the late 1990s, however, modelling profit has come to the fore (Lucas, 2001; Narain, 1992). So credit applicants are ranked according to their attractiveness to a lender based on scores representing profit profiles in contrast or in addition to default probabilities. Previous studies have presented various profit measures that can be used as scores for credit granting and management purposes. Sánchez Barrios, Andreeva, and Ansell (2014) presented for the first time relative profit measures as an alternative to traditional monetary profits in the context of credit granting. In that study, ROACUMtis the cumulative profit received from a customer since the beginning of the observation period, EBITACUMt, relative to the outstanding balance at time t. ROACUMtcan also be interpreted as a customer's coverage against default (i.e. it is the proportion of a customer’s outstanding debt that is already covered with the accumulated profit at time t). It was shown in that study that portfolio profitability differs when customers are ranked according to either monetary or relative profit measures. Ultimately, the use of relative profit scorecards (or credit scoring models) instead of monetary profits scorecards depends on the lender´s standpoint in terms of coverage against default considering context conditions and corporate aims.This study develops time-to-profit models for use in credit scoring. The idea of time-to-profit has been raised before (Finlay, 2008) but has not been attempted until now. This study builds on previous work (Sánchez Barrios et al., 2014) by using ROACUMt, the customer's return, to define a profit-related event and hence, time-to-profit. Application scorecards based on when a customer will be profitable rather than on monetary profits such as EBITACUMtrank customers based on the time required to be covered against default. This is particularly useful for unsecured consumer loans, where no collateral backups the outstanding debt.Designing time-to-profit scorecards contributes to the ongoing debate of scoring customers under two different approaches: either using predictions of continuous profit measures or the probabilities of occurrence of a binary event based on default or profits (Finlay, 2008). An additional aim of this paper is hence to compare the usefulness of using either type of scorecards in terms of their impact on portfolio profits and returns.This paper also investigates how predicted time-to-profit can be used for investment planning. Once a customer is profitable, the lender can decide to grant further credit to that customer or alternatively to new customers. Thus predicting when a customer will be profitable provides information on the availability of funds for the growth of credit programmes, ensuring sustainability.In accordance with the research aims presented above, this paper is organised as follows. Initially the paper will review the literature on profit scoring and the definition of time-to-profit in Section 2. This is followed by Section 3 with data description and the modelling rationale. A range of potential models were explored to identify the most appropriate approach to assessing time-to-profit. Section 4 covers results and their statistical significance and their implications. Proportional odds models with different specifications for time component were compared using three measures: Akaike's information criterion (AIC – overall fit), variance inflation factor (VIF – multi-collinearity) and area under the curve (AUC – accuracy of prediction). The best time-to-profit model was then used as a scorecard and compared with an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) model in terms of impact on portfolio results. Time-to-profit models were then used for investment planning with exploration of the effect of segmentation. Section 5 presents concluding remarks (i.e. conclusions, managerial implications, limitations and further research).The concept of profit scoring is based on the recognition that non-defaulting credit holders may not generate enough revenues to off-set the costs associated with maintaining their accounts, whilst defaulters can be profitable given they use the facility actively and repay major part of it (Hopper & Lewis, 1992; Leonard, 1997; Lucas, 2001). This made the time/duration aspect of credit important, so early work on profit scoring concentrated on applications of survival analysis in credit scoring (Andreeva, Ansell, & Crook, 2005;Andreeva, Ansell, & Crook, 2007; Banasik, Crook, & Thomas, 1999; Hand & Kelly, 2001; Narain, 1992; Stepanova & Thomas, 2001; Stepanova & Thomas, 2002). These papers investigated estimation of survival probabilities of different events (default, attrition and 2nd purchase) in application and behavioural scoring and for different credit products. Estimated survival probabilities were used as inputs in profit calculations.It should be noted that not all of the papers listed above have provided a formal definition of profit or explicitly demonstrated how the profit could be estimated, therefore, the rest of this section (as well as Table 1) will concentrate on papers where this analysis was provided. Similarly, this literature review omits a related body of work on estimation of parameters for calculating capital allocation under Basel II and III, i.e. Loss Given Default (LGD), Exposure at Default (EAD), since they only cover one aspect of profitability – default losses.The most commonly used profit measures are similar to the concept of customer lifetime value (CLV), widely used in marketing (see e.g., Pfeifer, Haskins, & Conroy, 2005). CLV can be defined as the net present value of the cash flows (anticipated or actual) per customer over time, and is expressed in monetary units.Given the potential of losses due to default various authors have suggested estimation of profit at application time by the difference between the cumulative discounted repayment instalments weighted by the survival probability at time t and the initial loan amount, e.g. see Stepanova and Thomas (2001) for fixed term loans. Similarly for revolving credit, Bellotti (2013) following from Thomas (2009) defines profit as the difference between gain and loss over observation period and the estimated profit. Alternatively, Banasik and Crook (2010) suggested separately estimating expected losses from default and early repayment and deduct them from potential receipts from the loan. One can further disaggregate income sources as in Ma, Crook, and Ansell (2010), where the conditional expected profit for a fixed term loan has been quantified as a result of four components/scenarios.An alternative to anticipated cash flows is to use actual observed payments in constructing the dependent variable that can then be predicted. Andreeva et al. (2007) in their analysis of a revolving German store card calculated the net revenue as the difference between the net present value of the actual discounted total payments and the amount written off from defaulted accounts. Another approach that avoids discounting would be to consider accrued costs rather than cash outflows (Pfeifer et al., 2005). Similarly Finlay (2008) used ‘customer worth’, the profit per customer net of bad debt provisions (only for accounts in arrears) and average fixed costs of managing each account. Later work (Finlay, 2010) considered a similar measure contribution per customer. Finally, some proxies can be used, as in Stewart (2011), where a two-year spend and charge-offs for the credit card were used to proxy revenues and costs.It should be noted that measures presented above are monetary (usually cumulative) ones. Whilst they are useful in assessing customers as profit centres accountable for generating revenues and covering costs, it can be argued that relative measures (ratios) should be preferred when the objective is maximise profits in relation to the initial investment (Sánchez Barrios et al., 2014). Quirini and Vannucci (2009) suggested a cash-flow based ratio for application credit scoring. Yet this study is solely based on simulated data. Besides, their measure compares actual and expected cash flows, so is different from return ratios (i.e. scaled profits) considered in Sánchez Barrios et al. (2014). Table 1 presents papers that give either formal definition of profit or explicitly demonstrate how the profit could be estimated. None of these papers estimated time-to-profit. This paper extends the findings of Sánchez Barrios et al. (2014) to time-to-profit modelling with profit being measured as a return ratio.Finlay (2008) used a number of predictors directly to predict profit using a variety of techniques, including regression. One can use models for either continuous (e.g. OLS) or binary outcomes (e.g. logistic). Finlay (2008) compared continuous models with logistic regression applied to two different binary outcomes: a traditional one (defaulters/non-defaulters) and another one where good customers were those with a positive “worth”. Unsurprisingly binary models demonstrated better classification accuracy, whilst continuous models (OLS) produced more accurate profit estimates. Yet Somers and Whittaker (2007) demonstrated that OLS may not be the best model for continuous revenue, when the outcome variable is non-normal.Others employed indirect approach which estimates intermediate variables (e.g. probability of default and probability of re-purchase) and uses them as inputs in the second stage to estimate profit. For example, Andreeva et al. (2007) obtain profit scores (or “survival combination scores”) by regressing on the probabilities of default and second purchase and amount borrowed. “Survival combination scores” outperformed a typical logistic regression model to predict default in terms of net revenue, yet this came at a cost of increased risk of bad debt. Indirect methods may suffer from correlation between intermediate variables used in the final stage of profit estimation. Finlay (2010) compared (1) traditional default-predicting logistic regression to (2) indirect two-stage estimation of default probability and then for expected defaulters and non-defaulters profits and losses through OLS and neural networks; and to (3) direct estimation of the expected profit per customer through OLS and neural networks. Approach 2 was shown to be superior. Sánchez Barrios et al. (2014) produced profit scorecards using direct and indirect methods. Under the former, profit was predicted directly using OLS whereas the latter used probabilities of default and repurchase as predictors. Direct models were superior in terms of their impact on portfolio profits and returns. Finlay (2008) stressed the need for further research on the use of either continuous or binary classification modelling for profit scoring, and the current paper continues this investigation.Time-to-profit can be calculated using the cumulative profit per customer, EBITAcumt(Sánchez Barrios et al., 2014). Customers took their first loan in 14 different cohorts: y = 0–14. Each customer was observed during t = 1–30 months or until they were time-censored. EBITAzwas calculated per customer per z = t + y month: z = 1–44, and after deflation and discounting (to account for customers joining at different starting periods) accumulated profit measure is given by(1)EBITAcumt=∑k=1tEBITAz×dfz(1+r)y×(1+r)t−kwhere dfzis a deflation factor (monthly inflation); and r is the opportunity cost or the cost for the company to invest funds in the credit programme.The cumulative return per customer, ROAcumt, is the profit per customer scaled by the outstanding debt. As a cash flow-based measure, it is a proxy of the return per customer excluding the effect of bad debt provisions and other non-cash flow expenses. It can also be interpreted as the coverage against default resulting from the cumulative payments made by a customer until time t (Sánchez Barrios et al., 2014):(2)ROAcumt=EBITAcumt/FBtwhere t = length of time since beginning of loan and FBt= final balance (outstanding debt) at time t. As a measure ROAcumtensures that not only the principal but also interests and other charges in cash are included in the final balance. By definition, revolving credit is dynamic as repurchase may occur and hence the outstanding balance is to some extent open-ended. Hence, ROAcumtis used to define time-to-profit for revolving credit.Time-to-profit, T, is the time that it takes a customer to be profitable or completely covered against default, that is, when the following event occurs:(3)ROAcumt≥1≈EBITAcumt≥FBtThe standpoint taken in this paper is that a customer is considered profitable once the outstanding balance is fully covered by the cumulative profits obtained until time T. Yet depending on the context, other thresholds can be investigated.The data set consists of holders of revolving credit granted by a lending institution that mostly serves customers that would be otherwise excluded by other financial institutions. Since the majority of these customers are unbanked, the current practice is to grant credit based on their utility payment behaviour during the previous two years. Not being in arrears is the main criterion to grant credit, given the high risk associated with these segments.The adopted threshold (ROAcumt≥ 1) is similar to those used in a micro lending context (Sinha, 2011). The rationale is that the outstanding debt of customers with returns less than 1 have not been fully recovered and hence may be lost given the high risk nature of the credit programme, which is not guaranteed by any collateral. An additional argument to justify such threshold is that micro-lending institutions are assessed in terms of their sustainability (CGAP, 2009). Furthermore, profits generated by existing customers should provide internal funds to grant further credit to new customers for the programme to be sustainable. This can be interpreted as the moment when ROAcumt of existing customers exceeds 1. ‘Goods’ (status = 1) were defined as those that achieved threshold within the observation period t = 30, whereas ‘Bads’ (status = 0) were those below threshold or time-censored. Obviously one could suggest alternative values for the threshold. The chosen threshold was agreed with the company; at this stage, though, values different from 1 would seem more arbitrary. One could define different thresholds throughout the loan duration in terms of anticipated returns during specific points in time and then compare actual returns against such values; this might indicate whether a customer is on track to become profitable at some specified future time. However, the increased uncertainty may potentially create over-optimistic estimates of returns. The danger also would be the inequity of comparison between different segments which might be hard to justify.Unlike the previous study (Sánchez Barrios et al., 2014) which excluded censored observations from the sample at t = 12, 24 and 30 months, the complete data set (n = 35,530 customers) was considered to produce time-to-profit scorecards including censored observations. Survival analysis techniques can deal with censored observations in contrast with OLS regression that was used in Sánchez Barrios et al. (2014). Customers were observed until they were actually profitable or time censored; for customers who did not achieve profitability by the end of the study's observation period, the common censoring time was t = 30 months.Time-to-profit is discrete for the case under analysis. Payments may occur at any point in time during the observation period; however income and expenses are reconciled at the end of month, together with the outstanding balance. Since customers are deemed profitable only at specific points of time, discrete survival models were used instead of continuous time models such as accelerated failure time or Cox proportional hazard models (Allison, 2010; Kleinbaum & Klein, 2012). This is similar to the approach taken by McDonald, Matuszyk, and Thomas (2010) who considered default for mortgage products.Only the first instance of becoming profitable was considered in this study. This is the first point where capital can be released for further loans. Using first time-to-profit allows one to apply the model to ‘new’ potential customers. The methodology can be generalised as a process to every time the customer becomes profitable subsequently. To ensure robustness of results, 5-fold cross-validation was used (Demsar, 2006), with n = 35,530 customers (C) in overallCsample being randomly split 5 times in 80/20 training/holdout (T/H) folds. The model was repeatedly estimated on training samples and tested on a corresponding holdout.Regarding the hazard of being profitable, it started to increase from the second year of observation onwards, with a sharp increase by month 30. As time goes on, hazard of being profitable increases. This justifies exploring different baseline hazard alternatives. A proportional odds model was used to predict a customer´s probability of being profitable at different points of time. A customer-month (CM) observation was generated per month until censoring from the sample occurred (Allison, 1982; Allison, 2010) (see Table 2). This process was applied to each training/holdout fold. Table 3shows socio-demographic and first purchase characteristics that were also used in Sánchez Barrios et al. (2014). The proportional odds model was:(4)Log[Pit/(1−Pit)]=αt+β1xi1+β2xi2+⋯+βkxik,where Pit= conditional probability of customer i being profitable at time t given that this did not occur in the previous month. βs=1 to k= coefficients of significant at 1 percent variables. xis=1to k= socio-demographic and first purchase attributes of customer i. αtis the hazard of being profitable. Various alternatives were considered to account for the unknown nature of such hazard, based on previous applications of discrete hazard model for credit cards (Bellotti & Crook, 2013) and in bankruptcy prediction (Nam, Kim, Park, & Lee, 2008):(5)αt=θThe constant hazard in (5) is the most parsimonious alternative. Despite of it being unrealistic, it allows comparison for potential time effects under the following alternatives:(6)αt=ζ+σt(7)αt=δ+Υ1t+Υ2t2(8)αt=γ+ξ1t+ξ2t2+ξ3t3(9)αt=ρ+ψln(t)(10)αt=η+Ωtt(11)αt=ϕ+κttSpecifications (6)–(11) express alternative effects of time: (6) is the linear model; (7) and (8) are the quadratic and cubic options respectively; (9) includes the smoothing effect of time through a logarithmic transformation. Specifications (10) and (11) use n − 1 dummy variables for either months (t = 1–29 months) or quarters (t = 1–9) respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This is the first study that formally defines and models time-to-profit for scoring consumer revolving credit. Time-to-profit refers to the period of time it takes a customer to be profitable for the first time since the first purchase (i.e. when cumulative payments are sufficient to cover the outstanding debt, regardless of additional payments or regulatory debt provisions). Defining the event of a customer being profitable and hence time-to-profit requires a threshold for a customer´s cumulative return, ROAcumt. The threshold taken in this study is when ROAcumt≥ 1.Survival techniques for profit scoring demonstrate positive impact on portfolio results through the use of models based on the probability of occurrence of a binary event (i.e. time-to-profit) instead of using models that predict continuous measures (i.e. OLS return scorecards). It is possible then to obtain good results in terms of classification accuracy and impact on portfolio returns when using time-to-profit scorecards. This has not been achieved before through the use of OLS and traditional logistic regression. It is important to note, however, that the dilemma of maximising both portfolio profits and returns simultaneously through the use of either profit or return scorecards still holds. Ultimately, profit, return and time-to-profit scorecards were designed to improve the same measures at the portfolio level.In terms of significant variables, two attributes had the highest economic significance in time-to-profit scorecards: loan duration and credit limit usage. Customers with longer term loan durations pay lower instalment during longer periods of time, which increases the time required for a customer to be profitable; this shows that time-to-profit survival scorecards are conservative, as customers with shorter loan durations are hence ranked in top deciles. Credit limit usage is related to lower probabilities of repurchase and default.For investment planning, the relevance of loan duration for revolving credit with an agreed payment period as the case under consideration was further confirmed. Again, the economic significance of credit limit usage was remarkable, in particular as segments reflected longer term loans. High risk credit programmes can be profitable and furthermore, internal funding can foster their growth. This requires, however, identifying when customers are profitable.Using time-to-profit has several managerial implications. First, it can be readily implemented through the use of ROAcumt, a return-based measure per customer; the data required for calculating such measure is usually gathered for profit scoring and regulatory purposes. Regarding the specificity of the product, revolving credit is more dynamic than fixed term loans; this is because default and repurchase may occur simultaneously and hence balances are more subject to change; a return-based measure can reflect such change throughout time. Time-to-profit can be equally applied to fixed term loans or any interest-bearing product. Second, as a return measure, it can be used to design scorecards to target customers that contribute to achieve company results according to industry performance and shareholders’ expectations. Hence, time-to-profit scorecards enhance coordination between strategic and operational levels with the aim of enhancing portfolio returns. Third, as an investment planning tool, predicting time-to-profit is useful to schedule investment planning activities of credit programmes. Knowing when customers are profitable is crucial to plan ordered growth strategies of credit programmes through internal (organic) and/or external sources. This enhances the sustainability of credit programmes that are profitable but might not be supported because of their high risk nature. Furthermore, it enables managers to allocate cash surpluses in risky but profitable segments. Fourth, survival scorecards are the most conservative compared with OLS profits and returns scorecards. This is from a coverage-against-default perspective, which provides reassurance to managers that customers with the best profile in terms of time-to-profit are ranked in the top deciles. This provides managers with further reasons additional to profitability to serve unexplored segments such as unbanked customers and other high risk segments. Finally, time-to-profit scorecards justify the use of actual cash flow-based measures per customer instead of those based on accrued profits; this is useful to adequately reflect the continuity potential of a credit programme. Ultimately, cash is the actual source of funds the lender can use to expand the scope of credit programmes.