@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A note on: Optimal ordering policy for stock-dependent demand under progressive payment scheme

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We correct errors in a recent model of Soni and Shah.We extend the model to account for different ratios of interest rates.We illustrate the benefit of the model in numerical examples.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Economic order quantity (EOQ),Stock-dependent demand,Progressive credit periods,Trade credit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In a recent paper, Soni and Shah [Soni, H., Shah, N. H. (2008). Optimal ordering policy for stock-dependent demand under progressive payment scheme. European Journal of Operational Research 184(1), 91–100] developed a model to find the optimal ordering policy for a retailer with stock-dependent demand and a supplier offering a progressive payment scheme to the retailer. This note corrects some errors in the formulation of the model of Soni and Shah. It also extends their work by assuming that the credit interest rate of the retailer may exceed the interest rate charged by the supplier. Numerical examples illustrate the benefits of these modifications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently, Soni and Shah (2008) developed a model to find the optimal ordering policy for a retailer with stock-dependent demand and a supplier that offers a progressive payment scheme to the retailer. The authors assumed that if the retailer settles its balance before time M, the supplier charges no interest to the retailer, whereas in case when the retailer settles its balance between times M and N with M<N, the supplier charges an interest rate Ic1 on the outstanding balance. In the case when the retailer pays after time N, the supplier charges an interest rate Ic2 with Ic2>Ic1. Revenues the retailer receives from sales may be deposited in an interest-bearing account until the account is settled completely, where an interest is earned at the rate of Ie.1Thus, we do not consider investment decisions which are not related to the lot sizing problem.1Soni and Shah (2008) assumed that in case the retailer is not able to settle its unpaid balance at time M (or N), s/he will settle as much of the unpaid balance as possible at these points in time. The work of Soni and Shah (2008) was extended by Teng, Krommyda, Skouri, and Lou (2011) who included additional aspects in the model, such as deterioration, limited capacity and non-zero ending inventory, and by Shah, Patel, and Lou (2011) who considered a variable retailer selling price in addition to the extensions made by Teng et al. (2011).In developing their model, Soni and Shah (2008) implicitly assumed that the interest rate charged by the supplier in the first credit period, Ic1, always exceeds the credit interest rate of the retailer, Ie. We note that this is not necessarily the case in practice. Instead, the interest rates charged by the supplier, Ic1 and Ic2, and the credit interest rate of the retailer, Ie, usually depend on the investment opportunities of the respective companies. Ie could thus represent the interest rate the retailer could realize by depositing money in an interest-bearing account, but it could also represent the profit that the retailer can gain from other business activities or its opportunity cost of capital (Summers & Wilson, 2002). The same applies to the interest rates charged by the supplier. It is clear that the ratios of Ie to Ic1 and Ic2 thus depend on the individual business environments of the supplier and the retailer, and that Ie could possibly exceed Ic1 and Ic2. If Ie exceeds Ic1, for example, it may not be reasonable for the retailer to settle its unpaid balance at time M, as assumed in Soni and Shah (2008). Instead, it would be better to keep the sales revenue in an interest-bearing account or to invest it elsewhere, and to settle the unpaid balance when the interest charged by the supplier exceeds the returns from interest. This note extends the work of Soni and Shah (2008) by explicitly assuming that the case Ie>Ic1 may occur in addition to the other cases studied by the authors. However, the case Ie>Ic2, where the retailer possibly never pays the supplier, is excluded.Depending on the ratio of the interest rates Ic1 and Ie and the time when the retailer sells off the entire production lot, ten different cases arise, which are summarized in Table 1. The cases that were not treated by Soni and Shah (2008) will be discussed briefly in the following, and further some errors contained in their work will be corrected. We adopt the assumptions and notations used in Soni and Shah (2008) hereafter, unless it is stated otherwise.Subcase 1.1This case is discussed as ‘Case 1’ in Soni and Shah (2008).For T⩽M and Ie>Ic1, the retailer achieves a financial benefit from postponing the refund and investing the sales revenue until time N. Between times M and N, s/he has to pay interest to the supplier. However, due to Ie>Ic1, the interest earned exceeds the interest paid within the specified time period. The interest earned per year can be calculated as:In the case when M<T⩽N and Ie⩽Ic1, the retailer settles as much of the unpaid balance as possible at time M to minimize interest payments. The first subcase assumes that the sum of sales revenue and interest earned by time M is sufficient to settle the unpaid balance, i.e. U1=0. The interest earned until time M is formulated as follows (note that this formulation corrects an error in Soni and Shah’s Eq. (3.11)):In this subcase, the sum of sales revenue and interest earned by time M is not sufficient to settle the balance completely, i.e. U1>0. Thus, the retailer has to pay interest on U1. Interest earned is the same as the one given in Eq. (6). In calculating the unpaid balance U1, Soni and Shah (2008) assumed that U1=CQ−(PR(M)M+IE2), where R(t) denotes the stock-dependent demand rate. Since the demand rate decreases in t due to a decreasing inventory level, we note that PR(M)M underestimates the sales revenue of the retailer, since R(M)<R(M−Δ) for Δ>0. As a consequence, U1 has to be reformulated as follows:This subcase occurs when M<T⩽N and Ie>Ic1, and is identical to Subcase 1.2.This subcase occurs when T>N, Ie⩽Ic1 and U1=0, and is identical to Subcase 2.1.This subcase occurs when T>N, Ie⩽Ic1, U1>0 and U2=0, and is identical to Subcase 2.2.In this subcase, with T>N and Ie⩽Ic1, the retailer is not able to pay off the total purchase cost at times M or N. Thus, s/he will settle as much of the balance as is possible at times M and N. Between times M and N, the sales revenue is invested, and the supplier charges interest on the outstanding balance U1 with interest rate Ic1. Afterwards, as in Subcase 2.2, the retailer transfers each dollar s/he earns directly to the supplier who charges interest on the gradually reducing unpaid balance U2 at the interest rate Ic2. As the retailer partially settles the account in M and N, s/he is able to realize interest earnings in the period [0, N], which can be calculated as:The unsettled balance U2 (at time N) calculated by Soni and Shah (2008) again underestimates the sales revenue of the retailer. Further, while estimating the interest earnings between times M and N, the authors neglected the time period the revenue is kept in the account. Therefore, U2 has to be reformulated as follows:(13)U2=U1(1+Ic1(N-M))-P∫MNR(t)dt+PIe∫MNR(t)(t-M)dtwhere U1 is the unpaid balance at time M as given by Eq. (10). Consequently, the interest payable per year, IC3,3, is given as:(14)IC3,3=Ic1TU1(N-M)+Ic2T∫NN+z(U2-PR(t)(t-N))dtwhere z is the time period that is needed to settle the remaining account U2, which can be derived by comparing the unpaid balance with the outstanding earnings between N and N+z, which leads toz=-1blog1-U2/Pabeb(T-N). Accordingly, N+z denotes the point in time when the unpaid balance is settled, with z>0 and N+z⩽T. The objective function for Subcase 3.3 has the same structure and solution procedure as the one given in Subcase 2.2, with the exceptions that IC2,2 needs to be substituted by IC3,3 and that the interests earnings IE3,3 have to be considered. Again, a near-optimal solution can be calculated numerically.Subcase 3.4If the interest rate of the retailer, Ie, exceeds the interest charges of the supplier for the first credit period, Ic1, s/he will again not settle the account before time N. Instead, the retailer invests the revenues from sales for the period M to N. As the unpaid balance U3 is zero in this subcase, the account is completely settled at time N. Thus, the interest earned is given as:The interest charges in the period [M,N] are the same as those given in Eq. (2). Thus, the total costs for this subcase are formulated as:(16)TC3,4=AT+hab2T(ebT-bT-1)+CIc1abT(ebT-1)(N-M)-PIeab2Teb(T-N)(ebN-bN-1)The optimal solution to Eq. (16) is the solution of the following non-linear equation:(17)dTC3,4dT=-AT2+ha(ebT-bT-1)b2T2-CIc1a(ebT-1)(N-M)bT2+PIeaeb(T-N)(ebN-bN-1)b2T2=0which minimizes TC3,4 provided that the second derivation with respect to T is(18)d2TC3,4dT2=2AT3-haT-2ha(ebT-bT-1)b2T3+2CIc1a(ebT-1)(N-M)bT3-2PIeaeb(T-N)(ebN-bN-1)b2T3>0,forallT.Subcase 3.5For the case when Ie>Ic1 and U3>0, the account is partially settled at time N, and afterwards the unpaid balance is continuously reduced by transferring each dollar earned from sales to the supplier until the balance has been settled completely. The interest earnings until time N are the same as those given in Eq. (15). In addition, the unpaid balance at time N equals:To illustrate the behavior of our model, we consider the parametric values shown in Table 2and the payment policies of the retailer introduced above. The numerical examples (cf. Tables 3 and 4) indicate that:1.For a fixed value of the scale parameter b, an increase in the first credit period leads to higher order quantities and demand rates. The total costs, in turn, are reduced as M adopts higher values. An increase in the second credit period results in higher order quantities, higher demand and lower total costs. The comparative cost reduction, however, is less than in the former case.An inverse interest structure with Ie>Ic1 does not affect the lot size policy. However, it affects the optimal payment policy of the retailer, who may choose a different point in time to settle the balance. In contrast to the model of Soni and Shah (2008) (cf. TC1 in Tables 3 and 4), the presented payment policy (cf. TC2 in Tables 3 and 4) may reduce the total costs of the buyer.An increase in the sensitivity of demand regarding the inventory level leads to a higher inventory level, higher demand and lower total costs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
