@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adoption of an emerging infrastructure with uncertain technological learning and spatial reconfiguration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper develops a model to analyze the adoption of an emerging infrastructure.The adoption involves uncertain technological learning and spatial reconfiguration.Low initial cost, high technological learning, etc. will favorite the adoption.The efficiency of an associated technology could influence the adoption heavily.The dynamics of the infrastructure's efficiency influence the implementing scale.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Technology adoption,Technological learning,Uncertainties,Spatial reconfiguration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper develops a stylized (or conceptual) system optimization model to analyze the adoption of an emerging infrastructure associated with uncertain technological learning and spatial reconfigurations. The model first assumes that the emerging infrastructure will be implemented for the entire system when it is adopted. With the model, this paper explores (1) how the emerging infrastructure's initial investment cost, technological learning and its uncertainty, market size, and efficiency influence the adoption of the emerging infrastructure and (2) how the efficiency and investment cost of the associated technology (which will be located in a different place with the adoption of the emerging infrastructure) influence the adoption of the emerging infrastructure. Then, this paper extends the model and explores whether it is a better solution to implement the emerging infrastructure for part of the distance from resource site to demand site if its efficiency is a function of the implemented distance. With optimizations under three types of efficiency dynamics, this paper finds that whether the emerging infrastructure should be implemented partly or entirely is not determined by the value of its efficiency but by the dynamics of its efficiency.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Models of technology adoption can be grouped into one of two streams. The first stream addresses the psychology-based acceptance of new technologies by individual users or organizations. Well-known models in this stream include the technology adoption lifecycle model (see Rogers, 1962), the Bass diffusion model (Bass, 1969), and the technology acceptance model (TAM) (see Bagozzi, Davis, & Warshaw, 1992; Davis, 1989). The second stream analyzes technology adoption from the perspective of social planning instead of from the perspective of individual users or organizational psychology. Well-known examples of such models include the MESSAGE (Messner & Strubegger, 1994) and MARKAL (Seebregts, 2001) models. Technology adoption with social planning is not commonly appropriate for end-use technologies; instead, they are more applicable to upstream technologies, e.g., power plants.Both of these streams have paid little attention to the adoption of new infrastructure technologies. Although most models in the second stream include infrastructures as part of a techno-economic system, infrastructures are commonly treated as links among different technologies or activities, rarely as main objects under study, and so, little work has been done to analyze how technological learning and its uncertainty influence the adoption of an emerging infrastructure.Establishing an emerging and advanced infrastructure commonly requires very high initial investment cost. For example, establishing a railway for maglev trains needs a huge investment, much higher than building a regular railway. Technological learning, which means the cost of using new technologies tends to decrease as the experience of using the new technology accumulates (Arrow, 1962; Arthur, 1989), is thought of as an endogenous driving force for the adoption of currently more expensive new technologies (e.g., Ma, Grubler, & Nakamori, 2009; Schwoon, 2008). Technological learning has been missing from most of the traditional models in which technological change has been largely treated as exogenous (see Ma, Grubler, & Nakamori, 2009). With technological learning, the cost of an emerging infrastructure could decrease in the future. However, it is not a free lunch. Cost reduction in the future relies on investment in the early stages of infrastructure development. Historical observations have shown that technological learning is quite uncertain (McDonald & Schrattenholzer, 2001). When a new advanced infrastructure technology emerges, from a social planner's perspective, when and at what pace should it be implemented to replace the existing one, especially when the future of the emerging technology is still uncertain? For example, when should human society widely establish the infrastructure for maglev trains? The problem could become more complex when the adoption of an emerging infrastructure is associated with the relocation of other important elements of the techno-economic system.Adoption of an emerging infrastructure technology can enable (or is accompanied with) the re-optimization of the topology or spatial layout of a techno-economic system. From a perspective of system optimization, when adopting an emerging infrastructure, social planners need to consider the cost of relocating elements associated with an infrastructure. For example, for a coal-electricity system, if the coal resource is far away from the demand site of electricity,11As in the case of China, the largest consumer of coal in the world.the traditional solution is to transport coal by railway and trucks from resource cites to demand cites where coal power plants are established (see Ma & Chi, 2012). A UHV (Ultra High Voltage) grid is believed to be able to transmit electricity for a long-distance efficiently, and thus coal power plants can be moved from demand sites to resource sites. When adopting a UHV grid, social planners need to consider the cost of moving coal power plants as well as the cost of establishing a UHV grid with uncertain technological learning. Another example could be cloud computing. Cloud computing enables us to move the computation capacity from the end-use site to the cloud. It can save the cost of the end-use site, but it will require powerful host computers as well as a more powerful infrastructure for transmitting data, which is costly (see Buyya, Yeo, Venugopal, Broberg, & Brandicc, 2009).In addition to issues about when and at what pace to establish an emerging infrastructure with uncertain technological learning and the relocation of other elements associated with the infrastructure, another issue is what will be the appropriate length of implementing the emerging infrastructure if its efficiency is a function of its implemented length. For example, when establishing a UHV grid, should it be implemented over the whole distance from resource site to demand site or just part of the distance, and if the better solution is to implement it for part of the distance, then what should the length of the part be?In short, this paper explores the above issues by developing a stylized (or conceptual) system optimization model with uncertain technological learning. The stylized model contains two types of infrastructures (an existing one and an emerging one) and a product producing technology that can be located at different place with different infrastructure. Diffusion of new technologies, especially a new infrastructure, commonly takes a long time (e.g., see Grubler, 2004). Therefore, the model introduced in this paper is built from a long-term perspective. The model first assumes that the emerging infrastructure will be implemented for the entire system when it is adopted. With the model, this paper explores (1) how the emerging infrastructure's initial investment cost, technological learning and its uncertainty, market size, and efficiency influence the adoption of the emerging infrastructure, and (2) how the efficiency and investment cost of the associated technology (which will be located in a different place with the adoption of the emerging infrastructure) influences the adoption of the emerging infrastructure. Then, this paper extends the model and explores whether it is a better solution to implement the emerging infrastructure for part of the distance from resource site to demand site if its efficiency is a function of its implemented distance.The model and study presented in this paper do not aim to represent the reality in terms of technological or economic details; instead, it is mainly for heuristic purposes.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the stylized techno-economic system of the optimization model. Section 3 presents the optimization model and analyzes (1) how a new infrastructure's initial investment cost, technological learning and its uncertainties, efficiency, and demand influence the decision of adopting it; and (2) how the efficiency and investment cost of the associated technology influences the adoption of the emerging infrastructure. Section 4 further extends the model and explores whether it is a better solution to implement a new infrastructure partly if its efficiency is a function of its implemented distance. Section 5 gives concluding remarks and suggestions for future work.For the sake of transparency, the techno-economic system of our model is quite simple and stylized. The simplification also follows previous research on endogenous technological change models (e.g., see Chi, Ma, & Zhu, 2012; Grubler & Gritevskyi, 1998; Ma and Nakamori, 2009; Manne & Barreto, 2002). In the system, the economy demands one homogenous good/service (e.g., electricity), and the demand increases exogenously with an annual growth rate. There is one resource for producing the goods (e.g., coal), and its extraction cost increases with resource depletion. There is one technology to produce the goods from the resource (e.g., coal power plant). There are two types of infrastructure technologies, an existing one and an emerging one. The existing infrastructure (e.g., railways) is used for transporting resource, while the emerging one (e.g., ultra high voltage grid) can be used to transport the goods. Thus with the existing infrastructure, the plant that produces the goods should be located at the demand site, and with the emerging infrastructure, the plant can be located at (or close to) the resource site. Although applying the emerging infrastructure is believed to be able to improve the entire system's efficiency as well as being more environmentally friendly, currently it is much more expensive than the existing one in terms of investment cost. The emerging infrastructure has technological learning potential, which means its investment cost will decrease as experience with it increases, but the learning remains uncertain.We use T1 and T2 to denote plants that produce the technology at the demand site and at (or close to) the resource site, respectively. In other words, T1 and T2 are the same technology applied at different sites. We use T3 and T4 to denote the existing infrastructure and the emerging infrastructure technology, respectively. When adopting T4, in addition to using it to substitute T3 for all of the distances from resource site to demand site (see Fig. 1), an alternative way is to implement it for part of the distance (see Fig. 8), which means T2 will be located between the resource site and the demand site, the old infrastructure will be used to transport resource from resource site to the location of T2, and goods will be delivered to the demand site from the location of T2 by T4. In this case, during the process of adopting T4, the existing infrastructure will exist in the system with two statuses. One is from resource site to the demand site, which is denoted with T3, and the other is from resource site to the location of T2, which will be denoted with T5. In other words, T3 and T5 are the same technology implemented with different lengths.In the following discussion, we assume the product for the end-use is electricity. This assumption does not lose the generality of the model. Readers can also assume the product is computation service or other products/service that can be produced at different sites with different infrastructure. The purpose of assuming the product is electricity is just to give a vivid background for the model so readers can imagine the story of the model more easily. With this assumption, we can imagine the resource is coal, T1 and T2 are coal power plants, T3 is a transportation infrastructure for coal, e.g., trains with railways, and T4 is a UHV (ultra high voltage) grid for transmission of electricity.Diffusion of a new infrastructure commonly takes a long time. We assume the entire decision time horizon is composed of 10 decision intervals. A decision interval is the basic time unit for installing new capacities of technologies. For the case of the above coal-electricity system, we can think of a decision interval as 10 years, and thus the entire decision time horizon as 100 years.With the above simplified techno-economic system, a social planner needs to find the optimal solution of adopting T4 to minimize the total cost of the system over the entire decision horizon while satisfying the dynamic demand. The total cost of the system includes the following three items.•The operation and maintenance cost of using T1, T2, T3, T4, and T5.The investment cost of building new capacities of T1, T2, T3, T4, and T5.The cost of extracting resource.Previous studies with endogenous technological change models have shown that a new (non-infrastructure) technology's initial investment, learning rate, and market size will influence the adoption of the new technology (e.g., Grubler & Gritsevskyi, 1998; Ma, 2010; Manne & Barreto, 2002). In this paper, we first (in Section 3) focus on these factors studied in the existing literature and develop an optimization model with the techno-economic system by assuming that T4 has a fixed efficiency and there is no T5 in the system, i.e., when T4 is adopted, it will be implemented from the resource site to the demand site, and its efficiency is not influenced by the distance of implementing it. With this model, we explore how the adoption of T4 is influenced by T4’s initial investment cost, technological learning rate and its uncertainty, efficiency, and the market size. Then, (in Section 4), we extended the model by including T5 (which means T2 can be located somewhere between resource site and demand site) and assuming that T4’s and T5’s efficiencies are dynamic as functions of their implemented distance. With the extended model, we explore whether it is a better solution to implement T4 for part of the distance from resource site to demand site with three types of dynamics of its efficiency as functions of its implemented distance. With uncertain technological learning, the model introduced in this paper is a non-linear, non-convex, and stochastic optimization model.As mentioned above, focusing on exploring how the adoption of T4 is influenced by its initial investment cost, learning rate, and so on, we first develop a model without considering T5. The model can be simply illustrated with Fig. 1. The objective of the model is to minimize the total cost of the system while satisfying the demand from a long-term perspective. The mathematics of the model is given as follows.Although the model is very conceptual, its framework and main assumptions follow existing operational optimization models such as MESSAGE (Messner & Strubegger, 1994) model and the MARKAL (Seebregts, 2001) model. The following mathematical formulations also follow previous literatures on conceptual models of endogenous technological change (e.g., see Chen & Ma 2014; Grubler & Gritsevskyi, 1998; Ma, 2010; Manne & Barreto, 2002). In short, the formulations we used in our model are mainly from existing studies and literatures. What is new in the model introduced in this paper is that we address an emerging infrastructure's technological learning effect and its uncertainty, as well as its efficiency dynamics with the increase of its length, which are missing in previous models and studies.The demand is exogenous and increases over time, as shown in Eq. (1).(1)dt=d0(1+α)t,where d0 denotes the initial demand, α denotes the annual growth rate, t denotes time period (year), and dtdenotes the demand at time step t.The (extraction) cost of the resource increases over time as a function of resource depletion, as shown in Eq. (2)(2)cEt=cE0+βr¯t,wherecEtdenotes the extraction cost per resource unit at time t,cE0is the initial extraction cost, β is a constant coefficient, andr¯tdenotes the cumulative extraction of resource by time step t,r¯tis calculated with Eq. (3).(3)r¯t=∑j=1trj,where rjdenotes the resource extraction at time step j, and(4)rj=x1jη1η3+x2jη2,wherex1jandx2jare the output of T1 and T2 at step j, η1, η2, and η3 are the efficiencies of T1, T2 and T3, respectively, and η1 = η2 because T1 and T2 are actually the same technology (located in different places).Letyit(i=1,2,3,4)denote the new installation of technology i at time t, then the total installed capacity of technology i at time t, denoted byCit(i=1,2,3,4), can be calculated according to Eq. (5).(5)Cit=∑j=t−τityij,where τidenotes the plant life of technology i.Following existing models of endogenous technological change (e.g., see Grubler & Gritevskyi, 1998; Ma, Grubler, & Nakamori, 2009; Manne & Barreto, 2002), the experience on a technology is quantified as the technology's cumulative installed capacity, which is calculated with Eq. (6).(6)C¯it=∑j=−∞tCij=∑j=1tCij+C¯i0whereC¯itdenotes the cumulative installed capacity of technology i by time t, andC¯i0denotes the initial cumulative installed capacity of technology i, which means the cumulative experience on technology i before t = 1.Technological learning is based on experience, which is quantified by the cumulative installed capacity; thus, future investment cost is a function of cumulative installed capacity, as shown in Eq. (7)(7)cFit=cFi0×(C¯it)−biwherecFitis the investment cost of technology i at time t, biis the elasticity of the investment cost with regard to cumulative installed capacity—and it is easy to prove that1−2−bi(which is called learning rate of technology i) is the percentage of the decrease in the investment cost when the cumulative installed capacity doubles—andcFi0is the initial cost of technology i.In the model, T1, T2, and T3 are assumed to be mature, and they have no learning potential. Therefore, when running the optimization model, it is not necessary to calculate their cumulative installed capacity, which is used to quantify learning effect. The new emerging infrastructure technology T4 has technological leaning potential, but it is uncertain.The objective of the optimization model is to minimize the total cost of the system over a time horizon T while satisfying the human demand. The objective function can be written as(8)min∑i=14∑t=1T(11+δ)t(cOMixit+cFityit)+∑i=1T(11+δ)tcEtrt+ρ{E{∑t=1Tmax{0,[cF4t(ψ)−cF4t]y4t}}},where δ denotes a discount rate,xitdenotes the production of technology i at time t,cOMidenotes the OM (operation and maintenance) cost of technology i; ρ denotes the decision maker's risk attitude (a small ρ denotes a risk-taking attitude, and a large ρ denotes a risk-averse attitude);cF4t(ψ)is a random variable with ψ denoting an element from a probability space that is characterized by a lognormal distribution,22Historical observations show that technological learning rates follow lognormal distributions (McDonald & Schrattenholzer, 2001).andcF4tis the mean of the distribution; and E denotes expectation. In Eq. (8),cF1t=cF2tandcOM1=cOM2because T1 and T2 are the same technology.The first item of Eq. (8) includes the OM cost and investment cost of T1, T2, T3 and T4. The second item is the resource extraction cost. The third item is the expected risk cost resulting from overestimating T4’s learning rate. The third item is not real cost but a term that simulates risk-avoiding behavior.The objective function is subject to the following constraints (9)–(14)(9)dt≤x1t+η4x2t(10)x1tη1≤x3t(11)x4tη4≤x2t(12)xit≤Cit(i=1,2,3,4)(13)xit≥0(i=1,2,3,4)(14)yit≥0(i=1,2,3,4)Constraint (9) denotes that the final goods delivered to the demand site must satisfy human demand, and η4 denotes the efficiency of T4. Constraint (10) denotes that the input of T1 cannot go beyond the output of T3. Constraint (11) denotes that the input of T4 cannot go beyond the output of T2. Constraint (12) denotes that the production (i.e., output) of each technology cannot go beyond its installed capacity. Constraints (13) and (14) denote that all of the decision variables cannot be negative.With Eqs. (1)–(14), the model introduced here is a non-linear, non-convex, and stochastic optimization model. It is solved for a sufficiently large sample M, where the size of M is determined empirically through successive experiments. Several successive model runs with the same sample size M are compared. If no major changes in the solution structure and the objective function can be observed, then M is considered sufficiently large (for more detail, see Messner, Golodnikov and Gritsevskyi, 1996).Parameters related to the technologies are initialized in Table 1. Table 2shows the initialization of other parameters related to demand dynamics, extraction cost dynamics, and so on. In the following, the simulation with parameter values set in Tables 1 and 2 is called the baseline simulation. Based on the baseline simulation, we will vary the values of T4’s initial investment cost, learning rate and uncertainty of the learning rate, efficiency, and annual growth rate of demand to see how they will influence the adoption of the new infrastructure (T4).Fig. 2shows the adoption of the emerging infrastructure T4 with different initial investment costs, from which we can see that the larger the T4’s initial investment cost is, the later its adoption is. When T4’s initial investment cost is 15,000, T4 dominates the system completely from 2060; when T4’s initial investment cost is 40,000, the time is 2100; and when T4’s initial investment cost is 45,000, T4 does not appear during the 100-year period.Fig. 3shows the adoption of T4 with different mean learning rates, from which we can see that the smaller the mean learning rate is, the later its adoption is. When the mean learning rate is approximately 21 percent, T4 dominates the system completely from 2080; when the mean learning rate is 19 percent, the time is 2100; and when slightly reducing the mean learning rate from 19 percent to 18.5 percent, T4 does not appear at all, which means that in our model, the adoption of T4 is very sensitive to the mean learning rate when the mean learning rate is approximately 19 percent.Fig. 4shows the adoption of T4 with different uncertainty (standard deviation) of the learning rate with the mean learning rate as 20 percent. As we can see, the higher the uncertainty, the later the adoption of T4, as the decision maker would “wait and see” when facing the uncertainty in technological learning.Fig. 5shows the adoption of T4 with different annual growth rates of demand. As we can see, the higher the annual growth rate of demand, the faster T4’s adoption is. In Fig. 5, when the annual growth rate of demand is low (3.5 percent), T4 will not appear during the 100-year period. This tells us that the volume of demand, or the market size, is an important factor for adoption of a new infrastructure.Fig. 6shows adoption of T4 with T4’s different efficiency levels. As we can see that the higher its efficiency is, the faster its adoption is. In Fig. 6, when T4’s efficiency is quite high, from 0.93 to 0.99, T4 dominates the system completely from 2080; when T4’s efficiency is 0.84, the time is 2010; and when T4’s efficiency is 0.81, T4 does not appear in the 100-year period.In summary, the above simulations show that factors that will favorite the early adoption of the emerging infrastructure include its low initial investment cost, high learning potential, low uncertainty in learning, high efficiency, and large market size. These factors have also showed a similar influence on non-infrastructure technologies (e.g., Grubler & Gritsevskyi, 1998; Ma, 2010; Manne & Barreto, 2002).Fig. 7shows adoption of T4 by 2050 with different combinations of T1’s (or T2’s because they are the same technology) efficiency and investment cost. From Fig. 7, we can see that the smaller T1’s efficiency is, the higher the share of T4. This is because a smaller efficiency of T1 means more transportation of the resource that is not efficient compared with transporting the goods, thus the optimal solution is to adopt T4 earlier. From Fig. 7, we can also see that the smaller the cost of T1, the higher the share of T4, although this tendency is not so remarkable. This is because, the smaller the T1’s investment cost, the smaller the cost of relocating them, but this relocating cost is quite tiny comparing with the cost of infrastructure, so its influence is not so remarkable.We did sensitivity analysis for all parameters listed in Tables 1 and 2, which is presented in the first section of the Appendix to this paper. Generally speaking, we found that although the change of these parameters in Tables 1 and 2 might bring forward or postpone the adoption of T4, they do not influence the s-shape diffusion pattern of T4 as shown in Figs. 2–6. Since our analysis on the 1st model is mainly on how market size and the cost, efficiency and learning rate of T4 influence its adoption, these conclusions holds if the diffusion pattern of T4 does not change. That is to say the parameters in Tables 1 and 2 do not have drastic impacts on our conclusions of the 1st model. In other words, the sensitivity analysis on these parameters provides a more complete understanding on the model's behaviors, and it does not influence our conclusions on how market size and the cost, efficiency and learning rate of T4 influence its adoption.An infrastructure technology's efficiency might decrease with the increase of its implemented distance. For example, for electricity transmission, the longer the length, the higher the loss of electricity, i.e., the lower the efficiency is. When the distance from resource site to demand site is quite long, the dynamic of an infrastructure's efficiency as a function of distance should be considered. Establishing a new infrastructure for a long distance needs quite a high investment cost and might result in low efficiency, but it could result in high learning potential. Then, how long should we implement a new infrastructure? With our simplified techno-economic system, will it be a better solution to implement T4 for part of the distance from the resource site to the demand site, and how long should we implement T4? For exploring these questions, we add z to the model as one more decision parameter. As shown in Fig. 8, z (≥0 and ≤1) denotes the share of T4’s length over all distance from resource site to demand site. When z equals to 0, it means T4 will not be implemented at all; when z equals to 1, it means T4 will be implemented from resource site to demand site; and when z is in the range from 0 to 1, it means T4 will be implemented for part of the distance, and thus T2 will not be installed at the resource site or the demand site, instead it will be installed at a place in between them, and the resource will be transported from resource site to T2’s site by T3, and then the goods produced with T2 will be delivered to the demand site with T4.To be easily expressed with mathematical formulations, we use T5 to denote T3 from resource site to the T2 site. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the added T5 is actually the same as T3 except it is not implemented from the resource site to the demand site. The objective function of the model can be written as Eq. (15).(15)min∑i=13∑t=1T(11+δ)t(cOMixit+cFityit)+∑t=1T(11+δ)t[z(cOM4x4t+cF4ty4t)+(1−z)(cOM5x5t+cF5ty5t)]+∑i=1T(11+δ)tcEtrt+ρ{E{∑t=1Tmax{0,z[cF4t(ψ)−cF4t]y4t}}}The first line of Eq. (15) denotes the investment cost and OM (operation and maintenance) cost of T1, T2, and T3. The second line denotes the investment cost and OM cost of T4 and T5. The first item in the third line is the resource extraction cost, and the second item is the expected risk cost resulting from overestimating T4’s learning rate.In Eq. (15),cF5t=cF3tandcOM5=cOM3because T5 and T3 are the same technology, Eqs. (1)–(7) still hold for Eq. (15) except that when calculating the cumulative installed capacity of T4, it should be timed with a factor z, as shown in Eq. (16), and rt(the resource extraction at step t) is now calculated with Eq. (17), instead of Eq. (4).(16)C¯4t=z∑j=−∞tC4j=z(∑j=1tC4j+C¯40).(17)rt=x1tη1η3+x2tη2η5,where η5 denotes the efficiency of T5. T5 and T3 are the same technology except T5 is shorter than T3. We assume the efficiency of T5 decreases with the increase of its length (1 − z), and(18)η5=1−(1−η3)(1−z).because T1, T2, T3 and T5 have no learning effect, it is actually not necessary to calculate their cumulative installed capacity.The objective function Eq. (15) is subject to the following constraints (19)–(26).(19)dt≤x1t+η4x2t.(20)x1tη1≤x3t.(21)x4tη4≤x2t.(22)x2tη2≤x5t.(23)0≤z≤1.(24)xit≤Cit(i=1,2,3,4,5).(25)xit≥0(i=1,2,3,4,5).(26)yit≥0(i=1,2,3,4,5).Constraint (19) denotes that the final goods delivered to demand site must satisfy human demand. Constraint (20) denotes that the input of T1 cannot go beyond the output of T3. Constraint (21) denotes that the input of T4 cannot go beyond the output of T2. Constraint (22) denotes that the input of T2 cannot go beyond the output of T5. Constraint (23) gives the range of z. Constraint (24) denotes that the production (i.e., output) of each technology cannot go beyond its installed capacity. Constraints (25) and (26) denote that all of the decision variables cannot be negative.Similar to Eq. (8), with Eq. (15), the model is a stochastic optimization problem. It is solved for a sufficiently large sample, where the size of the sample is determined through successive experiments. Several successive model runs with the same sample size are compared. If no major changes in the solution structure and the objective function can be observed, then the sample size is considered sufficient large.The η4 in Eqs. (19) and (21) is not a constant value as in Section 3. We did optimizations by assuming three types of dynamics of η4 as a function of z, as shown in Fig. 9. EFF1 denotes that T4’s efficiency will decrease with an exponential function of z, as shown in Eq. (26). EFF2 denotes T4’s efficiency will decrease with a linear function of z, as shown in Eq. (27). EFF3 denotes T4’s efficiency will decrease with a quadratic function of z, as shown in Eq. (28).(26)EFF1:η4=−0.0222×10z+1.0222(27)EFF2:η4=−0.2z+1(28)EFF3:η4=0.2z2−0.4z+1In all of the three types of efficiency dynamics, T4’s efficiency will decrease from 1 (when z is close to 0) to 0.8 (when z equals to 1). From Fig. 8, we can see that T4’s efficiency with EFF1 is always higher than that with EFF2 and EFF3.In the following, we present optimization results by varying annual growth rate of the demand, T4’s initial investment cost, learning rate, and uncertainty, respectively. When varying one parameter, values of all other parameters are set as in Tables 1 and 2, and the learning rate is assumed to be deterministic33Keeping the learning rate deterministic helps us to make clear how annual growth rate of the demand, T4’s initial investment cost, learning rate influence the value of z, otherwise it could be influenced by the randomness of the learning rate.except when varying the uncertainty, i.e., in the following, Figs. 10–12 are results with a deterministic learning and Fig. 13 are results with an uncertain learning rate.The left part of Fig. 10 plots the z versus different annual growth rates of demand with three types of efficiency dynamics. We can see that with EFF2 and EFF3, z is either 0 or 1, which means with EFF2 and EFF3, either the new infrastructure will not be established, or it will be established for all of the distance (the case when the annual growth rate is larger than 4 percent). While with EFF1, z can be a value between 0 and 1, which means, the best solution is to build T4 for part of the distance, i.e., the traditional infrastructure will still be used for delivering resource from resource site for a certain distance, and then the resource will be used to produce goods there by T2, and then the goods will be delivered by T4 to the demand site. This can be explained as with EFF1, when the length of T4 is beyond a certain value, its efficiency will decrease very sharply; thus, it is better not to implement it over that length. We can see that the larger the demand, the larger the z, which means T4 will cover longer distance. The right part of Fig. 10 plots the share of T4 by 2050 with different demand growth rates and the three types of efficiency dynamics, from which we can see that with EFF1, the share of T4 is larger than those with EFF2 and EFF3. When the annual growth rates of demand is 3.5 percent, T4 does not appear (with EFF1, EFF2 and EFF3), and we do not plot the value of z in Fig. 10.The left part of Fig. 11plots the z versus T4’s initial cost with three types of different efficiency dynamics. Again, we see that with EFF1, the best solution is to build T4 for part of the distance, and we see that with the increase of T4’s initial total cost, the length of implementing it tends to decrease. With EFF2 and EFF3, the best solution is to build T4 over the whole distance. The right part of Fig. 11 plots the share of T4 by 2050 with different initial costs and the three types of efficiency dynamics, from which we can see with EFF1, the share of T4 is higher than those with EFF2 and EFF3.The left part of Fig. 12plots the z versus T4’s learning rate with three types of efficiency dynamics, from which we can see that with EFF1, z could be a value between 0 and 1, and with the increase of T4’s learning rate, the length of implementing it tends to increase. While with EFF2 and EFF3, the best solution is to implement T4 over all of the distance once it is decided to implement it. The right part of Fig. 12 plots the share of T4 by 2050 with different learning rate and the three types of efficiency dynamics, from which we can see that with EFF1, the share of T4 is equal (when learning rate is from 0.15 to 0.17 and from 0.24 to 0.25) or higher (when learning rate is from 0.18 to 0.23) than those with EFF2 and EFF3. When T4 does not appear, we do not plot the value of z in Fig. 12.The left part of Fig. 13plots the z versus the uncertainty in T4’s learning rate with three types of efficiency dynamics, from which we can see that with EFF1, with the increase of uncertainty in T4’ learning rate, the length of implementing T4 tends to decrease. While with EFF2 and EFF3, the best solution is also to implement T4 over all of the distance. The right part of Fig. 13 plots the share of T4 by 2050 with different uncertainty in T4’s learning rate and the three types of efficiency dynamics, from which we can see that with EFF1, the share of T4 is also higher than those with EFF2 and EFF3.From Figs. 10 to 13, we can see that with higher efficiency (the case of EFF1), a new infrastructure tends to be adopted earlier, but whether a new infrastructure should be implemented partly or over the whole distance is not decided by the value of the efficiency, instead it is decided by the dynamics of efficiency. Our simulations showed that if a new infrastructure's efficiency decreases exponentially as a function of its implemented distance (EFF1), it could result in partial implementation of it even the efficiency is always higher than that with other functions (EFF2 and EFF3) which will not result in partial implementation.For the second model, we also did sensitivity analysis for all parameters listed in Tables 1 and 2, which are presented in the second section of the Appendix. We found, the same as to the first model, although the change of these parameters in Tables 1 and 2 might bring forward or postpone the adoption of T4, they do not influence the s-shape diffusion pattern of T4. In addition, as illustrated in Figs. A.12–A.22 in the Appendix, when changing the values of parameters in Tables 1 and 2, with EFF2 and EFF3, the length of T4 (z) will be either 1 or 0, while with EFF1, the length of T4 (z) is a value between 0 and 1, which means our above conclusion on the second model holds with different parameter values.This paper developed a stylized system optimization model to study adoption of a new infrastructure associated with uncertain technological learning and spatial reconfigurations. The main findings of the paper include the following:•Factors that will favor the early adoption of an emerging infrastructure are similar to those for adoption of non-infrastructure technologies, which include the new infrastructure's low initial investment cost, high learning potential, low uncertainty in learning, high efficiency, and a large market size. In our model, the smaller the associated technology's efficiency and cost, the earlier the adoption of the emerging infrastructure; and the influence of the associated technology's cost is not so remarkable compared with that of its efficiency.Although higher efficiency implies earlier adoption of the new infrastructure, whether a new infrastructure should be implemented partly or entirely is not decided by the value of the efficiency but by the dynamics of the efficiency. The simulations showed that if the new infrastructure's efficiency decreases with the increase of its implemented distance exponentially, the best solution might be to implement the new infrastructure for part of the distance.We did sensitivity analysis for both the two models for all parameters listed in Tables 1 and 2 (presented in the Appendix), which showed that although the change of these parameters might bring forward or postpone the adoption of T4, the above conclusions hold.The model introduced in this paper assumes that the technologies (T1 and T2) associated with the old and new infrastructure are the same. There is a situation in which both the infrastructure and its associated technologies are new. For example, traditional vehicles work with the gasoline refueling infrastructure, and an electric vehicle needs to work with infrastructure of recharging. In our future work, we will explore the adoption of new infrastructure when its associated technologies are also different.The model introduced in this paper assumes that a social planner makes the decision on adoption of a new infrastructure from a long-term perspective. In the real world, it is true that social planners will have a long-term strategy, but they will also adjust their decisions based on the results of previous stages. In our future work, we will also explore the adoption of new infrastructure with an adaptive decision-making framework.The model presented here is not intended by any means to be a “realistic” model in the sense of showing technological or sectoral detail. Rather, the model is mainly intended to be used for exploratory modeling purposes and as a heuristic research device to examine in depth the impacts of alternative model formulations on the dynamics of endogenous technology transition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
