@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuel emissions optimization in vehicle routing problems with time-varying speeds

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Describes a method to minimize fuel emissions for a vehicle routing problem.Allowed speeds in the road network depend on the time of day.Routes between customers and vehicle speeds are decision variables.Method is tested using real traffic data from a London road network.Gives potential reductions in greenhouse gas produced from use of the method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Distribution,Fuel emissions optimization,Vehicle routing problems,Column generation,Tabu search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The problem considered in this paper is to produce routes and schedules for a fleet of delivery vehicles that minimize the fuel emissions in a road network where speeds depend on time. In the model, the route for each vehicle must be determined, and also the speeds of the vehicles along each road in their paths are treated as decision variables. The vehicle routes are limited by the capacities of the vehicles and time constraints on the total length of each route. The objective is to minimize the total emissions in terms of the amount of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) produced, measured by the equivalent weight of CO2 (CO2e).A column generation based tabu search algorithm is adapted and presented to solve the problem. The method is tested with real traffic data from a London road network. The results are analysed to show the potential saving from the speed adjustment process. The analysis shows that most of the fuel emissions reduction is able to be attained in practice by ordering the customers to be visited on the route using a distance-based criterion, determining a suitable path between customers for each vehicle and travelling as fast as is allowed by the traffic conditions up to a preferred speed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Technical developments and the growth in road traffic pose new challenges for research in vehicle routing and scheduling for freight transport. Remote vehicle tracking techniques enable the road traffic data for different times of day and different days of the week to be collected, so as to provide detailed information on transit times for different roads by time of day and day of week. This provides an opportunity to plan vehicle routes and schedules taking time-varying speeds into account. In addition, the growth in road traffic and the use of road freight transport also bring problems of environmental pollution. Concerns about the environmental impact of transport activities have led to new vehicle routing models where the objective is to minimize the harmful effects of transportation on the environment.An increasing number of papers are being published where fuel emissions are explicitly modelled. However many of these simplify the model by assuming that paths between customers are fixed or that the speeds of the vehicles are time-independent. In the model described in this paper, the speed of the traffic on the underlying road network is time dependent. In addition, the path used by a vehicle between a pair of customers and the speeds on the road segments are decision variables. This paper will describe a column generation based tabu search algorithm, which can work together with a solution method for single paths, in order to minimize fuel emissions for Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs) with time-varying speeds.The algorithm is then used for modelling a distribution operation using real traffic data from a road network located in London. The aim of these experiments is to discover how much reduction in CO2e can be obtained by using the algorithm described in this paper, compared with other approaches that are faster to compute. Experiments are also carried out to determine the effect of allowing more waiting time at customers.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains a review of relevant literature. The problem is described in Section 3, which is followed by a set-partitioning model for the VRP. Section 4 introduces the framework of the column generation based tabu search algorithm, which is used to find a prospective sequence for a set of customers, and goes on to discuss details of the algorithm. The computational experiments and their results are then presented in Section 5. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6, and the main findings are highlighted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a column generation based tabu search algorithm is proposed to solve a vehicle routing problem where there are time-varying speeds and the objective is to minimize fuel emissions. The main findings can be summarized as follows:•The proposed algorithm can produce sets of routes for an urban distribution problem with a reduction in GHG emissions of about 3% compared with an approach where the objective is to minimize total time.Within NHA, the path selection process plays a more significant role in reducing fuel emissions, when compared with the speed adjustment process. When the speeds are allowed to be as fast as the traffic allows up to a maximum speed, the best fuel emission solution is only slightly worse than the one obtained using NHA, where the speeds are decision variables.By allowing a long waiting time at customer nodes, vehicles can avoid being caught in congestion, and the fuel emissions can be reduced. However, the costs of such waiting, such as drivers’ salaries, have to be considered. An alternative way to attempt to avoid congestion is to depart later to avoid the morning peak period, but this may not significantly reduce the fuel emissions.Minimizing distance can be an effective way to obtain a good sequence of customers. DBA, which determines the customer sequences by minimizing distance, has a good performance on instances without time windows, but there is a risk that it could fail to find a feasible solution, when it is applied with time-varying speeds. In this case, some simple repair strategy could be used to obtain a good feasible solution.