@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal contract design in the joint economic lot size problem with multi-dimensional asymmetric information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We refine the existing closed-form solution to a supplier–buyer bargaining problem.We characterize its sub-optimal stationary points.We establish a sufficient optimality condition.We discuss the problem in the context of adverse selection.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain coordination,Asymmetric information,Nonlinear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Previous work has studied the classical joint economic lot size model as an adverse selection problem with asymmetric cost information. Solving this problem is challenging due to the presence of countervailing incentives and two-dimensional information asymmetry, under which the classical single-crossing condition does not need to hold. In the present work we advance the existing knowledge about the problem on hand by conducting its optimality analysis, which leads to a better informed and an easier problem solution: First, we refine the existing closed-form solution, which simplifies problem solving and its analysis. Second, we prove that Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions are necessary for optimality, and demonstrate that the problem may, in general, possess non-optimal stationary points due to non-convexity. Third, we prove that certain types of stationary points are always dominated, which eases the analytical solution of the problem. Fourth, we derive a simple optimality condition stating that a weak Pareto efficiency of the buyer’s possible cost structures implies optimality of any stationary point. It simplifies the analytical solution approach and ensures a successful solution of the problem by means of conventional numerical techniques, e.g. with a general-purpose solver. We further establish properties of optimal solutions and indicate how these are related with the classical results on adverse selection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Banerjee’s joint economic lot size model (Banerjee, 1986) refers to a bilateral monopoly consisting of a single buyer operating in an EOQ setting and a single supplier who manufactures and ships to order. If the buyer’s economic order quantity (EOQ) and the supplier’s economic lot size (ELS) do not coincide then the parties should negotiate the lot size to be adopted for repetitive ordering, manufacturing and shipment of the product within this supply chain. As long as the buyer (referred to as he) has decision authority with regard to the order size, he will insist on his EOQ. The supplier (she) can still do better by offering the buyer a side payment as a reward for deviating from his EOQ to the system-optimal joint economic lot size (JELS), and thus realize a Pareto improvement. The JELS model has received a considerable attention in the literature as a conventional model of supply chain coordination and has further been extended to a number of more general settings (Ben-Daya, Darwish, & Ertogral, 2008; Glock, 2012; Liu & Çetinkaya, 2007; Pibernik, Zhang, Kerschbaum, & Schröpfer, 2011; Sucky, 2004, 2006).In particular, Sucky (2004, 2006) studied a setting in which the buyer is privately informed of his cost structure and can therefore abuse this information asymmetry by untruthful reporting of cost data, and thus induce favorable terms of contract with the supplier. To counteract, the supplier can proactively design a menu of offers, each comprising a particular lot size and a side payment, for presenting to the buyer. Determining such a menu of offers that would minimize the supplier’s own expected costs constitutes her bargaining problem. It has been modeled and solved in Sucky (2004, 2006) as a principal–agent problem in adverse selection form (Laffont & Martimort, 2002).Sucky’s work thus studies a conventional supply chain coordination model by Banerjee in a more general and a more realistic setting, and parallels much of the supply chain research that addresses information asymmetry in various settings (see e.g. Cachon & Zhang, 2006; Lau, Lau, & Zhou, 2006; Liu & Cetinkaya, 2009; Wang, Lau, & Lau, 2009; Yang, Aydin, Babich, & Beil, 2009; Voigt & Inderfurth, 2011; Ha, 2001; Burnetas, Gilbert, & Smith, 2007; Lutze & Özer, 2008; Corbett & de Groote, 2000). At the same time, it has a distinctive feature of assuming information asymmetry to be two-dimensional, i.e. with respect to holding and fixed ordering costs of the buyer. As a result, the bargaining problem in Sucky (2004, 2006) gives rise to a non-linear optimization problem whose solution poses certain challenges. In particular, as the problem proves to be non-convex, its stationary points do not need to be optimal. Consequently, the analytical solution as in Sucky (2004, 2006) requires, in general, to determine and evaluate all stationary points of the problem, whereas attempting to solve it numerically may result in a convergence to a non-optimal solution.These particular model properties have not, however, received attention in the follow-up research. Due to the significance of the JELS model, we believe that they deserve a closer investigation. Therefore, the present work intends to advance our knowledge of the bargaining problem under consideration and offer a better informed and an easier problem solution. Specifically, in Sucky (2004, 2006), a detailed analysis has been conducted for the setting in which two possible cost structures are assumed for the buyer. In the present work we (i) propose a refinement of the original closed-form solution, which simplifies problem solving and its analysis; (ii) demonstrate that the problem on hand may possess non-optimal stationary points due to non-convexity; (iii) prove that certain types of stationary points are always dominated; (iv) establish an easily perceivable sufficient optimality condition, under which any stationary point of the problem proves to be its optimal solution — despite of non-convexity of the problem. Result (iii), in particular, eases the analytical solution of the problem by allowing to restrict attention only to specific types of stationary points. Result (iv), in turn, ensures a successful solution of the problem by means of conventional numerical techniques, e.g. with a general-purpose solver, when the said condition holds true, and also simplifies the analytical solution approach. We further establish properties of optimal solutions and indicate how these are related with the classical results on adverse selection.The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of adverse selection problems. In Section 3 we introduce the problem setting, describe the solution approach as per (Sucky, 2004, 2006) and present a refined closed-form solution. In Section 4 we discuss the non-convexity of the problem on hand, identify solution properties and relate them with the classical results on adverse selection. In Section 5 we establish a sufficient condition for optimality of a stationary point. Section 6 provides concluding remarks.The principal–agent problem in adverse selection form has received an extensive treatment in the information economics literature and found a broad range of applications in diverse areas (Rochet & Stole, 2003; van Ackere, 1993). In its typical setup (Laffont & Martimort, 2002), a principal sets out to contract an agent to produce some quantity of a certain good. The parties need to settle on the contract terms (x, z), where x is the quantity to be produced and z is the payment to the agent. The principal’s valuation of the quantity x is S(x). The agent’s production costs are C(θ, x), where θ ∈ Θ is the agent type that is privately known by the agent; the principal has only knowledge of the probability distribution Ω over Θ.The principal has all of the bargaining power. The principal’s problem is to design and announce a mechanism (M, g(m)) with a message space M and allocation rule g: m↦(x, z) that establishes the contract terms depending on the message m ∈ M to be received from the agent. The objective of mechanism design is maximization of the principal’s own expected utilityEθ[S(x)−z]. By the revelation principle (Myerson, 1979, 1982), the principal can restrict attention to truthful direct revelation mechanisms, i.e. mechanisms withM=Θsuch that the agent weakly prefers revealing his true type to revealing any other type in the message m.Given a finite setΘ={θ1,…,θn}of possible agent types with respective probabilitiesω1,…,ωn,the problem can be stated as one of designing an incentive-feasible menu of contracts{(xi,zi)}i=1nfor presenting to the agent, where contracts are linked to agent types in a way that the agent self-selects by choosing the contract designed for his true type. Specifically, the principal solves:(O)max{(xi,zi)}∑i=1n[S(xi)−zi]·ωi(IRi)s.t.zi−C(θi,xi)≥u̲i∀i(ICij)zi−C(θi,xi)≥zj−C(θi,xj)∀i,j(i≠j)In the above problem, objective (O) is to maximize the principal’s expected utility from the contract selected by the agent. Constraints (IRi) respect the agent’s individual rationality by ensuring that the agent of any type i gets at least his reservation utilityuiwhen accepting the ith contract. Constraints (ICij) further ensure that the menu of contracts is incentive-compatible, so that the agent of any type i weakly prefers the ith contract to any other contract from the menu.Problem (O), (IRi)–(ICij) can be solved particularly easy when the following additional assumptions hold:(i)C(θ, x) is convex in x, for each θ ∈ Θ, and S(x) is concave.Reservation utility is the same for all agent types:u̲1=⋯=u̲n.Information asymmetry is one-dimensional, so that agent type is represented by a scalar θ.The single-crossing condition is satisfied: Cx(θ, x) is strictly increasing in θ, for each x.11Cxand Cxxrespectively designate the 1st and 2nd order partial derivatives of C with respect to x.C(θ, x) is strictly increasing in θ and Cxx(θ, x) is non-decreasing in θ, for each x.Note that assumption (ii) allows to normalize all reservation utilities to zero, whereas assumption (iii) implies, without loss of generality, a strict order θ1 < ⋅⋅⋅ < θnof the agent types. Assumption (iv) states that indifference curves of any two agent types on the (x, z)-plane cross at most once.22See in this regard e.g. Laffont and Martimort (2002) as well as Kreps (1990, Chapter 17). More generally, the single-crossing condition requires Cx( · , x) to be either strictly increasing for each x or strictly decreasing for each x.Withn=2,it can then be shown that constraints (IR2) and (IC12) bind at the optimum, while (IR1) and (IC21) do not, by virtue of assumptions (iv), (v) and monotonicity of the principal’s utility in z. Eliminating variables z1, z2 via binding constraints gives a concave function in (O) due to assumptions (i) and (v); its unconstrained maximization yields optimal quantitiesx^1,x^2to be offered to the respective agent types via a menu of contracts. These quantities are referred to as second-best, in contrast to the first-best quantitiesx1*,x2*that would have been allocated under complete information. By virtue of assumption (iv), it holds thatx^2<x2*<x1*=x^1; thus, the agent types are separated via different contracts in the optimal menu, while the quantity contracted for with the less efficient type θ2 is distorted downwards from the first-best.These insights carry over to the case of n > 2 as follows (Laffont & Martimort, 2002; Maskin & Riley, 1984): the individual rationality constraint (IRn) of the highest agent type and the local upward incentive compatibility constraints (ICi,i+1) fori=1,…,n−1must bind at the optimum. As a result, second-best allocation quantities to all agent types except for θ1 are distorted downwards from the first-best. The quantities are weakly monotonic in the agent type:x^n≤⋯≤x^2<x^1,where any equality leads to bunching of the respective types in terms of an identical contract intended for them in the optimal menu. The allocation quantities are, however, strictly monotonic ifCx(θi,x)+Ωi−1ωi(Cx(θi,x)−Cx(θi−1,x))is strictly increasing in i for each x, whereΩi=∑j≤iωj. Depending on the setting, this can be ensured by the monotonicity of the hazard rate of probability distribution Ω, i.e. byΩi−1ωibeing strictly increasing in i (see e.g. Laffont & Martimort, 2002).When Ω is a continuous probability distribution, it is being typically assumed thatΘ=[θ̲,θ¯](see Hellwig, 2010, for a mixed distribution of agent types). The problem is accordingly to determine an incentive-feasible schedule (x(θ), z(θ)) that maximizes the principal’s expected utility. Problem (O), (IRi)–(ICij) is then straightforward to adjust. Several solution approaches, featuring variational and control-theoretic methods, exist (see Rochet & Stole, 2003; Laffont & Martimort, 2002). The analysis of the problem and its solution leads under assumptions (i)–(v) to similar insights as in the discrete case indicated above.Problem solution becomes, however, more involved when one or more of the assumptions (i)–(v) are violated. In the discrete case, this may require to use direct nonlinear programming methods (Bazaraa, Sherali, & Shetty, 2006) or to resort to advanced numerical techniques (see e.g. Cecchini, Ecker, Kupferschmid, & Leitch, 2013). In the continuous case, the analysis may turn out to be intractable (Laffont & Martimort, 2002). Research work has particularly addressed study settings in which one of assumptions (ii)–(iv) does not hold. Regarding (ii), Kerschbamer and Maderner (1998) and Jullien (2000) studied the problem in the discrete and continuous-type settings, respectively, assuming that reservation utility depends on the agent type — what leads to countervailing incentives and may result in a different solution structure compared to the above classical results. Regarding (iii), Rochet and Stole (2003) point out that most of the studies assume the information asymmetry to be one-dimensional, while the agent’s hidden characteristics are in many settings inherently multi-dimensional. This may render a natural ordering of the buyer types impossible and the problem solution more involved (see also Schottmüller, 2015). Rochet and Stole (2003) and Rochet and Choné (1998) present in this regard solution methods for discrete and continuous-type settings that allow both for multi-dimensional private information and multiple goods. Their insights indicate that bunching is characteristic for multi-dimensional settings. McAfee and McMillan (1988) propose a generalized single-crossing condition for multi-dimensional multi-product settings, while Figalli, Kim, and McCann (2011) study conditions under which a continuous-type setting leads to a convex program. Regarding (iv), Schottmüller (2015) points out that, although the multi-dimensional agent types can always be enumerated and ordered in some way in a discrete-type setting, the single-crossing property is unlikely to hold. He also indicates other reasons, for which the agent utility may naturally violate the single-crossing condition, even if his hidden information is intrinsically one-dimensional. As a consequence, it is not sufficient to take only local incentive compatibility constraints into account when solving the problem. Araujo and Moreira (2010) and Schottmüller (2015) characterize optimal solutions in a continuous-type setting when the single-crossing condition is violated at most once and show how the optimal solution structure can differ from the classical result. In the next section we turn to discussing the JELS problem with asymmetric information as an adverse selection problem. In Section 4 we will then establish properties of its optimal solutions.Consider a supply chain with a single supplier and a single buyer (Fig. 1). The buyer faces a deterministic constant demand for a particular product over an infinite horizon and meets the demand from stock that he replenishes by repetitively re-ordering the product from the supplier. Upon receiving the buyer’s order, the supplier sets up a production batch, manufactures the order, and ships it to the buyer. Thus, the buyer’s order size represents, at the same time, the supplier’s manufacturing lot size, as per lot-for-lot assumption (Banerjee, 1986).The supplier aims to negotiate the order size with the buyer, while knowing the buyer’s cost structure only probabilistically. Following Sucky (2006), the problem data is comprised on the buyer side (referred to as A) of:ddeterministic constant demand for the product, in units per time unit,fixed ordering cost in the buyer’s possible cost structure no. i (i=1,2),unit holding cost per time unit in the buyer’s possible cost structure no. i (i=1,2),probability for the buyer to have the i-th cost structure {Bi, hA, i}, (ωi> 0,i=1,2),and on the supplier side (referred to as P) of:pproduction rate, in units per time unit (p > d),fixed setup cost per order,unit holding cost per time unit.The individual costs of the parties per time unit turn out then to be respectively the following functions of the order size x (cf. Banerjee, 1986):KiA(x)=Bi·dx+x2·hA,i(assumingcoststructureno.i,i=1,2)KP(x)=R·dx+x2·dphPThese functions are known to be strictly convex and possess a single minimum (i.e., being unimodal) — provided that all cost parameters involved are positive, what we will assume to hold.Assuming that the supplier has all of the bargaining power in this supply chain, while the buyer has the decision authority with regard to choosing the order size, the supplier’s bargaining problem can thus be stated as an adverse selection problem with the supplier acting as the uninformed principal and the buyer as the privately informed agent. Agent type is represented by the buyer’s cost structure θi≔ {Bi, hA,i}, and has the associated probability ωi(i=1,2;θ1≠θ2). The parties need to settle on the terms of contract (x, z), where x is the order size and z is the transfer payment (side payment) from the supplier to the buyer. The buyer’s and the supplier’s utilities are accordingly:u(θi,x,z)=−KiA(x)+z(i=1,2),v(x,z)=−KP(x)−z.Let furtherxA,i*denote the buyer’s EOQ that minimizes the cost functionKiA(x),i=1,2. The reservation utility of the buyer with cost structure θi(buyer type i) that he gets if bargaining fails is accordinglyu̲i=−KiA(xA,i*). As discussed in Section 2, the supplier’s problem reduces to that of designing a menu (a set) of two offers (x1, z1), (x2, z2) to the buyer that solves (Sucky, 2006):33In Sucky (2006), problem (1)–(6) additionally involves non-negativity constraints z1, z2 ≥ 0. It is, however, easy to see that constraints (2)–(3) automatically exclude side payments z1, z2 < 0 from consideration due to optimality of order sizesxA,1*,xA,2*to the respective buyer types. This allows to omit non-negativities z1, z2 ≥ 0 from (1)–(6), which, in turn, simplifies the analytical solution by avoiding the additional assumption of z1, z2 > 0 (Sucky, 2006).(1)minω1·(KP(x1)+z1)+ω2·(KP(x2)+z2)(2)s.t.K1A(x1)−z1≤K1A(xA,1*)(3)K2A(x2)−z2≤K2A(xA,2*)(4)K1A(x1)−z1≤K1A(x2)−z2(5)K2A(x2)−z2≤K2A(x1)−z1(6)x1,x2>0Note that the above problem is stated in terms of the firms’ disutilities, with (2)–(3) representing the individual rationality constraints, and (4)–(5) — the incentive-compatibility constraints.Problem (1)–(6) obviously complies with assumption (i) of Section 2 due to strict convexity of the firms’ cost functions. However, assumption (ii) does not hold in general because reservation utilities in (2)–(3) are type-dependent. Further, assumption (iii) is violated as well, since the buyer’s private information is two-dimensional. We shall distinguish in this regard between two cases:(a)Buyer’s possible cost structures strictly dominate one another in Pareto sense — i.e.,Bi>B3−iandhA,i>hA,3−iholds for some i ∈ {1, 2}.Buyer’s possible cost structures are both weakly Pareto-efficient — i.e., either B1 ≤ B2 and hA,1 ≥ hA,2, or B1 ≥ B2 and hA,1 ≤ hA,2 holds.Case (a) leads to violation of assumption (iv).44We are thankful to an anonymous reviewer for pointing our attention to this.Indeed, in this case, the cost curves of the buyer types are situated one above the other, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (left). The graph on the right shows that indifference curves can, as a consequence, cross twice, which implies that the two buyer types cannot be discriminated by their marginal rate of substitution between order size and payment. Further, this case proves to satisfy assumption (v). Indeed, the buyer types can naturally be arranged in the order of increasing cost Bi, under which assumption (v) holds. Thus, we can distinguish in case (a) between more and less efficient buyer types, but cannot do so ”at the margin”.On the contrary, case (b) satisfies assumption (iv) but partly violates assumption (v). Fig. 3illustrates this. It is straightforward to verify that the cost curves of the buyer types cross in this case at most once, and so do any two indifference curves. The single-crossing condition of assumption (iv) is therefore satisfied. Regarding assumption (v), observe that the costsK1A(x)andK2A(x)of the two buyer types cannot be ordered consistently for all x, except whenhA,1=hA,2. Thus, the first part of assumption (v) is violated whenever hA,1 ≠ hA,2. Without loss of generality, assume that B1 ≤ B2 and hA,1 ≥ hA,2 holds (see Fig. 3). ThenKiA′′(x)is non-decreasing in i, what satisfies the second part of assumption (v).55Regarding assumption (iv), note thatKiA′(x)is then strictly decreasing in i. See in this regard footnote 2.To summarize, we cannot consistently distinguish in case (b) between the more and less efficient buyer types, but can do so “at the margin”.Thus, problem (1)–(6) in general violates assumptions (ii), (iii) and either assumption (iv) or (partly) assumption (v). To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing works has studied adverse selection problems with these properties in their generality. As the classical solution approach outlined in Section 2 cannot be used, we follow Sucky (2006) in solving problem (1)–(6) in its general form by means of Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions (Bazaraa et al., 2006).KKT conditions and problem constraints (2)–(5) jointly comprise a system of equations and inequalities (A.1)–(A.8) given in Appendix A. A set of offers that satisfies (A.1)–(A.8) for some nonnegative values of Lagrange multipliers λ1, λ2, μ1, μ2 is called a KKT solution of problem (1)–(6), or its stationary point. By distinguishing between a zero and a positive value to be taken on by each of the four Lagrange multipliers, one obtains24=16distinct cases, of which only eight prove to be feasible (Sucky, 2006, p. 531). Solving system (A.1)–(A.8) analytically in its general form leads therefore to eight generic types of KKT solutions.We collate all types of KKT solutions from 1 to 8 in Table 1. Note that each type is represented by a closed-form expression of one or more candidate sets of offers as well as associated feasibility and necessary optimality conditions. If a candidate set of offers satisfies the respective conditions then, by construction, it qualifies as a KKT solution of problem (1)–(6). We refer the reader to Sucky (2006, Section 5.2) for derivation of KKT solutions of types 1 to 6.In the present work, we contribute to these results by:(1)refining KKT solutions of types 4–6;deriving KKT solutions of types 7–8.We provide specific details in Appendix B and Appendix C, respectively. These results simplify problem solution and ease its analysis that we conduct below.In the next section we turn to studying the properties of KKT solutions for the purpose of determining optimal solutions of the problem. To simplify the subsequent exposition, we will use the notation JELSito refer to the joint economic lot size associated with the buyer’s cost structure no. i. By definition, this is the order size that minimizes the total costsKP(x)+KiA(x)of the supplier and the buyer and has therefore the following expression (cf. Banerjee, 1986; Sucky, 2006):(7)JELSi=2d·Bi+RhA,i+dphP,i=1,2.As indicated in Section 3, Table 1 collates all types of KKT solutions from 1 to 8. The indicated sets of offers represent candidate solutions; they qualify as KKT solutions if they satisfy the respective feasibility and necessary optimality conditions. We should stress at this point that a KKT solution still does not need to represent an optimal solution to problem (1)–(6) because the problem proves to be non-convex — despite of convexity of the functions involved. Indeed, by rewriting the problem in a standard form(8)minω1·(KP(x1)+z1)+ω2·(KP(x2)+z2)(9)s.t.K1A(x1)−z1−K1A(xA,1*)≤0(10)K2A(x2)−z2−K2A(xA,2*)≤0(11)K1A(x1)−z1−K1A(x2)+z2≤0(12)K2A(x2)−z2−K2A(x1)+z1≤0with x1, x2 > 0, we can see that objective function (8) and the left-hand sides in (9)–(10) are indeed convex in x1, z1, x2, z2, whereas the left-hand sides in (11)–(12) are not, in particular because−K1A(x2)and−K2A(x1)are strictly concave functions of their arguments. An example in Table 2illustrates a situation in which four sets of offers (of types 3, 4 and 7) satisfy the respective feasibility and necessary optimality conditions and therefore qualify as KKT solutions. Only one of these solutions is optimal.This example shows that KKT conditions indeed do not need to be sufficient for optimality. Nonetheless, there holds the followingProposition 1KKT conditions(A.1)–(A.8)are necessary for local (and hence global) optimality.See Appendix G.□Proposition 1 implies that optimal solutions of problem (1)–(6) are captured by those sets of offers of types 1–8 that satisfy the respective feasibility and necessary optimality conditions, as given in Table 1. Thus in general, all of these sets of offers need to be checked against their feasibility and necessary optimality conditions in order to detect KKT solutions of the given problem instance, and then objective function (8) has to be evaluated at each KKT solution to determine an optimal one. Note that in the example given in Table 2, picking just the first set of offers on the list that satisfies the feasibility and necessary optimality conditions (i.e., set of offers of type 3) would have led to a non-optimal decision represented by a KKT solution with the worst objective value.The following result shows that the search for optimal solutions can nevertheless be restricted to certain types of KKT solutions only, because any other KKT solution is guaranteed to be sub-optimal. To be specific, observe that Table 1 contains expressions of 15 candidate solutions to problem (1)–(6) that are divided into eight types. We can index all candidate solutions asS:={1,2,3,4a--b,5a--b,6a--d,7a--b,8a--b},where solutions of the same type are sub-indexed with literals.66Sub-indexing of solutions of types 4–6 follows the lexicographical order of lot sizesxi1,2that determine the specific set of offers in Table 1 (i ∈ {1, 2}). E.g., of the two possible expressions for the order size x2 in a set of offers of type 4, solution 4a involves order sizex21,while solution 4b involves order sizex22. Sub-indexing of solutions of types 7 and 8 follows the order of their definition in Table 1.Then, there holds the followingProposition 2In an optimal set of offers,xi=JELSiholds for at least one i ∈ {1, 2}.See Appendix H.□An immediate consequence of the proof of Proposition 2 is the followingCorollary 1An optimal set of offers from {6a–d, 7b, 8b} necessarily coincides with some other set of offers fromS*={1,2,3,4a--b,5a--b,7a,8a}.We can for this reason disregard candidate solutions 6a–d, 7b, 8b when determining optimal solutions, and restrict our attention only to those contained in S*. Taking into account Observation 1 in Appendix C, the above result can further be strengthened as follows.Corollary 2A problem instance with JELS1 ≠ JELS2has all its optimal solutions among candidate solutions of types 1–5.Proposition 2 and Corollaries 1–2 lead us to establishing the following properties of optimal sets of offers.1.By Proposition 2, at least one of the order sizes in the menu is first-best, being represented by the respective joint economic lot size. Thus, there is no distortion from the first-best for at least one of the buyer types. This is in line with the classical result discussed in Section 2.When JELS1 ≠ JELS2, i.e. when the first-best quantities depend on the buyer type, Corollary 2 implies that there are five generic types of optimal menus. These five generic types can be described as follows: type 1 — first-best quantities, both individual rationality (IR) constraints bind, while the incentive compatibility (IC) constraints do not; types 2 and 3 — one IR constraint and one IC constraint bind; types 4 and 5 — both IR constraints and one IC constraint bind. This result is in line with the existence of five possible menu types derived by Kerschbamer and Maderner (1998) for the adverse selection problem with countervailing incentives under more restrictive assumptions (among which is a strict monotonicity of utility functions in quantity, and the single-crossing condition). Our result thus generalizes theirs.Further, when JELS1 ≠ JELS2, bunching does not occur. This follows from the expressions of the menus of types 1–5 in Table 1. Indeed, it is immediately seen that the order sizes in the menu of type 1 cannot coincide; the same can be easily derived from the expressions of order sizes in the menus of types 2 and 3. The same conclusion can be derived for the menus of types 4 and 5 from their necessary optimality conditions. This generalizes the result of Kerschbamer and Maderner (1998) as well.WhenJELS1=JELS2,we have that the first-best quantity is the same for both buyer types. Further, it follows from the definition of joint economic lot sizes in (7) that the cost structures of the buyer types must strictly dominate one another in Pareto sense. Pareto-dominance enables candidate solutions of type 7 and 8, that are undefined otherwise. WhenJELS1=JELS2,either menu 7a or menu 8a proves to be a KKT solution (see Table 1). Furthermore, menu 7a (resp. 8a) coincides with the menu of type 3 (resp. 2) when the latter is defined, and supplants it otherwise (see Appendix F). Hence, the conclusion about five generic menu types sustains in this case as well.WhenJELS1=JELS2,we have a possibility of bunching. Bunching occurs namely when a KKT solution of type 7a or 8a proves to be optimal. This possibility represents a marked contrast to the classical result of Section 2 and the results of Kerschbamer and Maderner (1998). We elaborate in Proposition 3 below on the conditions under which bunching takes place.To summarize, the following holds true: in an optimal set of offers, there is no distortion for at least one buyer type; there exist five generic types of optimal menus; bunching can only occur when the first-best quantities coincide. The following proposition gives precise conditions for the occurrence of bunching. To simplify the subsequent exposition, let(13)Si=R+BiandHi=dphP+hA,i(i=1,2).Furthermore, letELS≡xP*=2pR/hPrepresent the supplier’s economic lot size andEOQi≡xA,i*=2dBi/hA,i— the economic order quantity of the buyer type i.Proposition 3LetJELS1=JELS2hold. Then the buyer’s possible cost structures strictly Pareto-dominate one another. Without loss of generality, assume that B1 > B2and hA,1 > hA,2. Then the following is true:(i)IfEOQ1=EOQ2=ELSholds then the first-best outcome is realised without bargaining.Otherwise, the supplier’s optimal set of offers entails bunching if and only if ω1 ≤ H2/H1.See Appendix I.□Assertion (i) of the proposition is obvious: when all individually optimal order sizes coincide, they represent the first-best outcome per se, and therefore there is no need for bargaining. Assertion (ii) is illustrated in Fig. 4by referring to the problem instance given in Table C.3 of Appendix C. This instance hasJELS1=JELS2.Fig. 4 shows the cost curves KP(x) andKiA(x),the economic order quantities EOQi, and the joint economic lot sizes JELSi(i=1,2). We can see on the figure that the supplier’s costs would be reduced if the buyer adopted the order sizeJELS1=JELS2instead of his economic order quantity EOQi(i=1,2). In order to entice the buyer to do so, the supplier can offer him a side payment zias a compensation that should thus be at leastzimin:=KiA(JELSi)−KiA(EOQi).Fig. 4 illustrates the emergence of the side paymentsz1minandz2min. Note that in either case, the supplier’s cost reduction more than offsets the side payment; it is also known that her respective net benefit is biggest when the buyer type i (i=1,2) adopts exactly the order size JELSiand receives the minimum required compensation. In the presence of two buyer types, the supplier prepares a menu of two respective offers; given thatJELS1=JELS2,both offers contain an identical order size. Thus regardless of the buyer’s true cost structure, he will obviously pick the offer with the bigger side payment. Hence the supplier can equivalently design a menu of two identical offers that both feature the bigger of the two possible compensationsz1,2min(what is equivalent to satisfying the incentive compatibility constraints (4)–(5)). As a result, the buyer type requiring actually a lower compensation (buyer type 1 in Fig. 4) is going to be overpaid, and this happens with probability ω1. Proposition 3 states that if this probability is not too high — specifically, not above the threshold H2/H1 — then it will be optimal for the supplier to adopt the set of offers in question (menu 7a in the given example), which entails bunching. Otherwise, if ω1 exceeds the threshold, it is optimal for the supplier to hedge by adopting a different set of offers (one of type 4) — that intends the joint economic lot size for the buyer type 1, and a different lot size for the buyer type 2.The proof of Proposition 3 shows that if ω1 is exactly at the threshold H2/H1 (as in the example in Table C.3), the problem has multiple global optima — one represented by menu 7a, and two others — by sets of offers of type 4. Thus, the supplier is indifferent between these three menus; we adopt the convention that in this case, she offers a menu that entails a greater efficiency (in the expectation) — that is, menu 7a with the first-best quantity. Hence the assertion (ii) of the proposition: that bunching (via menu 7a) occurs if and only if condition ω1 ≤ H2/H1 holds.It is worth noting that sets of offers of type 4 and 7a do not depend on ω1, ω2 (see Table 1), and, thus, lack of bunching when the said condition does not hold is solely due to sets of offers of type 4 turning up as KKT solutions and the comparison between the objective values at KKT solutions in their favor. Hence, condition ω1 ≥ H2/H1 is similar to the monotonicity condition involving the hazard rate of the probability distribution with more than two agent types (see Section 2).77We are thankful to an anonymous reviewer for pointing us to this.Further, note that, since the equalityJELS1=JELS2implies Pareto-dominance among the buyer’s possible cost structures, the single-crossing condition does not hold (see Section 3); conversely, under single-crossing, bunching does not emerge, which is in line with the classical results (cf. Section 2).Although Proposition 2 and Corollaries 1 and 2 narrow down the number of candidate solutions to be evaluated using the analytical solution approach, this still, in general, does not obviate the need to deal with multiple KKT solutions even when seeking to find just any optimal solution.If the problem is being solved by means of numerical optimization techniques, e.g. with a general-purpose solver, then, depending on the choice of the starting point, the algorithm may end up at a KKT solution that does not necessarily represent a global minimum.88Neither should it represent a local minimum (cf. Chap. 10 in Bazaraa et al., 2006; Morrow, 2011). Using second-order sufficient conditions (see e.g. Bazaraa et al., 2006, Theorem 4.4.2) and the results derived in Section D.3 of Appendix D, it can still be shown that non-optimal KKT solutions represented by sets of offers of types 4, 5 and 6 must represent local minima of the problem, provided that the Lagrange multipliers that were assumed to be positive for the respective set of offers (Sucky, 2006, Table 5) have strictly positive values.Our numerical experience confirms this (we in particular experimented with fmincon solver from matlab’s optimization toolbox, version 5.1, and Excel® Solver 2010, using each solver’s default settings).It becomes therefore of interest to investigate the question whether it is possible to establish a condition that would guarantee that a KKT solution of the problem represents its globally optimal solution. When pursuing the analytical approach to solving the problem, such a condition would allow to pick just the first set of offers from the set S* that satisfies the respective feasibility and necessary optimality conditions as per Table 1. When pursuing a numerical approach to solving the problem, this condition would assure that the numerical solver that converges to a KKT solution, obtains an optimal solution. In this section we establish such a condition.To this end, it is instructive to illustrate the emergence of multiple KKT solutions by referring here once again to the problem instance given in Table 2 of Section 4. For illustrative purposes, we will restrict our attention to those feasible solutions of problem (1)–(6), at which individual rationality constraints (2)–(3) are binding, so that the following holds:z1=K1A(x1)−K1A(xA,1*),z2=K2A(x2)−K2A(xA,2*).This allows us to eliminate variables z1, z2 and resort to the following surrogate problem in place of the original one (cf. eq. (A.20)–(A.22) in Sucky, 2006):(14)minω1·(KP(x1)+K1A(x1)−K1A(xA,1*))+ω2·(KP(x2)+K2A(x2)−K2A(xA,2*))(15)s.t.−K1A(x2)+K2A(x2)+K1A(xA,1*)−K2A(xA,2*)≤0(16)K1A(x1)−K2A(x1)−K1A(xA,1*)+K2A(xA,2*)≤0where x1, x2 > 0. Fig. 5depicts the graph of objective function (14) over the feasible region defined by (15) and (16). As one can see, the feasible region consists of two disjoint parts, which gives rise to two distinct local minima. The reason is that one of the buyer’s possible cost structures in Table 2 strictly dominates the other in Pareto sense: B1 > B2 and hA,1 > hA,2, so that the left-hand side in (15), expressing as(17)(B2−B1)·dx2+x22·(hA,2−hA,1)+10014.7,is strictly concave and unimodal, see Fig. 6. As a result, (15) is satisfied on two disjoint intervals, which makes the feasible region of (14)–(16) non-convex and leads to existence of two local minima.Note further that the left-hand sides of constraints (15) and (16) represent univariate functions that are just additive inverses of one another, as Fig. 6 illustrates. As a result, a strict Pareto dominance among the buyer’s possible cost structures always makes exactly one left-hand side in (15)–(16) strictly concave and unimodal, and leads to multiple local minima.In contrast, if the buyer’s cost structures do not strictly dominate one another in Pareto sense and therefore happen to be weakly Pareto-efficient, then the left-hand sides in (15)–(16) both represent monotone functions. Fig. 7illustrates this for the problem instance obtained from the one given in Table 2 by interchanging the values of parameters B1 and B2. The consequence is that each constraint is satisfied on a convex subset of the real line, which makes the feasible region of the surrogate problem connected and hence convex. Note that strict concavity of one constraint may still persist (which is the case when B1 ≠ B2, cf. (17)). Nevertheless, both left-hand sides prove to be quasiconvex functions (see Appendix J for a definition); given the strict convexity of objective function (14), this guarantees optimality of a KKT solution (see Proposition J.2 in Appendix J).Unfortunately, weak Pareto-efficiency of the buyer’s possible cost structures does not lead to quasiconvexity of constraints in the original problem (1)–(6), so that the above argument does not carry over to problem (1)–(6). Despite that, there still holds the followingProposition 4Suppose that the buyer’s possible cost structures are both weakly Pareto-efficient. Then a KKT solution of problem(1)–(6)is an optimal solution. Specifically, the following is true:(i)a set of offers of type 1–5 satisfying the respective feasibility conditions and necessary optimality conditions is optimal;a set of offers of type 6 satisfying the respective feasibility conditions and necessary optimality conditions cannot exist, unless it coincides with a set of offers from i);sets of offers of types 7 and 8 are undefined.See Appendix J.□Proposition 4 thus establishes that weak Pareto-efficiency of the buyer’s cost structures guarantees optimality of a KKT solution of the original problem, too. To obtain this result, we employ the Generalized Lagrange Multiplier approach (see Appendix J for details) and prove that under this condition, the restricted Lagrangian function of the problem turns out to be convex, what guarantees optimality of the solution in question — despite the fact that the problem remains non-convex. This can be explained as follows. As we know from Section 3, weak Pareto-efficiency of the buyer’s possible cost structures implies the single-crossing property. Under single-crossing, the functions in Fig. 7 happen to be monotonic. This, in turn, leads to convexity of the restricted Lagrangian function and thus ensures optimality of the respective stationary point (see the proof of Proposition 4 in Appendix J for details).An immediate consequence of the proof of Proposition 4 is the followingCorollary 3The set of offers of type 1 is optimal whenever it satisfies the respective feasibility conditions. The buyer’s possible cost structures do not need to be both weakly Pareto-efficient.Indeed, as it is optimal for the supplier to offer (xi, zi) withxi=JELSiandzi=KiA(xi)−KiA(xA,i*)to the buyer with the cost structure no. i (Banerjee, 1986; Sucky, 2006), the set of offers of type 1 is an optimal solution to a relaxed problem (1)–(3), (6). If it happens to be feasible to the original problem (1)–(6) as well, then it obviously represents its optimal solution, irrespective of the relation between the buyer’s possible cost structures (see also Lemma I.1 in Appendix I).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
