@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interpreting supply chain dynamics: A quasi-chaos perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The application of the chaos theory needs careful assessment or the conclusion can be misleading.Randomness is not chaos; quasi-chaos behavior interpreted as chaos may lead to erroneous decisions.Stochastic demand results in more quasi-chaos phenomena than deterministic demand results in chaos.Opposite sets of decision-making in inventory adjustments are needed under the stochastic and the deterministic settings.Understanding delicate interplay to better tackle problem correctly/more effectively at the demand or the supply end.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Chaos theory,Lyapunov exponent,Quasi-chaos,System dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Chaotic phenomena, chaos amplification and other interesting nonlinear behaviors have been observed in supply chain systems. Chaos can be defined theoretically if the dynamics under study are produced only by deterministic factors. However, deterministic settings rarely present themselves in reality. In fact, real data are typically unknown. How can the chaos theory and its related methodology be applied in the real world? When the demand is stochastic, the interpretation and distribution of the Lyapunov exponents derived from the effective inventory at different supply chain levels are not similar to those under deterministic demand settings. Are the observed dynamics of the effective inventory random, chaotic, or simply quasi-chaos? In this study, we investigate a situation whereby the chaos analysis is applied to a time series as if its underlying structure, deterministic or stochastic, is unknown. The result shows clear distinction in chaos characterization between the two categories of demand process, deterministic vs. stochastic. It also highlights the complexity of the interplay between stochastic demand processes and nonlinear dynamics. Therefore, caution should be exercised in interpreting system dynamics when applying chaos analysis to a system of unknown underlying structure. By understanding this delicate interplay, decision makers have the better chance to tackle the problem correctly or more effectively at the demand end or the supply end.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent waves of product recalls that have taken place in the auto industry reaffirm the criticality of good supply chain management (SCM) to the competitiveness of companies. This is true because the demand and supply bases have become so connected and at the same time very dispersed globally. Various types of uncertainties originated from demand, design, production and delivery, as well as time delays and feedback between decision making and their effect render supply chain systems rather complicated. A case in point is a faulty design, a non-conforming manufacturing process or a failure in proper usage resulting in out-of-place floor mats or defective accelerator pedals, and eventually leads to a global product recall. Due to complex and dynamic characteristics, a seemingly insignificant change or deviation in system conditions such as the above-mentioned may usher the system into a chaotic state (Hwarng & Xie, 2008). Therefore, it is valuable to study the dynamics and intricate behaviors in a complex supply chain (Thomas, Kevin, & Rungtusanatham, 2001). By adopting a system dynamics approach with a complexity perspective, the intriguing nature of such systems can be better understood.There have been considerable interests in applying chaos theories and tools in finance, economics and management studies (Lorenz, 1993), while limited studies in SCM. A majority of the literature is based on the beer distribution model, such as Mosekilde and Larsen (1988) on two- and three-dimensional chaotic attractors, Thomsen, Mosekilde, and Sterman (1992) on hyperchaotic and higher-order hyperchaotic phenomena, Sosnovtseva and Mosekilde (1997) on chaos-chaos intermittency, Larsen, Morecroft, and Thomsen (1999) on stationary periodic, quasi-periodic as well as chaotic and hyperchaotic dynamics, Laugesen and Mosekilde (2006) and Mosekilde and Laugesen (2008) on border-collision bifurcations. These studies focus on showing the existence and categories of chaotic/hyperchaotic behaviors and various modes exhibited in a supply chain system. They highlight the role of decision making, e.g., the decisions on the adjustment of the actual inventory and the supply line, in the cause of system chaos. To further understand the chaotic dynamics, Hwarng and Xie (2008) conducted a comprehensive study of a complex supply chain system modeling after the well-known beer distribution model (Sterman, 1989), under some known deterministic settings with deterministic demand processes such as a step function or a broad-pulse function. The simulation results indicate that supply chain factors (Cachon & Fisher, 2000; Chen, Drezner, Ryan, & Simichi-Levi, 2000; Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997a; Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997b; Sterman, 1989) such as decisions on adjustment of discrepancy between inventory and supply line, demand pattern, ordering policy, information sharing, lead time, and supply chain level, have direct impact on the chaotic behavior of inventory dynamics.However, pure deterministic settings rarely exist in reality. In fact, the underlying structures of real-world data are typically unknown. Facing the situation with unknown demand processes, how should we interpret the result when applying the chaos theory to analyze historical data of which the underlying structure is unknown? Motivated by the theoretical limitation and practical utility, we investigate the impact of stochastic nature in demand on the system dynamics from a chaos perspective. A simulation model based upon the beer distribution model is developed to investigate system dynamics across all levels of the supply chain. Using the Lyapunov exponent (LE), we characterize the system dynamics in terms of inventory across all supply chain levels. The main idea is to ascertain the interplay of randomness and chaos and offer some insights into the practical utilities of the chaos analysis in complex supply chain systems.The structure of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the model under study; Section 3 presents concisely the methods and tools that we will adopt in our analysis; Section 4 explains the simulation and experiment settings as well as results and analysis; Section 5 discusses a few key findings; Section 6 closes with conclusions.Various forms of the beer distribution model (for example, Chen & Samroengraja, 2009) have been studied since the beer distribution game was first developed at MIT in the 1960s. Researches have mainly focused on the supply chain system dynamics and its complexity. Analytical studies tend to focus on the inventory level or order quantity decisions. Though based on random demand processes (Cachon, 1999; Chen et al., 2000; Kim, Chatfield, Harrison, & Hayya, 2006), they are not related to chaos dynamics. One typical phenomenon observed in the beer distribution model is the bullwhip effect manifested in the amplification of demand or inventory (Lee et al., 1997a, 1997b; Sterman, 1989). In this research, however, we focus on using the beer distribution model to investigate the applicability of the chaos theory in understanding inventory dynamics in a complex multi-echelon supply chain system from a chaos perspective. The supply chain system, shown in Fig. 1, is based on the beer distribution model which represents a multi-level supply chain consisting of retailer, wholesaler, distributor and factory.In this supply chain system, orders propagate from customers to the factory; while goods are shipped from factory to customers. Specifically, the retailer estimates customers’ demands and places an order with the wholesaler; the wholesaler decides how much to order from the distributor; the distributor places an order with the factory and the factory makes production decisions. Conversely, products flow from the factory to the retailer. The factory ships the goods to the distributor; the distributor transports the goods to the wholesaler; the wholesaler allocates the goods to the retailer; and customers’ orders are satisfied from the retailer.The only decision made at each supply chain level is the order quantity (or the production quantity for the factory). Each supply chain level may adopt a specific ordering policy to replenish its inventory, with the objective to minimize the holding costs while attempting to avoid out of stock situations. Adapted from Sterman (1989), in the simulation model, the ordering policy is an anchoring and adjustment heuristic designed to manage the inventory level. The characteristics of the ordering heuristic include replenishment of expected orders, correction of differences between the desired inventory and the actual one, and an evaluation of the supply line inventory, which comprises of the orders placed but not yet received. To facilitate the model description, relevant notations for model variables and parameters are listed in Table 1.At each supply chain level, the adjustment for the inventory level and the adjustment for the supply line at time t are expressed as follows:(1)ASt=αS(S∗-St)(2)ASLt=αSL(SL∗-SLt)The actual inventory level and supply line level at time t are expressed as follows:(3)St=∑t=t0tn(At-Lt)+St0(4)SLt=∑t=t0tn(Ot-At)+SLt0So the order at time t can be described as below:(5)Ot=max(0,L^t+ASt+ASLt)The expected demand is based on the adaptive expectation on demand as follows:(6)L^t=θLt+(1-θ)L^t-1,0⩽θ⩽1As exhibited in Fig. 1, various types of delays, t−pdnamely, order delay, production delay, and shipment delay, exist in the supply chain system. The expected demand dynamics at supply chain level i is captured by the following:(7)L^i,t=θOi-1,t-od+(1-θ)L^i,t-od,0⩽θ⩽1where odis the order delay. Similarly, the goods received at time t at supply chain level i (retailer, wholesaler and distributor) is the actual outgoing shipment at the successive upstream level i−1 at time t−sd, or the production quantity at time t−pd. In the simulation, we let od=1, sd=3, and pd=3. Thus, the replenishment lead-time between two successive levels of the supply chain is 4 time periods. With reference to the experiment conducted by Sterman (1989) and for the purpose of comparative studies with Hwarng and Xie (2008), we let θ=0.25. This is chosen to reflect a policy that is of more conservative in adaptive adjustment.In the conventional beer distribution model (Sterman, 1989), the decision makers at the various levels have no contact with each other, and the only information they can use is the order from the immediate downstream level. When making decisions, one considers downstream orders, the time delay between the placement of and the receipt of the order, and how much to order. Incorporating the above ordering policy, the supply chain model simulated here is a high-dimension dynamical system consisting of 27 state variables. It was built with widely-used system dynamics simulation software, Vensim DSS (Ventana Simulation Incorporation, 2003).In order to simulate a situation whereby the demand distribution is unknown, we have to study the system with some given demand distributions first. To investigate the impact of demand distribution types, we consider two types of demand processes, namely, deterministic and stochastic. Following and extending the work done in Hwarng and Xie (2008), for the deterministic demand type we consider three demand scenarios, i.e., a step function, a broad pulse function, and a periodical sinusoidal function. For the stochastic demand type, we also consider three demand scenarios, i.e., uniform distribution, Poisson distribution, and exponential distribution. These stochastic demand processes are often used in inventory management literature, e.g., Lee, So, and Tang (2000), and appropriate for modeling the arrivals of demand or interarrival times of customers (demand) (Law, 2007). Each demand process is detailed in Table 2.In this rather complex supply chain model, the two most important decision parameters are αSand αSL. The parameter αSdetermines how quickly the inventory level should be adjusted according to the discrepancy between actual and desired inventory levels; the parameter αSLdetermines how much of the discrepancy between actual and desired supply line should be considered in the overall inventory replenishment. This is reflected in Eqs. (1) and (2). It is logical to letαSL⩽αSas more attention is usually given to the visible inventory rather than the invisible supply line. To understand the wide extent of inventory replenishment decision making, we study the whole decision space of (αS,αSL) as in Hwarng and Xie (2008). We are interested in understanding the effect of (αS,αSL) on the dynamics of system chaos. We let these two decision parameters have all the combinations of values in the following range:(8)0⩽αSL⩽αS,0.02⩽αS⩽1with an increment of 0.02 for each parameter. Since the amount of adjustment should not be greater than the discrepancy itself, both αSand αSLare kept below 1. There are 1325 parameter combinations in total. By varying the two parameters, the ordering heuristic can represent many possible ordering decisions. A wide variety of ordering decisions thus can reflect many realistic situations and assist us in drawing more valid conclusions.As a comparative analysis, the effects of lead time, ordering policies, and information sharing in the current study are fixed, namely anchored at: transmission delay of orders between two successive supply chain levels is 1 time unit; shipment delay and production delay are both 3 time units; the same ordering policy is used across all the supply chain; no information sharing across different supply chain levels. Initial values of model variables and parameters are listed in Table 3.Chaos is a phenomenon of disorderly-looking long-term evolution occurring in a deterministic nonlinear system (Williams, 1997) whereby its behavior is sensitively dependent on initial conditions, topological transition and density of periodic points (Devaney, 1989). More specifically, a system of chaos can be characterized by a number of distinct features including (1) non-randomness and nonlinearity; (2) apparent disorder: the motion of the variables looks disorganized and irregular; (3) strange attractor: order, structure, or pattern can be found in phase space; (4) bounds: the ranges of the variables have finite bounds, hence, the attractor is bounded; and (5) sensitivity to initial conditions: a seemingly insignificant change in initial conditions can have a significant effect on the evolution of the system (Wilding, 1998; Williams, 1997).Typically there are two ways, i.e., graphical methods and quantifiers, to identify chaos or assess if a system is stable, periodic, quasi-periodic or chaotic. Graphs and plots are visually convenient in showing data trends and patterns. Time series plots, phase space plots, return maps and power spectrum can be used to study system behavior (Hilborn, 1994; Sprott & Rowlands, 1995). However, graphical methods are not the most accurate way to evaluate chaos. Well-defined quantifiers can be calculated to evaluate if a system is stable, periodic, quasi-periodic or chaotic. Lyapunov exponent (LE), entropy, fractal dimension, capacity dimension, and correlation dimension are some of the widely used quantifiers (Hilborn, 1994; Sprott & Rowlands, 1995). In this study, we use LE to quantify the chaos dynamics of the supply chain system as the principal quantifier because it is a proven measure for determining and classifying nonlinear system behavior (Wolf, Swift, Swinney, & Vastano, 1985). Using LE also makes our comparative analysis with the previous study (Hwarng & Xie, 2008) easier.Lyapunov exponents (LEs) measure the divergence of the trajectories from two nearby starting points, thus indicating if the behavior of the system is sensitive to the initial conditions. Several definitions of LE have been proposed (Rosenstein, Collins, & De luca, 1993; Wolf et al., 1985). A widely used definition of LE is as follows (Wolf et al., 1985):Given a continuous dynamical system in an n-dimensional phase-space, the long-term evolution of an infinitesimal n-sphere of initial conditions is monitored; the sphere will become an n-ellipsoid due to the locally deforming nature of the flow. The ith one-dimensional LE is then defined in terms of the length of the ellipsoidal principal axis pi(t):A critical step is to calculate the length of pi(t) and to trace its orientation change with respect to the time scale. For experimental time series with unknown underlying structure, Wolf’s method (Wolf et al., 1985) would involve phase-space reconstruction, finding two nearest points to form an initial vector with infinitesimal length, tracing the evolution of the vector, and finding a replacement point to form a new vector with infinitesimal length and minimum orientation change.The Lyapunov exponents are related to the expanding or contracting nature of different directions in phase space. From the above definition, we can see in an n-dimensional system, there are n LEs, called the Lyapunov spectrum. The sign of the LE provides a qualitative indication of the system dynamics from a chaos perspective. The existence of at least one positive LE indicates that the system is in a state of chaos; otherwise the system is stable, periodic or quasi-periodic. The magnitude of the LE may quantify the dynamics of an attractor in information theoretic terms, measuring the rate at which system processes create or destroy information. It reflects the level of sensitivity at which the system is dependent on initial conditions. The larger the magnitude the more sensitive the system is to initial conditions.In general there are two broad categories of methods developed under either known or unknown underlying structures for calculating Lyapunov exponents. When the exact dynamical structure of the system is known, the LE can be easily calculated using methods based on singular value decomposition, for example, Wolf et al. (1985). When the underlying structure of the data collected is unknown, methods based on the embedding technique developed for scalar time series are needed. The computation process may involve phase-space reconstruction and embedding dimension estimation.Takens’ theorem (Takens, 1981) provides the theoretical foundation for us to extract information from a single time series about the underlying structure of the system by phase-space reconstruction using embedding techniques. Let the time series be denoted as {x(1),x(2),⋯,x(N)}, where N is the length of the time series. The reconstructed phase-space is defined as(10)X={X(n)|X(n)=[x(n),x(n+τ),⋯,x(n+(m-1)τ)]T},n=1,2,⋯,Mwhere τ is the reconstruction delay, m is the embedding dimension. Therefore, the number of points in the reconstructed phase-space is M=N−(m−1)τ.According to Takens’ theorem, the embedding dimension is usually estimated to be m>2d, where d is the dimension of the attractor. Theoretically, any sufficiently large m and almost any choice τ, from a single time series, can reform the dynamics of the original system. However, due to the length constraint of the time series data, empirical evidences have shown that a smaller m (compared with 2d) performs better and is more reliable (Rosenstein, Collins, & De luca, 1994; Wolf et al., 1985). It should be noted that, in the presence of noise, the embedding dimension m should not be too large as it may make it harder to find replacement points and unnecessarily increase the level of contamination of the data. On the other hand, the embedding dimension m cannot be too small, even if the time series contain noise, as distinct parts of the attractor may be interlaced (Wolf et al., 1985). Therefore, it is necessary to estimate the embedding dimension and the reconstruction delay that would produce the best possible characterization of the system chaos. The two parameters can be treated as either independent or dependent in the estimation process. The three approaches considered here for estimating the embedding dimension are Grassberger–Procaccia algorithm (Grassberger & Procaccia, 1983), False Nearest Neighbors (Kennel, Brown, & Abarbanel, 1992), and Cao’s method (Cao, 1997).To determine the embedding dimension, we use the time series generated at the retailer level with αS=0.9 and αSL=0 under the step function to estimate m and τ. Assuming parameter independence, we let τ=1 since the data is from discrete time simulation, and then estimate the embedding dimension m. Based on all the methods, it is concluded that a stabilizing m should be at least 5, and preferably 15–20. Of course, the larger the m is, the more data are needed.By estimating the LE, we in effect monitor the long-term evolution of a single pair of nearby orbits (Wolf et al., 1985). Given the time series x(t), reconstruct the phase-space with embedding dimension m and reconstruction delay τ and denote the reconstructed vector as X(t), Wolf’s method can be summarized as follows.Let the initial point of trajectory X(t) be denoted as X(t0), and its nearest neighbor which is the initial point of another trajectory X0(t) be denoted as X0(t0), and the distance of these two points be denoted as L(t0). At a later time t1, the distance evolves to length L′(t1) satisfying the condition below:(11)L′(t1)=|X(t1)-X0(t1)|>ε,ε>0If the evolution time step, Δ=t1−t0, is too large, L′ may shrink as the two trajectories pass through a folding region of the attractor. This will lead to underestimating the largest LE,λ1.Find another point X1(t1) which minimizes the distance to X(t1) and the orientation change ϑ, i.e., X1(t1) satisfies the following condition:(12)L(t1)=|X(t1)-X1(t1)|<ε,ε>0and the angle between the vector X0(t1)−X(t1) and the vector X1(t1)−X(t1) is as small as possible, i.e., ϑ is small.Iterate the above procedure until X(t) is the end point of the trajectory. The LE is then determined as(13)λ1=1tM-t0∑k=1MlnL′(tk)L(tk-1)where M is the number of iterations.Wolf’s method can be used to calculate all the n LEs from a scalar time series for an n-dimensional system. For example, to calculate the second largest LE, we just need to trace two nearest points of the initial point to form a triangle in each step in the above tracing strategy.To meaningfully estimate the LE, it is necessary to estimate the mean orbital period p of a given time series. A properly chosen p would ensure the temporal separation in the original time series is at least one mean orbital period so that non-zero Lyapunov exponents can be derived (Wolf et al., 1985). In this study, we use a method (Rosenstein et al., 1993) applying the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) technique (Brigham, 1988) to estimate p of the time series. Fig. 2illustrates the mean orbital period in logarithmic scale estimated from the time series generated at the retailer level with αS=0.5 and αSL=0 under the step function. The mean orbital period p of this time series is estimated to be around 20 as shown in Fig. 2.Wolf’s method is widely used and implemented in software such as Chaos Data Analyzer (Sprott & Rowlands, 1995) which was used in phase I of this research (Hwarng & Xie, 2008). With the estimated embedding dimension m and the mean orbital period p, Wolf’s method is employed to compute LEs.It is worth noting, as discussed in Wolf et al. (1985), that when applying Wolf’s method, due to the presence of noise on finite length scales, the desired infinitesimal length scales of an attractor may be inaccessible, making it difficult to find a proper replacement point, since noise may drive a faraway data point into the replacement “arena”. The presence of noise may also increase the orientation error of a replacement point, leading to skewed replacement points. For noise of sufficiently large amplitude, Lyapunov exponent may not be accurately determined. Specifically, the average initial separation between replacement points may grow with the noise level and the large final separations may not be much affected by the noise. The result will be an underestimate of the positive exponent.Previous uses of the term “quasi-chaos” to characterize particular chaos-like phenomena, include Liboff, Weimann, and Porter (2002), where “data is said to be ‘quasichaotic’ if its plot is well-approximated by either a Wigner or Poisson distribution” and Ueno and Fan (2013), where quasi-chaotic behaviors are observed in the narrow-band response of a non-deterministic resonant system.By definition, chaos is produced from deterministic settings. When LEs are used to quantify the dynamic characteristics of a time series produced from an unknown or stochastic underlying structure, it is possible that the magnitude of LEs may suggest the presence of some phenomenon resembling chaos. In this study, we define the chaos-like behavior, as quantified by Lyapunov exponents, exhibited in a time series generated from unknown or stochastic input as quasi-chaos. It should be noted that the maximum LE may not be the best choice as the dynamic complexity indicator under stochastic settings. For the purpose of this study, however, LEs are used as if the typical chaos analysis is carried out for time series of which the underlying structure is unknown.To efficiently investigate the effects of demand type, demand process, and supply chain level on the chaos characteristics of the system dynamics, experimental settings are constructed according to the 24 scenarios coded in Table 4. As mentioned in Section 2.3, there are 1325 parameter combinations for each scenario. In other words, we will need to calculate the LEs for each of the time series generated from the 1325 parameter settings. The computation is to be repeated for all 24 scenarios. For each parameter combination, the simulation is run for 2000 time units. 2000 data points may not be enough to exhibit complex forms of dynamics that might exist in the beer distribution model. However, in reality, the amount of usable inventory data under a consistent set of operating conditions is generally limited. 2000 data points would be equivalent to the amount of data collected from a time span of close to 500years, 170years, 39years, or 6years if they were collected on a quarterly, monthly, weekly, or daily basis, respectively. Hence, this amount of data is deemed sufficient, for the purpose of the current study is not to detect the various forms of deterministic chaos but to demonstrate how to interpret the results when the chaos theory and tools are applied to data collected from realistic settings with unknown underlying structure.From Section 3.3, we note that embedding dimension m, reconstruction delay τ, and mean orbital period p need to be estimated in Wolf’s method to calculate LEs. Theoretically, each time series may require a unique set of embedding dimension m, reconstruction delay τ, and mean orbital period p to more accurately estimate the LE. However, based on our preliminary studies, the values of these parameters may become less critical after these values reach a certain range as shown in Section 3.3. Further sensitivity analysis (Appendix A) of LEs on the values of embedded dimension m and mean orbital period p shows that LEs are in general relatively insensitive. The sign of LEs usually do not change over a wide range of m or p. Thus, m=20,τ=1, and p=20 were used for all the time series.In theory, chaos can only be defined for nonlinear dynamics that are subject to deterministic factors. With the introduction of stochastic demand, the dynamics of the effective inventory are no longer purely contributed by deterministic factors. Thus, the observed phenomenon of inventory dynamics that resembles chaos can only be described as quasi-chaos. For each of the scenarios listed in Table 4, one LE can be derived for each of the 1325 parameter combinations. We then constructed a contour plot of the LEs to produce an overall picture of the chaos or quasi-chaos dynamics for each scenario. The LEs at the four levels, i.e., retailer, wholesaler, distributor, and factory, are denoted by RLE, WLE, DLE and FLE, respectively.Although it is desirable to derive theoretical stability criteria in the (αS,αSL) parameter space, the intended multi-facet of the model, particularly with stochastic demand, makes it intractable. Moreover, theoretical stability conditions are irrelevant from the practical viewpoint. It is rare, if not impossible, for a supply chain to remain unchanged for even 2000 time periods (days, weeks, or months). Contour plots become the most straightforward and visible instrument to communicate the dynamics and complexity of the system.Figs. 3–5exhibit the distribution of LEs at each of the four supply chain levels given all the possible combinations of (αS,αSL) for step function, broad pulse function, and periodic sinusoidal function, respectively.Based on the observation of these contour plots, it became clear that decision variables (αs,αSL) have direct impact on the chaos dynamics. With the complexity of all possible parameter combinations and scenarios, there is a need to define decision regions in order to investigate the effect of (αs,αSL) meaningfully. The effect of (αs,αSL) is then analyzed at the regional level rather than at the individual value level, as will be seen in Section 4.2.Adopting the similar approach used in Hwarng and Xie (2008), given that there are only 24 scenarios in this study, we divide the (αs,αSL) decision plane into 8 regions (as opposed to 64 scenarios and 11 regions in Hwarng and Xie (2008)). The objective is to keep the LE values within each region as homogeneous as possible. The homogeneity of LEs can be measured by the coefficient of variation (CV) of all the LE values within that region. The procedure begins with a clustering analysis on the decision plane for a given scenario to form different clusters. By inspecting the contour plots, we divide the plane into 8 regions, and calculate the corresponding CV for the 8 regions in each scenario. Several different ways of dividing the regions were considered. The one with the smallest average CVs of all 8 regions as shown in Fig. 6was eventually adopted. Table 5lists the boundaries of different regions. As will be seen in Figs. 7–9and Tables 5 and 6, the effect of (αs,αSL) on the system dynamics is rather complicated and can only be interpreted meaningfully with joint consideration of other system factors.The regions formed above will serve as the base upon which the comparative analysis of the effect of inventory decision (αs,αSL) under deterministic and stochastic demand types will be carried out using ANOVA.Figs. 7–9 exhibit the distribution of LEs at each of the four supply chain levels given all the possible combinations of (αs,αSL) for uniform distribution, Poisson distribution, and exponential distribution, respectively.Based on the observation of these contour plots, it is evident that the effect of (αs,αSL) on the chaos dynamics is quite different when the demand type is stochastic. This warrants an in-depth statistical analysis. However, it is impossible to derive any well-bounded decision regions. Since the purpose of the study is to show the outcome of applying the typical chaos analysis as if the time series under study is from deterministic settings, the same decision regions as shown in Fig. 6 are used.How do the chaos dynamics behave under various settings? Table 6 provides an overall realization of inventory dynamics in terms of the average LE in each scenario and region.Applying analysis of variance (ANOVA) to analyze the distribution of average LE, we consider the following three potential factors as the main effects.(a)Demand type (T): deterministic, stochastic.Demand process (P): step function, broad pulse, periodic sinusoidal function, uniform distribution, Poisson distribution, exponential distribution.Supply chain levels (L): retailer, wholesaler, distributor, factory.We adopted a nested design with random effect (Montgomery, 2008). The demand process (different demand distributions) nested in demand type (deterministic or stochastic) is analyzed as a random effect. Besides the three main factors, we also consider the interaction effects among these three factors. The hypothesis test is designed to ascertain if the effect of demand type (T), demand process (within type) (P(T)), or supply chain level (L) is significant on the average LE in each region respectively. Table 7summarizes the p-value for each factor (or source of variation) in each region. The results were obtained using Minitab (Minitab Incorporation, 2005).From Table 7, it is evident that the effect of demand type (T) is significant (at a level of α=0.05) on the average LEs in all regions except region 4. It implies that the average LEs are sensitive to the demand type except the only situation when the stock discrepancy is adjusted considerably, i.e., αS>0.5 and the supply line discrepancy has little or no adjustment, i.e., αSL<0.05. Overall, stochastic demand processes result in more quasi-chaos phenomena than deterministic demand processes result in chaos phenomena. The effect of supply chain level (L) is significant in regions 2, 3, 6, 7, and 8. It implies that the average LEs are sensitive to the supply chain level except when both the stock discrepancy and the supply line discrepancy are only adjusted marginally, i.e., αS<0.2 and αSL<0.2, and when the stock discrepancy is adjusted considerably, i.e., αS>0.5 and the supply line discrepancy is adjusted proportionally marginally, i.e., αSL<0.4αS−0.15. The demand process (P) nested in demand type (T) is significant in regions 1, 2, and 5. It implies that the average LEs are not sensitive to the demand process as long as the supply line discrepancy is adjusted more than marginally and above, e.g., αSL>0.2. Although the interaction effect of demand type (T) and supply chain level (L) is not significant in all regions, the interaction effect of supply chain level (L) and demand process (P) is significant across all regions. This suggests the presence of the chaos-amplification phenomenon within each demand process. This finding is consistent with that of Hwarng and Xie (2008).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
