@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A real options approach to labour shifts planning under different service level targets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Workforce planning, under conditions of market uncertainty, is reviewed.Decisions regarding workforce shifts, targeting different service levels, are discussed.A real options model, tailored to the contextual need, is proposed.The optimal timing is considered as an important input for workforce shifts expansion.The preparation period for workforce training/adaptation is modelled.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in manpower planning,Uncertainty modelling,Investment analysis,Timing options,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Firms that experience uncertainty in demand as well as challenging service levels face, among other things, the problem of managing employee shift numbers. Decisions regarding shift numbers often involve significant expansions or reductions in capacity, in response to changes in demand. In this paper, we quantify the impact of treating shifts in workforce expansion as investments, while considering required service level improvements. The decision to increase shifts, whether by employing temporary workers or hiring permanent employees, is one that involves significant risks. Traditional theories typically consider reversible investments, and thus do not capture the idiosyncrasies involved in shift management, in which costs are not fully reversible. In our study, by using real options theory, we quantify managers’ ability to consider this irreversibility, aiming to enable them to make shift decisions under conditions of uncertainty with the maximum level of flexibility. Our model aims to help managers make more accurate decisions with regard to shift expansion under service level targets, and to defer commitment until future uncertainties can be at least partially resolved. Overall, our investigation contributes to studies on the time required to introduce labour shift changes, while keeping the value of service level improvements in mind.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper, we define a model that is intended for application in make-to-order manufacturing environments and “no inventory” businesses in which short lead times are desired. Nevertheless, given its generality, the model can also be used by service firms to estimate shift work volumes in accordance with expected service levels. We exclude the use of inventory, long lead times, or outsourcing, in order to buffer the negative impact of variability in demand, and focus instead on the mechanism through which shifts can be used to increase capacity. We also concentrate on the decisions that firms typically make in adding labour shifts to improve the service level.For the sake of generality, we employ the terminology: (1) ‘service level improvement value’, to quantify the impact on sales order fulfilment made by increasing the number of labour shifts, and (2) ‘service level improvement deferred value’, to quantify the impact of delays in labour shift changes on the improvement of service levels.The role played by the number of labour shifts in uncertain environments continues to evolve, meaning that greater emphasis on the timing of shifts changes is necessary. Moreover, due to legal and cost constraints, organisations cannot always rapidly engage and dismiss employees in response to demand volatility (Sillekens et al., 2011). In addition, today’s manufacturing jobs tend to involve more skilled work, carried out with increasingly sophisticated equipment, and thus require production workers to receive extensive introductory training programs, which count as irreversible costs. One way to deal with this trend is to anticipate when labour shifts will need to be changed, for which a ‘trigger moment’, or decision point is needed.Today’s companies work at much higher levels of uncertainty than in the past, facing either a range of possible outcomes or unbounded possible outcomes. In highly uncertain environments, the traditional methods of workforce shift planning are of little use, and new approaches are required. With this in mind, the present study addresses new challenges involved in the use of real options in workforce planning, and identifies possible future directions for extending approaches to multi-planning periods.In this study, we focus on two important questions: (1) How can a decision regarding shift increases or expansion delays be valued while considering service level requirements? (2) What is the decision point or trigger moment for applying a shift increase?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
