@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Formulations for a problem of petroleum transportation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study tactical models for a crude oil transportation problem by tankers.We did our work on the top of a previous paper found in the literature.We use 50 instances from the literature and propose 25 new harder ones.We propose a column generation-based heuristic.We improve the literature results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mixed Integer Programming,Transportation problem,Column generation-based heuristic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Oil tankers play a fundamental role in every offshore petroleum supply chain and due to its high price, it is essential to optimize its use. Since this optimization requires handling detailed operational aspects, complete optimization models are typically intractable. Thus, a usual approach is to solve a tactical level model prior to optimize the operational details. In this case, it is desirable that tactical models are as precise as possible to avoid too severe adjustments in the next optimization level. In this paper, we study tactical models for a crude oil transportation problem by tankers. We did our work on the top of a previous paper found in the literature. The previous model considers inventory capacities and discrete lot sizes to be transported, aiming to meet given demands over a finite time horizon. We compare several formulations for this model using 50 instances from the literature and proposing 25 new harder ones. A column generation-based heuristic is also proposed to find good feasible solutions with less computational burden than the heuristics of the commercial solver used.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Oil tankers play a fundamental role in every offshore petroleum supply chain. Its optimization is usually divided in three levels: strategic, tactical and operational. Strategic decisions deal with fleet sizing, facility location and capacity sizing. Tactical decisions deal with production and distribution planning, transportation mode selection, storage allocation and order picking strategies. Finally, operational decisions deal with shipment and vehicle dispatching (Ghiani, Laporte, & Musmanno, 2004). When dealing with a planning level, all decisions made in the previous levels are assumed to be known. Since each level considers more details than the previous ones, past decisions usually have to be adjusted. Hence, it is important to make both the strategic and tactical models as detailed as possible to guarantee low adjustments in the operational level.In this paper, we study a tactical optimization model for crude oil distribution by tankers. The problem consists of scheduling the shipments through routes linking platforms (offshore production sites) and terminals (onshore consumer sites). The objective is to ship the products from the platforms to supply the terminals with minimum transportation cost for a finite planning horizon. For each site, the inventory levels must lie between a lower and an upper bound to avoid the lack or excess of product. Also, for each site, the demand or the production is given for the whole planning horizon. The products are shipped only by oil tankers and we assume that the global capacity of the fleet is unlimited. For each transportation, one has to decide the route, the lot size and the delivery day. This problem has already been addressed in Rocha (2010) and Rocha, Grossmann, and Poggi de Aragão (2011).This paper has two aims. The first aim is to compare mathematical formulations for the transportation problem proposed in Rocha et al. (2011). Firstly, a basic formulation is given, where the inventory level for each day in each site is represented by a continuous variable and the shipments are represented by binary variables. This formulation is similar to many others found in the literature. We refer to Sawik (2011) for an overview of such papers. We also test several variations of the formulation proposed in Rocha et al. (2011), referred to as Knapsack Cascading. Lastly, we devise a new formulation that outperforms all previous ones when given to a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) solver.The second aim of this paper is to propose a column generation-based heuristic approach. We note that, for difficult instances, the commercial solver used is not capable of finding good feasible solutions at the beginning of the branch-and-bound algorithm tree. Finding a good feasible solution at the very beginning of the tree is crucial to reduce the search by cutting off nodes of such tree, increasing the probability of proving the optimality in a reasonable computational time.We did our work on the top of a previous paper found in the literature (Rocha et al., 2011). The instances used to test the formulations are those proposed by Rocha et al. Our paper shows a clear evolution concerning the results as the formulations are improved, leading to the generation of new and harder instances (based on the existent ones) to evaluate the potential of such formulations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work presented a modeling study for the oil transportation problem. Three classes of instances taken from the literature were used to test the formulations. Given the good results obtained, a new class was generated with harder instances.Six formulations were devised: the Natural Formulation (NF), the Basic Formulation (BF), the Knapsack Cascading Formulation (KC), the Rounded Knapsack Cascading Formulation (RKC), the Accumulated Rounded Cascading Formulation (ARC), and the Dantzig–Wolfe Master Formulation (DWM). The first five formulations were tested with the CPLEX branch-and-cut algorithm, and the best results found used theARCformulation and its variants. Without the CPLEX cuts, theDWMformulation achieved the best lower bounds, which motivated the development of a column generation-base heuristic.In comparison with the results reported by Rocha et al. (2011), the results obtained in this work show a good improvement. This achievement is due only to a better understanding of the problem, incorporated in the mathematical formulation, reducing the computational effort.Rounding the inventories improves the formulation only forNF, not being noticeable when applied inRKCandARC.The harder class of instances has been used to evaluate the ability of the best formulations to find good feasible solutions when the optimality could not be proved. In this case, theARCformulation achieved the best performance when allowing inventory capacity violation in the demand sites, but keeping the violation cost high enough to ensure that the cost of the optimal solution will not change. The column generation-based heuristic used for the harder class of instances found good feasible solutions in a small computational time. We showed that it is also possible to improve the quality of the feasible solutions found by this heuristic allowing inventory capacity violations.