@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact of productivity on cross-training configurations and optimal staffing decisions in hospitals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Optimal cross-training decision under stochastic demand and productivity changes.Centralized and decentralized decision making analyzed for three configurations.Beyond threshold productivity fewer nurses provide benefit.Chaining policy on average provides 1.20% cost savings over partial flexibility.Productivity moderates demand increase and optimal cross-training decisions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cross-training,Productivity,Chaining,Healthcare,Stochastic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cross-training of nursing staff has been used in hospitals to reduce labor cost, provide scheduling flexibility, and meet patient demand effectively. However, cross-trained nurses may not be as productive as regular nurses in carrying out their tasks because of a new work environment and unfamiliar protocols in the new unit. This leads to the research question: What is the impact of productivity on optimal staffing decisions (both regular and cross-trained) in a two-unit and multi-unit system. We investigate the effect of mean demand, cross-training cost, contract nurse cost, and productivity, on a two-unit, full-flexibility configuration and a three-unit, partial flexibility and chaining (minimal complete chain) configurations under centralized and decentralized decision making. Under centralized decision making, the optimal staffing and cross-training levels are determined simultaneously, while under decentralized decision making, the optimal staffing levels are determined without any knowledge of future cross-training programs. We use two-stage stochastic programming to derive closed form equations and determine the optimal number of cross-trained nurses for two units facing stochastic demand following general, continuous distributions. We find that there exists a productivity level (threshold) beyond which the optimal number of cross-trained nurses declines, as fewer cross-trained nurses are sufficient to obtain the benefit of staffing flexibility. When we account for productivity variations, chaining configuration provides on average 1.20% cost savings over partial flexibility configuration, while centralized decision making averages 1.13% cost savings over decentralized decision making.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) in their 2010–2020 employment projections estimated that there will be 1.2 million job openings for nurses by 2020 and Buerhaus, Auerbach, and Staiger (2009) found that the US nursing shortage is projected to grow to 265,000 registered nurses by 2025. Nursing shortages in US hospitals are typically alleviated using cross-trained nurses floating between units, and/or contract nurses hired from an external agency on an ad hoc basis (Hassmiller & Cozine, 2006). Wright and Bretthauer (2010) found a 16.3% reduction in labor costs by coordinating float pool, agency staff, and regular nurses. Gnanlet and Gilland (2009) analyzed the financial benefit in using two resource flexibilities (staffing flexibility and patient upgrades) under different types of decision making.These benefits vary based on the type and breadth of cross-training. The benefit of using various cross-training configurations, such as partial cross-training, chaining, cherry-picking, and total cross-training, has widely been evaluated in service and manufacturing applications (Brusco & Johns, 1998; Brusco, 2008; Easton, 2011; Hopp, Tekin, & Oyen, 2004; Iravani, Oyen, & Sims, 2005; Jordan & Graves, 1995). However, as cross-training breadth increases (number of additional skill sets a worker is trained for), cross-trained workers may be less efficient than specialists. Pinker and Shumsky (2000) analyze a system with specialist and flexible servers when there is a trade-off between the efficiency of the specialist and the quality of the flexible servers. Increasing flexibility (cross-training breadth) may have significant impact on productivity and costs (Campbell, 1999; Karuppan, 2006; Pinker, Lee, & Berman, 2010; Stratman, Roth, & Gilland, 2004). Schultz, McClain, and Thomas (2003) experimentally show the negative effects in worker productivity because of work interruptions when using flexible workers. Despite the potential benefits of cross-training, the changing work environment can create stress, tension, negative attitude towards floating, and dissatisfaction. These arise from the fact that cross-trained nurses are not familiar with the physical layout, unit culture, and work relationship with unit nurses. In some cases float nurses are not confident in their skills and are apprehensive in taking on the responsibility for a patient on a different unit (Dzuiba-Ellis, 2006). Karuppan (2006) shows that too much cross-training may not be good for complex tasks. Therefore, due to learning and forgetting effects (Shafer, Nembhard, & Uzumeri, 2001; Stratman et al., 2004), changes in unit layout, protocols, and support system in float unit (Dzuiba-Ellis, 2006), cross-trained staff are frequently not as effective as specialists.This raises the question of the impact of productivity on cross-training configurations: is more cross-training always better when productivity varies? Our paper focuses on the following research questions: what is the impact of productivity on optimal staffing levels (both regular and cross-trained) and the financial benefits for hospitals under different types of decision making? What is the marginal benefit between different cross-training configuration, when productivity of cross-trained nurses varies?We evaluate the impact of productivity of cross-trained nurses on different cross-training configurations in two-unit and multi-unit systems. We consider two units that have full flexibility (both units are cross-trained to the other unit), three units that have limited cross-training (partial flexibility – two units are cross-trained to one other unit) and three units that have a minimal complete chain (chaining – each unit is cross-trained to one other unit and no unit receives nurses from two other units) to study the impact of productivity under decentralized and centralized decision making. Hospitals with centralized decision making decide, simultaneously the number of regular nurses and cross-trained nurses; while hospitals with decentralized decision making first determines, the total staffing available for each unit, and later nursing managers for the floor decide on the number of nurses to cross-train.We formulate and analyze the three cross-training configurations, under two types of decision making, using two-stage stochastic programming, with recourse in the second stage. The first stage decision is the staffing (regular and/or cross-trained nurses) in each unit. We consider general, continuous demand distributions for two and three non-homogenous units, and prove convexity of the objective function with respect to staffing variables for the two-unit system. We derive closed form expressions for the optimal amount of cross-training under the two-units, full-flexibility configuration. When cost of cross-training is high, an increase in productivity leads to an increase in the amount of cross-training. When cost of cross-training is relatively low, however, there is a productivity level beyond which further increases in productivity reduce the amount of cross-training. We derive an analytical expression for the threshold productivity under the two units and numerically evaluate the existence of threshold productivity for other cross-training configurations. Our results show that chaining (complete minimal chain) provides on average 1.20% cost savings compared to partial flexibility (one less cross-training link) even after accounting for unit-level productivity differences. Centralized decision making provides on average 1.13% cost savings compared to decentralized decision making. Our contribution to the literature is twofold: (1) we determine the optimal number of regular and cross-trained staff by accounting for productivity changes; and (2) we evaluate the marginal benefit of different cross-training configurations when productivity varies.This paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the literature review and discusses how our model differs from the staffing and cross-training literature. Section 3 introduces and formulates our model of cross-training and scheduling decisions. The model is analyzed in Section 4 as a two-stage stochastic program with recourse. Section 5 shows numerical analysis and highlights its implications for management. Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses possible extensions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
