@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Judicial productivity, delay and efficiency: A Directional Distance Function (DDF) approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Time as a key factor in the judicial system since it represents a negative externality.The DDF is the most appropriate and most coherent methodology to measure judicial efficiency.A bootstrap procedure is applied to the DDF.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Judicial efficiency,Directional Distance Function (DDF),Bootstrap procedure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this paper is twofold. On the one hand, it provides a contribution to the debate on judicial efficiency by conducting an applied research on the Italian tax judiciary thanks to a database covering the activities of the Italian tax courts over a 3-year period (2009–2011). On the other hand, it also contributes to the methodological debate, as it compares results obtained with Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) and Directional Distance Function (DDF), two related non-parametric techniques which allow evaluating the efficiency of each observation as the radial distance from the efficient frontier defined by the best observations. While DEA has already been used to assess the mere technical efficiency of judicial systems, the DDF offers a valuable additional contribution, since it makes it possible to minimize the social cost of production of adjudication in the measurement. This feature makes it particularly attractive in those sectors in which production externalities may arise, such as judicial delays in the case investigated here. Additionally, the paper first applies the bootstrap to the DDF procedure in order to provide more robust estimates and to compare them with the DEA results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The judicial system is vital to society for a number of reasons. It is crucial in protecting formal rights and in supplying citizens with what they perceive as justice. It is pivotal in the interplay with the legislature and the executive in order to jointly concur in providing socially and economically valuable outcomes. Moreover, it plays a role in fostering sustainable development and in making the economy healthy by effectively enforcing private property rights and by sending potential investors credible signals about the reliability of the economic system. In the same vein, only if the judiciary is accountable to the law, does it make sense to exchange goods via contracts.Although these issues are hardly new, until a decade ago only a handful of theoretical and empirical contributions had dealt with them. More recently, attention has been paid to the actions of international organizations like the World Bank or the European Community, which have focused on the connection between the judiciary and sustainable development and, when needed, have fostered the reform of national judiciaries in order to make them effective.Thus, interest in the tools for efficiency assessment has gained momentum in the scholarly and political debate. Studies on the performance of judicial systems, on the optimal organization of courts, and on incentives governing the judges’ activities have become a flourishing portion of the scientific literature. Following this line of inquiry, our paper attempts to provide an efficiency evaluation of a specialized branch of the Italian judiciary, the tax courts system.Tax courts are specialized since they essentially provide a judicial forum in which individuals or firms can dispute allegations of tax deficiencies. Naturally, this activity is very much economically connoted, since the resolution of tax disputes is central in preserving the proper working of public finance. However, measuring court efficiency is here somewhat ancillary to the purpose of moving forward in the methodological debate as well. In fact, while ‘accidentally’ providing insights into the performance of the Italian tax judiciary, this paper discusses the issue of how to properly consider the effect of externality on efficiency.In specific production sectors, such as the judicial system, two dimensions affect overall performance. One is a strictly quantitative measure – in our case, the ability to settle the highest number of disputes for given levels of inputs. The other, more qualitative dimension, concerns how the output is supplied; in the judicial system, this measure regards the time needed to settle a dispute. In other words, what is usually known as judicial delay represents, from an economic point of view, a negative externality – i.e. a “bad” output. Indeed, this is a key pillar of efficiency assessment, central to making the system consistent. Long delays undermine the reliability of the judiciary and, in the long run, they have an impact on the demand for justice and on the attractiveness of an economic system (Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, Levine, & Maksimovic, 2000; Jappelli, Pagano, & Bianco, 2005; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, & Vishny 1997; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, & Vishny 1998; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, & Vishny 2000; Levine, 1999; Rajan & Zingales, 1995).This approach also provides methodological insights, as the standard models based on the Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) commonly used for efficiency assessment become ineffective when it comes to considering the emergence of a production externality, i.e. a bad output. Since the latter introduces a social cost of production, it must be properly taken into account when assessing overall efficiency. The DDF appears to be the most suitable tool for such an assessment, because it simultaneously considers the maximization of a good output for given inputs and the minimization of a bad output. By using bootstrap and distinct regression models, the paper tries to identify the main determinants of the efficiency scores calculated with the two approaches and to check for substantial differences.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the literature on judicial efficiency, with specific focus on how this concept affects different dimensions, both internal and external to courts. In Section 3, the DEA and DDF formulations computed in the paper are introduced and described from a methodological point of view, while Section 4 illustrates the organization of Italian tax courts. Section 5 discusses the empirical strategy and shows some preliminary results by highlighting the differences between calculations performed using the DEA and DDF methods. Section 6 further develops the empirical analysis and presents additional points for discussion. Finally, Section 7 provides some concluding remarks.A number of articles have recently dealt with the issue of how to assess the determinants of the ‘production of justice’, specifically focusing on judicial efficiency. The issue is complex, since it involves a quantitative and a qualitative dimension. The former is a familiar concept in production theory and it concerns how to provide the maximum quantity of output (decisions) for given inputs. The latter looks at how the output is produced and at whether there are negative side effects, like long waiting times, since the time needed to settle disputes can be central to determining the uncertainty and, in turn, the reliability of a judicial system. A number of studies have favored the latter perspective, focusing on the determinants of delays in reaching decisions assumed as a rough proxy for overall judicial efficiency, thus understood as the ability of the system to respond to the demand for justice (Binford, Greene, Schmidlkofer, Wilsey, & Taylor, 2007; Cauthen & Latzer, 2008; Lindquist, 2007). In order to gain insights into the production technology, other studies have analyzed the relationship between the productivity of judges and their educational background, which appears to be significant in explaining how quickly they reach a decision (Choi, Gulati, & Posner, 2010; Landes, Lessig, & Solimine, 1998; Ramseyer, 2012). In the same vein, Dimitrova-Grajzl, Grajzl, Sustersic, and Zajc (2012) look at the productivity of First Instance Courts in Slovenia, considering both the number of judges and the current caseload for the judicial production process, and they find that the former becomes insignificant while the latter remains significant. Beenstock and Haitovsky (2004) examine the Israeli courts, suggesting that increasing the number of judges is not an efficient strategy in order to boost their productivity. The two scholars show that there is a correlation between the judges’ workload pressure and their productivity; hence, according to their hypothesis, the number of cases completed decreases if the number of judges increases.A step forward towards a more reliable methodology to measure productive efficiency is represented by the adoption of the DEA approach, which allows comparing homogenous production units – in this case, courts – and calculates relative technical efficiency scores, thus providing a robust measure of productive efficiency of single courts.In studies on the judiciary, DEA has so far been performed by using a single-stage model (Chaparro & Jimenez, 1996; Kittelsen & Førsund, 1992; Lewin, Morey, & Cook, 1982) as well as a two-stage model (Deyneli, 2012; Marselli & Vannini, 2004; Schneider, 2005). In their pioneering article, Lewin et al. (1982) use the DEA methodology to analyze the efficiency of criminal courts and judicial districts in North Carolina, adopting the number of judgments and the number of cases pending for less than 90days as outputs, whereas the inputs considered are: caseload, number of district attorneys and staff, days of court held, number of misdemeanors within the caseload, and size of white population. The analysis identifies the inefficient judicial districts and the comparison group, which is made up of efficient and comparable districts, and its purpose is to suggest suitable corrective policies to improve the performance of the inefficient Decision Making Units (DMUs).Kittelsen and Førsund (1992) carry out a study on Norwegian district courts, using the number of judges and staff as input and the number of cases completed as output, while also taking judicial classification (civil, criminal) into account. The authors analyze 107 District Courts of First Instance over 4years (1983–1986), i.e. a bigger sample than in the abovementioned study by Lewin et al. (1982). Moreover, the analysis is shaped around seven categories of output (i.e. lawsuits are classified according to seven crime categories); therefore, more specific results can be collected. The authors argue that the observed inefficiency is due to economies of scale in the Norwegian judicial system, i.e. the far from optimal size of these courts.Chaparro and Jimenez (1996) measure the technical efficiency of the administrative sections of the Spanish Courts, using staff (labor force) as input and number of cases completed as output, also drawing a distinction between cases ending with a judgment or with other forms of resolution (e.g. settlement, withdrawal of suit, etc.).Focusing on Italy and adopting the two-stage model, Marselli and Vannini (2004) propose an analysis of the national Districts of the Court of Appeal. They use the judges’ workload and total number of cases (divided between pending and incoming) as inputs and the number of cases completed as output. Then, environmental variables are introduced into the second stage to study inefficiency. Schneider (2005) presents a work on German courts also based on a two-stage analysis. Here, the number of cases dealt with is the output, whereas the number of judges and their caseloads are the inputs. In the second stage, the author looks at the relationship between the productivity of the courts and the judges’ careers.A more recent study by Yeung and Azevedo (2011) applies the DEA technique to measure the efficiency of Brazilian courts, taking the number of judges and staff as input and the number of both first and second instance judgments as output. Using the same methodology, Deyneli (2012) analyzes the relationship between judicial efficiency and the salary of judges at the European level. In the first stage, the author chooses the number of judges and staff as input and the number of resolved cases as output, while in the next stage the judges’ salary, their training, and the number of courts are introduced as regressors.In their research on tax judiciary, Falavigna, Ippoliti, and Ramello (2014) refine the use of DEA in studying judicial efficiency by also introducing the bootstrap option, as suggested by Simar and Wilson (2007). The authors analyze the judges’ productivity and the impact of public policies aimed at reducing their numbers.The only case in which the DDF has been applied to the judiciary is a study by Peyrache and Zago (2012), which focuses on optimal court size in the Italian justice system. The authors consider a specific public policy aimed at improving court performance by merging different courts and suggest an alternative approach to the criteria adopted by the government. However, their assumption on the directional vector does not allow them to include the production of undesirable outputs, i.e. externalities affecting the overall balance of efficiency. Yet, as emphasized by the literature mentioned at the beginning of this section, the time needed by a court to settle a dispute is undoubtedly an important feature of judicial performance. Delays are among the key factors that have an impact on the overall cost of the judicial system, both perceived, as they increase the degree of uncertainty in obtaining justice, and real, as longer lawsuits imply higher costs for the parties (lawyers’ fees) and for the system (public expenditure and congestion of the judiciary). Hence, as previously argued, failing to consider this dimension can severely affect the overall efficiency evaluation, reducing its usefulness in relation to policy prescriptions.By contrast, the DDF formulation can be employed to pursue, at the same time, the maximization of targets and the minimization of the social cost of production, thus integrating the two issues at hand, i.e. efficiency in the production of justice and judicial delay. To the best of our knowledge, this perspective has not yet been adopted in assessing the judiciary, while it has been applied, for instance, to the study of airports. In this case, flight delays are an undesirable output affecting efficiency and the endorsement of DEA models without considering externalities can lead to wrong conclusions and have negative policy implications (Lozano & Gutiérrez, 2011; Pathomsiri, Haghani, Dresner, & Windle, 2008).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper adopts the Directional Distance Function to estimate judicial efficiency in the specific case of Italian tax courts and to compare the results thus obtained with those calculated using a standard DEA model. Additionally, the bootstrap is applied to the DDF procedure in order to provide more robust estimates to be compared with the DEA results (as for the DEA methodology, the bootstrap procedure is applied following Simar–Wilson, 2007).While standard DEA models, more commonly used to assess the performance of a production unit, identify efficiency by maximizing outputs while keeping inputs equal, other DEA formulations perform a similar calculation but, at the same time, they refine the measure by minimizing bad outputs. This is a crucial feature when there is an externality which, if not considered, would otherwise lead to severe consequences. In other words, while the standard DEA approach is a powerful tool for production theory when the only target is productivity, those specific formulations prove to be crucial when production also involves bad outputs, i.e. externalities. Hence, efficiency assessments cannot disregard the appropriate balance between good and bad outputs without making the overall exercise weak or even wrong. In the paper we use the DDF formulation as it seems to be the appropriate DEA approach given its specific features, especially the null-jointness property and the weak disposability assumption on bad outputsIn the case under investigation, the externality is given by judicial delay, which produces social costs for what concerns the certainty of justice as well as private and public expenditure to enforce laws. In turn, this can endogenously affect the demand for justice – since potential plaintiffs might be discouraged from pursuing cases, as well as the overall reliability of the judiciary.The empirical evidence obtained by applying a two-stage approach according to Simar and Wilson (2007) shows that in the field of justice “the sooner the better” is a desirable but not affordable option. Although judgment times cannot be close to zero – which is also in line with the null-jointness property of the DDF, there are however nuances concerning the organization of dispute resolution, since saving time at every stage does not always produce the expected results and, accordingly, the pursuit of technical efficiency along with externality minimization requires the fine-tuning of every single step. All the above is much more evident if the DDF model is used.In this regard, the article offers a new insight into the organization and productivity of a specialized portion of the Italian judiciary, but it also provides a case study to test how an objective analysis of delay is crucial when judicial efficiency is at stake. A simple production efficiency assessment sheds light on how well a court performs but not on how well it serves society. The DDF rectifies the calculation by solving the conundrum, thus making findings more reliable for policies pursuing productive efficiency.