@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of challenging goals and structured method on Six Sigma project performance: A mediated moderation analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Impact of goals and method in Six Sigma projects through knowledge created.Examined through the lens of goal theory and sociotechnical systems theory.The mediated-moderation model is tested using both the regression and path analysis.The study develops a deeper understanding of technical and social aspects of projects.Method and goal are able to compensate for one another to some degree.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Six Sigma,Goal theory,Sociotechnical systems theory,Structured method,Mediated moderation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Over the past few decades, Six Sigma has diffused to a wide array of organizations across the globe, which has been fueled by the reported financial benefits of Six Sigma. Implementing Six Sigma entails carrying out a series of Six Sigma projects that improve business processes. Scholars have investigated some mechanisms that influence project success, such as setting challenging goals and adhering to the Six Sigma method. However, these mechanisms have been studied in a piecemeal fashion and do not provide a deeper understanding of their interrelationships. Developing a deeper understanding of these mechanisms helps identify the contingency and boundary conditions that influence Six Sigma project execution. Drawing on Sociotechnical Systems theory, this research conceptualizes and empirically examines the interrelationships of the key mechanisms that influence project execution. Specifically, we examine the interrelationship between Six Sigma project goals (Social System), adherence to the Six Sigma method (Technical System), and knowledge creation. The analysis uses a mediation-moderation approach which helps empirically examine these relationships. The data come from a survey of 324 employees in 102 Six Sigma projects from two organizations. The findings show that project goals and the Six Sigma method can compensate for one another. It also suggests that adherence to the Six Sigma method becomes more beneficial for projects that create a lot of knowledge. Otherwise the method becomes less important. Prior research has not examined these contingencies and boundary conditions, which ultimately influence project success.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past few years Six Sigma has increased in popularity and diffused to organizations across the globe in a wide array of industries (Antony, 2004; Kwak & Anbari, 2006; Linderman, Schroeder, Zaheer, & Choo, 2003; McAdam, Hazlett, & Henderson, 2005; Schroeder, Linderman, Liedtke, & Choo, 2008). Motorola first coined the term Six Sigma in 1986 to characterize their approach to measure defects and improve quality. Since that time Six Sigma has evolved into a business improvement strategy to enhance customer satisfaction, process improvement, learning, creativity and profitability (Biedry, 2001; Byrne, Lubowe, & Blitz, 2007; Choo, Linderman, & Schroeder, 2007a; Parast, 2011; Wiklund & Wiklund, 2002; Zu, Fredendall, & Douglas, 2008). Motorola initially reported that they saved approximately $2.2 billion within four years of implementing Six Sigma. Motivated by this financial success, several organizations from the manufacturing, service, healthcare to government have also deployed Six Sigma (Antony, Frenie, Kumar, & Cho, 2007; Kwak & Anbari, 2006; Schroeder et al., 2008). Recently, scholars have empirically confirmed the organizational level benefits that firms gain from implementing Six Sigma (Shafer & Moeller, 2012; Swink & Jacobs, 2012).Six Sigma takes a project-based approach to improvement, where deployment involves carrying out a series of process improvement projects that employ the Six Sigma method. As a result, project performance becomes an important determinant for the successful implementation of Six Sigma (Arumugam, Antony, & Linderman, 2014; Nair, Malhotra, & Ahire, 2011; Parast, 2011; Ray & Das, 2010). Understanding how Six Sigma leads to organizational benefits necessitates understanding what leads to Six Sigma project performance. Although scholars have investigated the organizational benefits of Six Sigma, only a few studies have examined what leads to Six Sigma project performance. Scholars have theoretically identified key factors that lead to Six Sigma project success (e.g., Arumugam et al., 2014; Choo et al., 2007a; Linderman et al., 2003; McAdam & Lafferty, 2004; Schroeder et al., 2008; Soti, Shankar, & Kaushal, 2010), but only a few studies have empirically investigated these factors (e.g., Arumugam, Antony, & Kumar, 2013; Choo, Linderman, & Schroeder, 2007b; Linderman, Schroeder, Zaheer, & Choo, 2006; Nair et al., 2011). Since projects underpin the Six Sigma approach, it's critical to have a detailed understanding of the precise mechanisms that lead to project performance. That is, taking a more micro-level view of Six Sigma to examine the precise mechanisms that lead to project success can help better understand what ultimately leads to successful Six Sigma deployment at the organizational level (Arumugam et al., 2014; Parast, 2011).Scholars have drawn on behavioural theories (Braunscheidel, Hamister, Suresh, & Star, 2011), goal setting theory (Linderman et al., 2003), agency theory (Lloréns-Montes & Molina, 2006), and work motivation theory (Buch & Toelentino, 2006) to understand Six Sigma project success. While these theories provide useful concepts to understand project success, scholars have studied these concepts in a piecemeal fashion (Linderman et al., 2003; Lloréns-Montes & Molina, 2006; McAdam et al., 2005; Nonthaleerak & Henry, 2008; Schroeder et al., 2008). Scholars have not developed a coherent and overarching theory that underpins Six Sigma. Developing a comprehensive understanding of the contingencies and boundary conditions of projects will help understand the foundation to successfully deploying Six Sigma.This study aims to develop a deeper understanding of Six Sigma by taking a comprehensive approach to investigating Six Sigma Project execution. We examine the role of project goals, use of the Six Sigma method, and knowledge creation on project performance. The findings of this research reveal that the Six Sigma method (hereafter called Method), project goals and knowledge creation relate to one another in interesting ways that affect project performance. We draw on Sociotechnical Systems (STS) theory as an overarching theory to integrate these concepts, which helps understand how these concepts come together to enhance project performance. The results show that Method moderates the relationship of goals and knowledge on project performance. Drawing on Sociotechnical Systems theory, the results suggest that the use of the Six Sigma Method may be less efficient for projects with very challenging goals. By integrating these concepts and drawing on Sociotechnical Systems theory, we help understand the contingencies and boundary conditions where Six Sigma has the biggest impact on performance.We contribute to the literature in the following five ways. First, we empirically investigate the precise relationship of the Six Sigma project's goals, use of the Method, and knowledge creation on project performance. Prior research has taken a piecemeal approach to investigate these factors (Anand, Ward, & Tatikonda, 2010; Arumugam et al., 2013; Choo, 2011; Choo et al., 2007b; Linderman et al., 2006), but does not take a comprehensive approach to understand the mechanisms and contingencies related to these factors. Second, we draw on Sociotechnical Systems (STS) theory (Pasmore, 1988; Trist & Bamforth, 1951) as an overarching theory to clarify the relationship between project factors and contingencies that influence Six Sigma success. Sociotechnical Systems (STS) theory argues that the compatibility between the technical system and social system enhances performance. Our study investigates both the technical aspects (e.g. Six Sigma method) and social aspects (e.g., goal setting) of Six Sigma projects, which align with the Sociotechnical Systems perspective. More specifically, we combine the concepts from quality management, knowledge management, goal theory, and use Sociotechnical systems theory to explain how these concepts relate to one another to enhance project performance. This study provides empirical evidence how technical and social components of quality practices lead to learning and knowledge creation to impact performance.Third, we apply a robust analytical method to examine the effects of moderation and mediation within a single research model. Edwards and Lambert (2007) proposed this approach which incorporates both path analysis and regression analysis. This approach overcomes some of the methodological problems in studying moderation-mediation effects. By using this more rigorous approach, we better clarify the relationships of the factors that underpin Six Sigma project success. This analytical approach helps assess the direct, indirect, and total effects of challenging goals on project performance at low and high levels of the structured Method – which prior studies have not done. It offers new insights into contingencies and boundary conditions that affect project performance.Fourth, most research in goal-setting theory focuses on individual goals (Kleingeld, van Mierlo, & Arends, 2011; Locke & Latham, 1990). Limited research has examined goal setting in the context of projects (Kleingeld et al., 2011). This study contributes to our understanding of how goals relate to knowledge and influence project performance. By incorporating knowledge into our research, we can now understand the relationship between goals, knowledge, and the Method on Six Sigma project performance. Finally, by investigating the impact of the structured Method and challenging goals on knowledge, this study also contributes to an emerging body of literature that investigates the antecedents to learning in teams (Arumugam et al., 2013; Edmondson, 1999, Choo et al., 2007b).The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces Six Sigma, challenging goals, goal theoretic perspective of Six Sigma, and Sociotechnical System theory. Section 3 develops our research model and hypotheses. Section 4 explains the research methods, data collection, and measures. Section 5 presents analyses and results. Section 6 includes a discussion of theoretical and practical implications followed by the limitations of the research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
