@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A simulation optimization approach for a two-echelon inventory system with service level constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an algorithm for the constrained multi-echelon inventory problem.We provide an argument in favor of using simulation instead of analytical methods.We discuss a reasonable sequence of parameter settings in R&S part of our algorithm.Our algorithm needs less simulation effort to guarantee finding a feasible solution.Sometimes the chosen solution is closer to optimal than other existing algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Multi-echelon system,Service-level constraints,Feasibility check,Stochastic optimization,Simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present a simulation optimization algorithm for solving the two-echelon constrained inventory problem. The goal is to determine the optimal setting of stocking levels to minimize the total inventory investment costs while satisfying the expected response time targets for each field depot. The proposed algorithm is more adaptive than ordinary optimization algorithms, and can be applied to any multi-item multi-echelon inventory system, where the cost structure and service level function resemble what we assume. Empirical studies are performed to compare the efficiency of the proposed algorithms with other existing simulation algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
After-sales customer service is of special importance for industries like information systems, automobile, computer and aircraft manufacturing. The downtime of critical machines may incur high costs, and thus it is essential to respond quickly to the need for service parts replacement when a failure occurs. To reduce the response time, the service parts are usually supplied via a multi-echelon distribution network. In this paper, we study a two-echelon repairable inventory system, which consists of a central warehouse in the higher echelon and multiple field depots in the lower echelon. The manufacturer prefers to keep the expected response time to each customer below a threshold level. Further, as the service parts are very expensive and highly reliable, it is necessary that the manufacturer keeps the inventory level as low as possible at the central warehouse and field depots. Therefore, our goal is to find the best setting of stocking levels in the central warehouse and field depots to minimize the system-wide inventory investment cost, while maintaining an acceptable level of the expected response time across multiple field depots.There has been extensive work on multi-echelon inventory system problems in the literature. Most studies handle these problems in the presence of service level constraints by using the results of queueing theory (e.g., Caglar et al., 2004; Kutanoglu and Mahajan, 2009), and the assumption of independent replenishment leadtimes for depots is required for the approximated analytical model. However, these leadtimes are obviously not independent, since they depend on the same inventory situation at the warehouse (Wang et al., 2000). Graves (1985) showed that if the correlation between successive leadtimes is high, the errors in the approximation may lead to an incorrect stocking level decision. To avoid the implausible assumption of independence between depots, we use a simulation approach. Another advantage of using simulation is its ability to allow complex systems that capture reality far better than simplified analytical methods. Complicated features, such as allowing transhipment between depots, more general distributions (other than the exponential distribution), and time-varying or uncertain arrival rates can also easily be considered in the simulated system.In this paper, we present a simulation optimization framework that is an application of the Sample Average Approximation (SAA) technique combined with a cutting plane method and Ranking and Selection (R&S) procedures to solve the multi-echelon constrained inventory problem. Typical SAA methods generally use sample averages to determine the feasibility of any potentially good solution, where the sample size is arbitrarily chosen. However, if the service level estimates are very noisy and the sample size is not large enough, then it is very likely that highly suboptimal or infeasible solutions will be obtained (Cezik and L’Ecuyer, 2008). We take a different perspective to solving this problem, where a statistical guarantee of feasibility is desired. This is achieved by modifying a newly developed R&S procedure and embedding it into our algorithm. It is also important to notice that R&S procedures are recommended only when the number of solution designs is small, usually within the range of 2–500 (Kim and Nelson, 2006). This implies that they are very inefficient when applied to the whole solution space of the multi-echelon inventory problem. Therefore we propose applying an integer linear programming technique to the sample average version of the optimization problem to help identify a promising candidate solution, and then employing R&S to detect the feasibility of the single solution. The proposed algorithm can be viewed as one type of SAA technique which can handle stochastic constraints, where the sample size used in each iteration is random and determined by R&S procedures. One advantage of a variable-sample scheme is that the sample sizes can be increased as the algorithm proceeds, so that sampling effort is not wasted on the initial iterations of the algorithm (Homem-de-Mello, 2003).The proposed simulation approach can be applied to solve any optimization problem with a deterministic objective function and multiple stochastic constraints. It requires that the output response is normally distributed or is approximately so, and the constraint function appears to be convex, and the inventory problem considered in this work exactly fits this framework. Although our main concern in this paper is a service parts inventory system, the proposed algorithm can be extended to any multi-item multi-echelon inventory system, where the cost structure and the service level function resemble what we assume. The numerical results show that the proposed algorithm requires less simulation effort, but in the meanwhile increases the possibility of choosing a feasible solution (i.e., it can consistently achieve the service targets) at modest increase in inventory holding cost. In some cases, the selected solution is closer to the optimal one than those obtained via other existing algorithms. Although neither of the evaluated algorithms is always dominant in terms of all performance measures, the new combined approach is a useful addition to the toolbox for solving this class of problems. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide a brief overview of multi-echelon inventory problem, the R&S procedure, and the SAA technique. Section 3 presents a formulation of the two-echelon spare parts inventory problem in the presence of service level constraints along with its SAA version. In Section 3, we also propose a simulation optimization approach combining SAA and R&S, which can return a solution that is close to optimal and is feasible with some guarantee. In Section 3.5, we discuss an appropriate sequence of parameter settings in the R&S part of our algorithm to ensure that the sample size does not grow too fast as iteration goes on. An empirical evaluation is provided in Section 4, while the paper ends with some concluding remarks in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the paper we have presented a simulation optimization algorithm to solve the multi-echelon inventory problem subject to service level constraints. We also provide an argument in favor of using simulation instead of simplified analytical methods. The proposed approach can be considered as a careful combination of SAA and FCP, in which a reasonable sequence of tolerance levels is used. The experimental results show that our algorithm requires less simulation effort to guarantee choosing a feasible solution, and sometimes it is closer to choosing the optimal one than other existing algorithms. There are several possible directions of future research along this line of work. Since the simulation approach has the advantage of being flexible for use with real world problems, we could consider the transhipment of spare parts between field depots or extend this method to inventory problems with more than two echelons, which are difficult to handle with analytical methods (see, for instance, Dong et al. (2012)). Additional improvements in efficiency are also possible by employing variance reduction techniques (see, for instance, Tsai and Kuo (2012)). Another possible extension is to develop more efficient R&S procedures to determine the feasibility of candidate solutions (e.g., the multistage procedures; see Tsai and Chu (2012)), and therefore the sampling cost of our simulation optimization algorithm could be further reduced. The other possible extension is to develop a better stopping rule to consider the tradeoff between the optimality of the obtained solution and the required sample size.