@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new approach for sheet nesting problem using guided cuckoo search and pairwise clustering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new approach for solving sheet nesting problem is introduced.Cuckoo search combined with guided local search are used in this approach.Pairwise clustering is proposed to reduce the complexity of the nesting problem.The proposed approach provides significantly better results than the previous state of the art.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cutting,Nesting,No-fit polygon,Clustering,Cuckoo search,Guided local search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The nesting problem is commonly encountered in sheet metal, clothing and shoe-making industries. The nesting problem is a combinatorial optimization problem in which a given set of irregular polygons is required to be placed on a rectangular sheet. The objective is to minimize the length of the sheet while having all polygons inside the sheet without overlap. In this study, a methodology that hybridizes cuckoo search and guided local search optimization techniques is proposed.To reduce the complexity of the nesting problem, pairwise clustering is introduced to group congruent polygons together in pairs. Pairwise clustering is done automatically to discover matched features among multiple present polygons. Computational experiments show that the implementation is robust and also reasonably fast. The proposed approach provides significantly better results than the previous state of the art on a wide range of benchmark data instances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The nesting problem is a very common problem and its economic and ecological impact is obvious in many industrial environments such as glass, paper, leather, textile, and sheet metal industries. This problem is a class of the cutting and packing problems and it is a combinatorial optimization problem that deals with various types of polygons including irregular or non-convex polygons, convex polygons, as well as rectangles. The problem involves placing a set of input polygons on a rectangular sheet or container of a fixed width (W) and variable length (L) ensuring that there are no overlapping polygons or protruding from the container. Using the typology of Wäscher, Haußner, and Schumann (2007), this problem is categorized as the two-dimensional irregular open dimensional problem (ODP). The main objective is to maximize the container utilization or to minimize its length while accommodating all polygons inside. The high utilization is greatly desirable in industry so as to minimize the waste material since the material cost is often the major part of the production cost. Fig. 1shows an instance of the nesting problem with a feasible layout.The nesting problem has a few variations relying on rotations of polygons: (1) rotations of any angle are allowed, (2) a finite number of angles are allowed, and (3) no rotation is allowed. In some industries such as textile or clothing industry, there is a restriction on the shape rotation due to the fabric drawing patterns and intrinsic characteristics, so it is limited to 0° or 180°. The nesting problem is known to be NP-hard even without rotation (Nielsen & Odgaard, 2003).In the industrial environments this problem is usually tackled by experienced workers who build the nesting layout and this may be with the aid of CAD systems. The quality and utilization produced by those skilled workers is high when it is compared with that produced from the available commercial software packages. A list of semi-automatic commercial solutions is available in Hopper (2000) and Nielsen and Odgaard (2003). In this paper a new solution method for the nesting problem is presented. This is based on a hybrid algorithm that combines the cuckoo search and the guided local search optimization techniques. In order to reduce the search space for generating a good layout, pairwise clustering is introduced. Pairwise clustering aims to discover matched features of congruent polygons and group them in pairs. Experiments show that the proposed solution method is very efficient compared with other published methods and new better results of high quality have been attained for all benchmark data instances.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
