@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measuring technical and environmental efficiency in a state-contingent technology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Previous research on technical and environmental efficiency measurement is extended.A state-contingent framework is used to model risk.Data envelopment analysis is used to implement the model.The application focuses on a sample of Catalan arable crop farms.Technical and environmental efficiencies depend on crop growing conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Uncertainty modeling,State-contingent methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most developed countries support farming activities through policies that are tailored to meet their specific social, economic and environmental objectives. Economic and environmental efficiency have recently become relevant targets of most of these policies, whose sound implementation can be enhanced by monitoring farm performance from a multidimensional perspective. This paper proposes farm-level technical and environmental efficiency measures that recognize the stochastic conditions in which production takes place. A state-contingent framework is used to model production uncertainty. An implementable representation of the technology is developed using data envelopment analysis. The application focuses on a sample of Catalan arable crop farms. Results suggest that technical efficiency is slightly lower in bad than in good growing conditions. Nitrogen pollution can decrease substantially more under good than bad growing conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since its inception, the European Union’s (EU) Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) has been continuously reshaped. While its initial objectives were focused on farm income support, its policy scope has widened to embrace environmental preservation. Increasingly, CAP reform proposals have tried to align the CAP with environmental sustainability, higher efficiency, effectiveness, and equitability. Especially noteworthy is the proposal to redistribute CAP direct payments on the basis of both economic and environmental criteria. Implementing such a redistribution scheme requires empirically-based tools to measure farms’ success in achieving these goals. To measure farms’ success, one could use the firm performance tools available in the efficiency and productivity measurement literatures.These tools have been employed in a variety of contexts to evaluate firm and industry performance, as well as to provide quantitative guidelines for benchmarking firm performance. It seems apparent, therefore, that conceptually sound farm-level technical and environmental efficiency indices could be relevant in assisting any redistribution scheme. While maintenance of technical efficiency and technical growth are pre-requisites for economic sustainability, maintaining environmental efficiency is equally important for ensuring the environmental sustainability of agricultural activities.Traditional performance measures typically focus on the efficient use of conventional inputs and outputs. However, as the environmental sustainability of economic activities has become of increasing interest, firm-performance studies have evolved to include environmental concerns, and conventional efficiency measures have been extended to include both technical and environmental dimensions (Chung, Färe, & Grosskopf, 1997; Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, & Pasurka, 1989; Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, & Yaisawarng, 1993; Färe, Grosskopf, Noh, & Weber, 2005; Oude Lansink, 2003; Oude Lansink & Silva, 2003; Oude Lansink & van der Vlist, 2008; Reinhard, Lovell, & Thijssen, 1999; Wossink & Denaux, 2007).There has been considerable debate in the technical literature on the proper modeling of pollution in productive technologies. One standard approach assumes that pollution and production are complementary outputs so that pollution can be treated as though it were an input (De Koeijer, Wossink, Struik, & Renkema, 2002; Reinhard, Lovell, & Thijssen, 2000; Reinhard et al., 1999). This modeling assumption is based on the empirical observation that pollution and intended output are frequently positively correlated. While analytically convenient, it is a reduced-form specification that ignores both physical reality and the requirements of material balance (Pethig, 2006). A competing approach treats pollution as a weakly disposable or unintended output subject to null jointness (Färe et al., 1989; Piot-Lepetit & Vermersch, 1998; Wossink & Denaux, 2007). Førsund (2008) and Murty, Russell, and Levkoff (2012) have shown that this specification also suffers from a number of weaknesses including a failure to address material-balance concerns. Two recent path breaking proposals include Coelli, Lauwers, and Van Huylenbroeck (2007) and Murty et al. (2012). Coelli et al. (2007) propose to include pollution into conventional productive efficiency measures by using the materials balance concept. Murty et al. (2012) model polluting technologies as a composition of two technologies, an intended-output and a residual-generation technology.While the proper specification of technologies involving production of both intended and unintended outputs has been heavily debated, the incorporation of the fundamentally stochastic nature of production technologies into efficiency and performance analysis has received much less attention. As O’Donnell et al. (2010) have shown, both conceptually and through simulation analyses, efficiency studies rooted in the assumption of non-stochastic technology can be seriously biased.A well-recognized problem affecting the efficiency measurement of a sample of firms is to confound heterogeneity arising from incomplete or missing information with true inefficiency (Kumbhakar & Lovell, 2000). Missing or incomplete observations on ex-ante production are important sources of heterogeneity. An efficiency analysis that completely relies on ex-post realized output can confound poor outcomes arising from the stochastic nature of technology with truly inefficient outcomes that arise under more favorable conditions. Hence, deterministic DEA techniques applied to data from stochastic technologies could exhibit a downward bias.Given the relevance of uncertainty in many production activities, it is important to characterize intended and unintended output production technologies in the presence of production uncertainty. This is one of the main objectives of this research. Hence, this paper offers a new and relevant step in the construction of sustainability indicators at the firm level. Chambers and Quiggin (1998, 2000) propose a characterization of production uncertainty by representing the stochastic technology in terms of state-contingent input and output correspondences. This approach is based on the recognition that production under uncertainty can be represented by differentiating outputs and potentially inputs according to the state of nature in which they are realized. It, thus, has its foundations in Debreu (1959) and Arrow (1965). The state-contingent approach offers two main advantages over more traditional methods. First, it does not require a probabilistic assessment of output, and second, it is applicable independently of the risk preferences of the decision maker. To date, the state-contingent approach has seen relatively few empirical applications in production and efficiency analyses.O’Donnell and Griffiths (2006) estimate a state-contingent production function by identifying the different states of Nature in terms of rainfall. Chambers (2007) uses the state-contingent approach to estimate a farmer’s stochastic discount factor, derived from his or her production cost structure, that is appropriate to calculate a farmer’s willingness to pay for insurance. Chavas (2008) empirically estimates cost functions for stochastic technologies defined over two-dimensional state spaces. Shankar, O’Donnell, and Quiggin (2011) offer an alternative two-dimensional approach that relies on the estimation of risk-neutral probabilities to produce estimates of the underlying cost function. Chambers, Serra, and Stefanou (2013) use survey-elicited ex-ante outputs to develop an empirical representation of a state-contingent technology in an activity-analysis framework, and develop an empirical test of output-cubicality.Efficiency measurement requires comparing actual performance with optimal performance embedded in the production frontier. Since the production frontier is unknown, an empirical approximation is required. Empirically implementable representations of state-contingent production frontiers can be based either on the stochastic frontier or the data envelopment analysis (SFA, DEA, respectively).3We discard productivity indices as they do not measure efficiency, which is the objective of this research work.3The way that each approach accommodates for statistical noise and for flexibility in the production technology constitutes the main difference between the two methods and centers the debate on their relative merits (Fried, Lovell, & Schmidt, 2008). Efficiency measurement in SFA relies on the choice of a specific parametric functional form for the production frontier, as well as on specific distributional assumptions of the random noise and inefficiency error components. Since SFA empirical results are usually very sensitive to parametric assumptions, modeling biases and erroneous inferences are likely to appear.DEA techniques allow overcoming many of the SFA limitations. Their largely non-parametric nature involves relatively mild assumptions on the underlying production technology. The use of techniques robust to misspecification issues is especially important when underlying functional forms are unknown. While the production economics literature has provided a wide array of alternate functional forms characterizing production of intended outputs, standard forms adequate to characterize the environmental impacts of agriculture are not yet widely known or available. More traditional DEA methods are generally less well suited for separating the stochastic component of production from inefficiency from stochastic factors, despite substantial progress with stochastic DEA approaches (e.g. Fried, Lovell, Schmidt, & Yaisawarng, 2002; Simar & Wilson, 2007). But the stochastic frontier approach to efficiency measurement is also typically grounded on the assumption that the underlying technology is non-stochastic. In reality, however, many technologies are in fact stochastic, and agriculture is an important case in point. Even though it is well understood that bad production outcomes due to stochastic factors can be mistakenly construed as production inefficiencies, until recently relatively little attention has been devoted to incorporating the fundamentally stochastic nature of agricultural production into farm-level efficiency analyses.The state-contingent approach (Chambers & Quiggin, 1998, 2000) helps circumvent the main limitation of DEA by representing the stochastic technology in terms of state-contingent input and output correspondences that can be implemented using DEA methods. While the state-contingent techniques can also be implemented within the SFA framework (see, for example, Chavas, 2008; O’Donnell & Griffiths, 2006), the high correlation between outputs in different states of nature creates important collinearity issues (specially when the number of states of nature considered is above 2). To avoid both multicollinearity issues and specification biases related to SFA, a DEA approach is used in this article.This article develops and implements technical and environmental efficiency measures in a framework that recognizes the stochastic environment in which production takes place. The paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses technical and environmental efficiency measurement in a state-contingent framework and develops an empirically implementable representation of the technology using methods adapted from activity analysis and data envelopment analysis (DEA). We then discuss our data set. A particularly unique characteristic of the data set is that it was derived from a sample designed to elicit measures of both ex-ante (stochastic) intended outputs and unintended outputs (pollution and damage to human health). Once the data set is discussed, our empirical model is applied to it to develop efficiency measures in terms of ex-ante intended outputs and pollution control. The paper concludes with a discussion and analysis of the results and method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
