@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cost-effectiveness analysis for heterogeneous samples

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A two steps cost-effectiveness procedure for heterogeneous samples is proposed.Step 1: a Bayesian clustering to measure the sampling heterogeneity.Step 2: a Bayesian meta-analysis to account for the clustering structure of the data.Examples with real data are developed to illustrate the procedure.We show that to not consider sample heterogeneity could give misleading results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clustering,Cost-effectiveness,Decision processes,Meta-analysis,Heterogeneous samples,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The sampling information for the cost-effectiveness analysis typically comes from different health care centers, and, as far as we know, it is taken for granted that the distribution of the cost and the effectiveness does not vary across centers. We argue that this assumption is unrealistic, and prove that to not consider the sample heterogeneity will typically give misleading results. Consequently, a cost-effectiveness procedure for heterogeneous samples is here proposed.The proposed cost-effectiveness procedure consists of a Bayesian clustering to measure the sample heterogeneity, and a meta-analysis to account for the specific clustering structure of the data.Examples with real data illustrate this methodology for normal and lognormal models, and the results are compared with those we would obtain if homogeneity of the samples is assumed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cost-effectiveness analysis of medical treatments is a well-known statistical decision procedure for choosing between alternative medical treatments. It is based on the realistic assumption that the health care system financial resources are scarce, and, consequently, the health provider compares competitor treatments based not only on their effectiveness but also on their cost. In this setting, statistical inference is applied for estimating the unknown parameters of the cost and effectiveness distribution of the treatments involved, or testing the equality of them. The samples of the treatments on which the inference is based typically come from k ≥ 2 health care centers. As far as we know, in the cost-effectiveness analysis literature it is taken for granted that samples from different health care centers have the same distribution. However, we argue that this unrealistic assumption can give misleading results, and, consequently, we formulate the cost-effectiveness Bayesian procedure for heterogeneous samples. The formulation of the cost-effectiveness for the case where homogeneity of the samples can be accepted is obtained as a particular case of our more general formulation.For clarity, in the presentation we give a brief background of the cost-effectiveness problem, and the difficulties that are found when heterogeneity of the samples is present.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the cost-effectiveness analysis of medical treatments, the cost and effectiveness data are collected in different centers, and the analysis is usually carried out for the aggregate data as if the distribution of the cost and the effectiveness does not vary across centers. However, even when the medical treatment protocols are the same, a certain heterogeneity degree between treatment effectiveness across centers is always present, and something similar can be said about the cost. DuMouchel and Waternaux (1992) assert that even when the study protocols are similar (dosage, length of treatment, control treatment) there is often considerable variation between studies.To account for this variation, the standard cost-effectiveness methodology for homogeneous data has to be substantially modified to what we could call heterogenous cost-effectiveness analysis. The heterogenous cost-effectiveness analysis methodology presented in this paper involves a novel methodology with two different parts. A first part in which a Bayesian clustering procedure for detecting the heterogeneity is applied to the data, and a second part of Bayesian meta-analysis for taking into account the detected heterogeneity in the cost-effectiveness analysis.The examples we presented show that the optimal treatment under the homogeneity modeling does not necessarily coincide with that under the heterogeneity, so that to ignore the existing heterogeneity of the data yields suboptimal cost-effective treatments. Therefore, to apply the heterogenous cots-effectiveness analysis developed here is strongly recommended. We note that the heterogeneous cost-effectiveness analysis reproduces the cost-effectiveness analysis for homogenous data.The heterogeneous cost-effectiveness analysis presents difficulties related to the computation of the clusters when the number of hospitals is moderately large, a point that deserves research. On the other hand, covariates have already been incorporated in the cost-effectiveness analysis literature providing the interesting subgroup analysis (Moreno et al., 2013a; Moreno, Girón, Vázquez-Polo, and Negrín, 2012 and references therein). It is of interest to see how the heterogeneous cost-effectiveness analysis reacts with the incorporation of such a covariates.