@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reserve stock models: Deterioration and preventive replenishment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We rectify a classical reserve stock model by accounting for ordering costs.We model the effect of exponential deterioration on the reserve stock.We propose a preventive replenishment model to curb the effect of deterioration.We establish the convexity of the expected cost for all three models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reserve stock,Supply interruption,Deterioration,Preventive replenishment,Inventory control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Reserve stocks are needed in a wide spectrum of industries from strategic oil reserves to tactical (machine buffer) reserves in manufacturing. One important aspect under-looked in research is the effect of deterioration, where a reserve stock, held for a long time, may be depleted gradually due to factors such as spoilage, evaporation, and leakage. We consider the common framework of a reserve stock that is utilized only when a supply interruption occurs. Supply outage occurs randomly and infrequently, and its duration is random. During the down time the reserve is depleted by demand, diverted from its main supply. We develop optimal stocking policies, for a reserve stock which deteriorates exponentially. These policies balance typical economic costs of ordering, holding, and shortage, as well as additional costs of deterioration and preventive measures. Our main results are showing that (i) deterioration significantly increases cost (up to 5%) and (ii) a preventive replenishment policy, with periodic restocking, can offset some of these additional costs. One side contribution is refining a classical reserve stock model (Hansmann, 1962).An implicit assumption in traditional inventory control models is the continuity of supply, where the potential for supply interruption is not considered. Supply interruptions can occur due to internal random incidents such as machine breakdown, or due to external random events such as worker strikes or political crises. For example, the internal operations of a factory can be disrupted if an upstream operation fails in a tandem factory layout; thus, starving the downstream machine. External random occurrences of natural disasters, wars, or strikes could also disrupt the incoming flow of material and render simple inventory control techniques inapt. A natural remedy to such situations is to resort to multi-sourcing solutions or simply carry a strategic/operational reserve stock that hedges against such random occurrences of internal and external disruptions. However, another complicating factor that is usually ignored in research is the deterioration of reserve stock. Deterioration, which could take place to any reserve stock (strategic or operational) is more pronounced in situations where the storage amounts are large and storage periods are long. Frequent monitoring of such reserves is necessary to ensure that the quality and the quantity of these reserves are maintained during long storage periods and are available when needed.Strategic oil reserves are important examples of reserve stock where deterioration can be an important factor. For example, the US government carries a strategic petroleum reserve of about 725 million barrels of oil (about 75days of import protection) in underground salt caverns at five sites along the Gulf of Mexico. These strategic reserves are kept for long periods and used only in case of emergency disruptions. Europe, Asia, and India are also following US footsteps in developing their own strategic storage programs (Thomson, 2009). Giles, Joachim Koenig, Neihof, Shay, and Woodward (1991) discussed the deterioration of such reserves and find that refined products tend to have less storage stability than crude oils. This finding is corroborated by data from the Canadian Ministry of Agriculture showing that evaporation losses from gasoline storage tanks is up to 3.2% per summer month (FSHR, 2005).In manufacturing, large reserves are kept, and deterioration may occur. For example, according to the US Census Bureau, the total value of manufacturing inventories was around $610 billion in December 2011. Among these, there are $240 billion dollars in nondurable goods inventory (such as food, beverages, petroleum and chemical products), where deterioration may occur at a significant level.In this paper, we combine both factors of random disruption and reserve stock deterioration, to build new models, which are more sensible in such uncertain environments. Next we present a concise review of the literature.Our proposed research relates to three streams of research on inventory models with (i) supply disruption, (ii) deterioration, and (iii) corrective and preventive actions. In the following, we briefly review the research in these three streams.First, on supply disruption, a seminal work is that by Hansmann (1962). He determined the optimal stock level by minimizing a cost function composed of holding and shortage costs. Our models are based on Hansmann’s work. However, we account for additional costs related to ordering, deterioration and preventive replenishment. More recent works on supply disruption include Parlar and Berkin (1991) who analyzed an inventory control problem with exponentially distributed on (supplier available) and off (supplier unavailable) periods and deterministic demand, as we assume in this paper. In addition, Parlar (1997) introduced a model with random demand and random lead-time assuming that supply may be disrupted.Few papers model supply disruptions as they relate to strategic reserves. Oren and Hang Wan (1986) determined the optimal size, fill up, and drawdown rates for a strategic petroleum reserve under a variety of supply and demand conditions using numerical methods. They assumed random on/off supply and deterministic demand, as we do in this paper. However, our model is different. We consider the additional factor of reserve deterioration, which is not studied by Oren and Hang Wan (1986). Wu and Weil (2010) developed a reserve stock policy that minimizes the expected insecurity cost to the Chinese economy arising from uncertainty in the supply of imported oil using a dynamic programming model. Zhang and Li (2009) developed a multi-objective model for managing strategic reserves with the objectives of minimizing storage equipment investment, storage expenses material value loss, and shortage risk. Both papers by Zhang and Li (2009) and Wu and Weil (2010) also ignored deterioration, unlike our models in this paper.In a recent work, Shen, Dessouky, and Ordonez (2011) developed a model for a manufacturer of deteriorating medical supplies used as a strategic reserve by the US government in the event of a public health emergency. This work is closely related to this paper. However, Shen et al. (2011) research is different in two aspects (i) they took the point of view of the manufacturer, while we take the point of view of the reserve keeper (e.g. the government) and (ii) they assumed that deterioration occurs after a fixed lifetime, while we assume a random lifetime.Second, on deteriorating or perishable inventories, it has been early recognized that special control policies are needed for such systems (see Nahmias (1982) for background and literature review). Random lifetime perishables, such as the one we consider in this paper, include oil produce, meats, and many other food products. One main ingredient of the research in this direction is the probability distribution of lifetime. The exponential lifetime distribution, which we adopt, is the most popular in the literature. The first known work that considered deterioration is by Ghare and Schrader (1963) who adapted the classic economic order quantity model to items with exponentially distributed lifetime. Several papers extended the work of Ghare and Schrader (1963) to account for backordering and finite production capacity, e.g., Misra (1975), Shah (1977) and Mak (1982). Reviews on perishable inventory models are presented by Raafat (1991) and Goyal and Giri (2001). This literature dealt with perishable products within an inventory control setting under continuous demand. However, in this paper, we investigate the effect of deterioration on a reserve stock where demand occurs sporadically when supply is disrupted, which constitutes a novel contribution.Finally, inventory models on corrective actions typically relate to repair. For example, Chakrababorty, Giri, and Chaudhuri (2008) considered production lot sizing with machines which are prone to failure. They differentiated between corrective repair, which is done if a breakdown occurs during a production run, and preventive repair, which is done on a regular basis to minimize the chance of failure. Similar corrective/preventive repair models are considered by many other authors, e.g., Abboud (1997, 2001), Giri and Dohi (2005), and Lin and Gong (2006). Lin and Gong (2006) also considered exponentially deteriorated items, similar to our case. However, their focus was on a production lot sizing rather than on a reserve stock, like our case. A recent work which is more related to this paper is by Lee and Wu (2006) who considered statistical process control (SPC) based replenishment. This is shown to be effective in reducing the bullwhip effect in a two-echelon supply chain. The SPC based replenishment is somewhat similar to our proposed preventive replenishment scheme as both policies are triggered by signals related to the supply process. (In our work, the signal is the reserve stock dropping below a certain level.)The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present a base model adapted from Hansmann (1962) but with an additional variable ordering cost, which we found to have an important effect on the optimal stock level and the total cost. Our core contribution is in Section 3 where we account for the effect of exponential deterioration on the reserve stock. In Section 4, and in an effort to mitigate the effect of deterioration on reserve stock, we assume that a periodic preventive replenishment policy is adopted and we analyze the cost implications. In Section 5, we present numerical results and managerial insights. We find that neglecting deterioration can increase costs up to 5%, and that preventive replenishment can offset a significant part of these additional costs. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses future research.Consider a reserve stock which is held to hedge against supply interruption. Supply availability time, i.e. “up time”, X, is a random variable with mean 1/λ. Likewise, supply interruption time, i.e. “down time”, Y, is a random variable with mean 1/μ. We make the reasonable assumption that down time is short relative to up time, Y≪X. A base stock policy is adopted; a reserve stock of level S is kept at all times when supply is available. In the event of a supply interruption, this reserve stock is consumed at a known rate D per unit time. In the event that demand during the down time exceeds supply S, excess demand is lost. At the end of the supply interruption the reserve stock is replenished instantaneously up to S. The assumption of instantaneous replenishment is not restrictive. We adopt it to simplify the presentation. Fig. 1shows a typical profile of stock level over time. Table 1presents the notation used in this section and the remainder of the paper.The company’s cost structure entails (i) a holding cost proportional to average inventory with a unit cost of h $/unit/unit time, (ii) a shortage cost proportional to shortage time with a unit cost π $/unit time, and (iii) a variable ordering cost proportional to the amount ordered at the end of supply interruption with a unit cost c $/unit time. The variable ordering cost must be accounted for because excess demand during down time is lost. Previous literature (e.g. Hansmann, 1962) ignores this fact and neglects accounting for the ordering cost.Under the assumption that Y≪X, the drop in inventory during down time can be ignored. It follows that the expected holding cost per unit time is(1)Chu(S)=hS.We define a cycle as the time between two consecutive supply restorations. Then, with the assumption that Y≪X, the expected cycle duration is approximately 1/λ. The shortage cost depends on whether demand exceeds supply during down time. Therefore, the expected shortage cost per cycle isCs(S)=π∫S/D∞(y-S/D)fY(y)dy,where fY(y) is the probability density function (pdf) of Y. Applying the renewal reward theorem (Ross, 1983, p. 78), it follows that the shortage cost per unit time is(2)Csu(S)=πλ∫S/D∞(y-S/D)fY(y)dy.Similarly, the variable ordering cost depends on whether demand exceeds supply during down time, with an expected value per unit time given by(3)Cou(S)=cλ∫0S/DDyfY(y)dy+∫S/D∞SfY(y)dy.Combining (1)–(3), the total expected cost per unit time is(4)Cbu(S)=hS+πλ∫SD∞(y-S/D)fY(y)dy+cλ∫0SDDyfY(y)dy+∫SD∞SfY(y)dy.The company’s objective is to minimize expected cost. This can be written as(5)minS>0Cbu(S).The following theorem establishes that the expected cost, Cbu(S), is convex in the reserve level S, and gives a closed-form expression for the optimal reserve stock S∗.Theorem 1If (π−cD)λ>hD, then Cbu(S) is convex in S and the optimal reserve stock is(6)Sb∗=DFY-11-hD(π-cD)λ,where FY(·) is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of Y.See Appendix A.□The condition (π−cD)λ>hD in Theorem 1 indicates that the shortage cost per unit time exceeds the expected ordering and holding costs. This condition is unrestrictive and allows avoiding the trivial case where it is optimal not to carry reserve stock. Note finally, that when the unit ordering cost is negligible, c=0, our model reduces to that of Hansmann (1962), and the reserve stock in (6) reduces to(7)SbH=DFY-11-hDπλ,which is the expression derived by Hansmann (1962). When c≠0, utilizing the reserve stock in (6) instead of the optimal one in (7) (i.e. neglecting the unit ordering cost) can lead to a significant increase in the expected cost, as we show in Section 5.Considering the base model in Section 2, we now assume further that reserve stock is subject to deterioration at an exponential rate θ per unit time. That is, starting with the base stock S at the beginning of a cycle, the stock level decreases to Se−θXat the end of up-time, as a result of deterioration, and then decreases further, during down time, as a result of both demand and deterioration as shown in Fig. 2. To simplify the analysis, we make the reasonable assumption that stock is consumed only by demand during down time. This assumption is highly justified in practice where the deterioration rate, θ, is commonly small with respect to the demand rate, D.Following a similar analysis to that in Section 2, the expected holding cost per unit time is(8)Chu(S)=hλ∫0∞∫0xSe-θtdtfX(x)dx=hλ∫0∞(S/θ)(1-e-θx)fX(x)dx,where fX(·) is the pdf of X. In addition, under the assumption that the stock is consumed only by demand during down time, the expected shortage cost per unit time is(9)Csu(S)=πλ∫0∞∫Se-θxD∞y-Se-θxDfY(y)dyfX(x)dx,and the expected ordering cost is(10)Cou(S)=cλ∫0∞∫0Se-θxD(S-Se-θx+Dy)fY(y)dy+∫Se-θxD∞SfY(y)dyfX(x)dx.The expected cost per unit time is Cdu(S)=Chu(S)+Csu(S)+Cou(S). Analyzing Cdu(S), we establish in the following theorem that it is convex in S under nonrestrictive assumptions similar to those in Theorem 1. The theorem also gives a single-variable equation which can be solved with any search method to obtain the optimal reserve stock.Theorem 2If π−cD>(1/φ−1)(hD/θ+cD), then the expected cost under exponential deterioration is convex in the reserve level, S, and the optimal reserve stock,Sd∗, is the unique solution of(11)c+hθ(1-φ)-(π-cD)D∫0∞1-FYSe-θxDe-θxfX(x)dx=0,whereφ=E[e-θX]=∫0∞e-θxfX(x)dx.See Appendix A. □Note that the condition,π-cD>1φ-1hDθ+cD, in Theorem 2 is equivalent toπD>hθ1φ-1+cφ, which will hold if, with respect to the shortage cost per unit,πD, the deterioration rate, θ, is not too high (as it can be shown that limθ→∞θφ=∞), the unit holding cost, h, is not too high, and the unit ordering cost, c, is not too high. This condition allows avoiding trivial cases where no stock is carried. (It can be shown formally that without the condition the optimal reserve stock level is zero.)Our numerical experimentation (see Section 5) indicates that solving the first-order optimality condition in (11) and obtaining the optimal reserve levelSd∗is straightforward. Note that when there is no deterioration, θ=0, the first order conditions in (11) reduces to (6), the optimality condition of the base model in Section 2. Setting θ=0 in the left-hand-side of (11) and utilizing L’Hospital’s rule on the first term, we gethλ-(π-cD)D1-FYSD=0,which is equivalent to (6).Our numerical results (in Section 5) indicate that deterioration can significantly increase the cost of maintaining a reserve stock. In an effort to mitigate the effect of deterioration on cost, we add preventive replenishment, where the stock level is replenished periodically up to a base level. This avoids having low reserve when a sudden supply outage occurs. Specifically, during the up-time (when supply is available) the reserve stock level is replenished to S every trunits of time (e.g., tr=3months, tr=1quarter, tr=6months, tr=1year or tr=3years). This is equivalent to the well-known (s, S) policy, withs=Se-θtr; whenever the stock level drops down to s, the stock is replenished up to S. The profile of the stock level in this situation is shown in Fig. 3. The cost structure is the same as in Section 3 here, with an additional fixed replenishment cost due to the preventive replenishment. Specifically, we assume that each preventive replenishment costs kr.Finding an exact expression for the expected cost is complex, and leads to intractable results, as one needs to keep track of the residual (remaining) time in the last preventive replenishment cycle before supply interruption. In the following, we develop a simplified approximate model which works well under reasonable assumptions, and, as such it is highly suited for practical applications.Consider first the case where the up-time is large enough, i.e., X>tr. We define the average stock level during a replenishment cycle as(12)S¯=∫0trSe-θxdxtr=Sδ(tr),whereδ(tr)=(1-e-θtr)θtr. Our main approximating assumption here is to use the average stockS¯as a base stock, similar to the base model in Section 2, for determining the holding, ordering and shortage costs when X>tr. This is a reasonable assumption as, in practice, the deterioration rate, θ, is small. In the following, we derive an approximate formulation of the expected cost as a function ofS¯and tr. Once suitable values of these alternate decision variables are found, an equivalent “optimal” (s, S) policy is easily determined via the identitiesS=S¯/δ(tr)ands=Se-θtr. Then, the holding and shortage costs per unit time are respectivelyChu(S¯,tr)=hS¯andCsu(S¯,tr)=πλ∫S¯D∞y-S¯DfY(y)dy. The ordering cost (at the end of down time) requires a slight modification from Section 2, as the stock is assumed to drop fromS¯at the beginning of the down time and is replenished back to S at the end of this time. Therefore, the expected ordering cost per unit time isCou(S,s)=cλS¯δ(tr)-∫0S¯D(S¯-Dy)fY(y)dy.Finally, we add the expected ordering cost during the up-time. This has two components, a fixed cost component, equal tokrtrper unit time, and a variable cost component accounting for the variable cost of stock purchasing during the up time at the end of each replenishment cycle, equal tocS(1-e-θtr)=cS¯θtrper replenishment cycle. Therefore, the expected cost per unit time when X>tris approximately(13)Cdru(S¯,tr|X>tr)=hS¯+πλ∫S¯D∞y-S¯DfY(y)dy+cλS¯θλ+S¯δ(tr)-∫0S¯D(S¯-Dy)fY(y)dy+krtr.Next, consider the case where the up-time is not too large, i.e., X<tr. (As the up-time, X, fluctuates randomly, the same system can exhibit both regimes, X>trand X<tr.) Then, the system behaves similar to the deterioration model is Section 3, but with an upper bound on X, equal to tr. Then, replacing S byS¯δ(tr)and setting the upper bound on X to, the expected cost when X<tris given from 7, 9 and 10 as(14)Cdru(S¯,tr|X<tr)=hλ∫0trS¯θδ(tr)(1-e-θx)fX(x)dx+πλ∫0tr∫S¯e-θxδ(tr)D∞y-S¯e-θxδ(tr)DfY(y)dyfX(x)dx+cλ∫0tr∫0S¯e-θxδ(tr)DS¯δ(tr)-S¯e-θxδ(tr)+DyfY(y)dy+∫S¯e-θxδ(tr)D∞S¯δ(tr)fY(y)dyfX(x)dx.Finally, the expected cost under deterioration and preventive replenishment is given from (13) and (14) as(15)Cdru(S¯,tr)=Cdru(S¯,tr|X<tr)P{X<tr}+Cdru(S¯,tr|X>tr)P{X>tr}.While the expected cost in (15) appears convoluted at first sight, its analysis, however, is relatively easy, by building on our previous results, when the replenishment time tris exogenously determined. In practice, one would experiment with a handful of values of trand pick an appropriate one. This is especially plausible since our numerical analysis shows that the expected cost is not too sensitive to tr. When tris given, the expected cost in (15) is convex in the average stock levelS¯as indicated in the following theorem. This greatly simplifies the analysis, asS¯could be found with any numerical search technique.Theorem 3If π−cD>0, then the expected cost under exponential deterioration and preventive replenishment is convex in the average stock levelS¯.See Appendix A. □In this section, we present the results of our numerical study. Much of the numerical study is a sensitivity analysis from a base case. The base case has the following reasonable parameter values. The demand rate is D=18,000units/year. The cost structure entails a unit ordering cost c=$1/unit, a holding cost h=$0.15/unit/year, and a shortage cost π=$45,000/year. In the case of preventive replenishment (see Section 4), each preventive replenishment costs kr=$1. The supply process involves an up-time which is exponentially distributed with mean 1/λ=1year, and a down time which is also exponentially distributed with mean 1/μ=7/365year (1week). Finally, the deterioration rate is θ=5%.For the base model in Section 2, where deterioration is assumed away, the optimal reserve stock is given from (6), withFY-1(z)=-(1/λ)ln(1-z), asSb∗=795, with an expected costCbuSb∗=$516/year, given from (5). If instead of using our optimal base model, one utilizes Hansmann’s (1962), which ignores the variable ordering cost as discussed in Section 2, the resulting reserve stock level from (7) isSbH=971with a corresponding actual cost ofCbuSbH=$522/year. That is, the regret (penalty) from using Hansmann’s model instead of our optimal model is ΔH≈1%, whereΔH=CbuSbH-CbuSb∗/CbuSb∗. Table 2shows further comparison between our base model and Hansmann’s model. Each entry in Table 2 involves the variation of one or more parameters from the base case while keeping other parameters at their base values. The major insight from Table 2 is that the penalty from utilizing Hansmann’s model instead of our base model can be significant reaching 15%in some cases where the shortage cost is low, e.g. Case 9 in Table 2. Table 2 also indicates that Hansmann’s model always recommend a higher reserve stock,SbH, than the optimal one,Sb∗. Table 3shows similar results as Table 2 but with a longer up-time with a mean of 5years, and shows similar insights as Table 2. The penalty from using Hansmann’s model is significant (reaching 24% here) and this model recommends high reserve levels. Finally, by comparing Tables 2 and 3, we observe that the optimal reserve levels and their corresponding costs decrease with the duration of up-time, which is intuitive. (Note that when the up-time is infinite, no reserve stock is needed.) Case 4 with zero ordering cost shows that the model converges to Hansmann’s model when the unit ordering cost is ignored.Next, we analyze the effect of exponential deterioration on the reserve stock policy. For the base case given at the beginning of this section, the optimal reserve stock under deterioration is obtained by solving (11) asSd∗=730with a corresponding annual costCudSd∗=$554. If one ignores deterioration, and utilize the optimal reserve level of the base model,Sb∗=795, the actual annual cost isCudSb∗=$555. That is, the regret (penalty) from using the base model instead of the optimal deterioration model (Model 1) is Δb≈0.2%, whereΔb=CduSb∗-CduSd∗/CduSd∗. In this case, the penalty from ignoring deterioration Δb, is not too high, because the deterioration rate is somewhat small (at 5%) and the reserve level is not high. This is not always the case.Table 4shows several other cases where the penalty from ignoring deterioration, Δb, is high especially when the holding cost is low (e.g. Case 2 with Δb=1.3%) or the deterioration rate θ is high the penalty from ignoring deterioration (e.g. Case 11 with Δb=1.2%). Table 5shows similar results to Table 4 but with a longer up-time having a mean of 5years. This table reveals similar insights as Table 4, while highlighting the effect of deterioration at a more pronounced level. That is, deterioration is more damaging at longer up-times, which is intuitive, and this is even most severe for low holding cost (Case 2, with Δb=1.4%) and high deterioration (Case 10, with Δb=5%). The main insight from Tables 4 and 5 is that the penalty of ignoring deterioration can be significant, reaching 5%.In terms of the effect of deterioration on the reserve level, both Tables 4 and 5 indicate that the reserve level decreases with deterioration, asSd∗<Sb∗in all cases of these tables. This may seem counter-intuitive at first sight, as one expects the reserve stock to increase to avoid shortages resulting from the reserve stock depletion as a result of deterioration. However, keeping a high reserve stock will significantly increase the deterioration cost, as under exponential deterioration, the deterioration amount is a percent of the on-hand reserve. Therefore, the reserve stock is decreased to avoid excessive deterioration costs. A similar behavior is observed in the classic inventory control literature (e.g. Nahmias, 1982).Finally, we analyze Model 3 on preventive replenishment aimed at curbing the effect of deterioration. As discussed in Section 4, given the complexity of the problem, we analyze this model by optimizing over the average stock levelS¯for a set of practical values of the replenishment time, tr. Here, we choose values of one quarter, half-year, three quarters, and one year. For each one of these replenishment times, we solve forS¯, and we get the following results for the base case. For tr=0.25year (a quarter), the optimal average stock isS¯dr∗=514and the corresponding annual cost is $576. (This gives an order-up-to level ofSdr∗=S¯dr∗δ(tr)=192and a reorder pointsdr∗=Sdr∗e-θtr=190.) Since the (s, S) policy follows immediately from the optimal average stock,S¯, and given replenishment time, tr, we report only onS¯in the sequel. Recall that the expected cost with no preventive replenishment, from the model in Section 3, is $554, with a base-stock levelSd∗=730. This indicates that preventive replenishment is not useful in this case, with an “improvement” over Model 2,Δd=CduSd∗-CdruS¯dr∗CduSd∗, of around −4%. That is, the savings on shortage do not outweigh the additional ordering costs accrued from preventive replenishment. Similar analysis with different values of the replenishment time, namely, tr=0.5, 0.75 and 1year, was carried-out and a similar result is observed. Preventive replenishment is not useful in this case. This is perhaps due to the somewhat short up-time (1year, on average) and low shortage cost ($45,000). In an attempt to identify cases where preventive replenishment works, we systematically increase the shortage cost, π, up to $500,000. However, we continue to observe no significant improvement from preventive replenishment.We then increased the up-time to 5years, on average. This revealed significant improvements from preventive replenishment, as shown in Table 6, whereCud∗=CduSd∗andCudr∗=CdruS¯dr∗. The improvement ranges from 26%, when π=$100,000 and tr=2.5years, in Case 2 of Table 5, to 43%, when π=$500,000 and tr=2.5years, in Case 10 of Table 6. We point out, that in some situations, e.g., in airlines, when shortages of fuel or other supplies lead to grounding a plane, such high shortage costs are not unusual. We have observed such high shortage penalties at a US-based airline few years ago. The main insight here is that preventive replenishment is most useful for (i) infrequent supply interruption (ii) high deterioration and (iii) high shortage cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
