@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operational aircraft maintenance routing problem with remaining time consideration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new ILP model is proposed for the operational aircraft maintenance routing problem.Regular connection network is modified to keep track of remaining times of aircrafts.OAMRP is solved by using exact (B&B) and heuristic (compressed annealing) methods.Compressed annealing yields high quality routings within a reasonable amount of time.Aircraft initial conditions, airport capacities & booked maintenances are considered.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in airlines,Integer programming,Metaheuristics,Compressed annealing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aircraft maintenance routing problem is one of the most studied problems in the airline industry. Most of the studies focus on finding a unique rotation that will be repeated by each aircraft in the fleet with a certain lag. In practice, using a single rotation for the entire fleet is not applicable due to stochasticity and operational considerations in the airline industry. In this study, our aim is to develop a fast responsive methodology which provides maintenance feasible routes for each aircraft in the fleet over a weekly planning horizon with the objective of maximizing utilization of the total remaining flying time of fleet. For this purpose, we formulate an integer linear programming (ILP) model by modifying the connection network representation. The proposed model is solved by using branch-and-bound under different priority settings for variables to branch on. A heuristic method based on compressed annealing is applied to the same problem and a comparison of exact and heuristic methods are provided. The model and the heuristic method are extended to incorporate maintenance capacity constraints. Additionally, a rolling horizon based procedure is proposed to update the existing routes when some of the maintenance decisions are already fixed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Operations research methods are widely used for different planning and scheduling problems in the airline industry. These problems can be divided into four major classes: Flight scheduling, fleet assignment, aircraft maintenance routing and crew scheduling (Liang & Chaovalitwongse, 2009). In general terms, the flight scheduling problem deals with the scheduling of flights so that the market demand is met. The fleet assignment problem sorts out the assignments of plane types to fleets for predetermined flights with the aim of maximizing the total profit. While the crew scheduling problem tries to handle the assignments of crew members to each aircraft, the aircraft maintenance routing problem (AMRP), which is the main focus of this study, deals with arranging routes for the aircrafts so that the maintenance regulation constraints are not violated. Although all of these problems have been widely studied for the last few decades, the challenge remains due to high complexity of airline networks and increasing size of the industry.There are established thresholds for the number of consecutive flight days and the number of operating hours for an aircraft beyond which a predetermined maintenance check must take place. The maintenance checks have different frequencies and durations depending on their type (Clarke, Johnson, Nemhauser, & Zhu, 1997). A type A check is repeated every 65–125hours of flying or every week and it involves visual inspection of major systems for about eight hours. A type B check is repeated every 300–600hours of flying and lasts around 1–3days. Type C and type D checks are repeated once in every one to four years and they can be only completed at specialized hangars in about one month (Sriram & Haghani, 2003). AMRP addresses short-term maintenance requirements with shorter maintenance frequencies. The rationale behind this is that longer checks which are less frequent directly affect the fleet capacity; hence, such maintenance checks must be considered while solving the fleet assignment problem.Among the many studies that deal with AMRP, most of the early ones address the problem at a more tactical level, ignoring the operational level constraints and dynamic issues. In these studies, the aim is to find a unique rotation of flights (starting and ending at the same location) that will be repeated by each aircraft in the fleet with a certain lag. In practice, using a single rotation for the entire fleet may not be applicable due to stochasticity and operational considerations in the airline industry. Thus, AMRP has also been addressed at a more operational level to assign maintenance feasible flight sequences to each individual aircraft (identified by its tail number) of a given fleet by considering the current states of the aircrafts while covering all the flights in the flight schedule over a short-term planning horizon. A route is maintenance feasible when it contains no maintenance-free segment of flights whose accumulated duration is larger than the remaining time of the corresponding aircraft. The remaining time of an aircraft is defined as the difference between legal flying hour limit, which is the amount of time allowed between consecutive maintenance operations, and the accumulated flight duration since its last maintenance operation. In this study, our aim is to develop a fast and responsive methodology to solve the operational aircraft maintenance routing problem (OAMRP). For this purpose, a new ILP formulation is proposed for OAMPR. After attempting to solve this new model by exact methods, a heuristic method based on compressed annealing (CA) is proposed. The performance of the CA heuristic is validated with respect to exact solutions on a relatively small real-life flight network, then its applicability to larger networks is shown by using examples from the literature. Furthermore, the model and numerical examples are extended to incorporate capacity considerations for the maintenance facilities. Lastly, a rolling horizon based procedure is proposed to update the existing routes when some of the maintenance decisions are already fixed.The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we present a literature review about AMRP and discuss the contributions of our study. In Section 3, OAMRP model is described and the new ILP formulation is proposed. In Section 4, the exact and the heuristic methods are presented in detail. Section 5 covers the numerical experiments and the comparison of the proposed methods. In Section 6, maintenance capacity related extensions are presented and a rolling horizon based routing method is introduced along with a discussion about the applicability of the heuristic method in real life. In Section 7, concluding remarks are provided.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
