@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supply planning for processors of agricultural raw materials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Challenges arising from material use of renewable resources are explored and illustrated with the example linseed oil.A supply decision for a processor of agricultural goods is derived and a risk mitigation approach is developed.A two-stage stochastic program is presented as decision support.A numerical analysis is conducted with data for linseed oil and its results are interpreted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,OR in agriculture,Stochastic programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Material use of agricultural raw materials as renewable resources is gaining increasing importance in industrial production. Seasonal availability as well as variations in raw material quantity and quality and of market prices need to be considered in supply planning. This research depicts the planning problem of a processor of agricultural raw materials and illustrates it with data on the industrial use of linseed oil, which is a promising raw material for the production of new polymers. A two-stage stochastic program provides decision support and is applied to the example. The approach can be used for a variety of planning problems concerning the supply of agricultural raw materials.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The interest of industry in the use of renewable resources as input for production processes is growing, since raw material supply needs to depend less on fossil resources, at least in the long run. Resource efficiency can be achieved by selecting utilization paths that imply options for the use of by-products (Geldermann, 2012). These utilization paths will become more attractive if research improves value chains and reduces costs (Carus, Raschka, & Piotrowski, 2010). Today, knowledge about the limited availability of crude oil motivates the search for alternative raw materials that can be used to produce industrial goods. The European Commission has identified the market for bio-based products as highly innovative, and selected it as a lead market with high development potential. The establishment of this market should be beneficial for economy and society (European Union, 2011).Renewable resources are defined as “[…] all biomass produced from agriculture and forestry that is not used for food or animal feed" (FNR, 2010). Non-food applications of renewable resources for the production of physical goods are referred to as material use (Oertel, 2007, p. 5). Important agricultural raw materials for material use are, for example, sugar cane, corn, and potatoes, which supply sugar and starch. Fibre plants like flax, hemp and jute can be used for the production of cellulose, while soy, rapeseed, and linseed produce oils (Carus et al., 2010; Oertel, 2007).In many applications, bio-based products compete with conventional products based on petrochemicals. Therefore, the requirements demanded from industry and customers include competitive prices, constant quality, and availability throughout the year. However, supply markets face variations in prices, qualities and quantities of agricultural products (Lowe & Preckel, 2004). They can occur simultaneously both in short term and in long term periods. The respective varying data need to be handled as uncertain since information on the past values is often incomplete. Not all influencing factors are known and the probabilities of the values of some known influencing factors cannot be predicted for the future.Dealing with uncertain yield and quality of the harvest is one of the biggest challenges connected with using renewable resources in industry. Moreover, agricultural products can only be harvested at certain times of the year. In this paper, an approach and decision support for a processor of agricultural products are presented, where planning of supply requires taking several uncertainties as well as seasonal availability into account. The problem is illustrated by the example of linseed for which real-world data on quality, quantity, and price variation is available from Canada. Information on the industrial use of linseed and linseed oil is provided in Section 2.1. An exemplary supply planning situation of a processor, which requires a risk mitigation strategy, is introduced in Section 2.2. An overview of the present state of research is provided in Section 3. A risk mitigation strategy for the planning problem of the processor is outlined in Section 4.1 and a suitable optimization approach is selected in Section 4.2. Decision support based on stochastic programming is developed in Section 5. The selection of values for the numerical analysis of the example linseed is described in Section 6.1. In Section 6.2, computational results of the model are provided and discussed. A sensitivity analysis in Section 6.3 further illustrates the decision making behaviour of the model. Concluding suggestions for the decision maker are provided in Section 7.In 2012, the acreage used worldwide for linseed production was about 2485 Million hectares and about 92,535 tonnes linseed were harvested, with Canada being one of the main growing regions. In terms of resource efficiency, linseed is a very interesting plant because it is possible to utilize all its parts. The seeds contain a high percentage of valuable oil, which can be extracted. The by-product, linseed cake/meal, can be used as a livestock protein supplement with high nutritional value (Prentice & Storey, 1989). The fibres of linseed can be used in the pulp industry to replace wood fibres, which are added in the process of paper recycling and are used for the production of specialty papers. Further potential applications include geotextiles, bio-plastic composites, insulation, and use in the garment industry as new types of cottonized fibres, which can be used for spinning in traditional cotton mills (Flax Council of Canada, 2014; Rowland, 2002; Vromans, 2006). Shives, the non-fibre parts of the stem, compose 70–85 percent of the total weight of linseed straw. They can be used for the production of wood particle boards. Other options are to burn shives and use the energy for heating, use them as mulch or animal bedding, or as fillers in plastics (Rowland, 2002).Linseed is an interesting raw material due to the properties of its oil. Linseed oil has an extraordinary high content of linolenic acid which enables easy polymerization (Nykter, Kymalainen, Gates, & Sjoberg, 2006; Wool, 2005). Therefore, it is used in well-established applications e.g. as binders in coatings, cross-linked for powder coatings, as a basic resource for the production of linoleum. It does, however, also represent a promising starting point for the development of new plastic materials (Derksen, Kloster, & Cuperus, 1995; Henna, Andjelkovic, Kundu, & Larock, 2007; Meier, Metzger, & Schubert, 2007; Overeem et al., 1999; Rowland, 2002). Petrović (2008) and Zlatanic, Lava, Zhang, and Petrovic (2004) showed that polyurethanes produced from linseed oil had significantly different material properties than polyurethanes produced from other plant oils. In the example of polymer production, high and stable oil quality enables a stable process and reliable product quality. Quality requirements of the industrial customer need to be considered in the planning of all suppliers upstream the value chain.Uncertainties on the supply side start in the production of the primary raw material. Yield and quality of the harvest of an agricultural crop are influenced by many factors, e.g. seeding time, seeding rate, presence of nutrients within the soil, weather conditions, use of fertilizers and pesticides and harvest time. It is quite difficult to quantify the influence of these factors on the outcome of the harvest (Rowland, 2002).The Canadian Grain Research Laboratory publishes data on several quality indicators of harvest survey samples from 1990 to 2010 with mean values for the years 2000–2009. The content of linolenic acid varied between approximately 52.1 percent and 61 percent with a mean value of 56.9 percent. For the Canadian State of Manitoba, data on the content of linolenic acid and the linseed yield for the years 1990–2011 are depicted in Fig. 1. In this figure, the yield of agricultural production is indicated by land productivity, which is the output of crop per hectare. If multiplied with the cultivated area, it can be used as a measure for the harvest quantity.Presently, linseed is only traded over-the-counter. For the years 1990–2011, the prices of linseed in Manitoba are depicted in Fig. 2. Prices for linseed oil are highly correlated to the price of linseed. Data on prices for linseed oil are available from the information provider Oil World, but due to copyright restrictions, they cannot be published here (Oil World, 2011).Agricultural supply markets can be standardized to different extents. Basically, the processor can order raw materials from a commodity market, where standardized contracts are used, and the quality of goods is labelled in grades. In Canada, three different grades are established for linseed and traded over-the-counter, but the grading system does not consider the fatty acid distribution or the content of linolenic acid in the oil (Canadian Grain Commission, 2014) which is important for the quality of polymers as polyurethane (Zlatanic et al., 2004). Therefore, a processor that delivers oil for quality-sensitive applications like new biomaterials would not use this market and rather specify the iodine value or the content of linolenic acid in the supply contract.For a rough estimation, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development publishes Free Market Commodity Prices for selected commodities exported by developing economies on a monthly basis, as for wheat, cotton, tea, vegetable oilseeds and oils and cattle hides. However, prices for quality-sensitive renewable resources for the non-food industry might differ significantly. Because of the brisk development of new products and markets for renewable resources for industrial use, market mechanisms are not yet as elaborated as for the food industry, which has similar, albeit differing conditions. Therefore, in the following, the basic decision problem of processors of agricultural raw materials is being analysed.Irrespective of the selected plant species, variations of quality and quantity of raw materials and commodity market prices can have a big impact on the optimal supply quantity. For many agricultural plants, harvests are only possible at specific times of the year. Therefore, due to the seasonal availability of supply, deciding the acreage for contract farming is a tactical decision. Seasonal availability of agricultural raw materials requires tactical plans that provide flexibility.A processor can reduce the quality risk by engaging in contract farming, which is a well-known tool in agricultural production to diminish supply risk by sharing it (Eaton & Shepherd, 2001; Endres, Enderes, & Stoller, 2012). Minot (1986, p. 2) defines contract farming as “agricultural production carried out according to an agreement between farmers and a buyer, which places conditions on the production and marketing of the commodity”. The genetic disposition of the used linseed cultivar influences the composition of the oil (Nykter et al., 2006). Contract farming is advantageous for the production of agricultural raw materials of special quality, e.g. linseed with a high content of linolenic acid.For the investigation of a suitable optimization approach, an initial decision situation is analysed as depicted in Fig. 3. For the processor, a main source of supply is contract farming, i.e. an agreement with a farmer to use a fixed acreage x for the cultivation of the required crop. It is assumed that the price Pcper unit of harvested good from contract farming is agreed at the time t0 of signing the contract and the processor promises to buy the farmer's complete production quantity Qc= xα, where α indicates the uncertain land productivity. As agricultural production is subject to natural variability, there is a risk of insufficient supply quality and quantity Qc, which might cause shortages and reduce the profit. Relevant quality parameters are depicted in the vectorq¯. Their measurement units generally should not be important for the model but the fact of whether the quality of the raw material fulfils the given specification, i.e. ifq1¯≤q¯≤q2¯for all quality parameters inq¯and upper and lower limitsq1¯andq2¯. Products of lower quality or surplus production can be sold on the commodity market for an uncertain price Pcp. The processor needs to give special attention to the supply planning process, especially to the tactical decision on the acreage x for contract farming. The industrial customer's demand Qd, the sales price Popand the quality specificationq1¯,q2¯are assumed deterministic elements of the planning situation. Penalty costs Cpenoccur if P cannot satisfy the demand of C.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Rising demand for industrial products from renewable resources calls inter alia for decision support for industrial processors of agricultural raw material. While many decision models for supply planning or price settings in the food industry are available, the supply planning for emerging industrial bio-based products shows some peculiarities. Especially the tight quality requirements impede sourcing from commodity markets, but require contract farming with exclusive business partners. In this work, for the first time an approach is developed for supply planning considering requirements caused by material use of agricultural raw materials: seasonal availability, uncertain supply quality and quantity, and uncertain sales price. Using optional supply can be applied if an actor is willing to provide such for a risk premium. The developed decision support for processors of agricultural raw materials determines the optimal acreage for contract farming and the volume of optional supply for various situations.This work extends the body of knowledge as it demonstrates the suitability and flexibility of stochastic programming for modelling such problems. The stochastic program can easily be adapted to other decision situation as to model utilization of by-products, penalty costs proportional to the volume of shortage, a price escalation clause, the possibilities to split optional supply, the presence of different quality grades on the commodity market or diversification on the demand side (see Wiedenmann, 2013). A modification of the model has been implemented for a seed company (see Wiedenmann, 2013). This flexibility of the method is significant, especially compared to analytically derived closed-form expressions, which are commonly applied in inventory control.The data for linseed are based on values taken from the literature. The scarcity of past data and the difficulty of how to select the right data set is a problem that a processor or farmer might face if he engages in cultivation of linseed for the first time. He might receive information about past yields and harvest quality from experienced actors in the market, but their relevance for the actual planning is unknown. Therefore, the stability of results needs to be investigated by testing several probability distributions and by conducting a sensitivity analysis. Hence, selecting four sets of past price data to test the model results reflects a step in the decision process a new actor in the market would conduct. As the values of the stochastic solution for the four different cases show, in a real-world application, the decision maker should invest in gaining additional information about the market conditions that support the appropriate selection of probability distributions. Past data sets for quality and quantity of the farm level would provide more information about possible ranges of values for a single farmer, but are not available in the literature. Statements about the optimal decisions should only be given if company data of sufficient quality are available. For the four problem instances, the expected value of perfect information is calculated which emphasizes the possibility to gain additional profit by improving the information on uncertain parameters.As the material use of agricultural resources will gain increasing importance, the need for specific decision support for involved decision makers will increase as well. Due to seasonal availability of supply, the respective planning problems are tactical. Stochastic programming provides suitable modelling approaches for such problems if uncertain parameters can be described with probabilistic information. The effort for the development of decision support or its modification should be in a justifiable relation with the additional profit gained by using the approach. In principle, such models can be applied in many situations of stochastic uncertainty in which decisions, e.g. in purchasing, production, or sales, need to be made early in advance before the uncertainty is revealed. This type of situations is quite common in the context of using renewable resources, e.g. for the decision which crops to grow in the coming years on a short rotation coppice (see Ide, 2013). Decision support based on stochastic programming might also be suitable for other actors in a bio-based supply chain, who have to conduct tactical planning decisions, e.g. for farmers as well as for processors, producers and distributors downstream the supply chain. The approach of including options to mitigate risk might be applied in such cases as well.This research has been partially supported by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7-PEOPLE-2009-IRSES) under grant agreement no. 246647. Further support was received by the German Research Foundation (DFG), grant GRK 1703/1 for the Research Training Group ‘Resource Efficiency in Interorganizational Networks – Planning Methods to Utilize Renewable Resources’.