@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Relief inventory modelling with stochastic lead-time and demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Humanitarian logistics and commercial logistics differ in terms of planning and designing.Combined effects of two stochastic variables on inventory modelling are explored.The presence of a unique reorder level wherever the order quantity is insensitive to certain parameter values.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Earthquake,Humanitarian logistics,Uniform distribution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The irregular demand and communication network disruption that are characteristics of situations demanding humanitarian logistics, particularly after large-scale earthquakes, present a unique challenge for relief inventory modelling. However, there are few quantitative inventory models in humanitarian logistics, and assumptions inherent in commercial logistics naturally have little applicability to humanitarian logistics. This paper develops a humanitarian disaster relief inventory model that assumes a uniformly distributed function in both lead-time and demand parameters, which is appropriate considering the limited historical data on relief operation. Furthermore, this paper presents different combinations of lead-time and demand scenarios to demonstrate the variability of the model. This is followed by the discussion of a case study wherein the decision variables are evaluated and sensitivity analysis is performed. The results reveal the presence of a unique reorder level in the inventory wherever the order quantity is insensitive to some lead-time demand values, providing valuable direction for humanitarian relief planning efforts and future research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Logistics research and practice is usually applied in the context of commercial logistics (Kovacs & Spens, 2009). Recently, humanitarian logistics (HL) has gained attention because it is uniquely different from commercial logistics (CL), particularly in the context of appropriate relief delivery (e.g. water, medicine, and shelter) to disaster survivors. Thomas’s (2003) study on logistics management revealed that the progress of HL research is thirty years behind that of CL, and several studies have compared and contrasted the characteristics of the two (Balcik & Beamon, 2008; Van Wassenhove, 2006). However, as Whybark (2007) has argued, humanitarian logistics inventory management (HLIM) is thus far neither well researched nor clearly understood.Table 1summarizes the differences between commercial and humanitarian inventory management. Commercial logistics inventory management (CLIM) has the characteristics of a static network that focuses on product distribution and gathers historical data for demand forecasting. In contrast, HLIM, according to Whybark (2007), is a social inventory that aims to meet the needs of disaster survivors in a timely fashion; as such, its demand-forecasting model is based on quick assessment. For both CLIM and HLIM, lead-time (i.e., the interval between the placement of an order and the arrival of ordered goods) is a controlling factor for inventory modelling. However, HLIM’s driving forces, such as philanthropy and human suffering, necessitate a new model.According to an internal report of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), the current lead-time during earthquake relief operation is unacceptably long. The comparison of inventory management factors in Table 2shows that the Indian Ocean tsunami relief response lead-time was 30days; in comparison, the lead-times for the Pakistan and Yogyakarta earthquake relief operations were significantly reduced. As humanitarian relief lead-time is governed by several factors (e.g. transportation, order preparation, and order delivery), its duration cannot be predicted with certainty. In addition, it appears that logistic costs (e.g. items, transport, and storage cost) comprise a significant share of the total cost of earthquake relief operations. Therefore, these factors should inform the formulation of a new HLIM model for large-scale earthquake relief operations.There have been some key studies on disaster operations management; for example, Altay and Green (2006) provided a holistic review of mathematical models in disaster operations management until 2004, while Galindo and Batta (2013) developed an extensive review of recent progress in the field. Additionally, though many studies emphasize the importance of HLIM (Kovacs & Spens, 2009; Whybark, 2007), few studies have paid serious attention to quantitative inventory modelling in this context. Beamon and Kotleba (2006) addressed the problem of man-made emergencies (i.e., war and conflict) and demonstrated the problem of uncertain demand for static lead-time in times of war. In contrast, Ozbay and Ozguven (2007) analyzed the inventory problems associated with supporting hurricane survivors living in shelters. Having assumed that lead-time-demand (LTD) is a multivariate normally distributed parameter, they examined the effects of the changing parameter. However, according to Eppen and Martin (1988), ‘the normality assumption of lead-time-demand is unwarranted, in general, and this procedure can produce a probability of stocking out that is egregiously in error’.Another way of representing LTD is to discretely assess the properties of lead-time and demand. Most inventory models generally assume that either demand or lead-time is a deterministic parameter. While studies on stochastic demand with constant (or zero) lead-time are a popular research area in inventory modelling (Kouvelis & Li, 2008; Kouvelis & Tang, 2012; Moinzadeh & Nahmias, 1988), studies on stochastic lead-time with constant demand have attracted less attention (Bookbinder & Cakanyildirim, 1999; Zipkin, 1986). Therefore, there is a need to bridge these two research streams to analyze scenarios where the stochastic relief demand and the stochastic lead-time are combined to calculate the expected LTD (i.e., multiplication of lead-time and demand).With this in mind, we attempt to explore the difference between CLIM and HLIM, with a particular focus on large-scale earthquake disasters where both demand and lead-time are stochastic. In this study, we propose an HLIM model that combines decisions about the reorder level (RL), order quantity, the probability of a stock-out per cycle, the expected shortage cost per cycle, and the expected holding cost per cycle, with the assumption of stochastic lead-time and stochastic demand following a large-scale earthquake.Accordingly, this study presents a stochastic HLIM approach in a two-stage relief supply chain to support decision-making during the relief response phase. More specifically, the proposed approach uniquely includes two distinct features:1.We propose a model to estimate LTD, average inventory per cycle, and cycle length for stochastic demand and lead-time for HLIM.Due to the distinctive feature of relief logistics, we incorporate exigent orders and systematic orders to minimize expected relief shortage.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the model (Section 2), we introduce the formulations of the expected LTD, average on-hand inventory, and expected shortage per cycle, as well as an algorithm for a multi-product system. This section also determines the optimum order quantity using a first-order differential equation. Then, in the case study (Section 3), we discuss a numerical example, a parametric programming-based solution, and its analysis. Finally, in the conclusion (Section 4), we summarize the outcome and the contributions of this study.Fig. 1shows the two-stage system for distributing relief to disaster survivors; it is a simplification of a relief operation system used after the Tohoku earthquake in Japan. There are two stocking points: the first stocking point, located at the earthquake-affected area, is known as the point-of-distribution (POD); the second stocking point, located at an unaffected area, is called the central warehouse in this study.In this two-stage supply chain model, the POD follows a continuous inventory review strategy to place orders with the central warehouse. It is assumed that the central warehouse is capable of delivering the requested amount of relief. The on-hand inventory at POD at the time of order placement with the central warehouse is r1, which is expected to meet LTD. The placing of an order at the inventory level r1 is called a ‘systematic order’ in this case. If the inventory level at POD reaches the threshold limit before the arrival of the systematic order, the logistics manager places an additional order—called an ‘exigent order’—in an effort to prevent shortages. Thus, the threshold limit of the inventory at POD is r2. Then, without losing generality, the limit of the two inventory levels is 0⩽r2<r1.When lead-times are stochastic, orders may not be received in the same sequence as they were placed. This phenomenon, known as an ‘order crossover’, complicates analysis. To address this problem, it is usually assumed that orders do not cross in time (Hadley & Whitin, 1963; Kaplan, 1970; Tijms & Gronevevelt, 1984) or that not more than one order is outstanding at any point in time (Moinzadeh & Nahmias, 1988). This study assumes that an exigent order will arrive earlier than a systematic order; since an exigent order is delivered by an expediting service (e.g. by air or special convoy) rather than systematic services, it incurs a higher cost than that of a systematic order. The exigent supply source is assumed to be within the affected country or in a nearby country.In this study, we explore a strategy to prevent shortage without having to resort to an exigent order. For the purposes of analysis, we assume an infinite time horizon for the relief operation. While all relief operations in practice have a termination point, our model assumes the relief operation will continue as long as there is relief demand, and internally adjusts the decision variables as demand changes. It should be noted here that the assumption of infinite time horizon affects only the modelling formulation, since no order will be issued if there is no demand. The system properties and parameters are described below in detail.Three popular demand distribution types cited in relevant literature are uniform distribution, normal distribution, and Poisson distribution (Bagchi, Hayya, & Chu, 1986). Poisson distribution cannot demonstrate relief demand characteristics since it calculates the gap between two discrete events. In contrast, normal distribution (the most popular distribution function) requires a large amount of data to define its shape and parameters (kurtosis, mean, standard deviation, and asymmetry). As HL has limited historical data, normal distribution is not an appropriate analysis method for HLIM.The stochastic characteristics of disaster scenarios pose another modelling challenge. For example, large-scale earthquakes destroy houses and displace a large number of people, either for immediate shelter or for better future opportunities. These displaced people, who are called Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) (UN, 1995), may not visit the same POD every time when collecting relief. Hence, the variable nature of IDP visits to PODs represents the stochastic properties of relief demand at each POD.Additionally, data collection methods for demand forecasting also emphasize the stochastic properties of relief demand. Modern data collection technology is not readily available after large-scale earthquakes. While social networking media (e.g. Facebook, Google, and Twitter) are potentially viable alternative post-disaster data collection methods, traditional sources (e.g. electronic and print media, Rescuer) are still the major data suppliers in such scenarios (Sheu, 2007). The numerical values of collected data from different sources are not identical, but rather interval-based.With this in mind, a uniformly distributed relief demand parameter is the most reasonable model to apply to the lead-time after an earthquake disaster. It is clear that lead-time after a large-scale earthquake cannot be predicted quickly; however, uniform distribution parameters can be easily estimated by efficiently assessing local knowledge, since the parameters are subjective estimates of the minimum and maximum value.Furthermore, we assume both lead-time and demand are independent. This assumption, while unsuitable for CLIM, can be pertinent to HLIM. In CLIM, an order for a large quantity of product (i.e. a high-demand product) that requires longer manufacturing can result in mutually dependent lead-time and demand. However, this is not the case with HL. Aid organizations delivering disaster relief after large-scale earthquakes, such as the 2010 Haiti earthquake and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, did not experience relief shortages; sufficient relief commodities were available at point-of-entry or near the affected area. Though transportation management was a major challenge in these relief operations, this can be solved via proper transport planning. The major barrier to relief delivery in these disaster scenarios was transportation management, not relief availability (Holguín-Veras, Jaller, & Wachtendorf, 2012). Therefore, we assume that demand and lead-time are independent.Let t represent a random variable of systematic order lead-time, ranging between minimum value tmand maximum value tM. The expected value (E[t]) and variance (var(t)) of t are given by:(1)E[t]=12(tm+tM)(2)var(t)=112(tM-tm)2Assuming d is a random variable of daily demand, ranging between minimum value dmand maximum value dM, the expected value (E[d]) and variance (var(d)) of d are computed by using an equation similar to Eqs. (1) and (2).Since t and d are independent, the product of t and d can be easily computed. If D represents LTD (the product of t and d), then the expected value of D is given by:(3)E[D]=E[t]E[d]=(dM+dm)(tM+tm)4The variance of D is:(4)var(D)=var(t)E[d]2+var(d)E[t]2+var(t)var(d)(5)=11443(dM+dm)2(tM-tm)2+3(dM-dm)2(tM+tm)2+(tM-tm)2(dM-dm)2The properties of t, d, and D are summarized in Table 3. Now, we derive the joint probability distribution of D. According to Dougherty (1990, chap. 5), the joint probability of two independent random variables t and d is:(6)f(D)=pr(t=x1)pr(d=x2)Since t is uniformly distributed, the probability of occurrence of each point within the range generates an identical value. Hence, the probability of t=x1 is:(7)g(t)=pr(t=x1)=1tM-tmSimilarly, the probability of d=x2 is:(8)f(d)=pr(d=x2)=1dM-dmNow, substituting Eqs. (7) and (8) into Eq. (6), yields the probability distribution function (PDF) for D as Eq. (9):(9)f(D)=1(dM-dm)(tM-tm)We adopt the algorithm proposed by Glen, Leemis, and Drew (2004) to compute the cumulative probability of D. Since d and t exist within the ranges of (dm,dM) and (tm,tM) respectively, D is always positive. The joint PDF of d and t can be defined in a rectangular space. The rectangular space is divided in several regions, the number of which depends on the values of d and t. Each region in the rectangular space is bounded by two hyperbolas. The function of each hyperbola is td=D. For a given value of D, three different cases occur under the condition of dm≠0 and tm≠0: case 1 is dmtM<dMtm; case 2 is dmtM>dMtm; and case 3 is dmtM=dMtm. Case 1A is a special form of case 1, where dm≠0 and tm=0. We enumerate the region’s boundary for each case in Table 4.Next, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of D is computed by the integration over the regions in the rectangular space. Given D, the interval of integration consists of those values of d for which the curve td=D intersects the rectangle {(t,d): tm<t<tM, dm<d<dM}. The CDF of D comprises three distinct regions for cases 1 and 2. However, the CDF of D comprises two regions for cases 3 and 1A. Figs. 2–5illustrate the different integral limits of the regions of the four respective cases.The following sections of this paper explain case 1; the other cases can be computed analogously.In this section, we derive the expression for expected shortage per cycle. Here, t with PDF g(t) and d with PDF f(d) are continuously random, while the CDF of td=D for Fig. 2 is Eq. (10) (Glen et al., 2004).(10)h(D)=∫dmD/tm1dgDdf(d)ddforregion1∫D/tMD/tm1dgDdf(d)ddforregion2∫D/tMdM1dgDdf(d)ddforregion3The CDF of D represents the desired probability of not running out of stock in any one ordering cycle. Note that the systematic order is placed when the inventory at POD touches r1. In other words, it is expected that D is equal to or less than r1, D⩽r1. The PDF of t and d from Eq. (9) is plugged into Eq. (10). By adopting a similar approach to Wanke (2008), we expand Eq. (10) to estimate the cumulative probability of observed D to be equal to or less than r1, which is defined as service level (SL).(11)Region1:SL(r1)=∫dmr1/tm∫tmr1/df(D)dddt(12)=f(D)r1lnr1tmdm-r1+tmdm(13)Region2:SL(r1)=∫dmr1/tM∫tmtMf(D)dddt+∫r1/tMr1/tm∫tmr1/df(D)dddt(14)=f(D)((tM-tm)r1tM-dm+r1lntMtm-r1tM(tM-tm))(15)Region3:SL(r1)=∫dmr1/tM∫tmtMf(D)dddt+∫r1/tMdM∫tmr1/df(D)dddt(16)=f(D)(tM-tm)r1tM-dm+r1lndMtMr1-tmtM(dMtM-r1)Accordingly, the expected shortage per cycle (B) is given by (Silver, Pyke, & Peterson, 1998):(17)B(r)=∫r∝(D-r)f(D)d(D)=∫r∝Df(D)d(D)-r(1-SL(r))The double integration over each region in Fig. 2 is thereby calculated as follows:(18)Region1:B(r1)=∫r1/tmdM∫tmtMdtf(D)dddt+∫dmr1/tm∫r1/dtMdtf(D)dddt-r1(1-SL(r1))(19)Region2:B(r1)=∫r1,/tmdM∫tmtMdtf(D)dddt+∫r1/tMr1/tm∫r1/dtMdtf(D)dddt-r1(1-SL(r1))(20)Region3:B(r1)=∫r1/tMdM∫r1/dtMdtf(D)dddt-r1(1-SL(r1))(21)=12f(D)tM22dM2-r12tM2-r12lndMtMr1-r1(1-SL(r1))The post-integration outcomes are closed-form. We have only shown the integration result for region 3 in Eq. (21). The integration of the other two regions can be performed analogously.The expected inventory level in a cycle induces holding cost. Lau and Lau (2002) compared different methods for estimating the average inventory level in a (Q,r) system. While they assumed either a deterministic lead-time or a deterministic demand in all cases, we propose an approximation method to estimate the expected inventory levels for simultaneously stochastic lead-time and demand. The formulation of expected inventory level for each region, which largely depends on r1, is shown below. The expected inventory per cycle denotes the area under the inventory line in Fig. 6. As illustrated in Fig. 6, an order cycle consists of two distinct periods: L, the replenishment systematic order lead-time, and t0, the time between the arrival of one systematic order and the next.D appears to be equal to (or less than) r1, with a probability of (SL(r1)). Here, μ represents the average demand during t0, and is considered constant. The first two terms in Eq. (22) compute the average inventory during L, while the last two terms represent the average inventory during t0.(22)Region3oh(r1)=∫dmr1/tM∫tmtM(r1-dt)f(D)dddt+∫r1/tMdM∫tmr1/d(r1-dt)tf(D)dddt+∫dmdM∫tmtM(Q1-dt)22μf(D)dddt+∫dmdM∫tmtM(Q1-dt)r1μf(D)dddt(23)=f(D)r13tM2-dmr12(tM2-tm2)+dm26(tM3-tm3)-r136dM-dMr1tm22+dM2tm36+Q122μ-Q1E[D]μ+f(D)18μ((tM3-tm3)(dM3-dm3)+Q1r1μ-r1E[D]μThe average cycle length is also derived from Fig. 6. Let T denote the average length of a cycle.(24)T=∫dmr1/tM∫tmtMr1df(D)dddt+∫r1tMdM∫tmr1/dr1df(D)dddt+∫dmdM∫tmtMQ1-dtμf(D)dddt(25)=f(D)r1(tM-tm)lnr1tMdm-r12dM+r1tM-r1tmlntMdMr1+Q1μ-E(t))Here, we show that the cycle length for r1 lies in region 3. The expected inventory level and cycle lengths for r1 in regions 1 and 2 can be computed analogously.The expected cost in cycle TC (Q1,r1) comprises the systematic order’s fixed cost (f1), as well as variable cost (c1), the inventory holding cost (h), and the shortage cost (s). Then TC (Q1,r1) is given by:(26)TC(Q1,r1)=f1+c1Q1+hE[oh]+sE[B]To obtain the expected cost per unit time (ECUT), we must divide the total inventory cost by the expected cycle length.(27)ECUT(Q1,r1)=TC(Q1,r1)E[T]=f1+c1Q1+hE[oh]+sE[B]E[T]The partial derivative of the ECUT with respect to Q1 is:(28)δ(ECUT)δQ1=0Solving Eq. (28), (see the Appendix for details), the optimal Q1 is given by(29)Q1=1h(-(μ(A1+hA2-c1)+h(E[D]-r1))±((μ(A1+hA2-c1-2h(μA1A2-A3))+h(E[D]-r1))2)where(30)μ=E[d]=12(dM+dm)(31)A1=c1+hμ(r1-E[D])(32)A2=f(D)r1(tM-tm)lnr1tMdm-r12dM+r1tM-r1tmlndMtMr1-E[t](33)A3=μf1+hμ(f(D)r12tM2-dmr12tM2-tm2+dm26tM3-tm3-r136dM-dMr1tm22+dM2tm36+f(D)18tM3-tm3dM3-dm3-r1E[D])+μsE[B]In this section, we present an algorithm for a multi-commodity inventory model. This model may have the benefit of sharing the costs of joint replenishment (Goyal & Satir, 1989). If there is no ordering cost reduction after joint replenishment, each commodity inventory policy is planned using a single commodity inventory model. On the other hand, the multi-commodity model is more beneficial than the single commodity model if ordering cost is dependent on the number of orders placed in one period.Simmons (1972) proposed an algorithm for solving this problem. Let f1 be unfixed and variable from one scheduling period to the next, depending on the number of orders placed in each scheduling period. We further assume that f1 can be evaluated or approximated to a satisfactory degree for any given set of reorder quantities; that is, in functional notations, we assume that(34)f1=Z+z(Q1,Q2,…,Qn)where Z is constant for ordering cost, and z (Q1,…,Qn) represents either an ordinary analytical function or a convergent computational algorithm.In order to find the optimal (ri,Qi) policies in our joint setup cost environment, Eq. (34) must hold. The value of f1 that was used in Eq. (29) to calculate the optimal order quantities is recalculated after plugging the value of (ri,Qi) into Eq. (34). For an n-product problem, there are n- equations of Eq. (29) plus Eq. (34). Therefore, there is 5n+1 with simultaneous computation of Eqs. (30)–(33) This system would usually be impossible to solve directly. Therefore the algorithm for solving the model is:•Step 1: Set f1=Z.Step 2: Treat f1 as a constant per-order setup cost; solve the Eq. (29).Step 3: Use the functional relation Eq. (34) to calculate a new value of f1. If it is sufficiently close to the previous value, stop; otherwise return to step 2.Observe that for any finite positive reorder, quantities per period will be finite, and the per-order setup cost will lie somewhere between Z and z+Z. In particular, the value f1 increases after step (3) has been executed for the first time.This section presents a case study to illustrate the HLIM model. In order to verify this approach, the case study is small enough to be solved in its extensive form using open-source software (R Core Team, 2012), but detailed enough to be of interest as an illustration. Table 5summarizes the key parameters of the commodity.There is no methodology to measure the cost of human suffering due to relief shortage. The general assumption is that the shortage cost is higher than the expenditure per unit (Balcik & Beamon, 2008; Rawls & Turnquist, 2010). In this study, we assume that the shortage cost per unit is 50 times higher than the variable cost per unit. We select a low holding cost since it represents POD’s operational cost. (Note that, although these values are useful for exploratory purposes, they may not match the values that may be estimated by the ultimate users of the model.) After plugging the base data into the proposed model, the following results are obtained.Fig. 7shows the CDF of lead-time-demand that is derived from the combination of Eq. (12) (i.e. region 1), Eq. (14) (i.e. region 2) and Eq. (16) (i.e. region 3). The cumulative probability of LTD being in region 1 is less than 0.2. There is an 80% probability of shortage if the reorder level is 260 units. The upper boundary of region 2 is 500 units, and the cumulative probability of LTD being in region 2 is less than 0.5. The expected value of LTD is 600 units, and the cumulative probability that it lies in region 3 starts at 0.5 and increases rapidly as it ultimately approaches 1.00.Fig. 8reveals the relationship between expected shortage unit and reorder level. The expected shortage unit decreases linearly in regions 1 and 2 for the increment of reorder level. However, the expected shortage unit decreases exponentially in region 3.We then investigated the relative effect of cost parameters on order quantity through a series of sensitivity tests. With this aim, we modified each parameter and compared the resulting order quantity with that corresponding to a base case with specific parameter values. At the given level of holding cost and shortage cost, Fig. 9displays the change in order quantity with respect to different variable costs. The change in order quantity is equal to Eq. (35):(35)The change of order quantity=(Qa-Q0)100%Q0where Qais the new order quantity after parameter change and Q0 is the base order quantity calculated with base dataIncreasing the variable cost by 10% results in a decrease in order quantity; similarly, decreasing the variable cost by 10% or 20% results in an increase in order quantity. However, the order quantity is not sensitive to the variable cost at the reorder level of 661 units (near the expected D), and all the curves converge to zero. The convergence value is also influenced by the fixed cost of placing an order. Judging by these model dynamics, change of variable cost is possible in three cases: (1) if the relief goods are procured at a higher rate; (2) if donation goods are available in sufficient amounts; and (3) if transport companies offer discount rates for relief goods.In contrast, the order quantity changes exponentially with a change in shortage cost, as displayed in Fig. 10. The order quantity at a reorder level of 501 units increases by 1.02% when the shortage cost increases by 10%, and decreases by 1.03% when the shortage cost decrease by 10%. At a reorder level of 1,341 units, all the curves converge to zero. Fig. 11depicts the changes in order quantity caused by the changes in holding cost. The order quantity changes proportionately with the reorder level. It decreases by 4.6% when the holding cost increases by 10%, and increases by 5.4% when the holding cost decreases by 10%. Finally, Fig. 12describes the change in ECUT sensitivity with changing shortage cost. All the curves converge to zero at a reorder level of 1241 units.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Relief operation is a highly challenging, diverse, and extensive effort. Using a uniform distribution model for the two stochastic variables (i.e. lead-time and demand) allows us to compute the probability of relief shortage and its treatment. The model presented here is a stochastic optimization model based on a first-order differential equation that attempts to determine the order quantity and reorder level necessary to prevent relief disruption for a given probability, which would be most applicable to decision-makers who do not possess the actual LTD curve. The case study presented here addressed the stochastic nature of LTD relief demand in a practical context and revealed the model’s sensitivity to changes in the cost parameter.The research presented in this paper is the first step toward developing an inventory management system to be used after a large-scale disaster. The developed model has a key limitation, in that it was based on the assumption that there is no transport capacity constraint. It is recommended that further build upon this model by incorporating this constraint. The characteristic of the probability distribution for LTD, as revealed in the case study, also presents a new way to control exigent orders by keeping RL within region 1 or 2. Furthermore, since planning decisions driven solely by worst-case scenarios are seldom affordable, it is probably desirable to reach some middle ground between expected values and worst-case scenario plans (Rawls & Turnquist, 2010). For this reason, regions 1 and 2 will be explained through the inclusion of exigent orders to reduce the relief shortage.