@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An adaptive large neighborhood search algorithm for a selective and periodic inventory routing problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider a Selective Periodic Inventory Routing problem (SPIRP).It is about the logistics of waste vegetable oil collection for biodiesel production.Partial collection of waste oil accumulating at the source nodes is not permitted.A periodic weekly routing schedule is generated to satisfy production requirements.We propose an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search algorithm (ALNS) for SPIRP.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Routing,Periodic inventory routing,Adaptive large neighborhood search,Waste vegetable oil collection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study a selective and periodic inventory routing problem (SPIRP) and develop an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) algorithm for its solution. The problem concerns a biodiesel production facility collecting used vegetable oil from sources, such as restaurants, catering companies and hotels that produce waste vegetable oil in considerable amounts. The facility reuses the collected waste oil as raw material to produce biodiesel. It has to meet certain raw material requirements either from daily collection, or from its inventory, or by purchasing virgin oil. SPIRP involves decisions about which of the present source nodes to include in the collection program, and which periodic (weekly) routing schedule to repeat over an infinite planning horizon. The objective is to minimize the total collection, inventory and purchasing costs while meeting the raw material requirements and operational constraints. A single-commodity flow-based mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model was proposed for this problem in an earlier study. The model was solved with 25 source nodes on a 7-day cyclic planning horizon. In order to tackle larger instances, we develop an ALNS algorithm that is based on a rich neighborhood structure with 11 distinct moves tailored to this problem. We demonstrate the performance of the ALNS, and compare it with the MILP model on test instances containing up to 100 source nodes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recovery and reuse of waste and end-of-life products provide significant environmental and economic benefits. While collection of recoverable material from various sources can be costly for a processing facility, efficient management of the collection operations may determine the economic viability of the recovery operations. In this study, we consider a facility that collects and processes waste vegetable oil for reuse as raw material, and thus needs an effective periodic collection plan. The problem originates from a case study about a company in Istanbul that collects waste vegetable oil from different locations in the city to use the oil in biodiesel production (see Aksen, Kaya, Salman, & Akça (2012)). Biodiesel, which is a nontoxic and biodegradable alternative fuel, is a substitute for petroleum. While the cost of virgin oil used in the production of biodiesel constitutes 85% of the total production cost, Gonzalez, Encinar, and Rodriguez-Reinares (2005) and Predojević (2008) state that collecting and using waste vegetable oil costs almost half the price of using virgin vegetable oil.The source nodes for the collection of waste vegetable oil include businesses that consume cooking oil in large volumes, such as restaurants, hotels, and catering companies. The biodiesel production facility makes an agreement with the selected source nodes, and specifies on which days of the week their accumulated waste oil will be collected. Waste oil accumulates with different rates at source nodes, and the uncollected amount is stored until the next visit of the collection vehicle. The facility has a predetermined daily production plan, and needs to procure vegetable oil as raw material input to follow the plan. This creates the daily input requirements. The facility can satisfy its vegetable oil need either by waste vegetable oil collection or by purchasing virgin oil. The latter has a much higher marginal cost, but also the former has a significant cost due to vehicle dispatching, driver wages, fuel consumption, etc. Daily vehicle routes should be determined to realize the collection at the minimum possible cost. Moreover, the amount of waste vegetable oil accumulating at the source nodes might be more than the capacity of the collection vehicle or the amount needed for production. In such cases visiting all source nodes is not necessary or not feasible. Hence, the facility manager is faced with the following threefold decision problem:1.Which of the source nodes to select for the collection program.How many vehicles to use each day and which periodic (weekly) routing schedule to repeat over an infinite planning horizon so as to collect the waste oil accumulating at the selected source nodes.How much virgin oil to purchase on each day in order to meet the daily input requirements for biodiesel production.The objective is to minimize the total collection, inventory and purchasing costs while meeting the production requirements and operational constraints. This considerably hard routing and scheduling problem has been recently defined as the Selective and Periodic Inventory Routing Problem (SPIRP) by Aksen et al. (2012) in 2012. The authors introduced a commodity flow-based mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation, and solved it on a real-world case with 25 hospitals treated as waste oil accumulation nodes. In this paper, we propose an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) method to solve large size SPIRP instances in less than one hour. It includes a variety of move operators that are adapted to the characteristics of SPIRP. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first metaheuristic algorithm developed for SPIRP.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing literature on periodic, inventory, and selective vehicle routing problems. The definition of SPIRP and its MILP model are given in Section 3. In Section 4, we elaborate the proposed ALNS method. In Section 5, we test the ALNS method and compare its performance with that of the exact solution of the MILP model. Finally, Section 6 provides concluding remarks and discusses possible directions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study provides an effective heuristic solution method to a selective and periodic inventory routing problem (SPIRP) for a biodiesel production facility that collects waste vegetable oil. The facility manager has to decide which of the present source nodes to include in the collection program, which periodic routing schedule to repeat over an infinite horizon, how much virgin oil to purchase on each day, and how many vehicles to operate in which routes. The objective of the problem is to minimize the sum of collection, inventory holding, and purchasing costs subject to production requirements and operational constraints. SPIRP was first described in a recent paper by Aksen et al. (2012). The solution of the MILP model proposed for this problem does not supply acceptable gaps for problem instances with more than 30 source nodes in a reasonable time. Besides, the near optimal solutions found by that MILP model take quite long CPU times even for small size instances.We develop an adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) algorithm with a rich set of moves for this reverse logistics problem. The typical features of an ALNS are large neighborhoods, adaptive selection probabilities of the moves which are updated according to their past efficacy, a roulette-wheel selection mechanism, and a Simulated Annealing-based acceptance criterion for the neighborhood solutions. We solve 54 SPIRP instances of size 20 to 100 source nodes. For smaller instances with up to 40 nodes, we compare our results with those of the MILP model. When there are less than 30 source nodes, ALNS cannot perform as well as MILP. However, for 30 and above, ALNS outperforms MILP considerably. For instances with 40 source nodes, ALNS improves the MILP solutions by 15.4% on average. The maximum CPU time spent by ALNS is 240seconds, while the Cplex solution of the MILP model cannot match the respective ALNS solution even at the end of four hours.For larger instances which have 50–100 source nodes, we evaluate the performance of ALNS on the basis of the lower bounds obtained from three models, namely MILP, PLR and RR. PLR was proposed earlier as a partial relaxation model of the MILP. Among the three, the new relaxation without routing model RR yields the highest lower bounds in all 24 large size instances. Our proposed heuristic ALNS achieves an average worst-case optimality gap of 7.14% (4.15%) and an average solution time of 484seconds (40seconds) for large size (small size) instances.For future research, one could envisage a richer SPIRP that has such problem characteristics as a heterogeneous vehicle fleet, maximum tour durations, multiple collection facilities, and stochastic rates of waste oil accumulation at the source nodes.