@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Non-dominance and potential optimality for partial preference relations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper investigates the choice of single or several best objects.Decision maker’s preferences are expressed by means of binary relations.The notions of potential optimality and non-dominance are equivalent.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Binary preference relations,Non-dominated objects,Potentially optimal objects,Choosing l best objects,l-Non-dominated objects,Potentially l-optimal objects,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we obtain new theoretical results relating the notions of potential optimality and non-dominance without an assumption that a value function exists. In particular, we investigate a decision problem involving the choice of single or multiple best objects. Our results show that the notions of potential optimality and non-dominance are equivalent in a special case of preferences of the decision maker expressed by partial quasi-orders.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The mathematical concept and language of binary relations are widely used for the modeling of preferences of the decision maker (DM) in decision theory (Xu, 2007; Joseph, 2010). For example, criteria importance theory for multiple criteria decision aiding is based on such relations (Podinovski, 1993, 2002).Let X be a set that contains two or more elements. Generally the set X can be finite or infinite unless there is a specific assumption otherwise. We refer to the elements of X as objects. In decision making problems such elements can be decision variants, strategies, plans, and alternatives. Let the preferences of the DM be described by the non-strict preference relation R on the set X: we write xRy if the DM considers object x to be not less attractive than object y. We call objects x and y comparable if xRy or yRx is true, otherwise x and y are not comparable. Relation R is connected if any two elements of X are comparable. In particular, xRx must hold. If relation R is not connected it is called partial.The preference relation R induces the relations of strict preference P, indifference I and non-comparability N in the usual way: xPy holds if xRy but yRx is not true; xIy holds if we simultaneously have xRy and yRx; xNy holds if neither xRy nor yRx is true. The binary relation R is assumed to be a quasi-order (also commonly referred to as a weak order), i.e. R is a reflexive and transitive relation. It is easy to see that in this case P is a strict partial order (P is irreflexive and transitive) and I is an equivalence (I is reflexive, symmetric and transitive). Furthermore, P is transitive with respect to I: xPy and yIz imply xPz, and xIy and yPz also imply xPz (Sen, 1970).If it is required that we choose only one, the most preferred, object from the set X, we can take any optimal object defined as follows.Definition 1An object x∗ is called optimal, or greatest (with respect R), if x∗Rx holds for any object x∈X.Note that an optimal object always exists if the set X is finite and the quasi-order R is connected. If the quasi-order R is partial then an optimal object may not exist even if the set X is finite. In this case the notion of optimality is generalized to the notion of non-dominance.Definition 2An object x0 is called non-dominated, or maximal (with respect P), if there exists no object x∈X such that xPx0. Otherwise object x0 is dominated.Let X∗ and X0 denote the sets of all optimal and non-dominated objects respectively.The notion of potential optimality was originally introduced in the case of an additive value or utility function with unknown parameters (see, for example, Hazen, 1986; Athanassopoulos and Podinovski, 1997; Eum et al., 2001; Lee et al., 2001; Mateos et al., 2007). White (1980) proposed a definition of potential optimality based on the set of real-valued functions v, defined on X and monotone with respect to R (i.e. such that xRy implies v(x)⩾v(y) and xPy implies v(x)>v(y)), and proved that an object is potentially optimal if and only if it is non-dominated.In this paper we introduce the notion of potential optimality without the assumption that a value function exists. This development is motivated by two considerations.First, the existence of a value function requires the verification of a number of non-trivial assumptions about the preferences of the DM (see, e.g., Fishburn, 1970) the subtle meaning of which may be difficult to take into account in practical assessments. Note that in practice, value functions are often used without a proper theoretical justification. It is therefore of both theoretical and practical interest to see if the notion of potential optimality could be developed without assuming the existence of a value function and verifying the corresponding conditions.Second, the notion of a value function essentially assumes that there is a trade-off between any two criteria. There are, however, preference structures that disagree with the latter assumption. In particular, it is known that a lexicographic quasi-order on the vector space Renwith n⩾2 (or on a n-dimensional parallelepiped) is connected and extends the Pareto dominance relation, which is a partial quasi-order. However, the lexicographic quasi-order is inconsistent with, and therefore cannot be represented by, a value function (Fishburn, 1970).Furthermore, value functions do not adequately represent the preference structures underlying the well-known maxmin decision rule used in multi-criteria decision analysis (and in other areas such as game theory and military applications), and its variants. The maxmin decision rule and the corresponding function v(x) disregard any values of criteria except the worst ones. Because this is often deemed unsatisfactory in practical applications, several extensions to the maxmin decision rule, known as lexicographic approaches, have been proposed (see, e.g., Vilkas, 1986, Podinovski, 1975). For example, according to the leximin quasi-order (Vilkas, 1986), if the worst criterion values for the two objects are equal, the second worst values should be compared, and so on. The described quasi-order is appropriate when all criteria are of equal importance and higher values on some criteria cannot compensate for lower values on the other (Podinovski, 1975). Using above result from Fishburn (1970), it is straightforward to prove that the described preference structure cannot be represented by a value function.The use of preference relations of the lexicographic type has been reported in various applications of decision analysis. As noted, in such applications the existence of a value function cannot be assumed. Therefore the analysis of dominance and potential optimality presented in our paper which does not assume the existence of a value function is not only theoretically interesting but also practically relevant.The aim of this paper is threefold. First, we introduce a general definition of potential optimality, without an assumption of existence of any value function. Second, we prove the above result of White (1980) for this general case. Third, we extend the notion of potential optimality to the problems of selecting a predetermined number of objects (Podinovski, 2010).This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the basic definition of potential optimality for the problem of choosing a single best object and prove our fundamental result. In Section 3 we give definitions and present theoretical results for the case of choosing l best objects. In Section 4 we consider the notion of potential optimality for such problem. The conclusion in Section 5 summarizes the main results of this paper. All proofs are given in Appendix A.Following (Sen, 1970; Ozernoy and Gaft, 1978) we say that a quasi-order R′ is a (consistent) extension of a quasi-order R, or that R is a sub-relation of R′, if the following is true: R′⊃R, I′⊇I, P′⊇P (note that the first embedding implies the second).According to the known theorem of Szpilrajn (1930), any partial quasi-order R on X can be extended to a connected quasi-order R′. LetRbe the class (set) of all connected quasi-orders on X that extend R, andRbe some class (non-empty subset ofR)of such connected quasi-orders.Definition 3An object x∗ is potentially optimal for the classRif there exists a connected quasi-order R′∈Rwith respect to which x∗ is optimal(∃R′∈R:x∗R′x,∀x∈X).An object x∗ is potentially optimal if it is potentially optimal for the classR(∃R′∈R:x∗R′x,∀x∈X).Each potentially optimal for the classRobject is non-dominated:XR⊆X0.If the classRis a proper subset ofR(that is,R⊆RandR≠R, denoted asR⊂R)then the embeddingXR⊆X0may be strict (that is,XR⊂X0)so that some non-dominated objects may not be potentially optimal. An example of this may be found in Insua and French (1991).Theorem 2Any non-dominated object is potentially optimal: X0⊆XR.Taking into account Theorems 1 and 2 we obtain.Theorem 3An object is non-dominated if and only if it is potentially optimal: X0=XR.Assume that X has four objects x, y, z, u and the strict partial order P is defined by the graph shown in Fig. 1. The quasi-order R is the union of P and I, where I is the identity relation. In this example two objects x and y are non-dominated: X0={x,y}. Fig. 2shows all possible connected quasi-orders that are consistent extensions of R. (Only the transitive skeletons of these relations are shown: the arcs that can be recovered from transitivity, such as the arc from x to z for the R2 and the arc from y to z for the R11, are not shown.) Fig. 2 shows that two objects x and y are potentially optimal XR={x,y}. Therefore, X0=XR.In this section we briefly summarize some basic definitions and results related to the choice of l best objects from the finite set X of all objects (Podinovski, 2010). These results are used in our further development in the next sections.Let ∣X∣=n, that is, the number of objects in X is n, and assume that n>l>1. Let L be the set of all subsets of X each of which consists exactly of l objects of X. The set L is finite, and|L|=Cnl. We shall refer to the elements of L as collections. We use notation A={a1,…,al} and B={b1,…,bl} to identify collections.Let Π be the set of all permutations of the set {1,…,l}. For any collection A={a1,…,al}, a permutation π∈Π defines the ordered set π(A)=〈aπ(1),…,aπ(l)〉. A non-strict preference relation (quasi-order) Rlon the set of collections L is defined as follows: ARlB holds if and only if there exist two permutations π, σ∈Π such that aπ(i)Rbσ(i), i=1,…,l. (The motivation of this definition of relation Rlwas discussed in Podinovski (2010).)Definition 5Collection A∗∈L is optimal if A∗ is the greatest element of L with respect to quasi-order Rl, i.e. for any collection A∈L we have A∗RlA.Collection A∈L is non-dominated with respect to quasi-order Rlif A is the maximal element of L with respect to the strict partial order Plinduced by the quasi-order Rl, i.e. for no collection A∈L we have APlA∗.Define L∗ and L0 the sets of optimal and non-dominated collections of L, respectively. The set L0 is not empty (Podinovski, 2010).Definition 7An object x∗ is called l-optimal if the number of objects x∈X for which x∗Rx does not hold is strictly less than l.An object x0 is called l-non-dominated if the number of objects x∈X for which xPx0 holds is strictly less than l. Otherwise object x0 is called l-dominated.As shown in Podinovski (2010), if a collection is l-optimal then it is l-non-dominated. An optimal (non-dominated) collection can contain only l-optimal (respectively, l-non-dominated) objects.If a quasi-order R is connected then the quasi-order Rlis partial but there exists an optimal collection (Podinovski, 2010). This observation motivates the following new definitions.Definition 9CollectionA^is potentially optimal for the classRif there exists anR¯∈Rsuch thatA^is an optimal collection(∃R¯∈R:A^R¯lA,∀A∈L).CollectionA^is potentially optimal, if it is potentially optimal for the classR(∃R¯∈R:A^R¯lA,∀A∈L).An objectaˆis potentially l-optimal for the classR, if there existsR¯∈Rsuch thataˆis l-optimal.An objectaˆis potentially l-optimal if it is potentially optimal for the classR.The following statements hold.Theorem 4Any potentially l-optimal for the classRobject is l-non-dominated.Any l-non-dominated object is potentially l-optimal.Taking into account Theorems 4 and 5 we obtain.Theorem 6An object is l-non-dominated if and only if it is l-potentially optimal.The following statement reveals the composition of potentially optimal collections.Theorem 7A potentially optimal for the classRcollection may contain only potentially l-optimal for the classRobjects. Similarly, a potentially optimal collection may contain only potentially l-optimal objects.In Example 1 for l=2 we have three l-non-dominated objects x, y and u. Fig. 2 shows that all these three objects are potentially l-optimal. (Note that object u is l-optimal for R10 and R11.) However, the fourth object z is not potentially l-optimal.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
