@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Portfolio optimization under loss aversion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Conditional mean of most unfavorable outcomes given they fall under the critical return level.Properties of the proposed risk measure.Methodology for portfolio selection with loss aversion.Study of the dissimilarities between the proposed model and classical ones.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Portfolio optimization,Loss aversion,Mean-Risk model,Utility functions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present an integrated methodological approach for selecting portfolios. The proposed methodology is focused on incorporation of investor’s preferences in the Mean-Risk framework. We propose a risk measure calculated with the downside part of the portfolio return distribution which, we argue, captures better the practical behavior of the loss-averse investor. We establish its properties, study the link with stochastic dominance criteria, point out the relations with Conditional Value at Risk and Lower Partial Moment of first order, and give the explicit formula for the case of scenario-based portfolio optimization. The proposed methodology involves two stages: firstly, the investment opportunity set (efficient frontier) is determined, and secondly, one single preferred efficient portfolio is selected, namely the one having the highest Expected Utility value. Three classes of utility functions with loss aversion corresponding to three types of investors are considered. The empirical study is targeted on assessing the differences between the efficient frontier of the proposed model and the classical Mean-Variance, Mean-CVaR and Mean-LPM1 frontiers. We firstly analyze the loss of welfare incurred by using another model instead of the proposed one and measure the corresponding gain/loss of utility. Secondly, we assess how much the portfolios really differ in terms of their compositions using a dissimilarity index based on the 1-norm. We describe and interpret the optimal solutions obtained and emphasize the role and influence of loss aversion parameters values and of constraints. Three types of constraints are studied: no short selling allowed, a certain degree of diversification imposed, and short selling allowed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Beginning with the seminal work of Markowitz (1952), the Mean-Variance model has been the main paradigm for the portfolio selection. To account for the obvious asymmetric nature of risk, there are a number of proposals, such as Roy’s (1952) safety first technique that was decisive for the wide recognition of the fact that only downside risk is relevant for the investor. Markovitz (1959) proposes two semi-variance measures computed only with the returns below the expected return, respectively below a given target return, also discussed in Markowitz (2012). The research on downside risk measures continued with the development of the Lower Partial Moment (LPM) introduced by Bawa (1975) and Fishburn (1977) and further developed and analyzed by Bawa and Lindenberg (1977), Harlow and Rao (1989), Grootveld and Hallerbach (1999), just to name a few. But nowadays, the financial industry uses extensively quantile-based risk measures as risk management tools, especially the Value at Risk (VaR), see for example Jorion (1997) and Dowd (1998). The ease and intuitiveness of VaR are counterbalanced by its mathematical properties and difficulties in numerical optimization. The Conditional Value at Risk was introduced by Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000) and has been defined for general distributions in Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002). It is a coherent measure of risk in the sense of Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, and Heath (1999), see Pflug (2000), Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) and also Acerbi and Tasche (2002) and Stoyanov, Racheva-Iotova, Rachev, and Fabozzi (2010). Given its qualities, CVaR is a source of further developments, see for example Pavlikov and Uryasev (2014).The alternative approach traditionally used in modeling the portfolio selection problem is the Expected Utility Theory (EUT) developed by Von Neumann, Morgenstern, and Princeton (1947). EUT is based on the axiomatic model of risk-averse preferences. Empirical evidence suggesting that inconsistencies may occur in EUT framework can be found in the papers of Camerer (2001), Starmer (2000), Hershey and Schoemaker (1985) and Rabin (2000). A distinct class of models of choice between random variables closely connected to EUT is the Stochastic Dominance (SD) rules, see Levy’s survey (1992). As opposed to the Mean-Risk framework where each random variable is described by two scalars, SD provides a different approach: random variables are compared by pointwise comparison of functions constructed from their distribution functions. The tractability of models based on SD has been of a permanent concern, see the advances achieved in Dentcheva and Ruszczynski (2006), Roman, Darby-Dowman, and Mitra (2006), Fábián, Mitra, and Roman (2011), just to name a few.In their papers from 1979 and 1992, Kahneman and Tversky present evidence that the decisions of actual investors depart not only from the assumed rationality of EUT, but also from the Mean-Variance model in many ways. They show that investors are loss averse: they consider the deviations of their terminal wealth as gains and losses starting from a reference level θ , and they react differently to gains than to losses. There is a variety of reasons triggered by real-life constraints explaining how one ends up having a critical level of potential losses, see for example Borgonovo and Gatti (2013) who investigated the consequences of including covenant breach in the risk analysis of large industrial projects, and provided an objective view on their effect and significance. There are many papers dealing with loss aversion: Benartzi and Thaler (1995) and Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) use numerical techniques to solve the portfolio problem of loss averse investors, Gomes (2005) provides an exact solution in a model with two states of the world, Berkelaar, Kouwenberg, and Post (2004) extend these results toward closed form solutions assuming a complete markets setting, Lien (2001) studies the implications of loss aversion for futures hedging, Zakamouline and Koekebakker (2009) show that a decision maker exhibits more than loss aversion, Fortin and Hlouskova (2011) and Best, Grauer, Hlouskova, and Zhang (2014) study the asset allocation for the particular case of linear loss-averse investor.Our goal is to propose an alternative methodology for defining, measuring and optimizing risk that addresses some of the conceptual shortcomings of the Mean-Riskframework such as the disregard of investor’s attitude toward risk and implicit assumption of neutrality to loss aversion. The key in our proposed methodology is a risk measure called ESLA that, for continuous return distribution functions, can be represented in terms of the conditional expectation of the distribution tail, where the tail is determined by the critical return level θ characterizing the loss-averse investor. The idea of isolating several damage ranges on which is based the partitioned multiobjective risk method introduced by Asbeck and Haimes (1984) was applied to real-life problems such as groundwater contamination, dam safety, flood warning and evacuation, navigation systems, software development, project management, risk management in agriculture, see Haimes and Santos (2009) and the references therein, and also to portfolio selection under the assumption of normal distributions in Santos and Haimes (2004).The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.In Section 2 we define ESLA, show the relations of the proposed risk measure with CVaR, and LPM of first order (LPM1), establish its properties, study the link with stochastic dominance criteria, and discuss practical aspects regarding the calculation in the case of scenario-based portfolio optimization.In Section 3 the portfolio selection methodology in two stages in which investor’s loss aversion is fully taken into consideration is described: firstly, the investment opportunity set is determined (in our case, the Mean-ESLA efficient frontier), and secondly, one single preferred portfolio out of the entire frontier is selected – the procedure applied for this final selection was also used in Kroll, Levy, and Markowitz (1984), Levy and Levy (2004), De Giorgi and Hens (2009), Hens and Mayer (2014). Three types of investors characterized by different classes of utility functions with loss aversion are considered.In Section 4 the empirical study is targeted on assessing the differences between the Mean-ESLA efficient frontier and the classical Mean-Variance, Mean-CVaRαand Mean-LPM1 frontiers. Firstly, we measure the loss of welfare incurred by using another model instead of the proposed one using a proximity index similar to that defined by Kroll et al. (1984) and Hens and Mayer (2014) in the EU framework. Secondly, to assess how much the portfolios really differ in terms of their compositions, we use a dissimilarity index based on the l1 norm. We emphasize the role and influence of loss aversion parameters values and constraints.In Section 5 we present the conclusions of our study.Several definitions of loss aversion have been put forward in the literature, see for example Abdellaoui, Bleichrodt, and Paraschiv (2007), but here we consider the most usual one characterized by two parameters:(i)the critical return level θ where the perception changes because of the passage from the outcomes perceived as gains to those perceived as losses,the coefficient of loss aversion λ used to capture the fact that losses are more painful than equivalent gains even when the threshold θ is only slightly exceeded.In order to measure in the most adequate way the risk in the presence of loss aversion, we should pay attention to two important aspects.(1) The critical threshold (representing the upper bound of the tail of the return distribution used in the definition of the downside risk measure). What choice is more appropriate for a loss-averse investor? A threshold θ (loss aversion parameter) defined ex ante that remains constant during the optimization step? Or a variable one ϑ(R(x)), changing with each portfolio return distribution R(x) such as VaRα(R(x)) for CVaRα(R(x))? Since we are concerned with the loss-averse investor, we argue that the natural choice is the constant parameter θ for all portfolios. Choosing to work with a variable threshold ϑ(R(x)) leads to ignoring the fact that the loss-averse investor has a clear image of his/her financial situation and knows for sure where the cut should be done. Moreover, changing the threshold ϑ(R(x)) at each portfolio means acting inconsistently (from the loss-averse investor’s viewpoint) during the same cycle of optimization in the following sense:•For portfolios for which ϑ(R(x)) > θ, returns between θ and ϑ(R(x)) are taken into account when calculating the risk measure despite the fact that the investor perceives them as manageable losses. For these portfolios, it is considered that the investor has an untrue excessive degree of loss aversion.For portfolios for which ϑ(R(x)) < θ, risk is not properly managed: returns ranging from ϑ(R(x)) to θ (subjectively perceived as losses by the particular investor) are simply ignored. For these portfolios the optimization step is performed as if the investor is neutral from the loss-aversion viewpoint.(2) The distribution used. We argue that the conditional distribution of returns below the critical level are far more eloquent than the portfolio return distribution. Indeed, for the loss-averse investor for which the loss values breaching the critical threshold even with small probabilities are very important, the conditional distribution gives the proper weights to these high losses, while, when using the return distribution their magnitude is hidden to some extent.General framework. Let n be the number of stocks used to build portfolios. The key random inputs in the portfolio problem are the stocks returns denoted byr(ω)=(r1(ω),...,rn(ω))′,ω ∈ Ω or simply by r (we use a bold symbol for vectors). The set Ω represents the set of future states of knowledge and has the mathematical structure of a probability space with a probability measure P for comparing the likelihood of future states ω. LetR(x)=x′rbe the return of the portfoliox∈X⊂Rn,where X is the set of available portfolios defined by the budget constraint and positivity constraints meaning that no short sell are allowed(1)X={x=(x1,...,xn)′∈Rn|x′1=1,xi≥0,i=1,...,n},where1∈Rnis the all-1 vector. The underlying probability distribution of the vector of the assets returnsrinRnis assumed to have a continuous probability density function (pdf) and hence, for eachx∈ X, R(x) is a random variable having the pdf gR(x)( · ) induced by that ofr. R(x) is measurable inrand E(|R(x)|) < ∞. Given z a level of returns, the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of R(x) is defined byGR(x)(z)=P(R(x)≤z)=∫R(x)≤zgR(x)(r)dr. It is also assumed that the probability distribution is such that no jumps and no flat parts occur, i.e. GR(x)(z) is continuous and strictly increasing with respect toz∈R,and hence the equationGR(x)(z)=αhas a unique solution for any α ∈ (0; 1). The negative of the return distribution is referred to as portfolio loss distributionL(x)=−R(x).In this paper we focus on optimizing decisions of a loss-averse investor who measures the risk of an investment by taking into consideration only the returns inferior to a critical return level denoted by θ. To measure the risk associated with R(x), we use the conditional mean of the most unfavorable outcomes given that they fall under the specified critical threshold θ.Definition. Assuming that P(R(x) ≤ θ) > 0, we define the Expected Shortfall with Loss Aversion parameterθ as follows:(2)ESLAθ(R(x))=−E(R(x)|R(x)≤θ).Let θ be the investor’s critical return level andx1 andx2 two portfolios for whichGR(x1)−1(α)=θ1<θ<θ2=GR(x2)−1(α),where α is the confidence level used for calculation of CVaR, andGR(x)−1is the inverse of the cdfGR(x)(r)=P(R(x)≤r). Applying the definition leads toCVaRα(R(x1))=−E(R(x1)|R(x1)≤−VaRα(R(x1)))which can be written asCVaRα(R(x1))=−E(R(x1)|R(x1)≤θ1)because−VaRα(R(x1))=inf{r|P(R(x1)≤r)≥α}=GR(x1)−1(α)=θ1. But θ1 < θ and realizations of R(x1) that should be taken into account when assessing the risk of the loss averse investor are left out. In this case, from the loss averse investor’s viewpoint, risk ofx1 is underestimated if CVaRαis used. Forx2, the risk is overestimated because θ2 > θ . So in general, for a previously fixed confidence level, ESLAθand CVaRαhave different values.Proposition 1Let θ be investor’s critical return level andxsome portfolio. ESLAθ(R(x)) is equal to a CVaR value if and only if CVaR is calculated at the confidence levelα=αR(x)θwhere(3)αR(x)θ=P(R(x)≤θ)=GR(x)(θ).For this particular confidence level, we haveESLAθ(R(x))=CVaRαR(x)θ(R(x)).Definition (2) can be written in the equivalent form(4)ESLAθ(R(x))=−1GR(x)(θ)∫−∞θrgR(x)(r)dr=which by integration by parts leads to(5)ESLAθ(R(x))=−1GR(x)(θ)(θGR(x)(θ)−∫−∞θGR(x)(r)dr)=(6)=−θ+1αR(x)θ∫−∞θGR(x)(r)dr=−1αR(x)θ∫0αR(x)θGR(x)−1(α)dα.We have also(7)ESLAθ(R(x))=−θ+1αR(x)θE([θ−R(x)]+)=−1αR(x)θE(R(x)1{R(x)≤θ}),where[r]+=max{r;0},E(R(x)1{R(x)≤θ})=∫−∞θrgR(x)(r)dr.111{R(x)≤θ}=1for all the realizations of the random variable inferior or equal to the critical loss threshold, and equal to 0 otherwise.The equivalent form (7) suggests the relation between Lower Partial Moment of first order LPM1(R(x); θ) and ESLAθ(R(x)).Proposition 2Let θ be investor’s critical return level andxsome portfolio. Then LPM1(R(x); θ) and ESLAθ(R(x)) are related:(8)ESLAθ(R(x))=−θ+1αR(x)θLPM1(R(x);θ),whereLPM1(R(x);θ)=E([θ−R(x)]+).Proposition 3ESLAθ exhibits the following properties:(i)If P(R(x) ≤ θ) > 0, thenESLAθ(R(x))≥−θ.If θ1 < θ2and P(R(x) ≤ θ1) > 0, thenESLAθ1(R(x))≥ESLAθ2(R(x)).Letk∈Rsuch thatP(R(x)+k≤θ)>0.ThenESLAθ(R(x)+k)=ESLAθ−k(R(x))−k.Letk∈R*such that P(kR(x) ≤ θ) > 0.(a)If k > 0, thenESLAθ(kR(x))=kESLAθ/k(R(x)).If k < 0, thenESLAθ(kR(x))=−kESLA−θ/k(L(x)),L(x)=−R(x).E(R(x))=−αR(x)θESLAθ(R(x))+αL(x)−θESLA−θ(L(x)).Letx1,x2two portfolios such thatP(R(x1)+R(x2)≤θ)≤min{P(R(x1)≤θ);P(R(x2)≤θ)},If θ ≤ 0, then,ESLAθ(R(x1)+R(x2))≤ESLAθ(R(x1))+ESLAθ(R(x2)).Letx1andx2be two portfolios and λ ∈ (0; 1) such thatP(λR(x1)+(1−λ)R(x2)≤θ)≤min{P(R(x1)≤θλ);P(R(x2)≤θ1−λ)}.Then, we haveESLAθ(λR(x1)+(1−λ)R(x2))≤λESLAθ(R(x1))+(1−λ)ESLAθ(R(x2)).From the viewpoint of the economic theory of decision making under uncertainty, the First order Stochastic Dominance (FSD) relation describes the preferences of the group of non-satiable investors characterized by non-decreasing utility functions. The practical application of FSD in optimization models is limited because the random variables are ranked by pointwise comparison of their cdfs: we say thatx2 dominatesx1 under the FSD rules and write R(x1)⪯FSDR(x2) or evenx2≽FSDx1 if(9)GR(x1)(r)≥GR(x2)(r),∀r∈R,or, equivalently,GR(x1)−1(α)≤GR(x2)−1(α),∀α∈[0;1],where, for continuous distributions, the right continuous inverse of the cdf GR(x) is the usual inverse functionGR(x)−1,see Ogryczak and Ruszczynski (2002) and Sriboonchitta, Wong, Dhompongsa, and Nguyen (2010). We note that, forr=θ,(9) givesαR(x1)θ≥αR(x2)θ.Proposition 4Letx1andx2be two portfolios for which(i)αR(x1)θ=αR(x2)θorαR(x1)θ<αR(x2)θ,andGR(x1)(r)≥GR(x2)(r),∀r<θ.Then we have ESLAθ(R(x1)) ≥ ESLAθ(R(x2)).We consider (i) and (ii) from Proposition 4 as the relations defining the limited-FSD with critical loss thresholdθ. If (i) and (ii) are fulfilled, we sayx2 dominatesx1 under the limited-FSDrules, and writex2⪰FSDθx1or evenR(x2)⪰FSDθR(x1).As opposed to FSD rules that require the relation (9) between the two cdfs for all return values r in order to havex2≽FSDx1, the limited-FSD rules are much more loss-averse oriented. In order to havex2⪰FSDθx1,the relation (ii) between cdfs must be satisfied only for those painful return values that are strictly inferior to the critical return threshold θ. Forr=θwe can haveGR(x1)(θ)=GR(x2)(θ)as in (i), or evenGR(x1)(θ)<GR(x2)(θ)and still havex2⪰FSDθx1. Consequently, in order to ensure ESLAθ(R(x1)) ≥ ESLAθ(R(x2)), on one hand we have to perform fewer pointwise comparisons than in the case of FSD requirements – not for allr∈R,but only forr∈(−∞,θ),but on the other hand, the requirement for the particular value of the critical loss threshold θ is stronger – condition (i) must be satisfied.The improvement in the tractability of portfolio models based on FSDθin comparison with that of models based on FSD is not significant: pointwise comparisons of cdfs are still necessary, but the calculations onRare reduced to(−∞,θ]. The tractability is an important issue not only for models based on FSD, but also for models based on stochastic dominance relations of higher orders – the applicability of these models in practice of risk depends on it. But lately there have been significant progress in the area of tractability of portfolio models based on stochastic dominance that can be applied to FSDθ. The studies were conducted especially on models based on the stochastic dominance of second order (SSD) whose importance is due to its relation with risk averse preferences, see Dentcheva and Ruszczynski (2006) and Fábián et al. (2011), just to name a few.We say that portfoliox2 dominates portfoliox1 under the SSD rules and write R(x1)⪯SSDR(x2) or evenx2≽SSDx1 if(10)∫−∞tGR(x1)(r)dr≥∫−∞tGR(x2)(r)dr,∀t∈R.Proposition 5Let two portfoliosx1andx2such that(i)αR(x1)θ=αR(x2)θorαR(x1)θ<αR(x2)θand∫−∞θGR(x1)(r)dr≥∫−∞θGR(x2)(r)dr.Then ESLAθ(R(x1)) ≥ ESLAθ(R(x2)).If, as before we consider (i) and (ii) from Proposition 5 as the relations defining the limited-SSD with critical loss thresholdθ, we find that ESLAθis consistent with⪰SSDθ. As opposed to the previous case of FSDθ, the tractability of models based on SSDθsignificantly improves compared to that of SSD: instead of pointwise comparisons of the two cdfs onR,there are only two relations to be verified, (i) and (ii) from Proposition 5.In scenario models, we suppose that a number of S scenarios for the n-dimensional vectorr=(r1,...,rn)′of assets returns are available. Each scenario s ∈ {1, ..., S} consists of a vector of assets returnsrs=(r1s,...,rns)′. There are a total of S calculated values for the portfolio return r1, ..., rS, wherers=Rs(x)=x′·rs,s=1,...,S. Without any loss of generality, the corresponding sorted sample is assumed in a strictly ascending order r(1) < ... < r(S). In this context, it is implicitly assumed that the distribution of the portfolio return R(x) is concentrated in these S points:P(R(x)=r(s))=ps>0,s ∈ {1, ..., S}. Lets(θ)∈{1,...,S−1}be such thatθ∈[r(s(θ));r(s(θ)+1)). Given the definition (2), ESLAθis the negative of the mean of the conditional distribution R(x)|R(x) ≤ θ. whose cdf is defined byGR(x)|R(x)≤θ(r)={GR(x)(r)αR(x)θ,ifr<θ1,ifr≥θ,and probability mass function bygR(x)|R(x)≤θ(r(s))=P(R(x)=r(s))={psp1+...+ps(θ),ifs∈{1,...,s(θ)},0,otherwise.We have assumedθ∈[r(s(θ));r(s(θ)+1))therefore, due to (3), we haveαR(x)θ=∑s=1s(θ)ps. Hence, the definition (2) results in an expression, similar to those obtained for the expected shortfall: formula (25) in Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) or (7) in the survey of Stoyanov et al. (2010).Proposition 6Let{rs|s=1,...,S}be a number of S scenarios of vectors of assets returns. Suppose that the following conditions are fulfilled:(i)the probability measure is concentrated in{rs=(r1s,...,rns)′|s=1,...,S}and consequently, for any portfolioxthe return distribution denoted by R(x) is also concentrated in the corresponding S valuesrs=Rs(x)=x′·rs,s ∈ {1, ..., S},the sorted portfolio return values are assumed in a strictly ascending order r(1) < ... < r(S), and the corresponding probabilitiesP(R(x)=r(s))=ps>0,s ∈ {1, ..., S},s(θ)∈{1,...,S−1}denotes the location index of the critical threshold θ in the sorted sequence of portfolio returns i.e.s(θ)=max{s|r(s)≤θ}.Then, the ESLAθ value corresponding to the given set of S scenarios is calculated as follows:(11)ESLAθ(R(x))=−∑s=1s(θ)psp1+...+ps(θ)·r(s).We assume that the conditions (i) and (ii) from Proposition6are fulfilled. If θ does not belong to the interval [r(1); r(S)), then ESLAθ is defined as follows:(1)If{s|r(s)≤θ}=∅,then ESLAθ(R(x)) is the negative of r(1).If r(s) ≤ θ for all s ∈ {1, ..., S}, then ESLAθ(R(x)) is the negative of the mean:ESLAθ(R(x))=−∑s=1Spsr(s).In scenario-based portfolio optimization models, the higher the number M of sets of S scenarios, the better is the approximated value of the true value of ESLAθ(R(x)). For a number of M sets of S scenarios, the estimated value is as follows:ESLAθ^(R(x))=1M∑m=1MESLAθ(Rm(x)),where ESLAθ(Rm(x)) represents the value of ESLAθ calculated with(11)applied to the mth set of S scenarios, and m ∈ {1, ..., M}.The Mean-Risk model we work with is based on the risk measure ESLAθand will be referred to as Mean-ESLAθ:(12)minx∈X(−E(R(x)),ESLAθ(R(x))).Depending on the constraints considered, different models that provide different investment alternatives with different financial consequences are obtained. In our empirical study the following three types of constraints are considered.(a)Short selling not allowed:X={x∈Rn|x′1=1,xi≥0,.. 1 ≤ i ≤ n.}.A certain level of diversification is imposed using box constraints with liand uilower, respectively upper bounds:X={x∈Rn|x′1=1,li≤xi≤ui,1≤i≤n}.Short selling allowed: there is at least one index i ∈ {1, ..., n} such that li< 0.The proposed methodology follows the general path of selecting investments in two stages, but it has the specific feature of taking into consideration investor’s loss aversion in both stages: firstly, we determine the investment opportunity set which is the Mean-ESLAθ(ME) efficient frontier, and secondly we select one preferred efficient portfolio using investor’s utility function with loss aversion.In our analysis, the ME model (12) is compared with the classical:(i)Mean-Variance (MV) model(13)minx∈X(−E(R(x)),σ2(R(x)))whereE(R(x))=μ′x,μ=(μ1,...,μn)′,μi=E(ri),riis the random return of the ith asset,σ2(R(x))=x′Σx,Σ=(Σi,j)1≤i,j≤n,andΣi,j=cov(ri,rj),i, j ∈ {1, ..., n} ,Mean-CVaRα(MC) model(14)minx∈X(−E(R(x)),CVaRα(R(x))),whereCVaRα(R(x))=−E(R(x)|R(x)≤−VaRα(R(x))),andVaRα(R(x))=−inf{z|P(R(x)≤z)>α},Mean-LPM1 (ML) model(15)minx∈X(−E(R(x)),LPM1(R(x);θ)),whereLPM1(R(x);θ)=E([θ−R(x)]+).For determining the efficient frontiers, the following steps were taken.Step 1.We determine the range of expected returns for all four frontiers as follows. (1a) The expected return of the global minimum risk portfolio is calculated and, depending on the model, it is denoted byE(R)minME,E(R)minMV,E(R)minMC,respectivelyE(R)minML. For example,E(R)minMEis the expected return of the portfolio obtained asargmin{ESLAθ(R(x))|x′1=1,li≤xi≤ui,1≤i≤n}. (1b) By solving the problem max{E(R(x))|x′1=1,.. li≤ xi≤ ui,  1 ≤ i ≤ n.} we obtain the maximum value E(R)max  which is common to all four models.The range of expected returns is divided in sub-intervals of equal length:E(R(x))min=μ1<μ2<...<μJ=E(R(x))max,where J is the number of portfolios on each efficient frontier,μj=μj−1+Δμ,for any j ∈ {2, ..., J}, andΔμ=(E(R)max−E(R)min)/(J−1). We note that the divisions(μ1ME,...,μJME),(μ1MV,...,μJMV),(μ1MC,...,μJMC)and(μ1ML,...,μJML)might differ because the valuesE(R)minME,E(R)minMV,E(R)minMC,andE(R)minMLmight be different.For each model, J optimization problems are solved(PjME){minx∈XESLAθ(R(x))E(R(x))≥μjME,(PjMV){minx∈Xσ2(R(x))E(R(x))≥μjMV,(PjMC){minx∈XCVaRα(R(x))E(R(x))≥μjMC,(PjML){minx∈XLPM1(R(x);θ)E(R(x))≥μjML,where j ∈ {1, ..., J}, and the efficient frontiers are derived. The jthefficient portfolio obtained as the optimal solution of(PjME)is denoted byxjME. Analogously we use the notationsxjMV,xjMC,xjMLfor the optimal solutions of(PjMV),(PjMC),respectively(PjML).In our study on portfolio optimization under loss aversion, as opposed to Prospect Theory that allows investors to overweight small probabilities in their decisions (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), we refrain from using subjective decision weights. Under this assumption, the loss averse investors maximize expected values and not prospective values. Thus, we model loss averse investors as expected utility maximizers and determine the preferred efficient portfolio that will be called optimal based on the following procedure (also used in De Giorgi and Hens, 2009; Berkelaar et al., 2004, see also the rich bibliography therein). Firstly, we calculate the Expected Utility (EU) of returns of all efficient portfolios, where U is the utility function characterizing the loss averse investor, and then we select the portfolio with the highest EU value. For example, for the Mean-ESLAθ optimal portfolio denoted byxMEwe have:E(U(R(xME)))=max1≤j≤JE(U(R(xjME))). Analogously we find the optimal portfoliosxMV,xMC,xMLfor the other three efficient frontiers, see also Kroll et al. (1984), and Levy and Levy (2004).In our study, we use three different classes of utility functions with loss aversion.•The class of S-shaped piecewise power utility functions suggested by the Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT) value function, Tversky and Kahneman (1992):(16)U(1)(r)={(r−θ)α,forr≥θ,−β(θ−r)α,forr<θ.We note that U(1) is used also by Hens and Mayer (2014) to select the preferred portfolio – through the maximization of E(U(1)) along the MV-efficient frontier.• The class of utility functions defined in Cremers, Kritzman, and Page (2005):(17)U(2)(r)={ln(1+r),forr≥θλ(r−θ)+ln(1+θ),forr<θ.The class of S-shaped piecewise negative exponential utility functions defined by De Giorgi and Hens (2006):(18)U(3)(r)={−A(e−γ(r−θ)−1),forr≥θ,+B(eγ(r−θ)−1),forr<θ.As showed in De Giorgi and Hens (2006), for return values around θ, U(3) and U(2) are close, but for outcomes not so close to θ , U(3) exhibits more curvature than U(2), thus discouraging risk-taking.The empirical study performed is targeted on assessing the differences between the Mean-ESLAθefficient frontier and the other three frontiers considered in our study. Two issues are addressed.To measure the welfare loss incurred by using one model instead of another, Kroll et al. (1984) proposed a proximity index in the Expected Utility framework. In order to be invariant under linear transformations, this index was defined as a ratio; also, the expected utility values were considered with respect to a reference valueE(U(R(xnaı¨ve))),where the naïve strategyxnaı¨veinvolves holding a portfolio weight of 1/n in each of the n risky assets. This index was used also in the Cumulative Prospect Theory framework by Hens and Mayer (2014). Here, we use a similar index in order to measure the loss of welfare caused by using another model (MV, MC, or ML) instead of Mean-ESLAθ. We define the Expected Utility-based Proximity Index(EUPI) of Mean-ESLAθversus Mean-Variance as follows:(19)EUPI(ME/MV)=E(U(R(xME)))−E(U(R(xnaı¨ve)))E(U(R(xMV)))−E(U(R(xnaı¨ve))).Analogously, we define EUPI for the other two pairs (ME/MC) and (ME/ML).22Without any loss of generality, we assume the denominator different from zero for all pairs of models. If we come across the case “null denominator” in (19), instead of EUPI(ME/MV) which is not well defined in this case, we can always calculate the differenceΔEU(ME/MV)=E(U(R(xME)))−E(U(R(xMV)))that indicates which one of the two portfolios meets investor’s preferences to a greater extent.An EUPI value strictly larger than 1 shows a gain of welfare when using ME instead of other model – we have assumed the usual case when both denominator and numerator are positive.33We expect that the optimal portfolios along each of the four frontiers have an expected utility value that is at least as high as that of the naïve portfolio, thus we usually have EUPI ≥ 0. But, occasionally, EUPI may be negative.Remarks. (1) An EUPI value of 0 does not mean that the portfoliosxMEandxnaı¨veare identical; it means only that for these two portfolios the satisfaction in terms of expected utility is exactly the same. (2) An EUPI value of 1 means that ME and MV provide the same expected utility so, there is no gain/loss of welfare when using the optimal solution provided by one model instead of the other.We note that we would gain more insight if we supplemented the interpretation of the EUPI value with an index that expresses the degree of dissimilarity of the two optimal portfolios.Firstly, we focus on measuring how dissimilar are the compositions of two optimal portfolios obtained from different models, and secondly on the dissimilarity of two efficient frontiers.Letx=(x1,...,xn)′∈Xandy=(y1,...,yn)′∈Xbe two portfolios. We determine how much they really differ in terms of their compositions by calculating the l1-norm of their difference:∥x−y∥1=∑i=1n|xi−yi|. The maximum valuemaxx,y∈X∥x−y∥1=2corresponds to the case when the portfoliosxandyhave no assets in common (xi·yi=0,∀i=1,...,n), i.e. the portfoliosxandyshow a dissimilarity of 100 percent. The minimum valueminx,y∈X∥x−y∥1=0corresponds to the case whenxandyhave the same composition (xi=yi,∀i=1,...,n), i.e. the portfoliosxandyshow a dissimilarity of 0 percent. The natural association of minimum and maximum dissimilarity with 0 percent and 100 percent suggests an index with values in [0; 1]. Therefore, we propose the following definition for the Dissimilarity Index (DI) ofxandy:(20)DI(x,y)=12∥x−y∥1.Remarks. (1)DI(x,y)=∑{i|xi>yi}(xi−yi)is equivalent with (20). (2) DI is a metric onRnand DI(x, y) is interpreted as the distance between two portfoliosxandywith respect to the metric DI. (3) DI can also be interpreted as the total weight of the current portfolioythat would have to move (to be re-allocated) in order to produce a portfolio that matches entirely the reference portfoliox. To give an intuition of this interpretation, we considerx=(0.25,0.25,0,0.50)′the reference portfolio, andy=(0.15,0.15,0,0.70)′the current one. The weight of 0.20 makes the difference between the two portfolios and represents a natural value for DI. In this case, we can say that the two portfolios show a difference of 20 percent.The index DI may be also used to assess the differences between the Mean- ESLAθefficient frontier and one of the others. To fix the ideas, we consider the pair (ME/MV). We calculate the DI of each pair of efficient portfoliosDI(xjME,xjMV)=12∥xjME−xjMV∥1=∑{i|xijME>xijMV}(xijME−xijMV),j∈{1,...,J},and define the Dissimilarity Index of the pair of Frontiers (DIF) as follows:(21)DIFJ(ME/MV)=1J∑j=1JDI(xjME,xjMV).Analogously, we define DIFJ(ME/MC) and DIFJ(ME/ML). We notice the dependence of DIF on the discretization of the efficient frontiers involved (as described in Section 3.1, Step 2). Thus, the portfoliosxjMEandxjMVpaired in (21) might have different expected returns,E(R(xjME))≠E(R(xjMV)). If we are interested in comparing portfolios with similar expected returns, (i) we either consider the common part of the two ranges of expected returns and discretize this common range, or (ii) we maintain the different ranges, but we pair each ME portfolio with the MV portfolio having the nearest expected return. In this case, instead of DIF we use the notation DIFcomto emphasize the “common” value of expected return shared by any two paired portfolios. The calculation of DIFcomof a pair of frontiers when keeping distinct ranges of expected returns is time consuming. Indeed, it not infrequently happens that the first portfolio is best associated with, for example, the kth portfolio on the other frontier, where the “first portfolio” is the portfolio of global minimum risk having the largest expected return out of the two. Therefore, we can use two methods for the computation of DIFcom: (iia) we either determinek−1efficient portfolios to be paired with the already existing efficient portfolios on the other frontier thus keeping a number of J pairs in the average in (21), or (iib) we compute the average with onlyJ˜<Jpairs, in our exampleJ˜=J−k+1. When the latter method is applied, we use the notationDIFJ˜com;for example,DIFJ˜com(ME/MV)=1J˜∑j=1J˜DI(xjME,xjMV).Our goal is to assess to what extent ME efficient portfolios and frontiers differ from the classical models MV, MC, ML. To achieve this objective, we propose the following methodology:(1)Two datasets DS1 and DS2 are generated. The dataset DS1 is a series of normally distributed returns, whereas DS2 is a non-normal series.Comparisons between ME and the other efficient frontiers are performed. We note that if the efficient frontiers are found dissimilar, the optimal portfolios are also expected to be dissimilar.The ME and MV, MC, ML optimal portfolios are compared for the non-normal dataset DS2. The values of the proximity measures EUPI and DI, DIF, DIFcomfor the loss-averse utility functions (16)–(18) are compared and interpreted. Thus, we assess to what extent each type of loss averse investors is favored by using the proposed methodology based on ME model. The comparison of the proximity measure values allows to determine which of the three utility functions has the least favorable results for ME; we further analyze this utility function.Using the utility function previously selected, the proximity measures values are calculated for both datasets DS1 and DS2 and compared. Inevitably, one of the datasets leads to better results than the other. Again, we choose to continue our analysis for the dataset which is the least favorable to ME.For the previously selected utility function and dataset, the proximity measure values are compared for three types of constraints: (a) the usual non-negativity and budget constraints, (b) budget and box constraints, and (c) budget constraint and short-selling allowed, as described in Section 2.6.For details on practical implementation of the models and numerical considerations, see Annex 1 from Supplementary Material.We considern=10representative securities selected from the New York Stock Exchange whose full names and descriptive statistics are given in Table 1.The procedure used to determine the datasets DS1 and DS2 is described in Annex 2 from Supplementary Material. The descriptive statistics of the datasets are given in Table 2. For DS1, the value of skewness less than 0.5 indicates that the shape of the distribution is nearly symmetric and together with the small deviation of kurtosis indicate a close to normal distribution. The scenarios grouped under DS2 are more pessimistic than the scenarios of DS1.The comparison of ME efficient frontier with MV, MC, ML with the aim of determining their degree of dissimilarity involves several steps, starting with establishing the division and the algorithm of pairing points from one frontier with points from the other frontier, and ending with the interpretation of the values of proximity measures EUPI, and DI, DIF, DIFcom. Table 3presents the relevant data needed to start the entire procedure calculated for the dataset DS1. It is important to notice that the range of expected return is different for each model. For MV and MC, the valuesE(R)minMV=0.019474224,E(R)minMC=0.0231are constant. For ME and ML, they depend on the critical return level θ as can be seen on the first two columns of Table 3; thus, the ranges and the divisions are different. For MV and MC, the steps are constant:ΔμMV=(E(R)max−E(R)minMV)/999=6.63736×10−5,respectivelyΔμMC=6.27442×10−5. For ME and ML, they vary with θ as can be seen in the last two columns of Table 3.To have an intuition of the differences between portfolios belonging to two different efficient frontiers, we give in Fig. 1 the graphical representation of the DI values for all 1000 pairs of efficient portfolios along the pair of frontiers (ME/MV), (ME/MC) and (ME/ML). On the horizontal axis, we havethe order number j ∈ {1, ..., 1000} of the pair of efficient portfolios, and on the vertical axis the corresponding DI value. We used the critical return levelθ=−0.10. We remark that the DIs have high values, between 5 percent and 30 percent, except for the last few portfolios, where the dissimilarity goes to zero. Indeed, the high values of the expected return cannot be achieved otherwise than selecting (almost) the same undiversified portfolios by all models. Fig. 1 shows that the logic of measuring risk with ESLAθleads to efficient portfolios that differ significantly from the classical models, therefore we expect that ME efficient frontier is composed of portfolios with new characteristics.We firstly consider a loss averse investor characterized by the utility function (16) withβ=2.25andα=0.88. We assumed that we do not use subjective decision weights, so in order to determine her/his optimal portfolio, the loss averse investor acts as a utility maximizer with one of the four efficient frontiers as feasible set. We denote by jMV, jMC, jML, and jME∈ {1, ..., 1000} the order number of the optimal portfolioxMV,xMC,xML, respectivelyxME. The values 0; ±0.05; ±0.10 for θ were chosen such that the whole range of variation of portfolio returns to be covered (for both datasets DS1 and DS2). Several conclusions can be drawn from the results displayed in Panel A from Table 4 obtained for the non-normal dataset DS2. Table 6 shows the results obtained for the almost normal dataset DS1.(i) As indicated by the jMEvalues in column 6 of Panel A, Table 4, the ME optimal portfolio is characterized by a smaller risk and consequently a lower expected return compared to the other models; indeed, jMEis substantially smaller than jMV, jMC, jMLfor all for θ ∈ { ± 0.05; ±0.10}. Only forθ=0,for whichjME=61,xMEhas a larger expected return value than the other corresponding optimal portfoliosxMV,xMC, andxML. We notice that when θ increases from 0 to+0.05and+0.10,jMEalso increases. This means that if investor’s financial situation worsens (and she/he begins to perceive small positive returns between 0 and θ as losses), the optimal portfolio must have E(R(xME)) higher than previously, when θ was 0. For a higher value of θ, for exampleθ=0.25,all portfolio returns are smaller than θ, therefore Proposition 7 (2) applies. Hence, minimizing ESLA means maximizing the expected return, and we expect to havejME=1000. For extreme values of θ smaller than all return values, Proposition 7 (1) applies: now, the portfolio with the lowest value of ESLA is the one minimizing the negative of the smallest return over all scenarios. Thus, all 1000 portfolios on the ME efficient frontier are chosen such that their smallest return values are as large as possible, i.e. as large as the constraints in(PjME)allow. In this case, we expect that the optimal portfolio corresponding to this extreme θ value to have a reasonably high expected return and jMEvalue. The results in Table 4 are for the dataset DS2 for whichθ=−0.10is not an extreme value, but it is small enough so, a jMEvalue of 294 is not surprising. If we had chosen a true extreme value likeθ=−0.25,we would have expect to have an even larger jME, like 500. Fig. 2illustrates how the ME optimal portfolio for whichE(U(R(xME)))=max1≤j≤JE(U(R(xjME)))changes with θ according to the behavior previously described, and also shows the dependence on the utility function. The three subplots (a), (b), (c) on the left column of Fig. 2 correspond to the utility function (16) with different critical return levels: in (a)θ=−0.10,in (b)θ=0,and in (c)θ=0.10. The expected returns observed on the horizontal axis correspond to the jMEvalues of 294, 61, 576, as seen in Table 4. The three subplots (d), (e), (f) on the right column of Fig. 2 correspond to the utility function (17) withλ=5and the same three θ values−0.10,0,+0.10.(ii) Regarding the EUPI values displayed in Panel A, Table 4, they are systematically close to 1 for ME versus MV. Therefore, we cannot say that one of the two models is clearly preferred. Regarding ME versus MC, the EUPI values that correspond to θ ∈ {0; 0.05; 0.10} show a gain of welfare when using the model ME instead of MC; the values around 0.88 corresponding to the two negative θ values show that some loss of welfare appears when using ME instead of MC. The EUPI values in column 9, Panel A, show that for all θ there is a systematic gain of welfare when using ME instead of ML.(iii) The DI values displayed in Table 4 generally confirm the values of the corresponding EUPI in the following sense: two portfolios which do not distinguish clearly in terms of utility (EUPI ≃ 1) show a small dissimilarity in terms of DI. For instance, forθ=+0.10,EUPI(ME/MV)=0.990551is associated withDI(xME,xMV)=3.9186percent. When the preference between models is clearly stated, see for example the caseθ=−0.10for whichEUPI(ME/ML)=1.358092,the DI has high values,DI(xME,xML)=40.3886percent. The indices measuring the dissimilarity between frontiers are displayed in Table 5.The DIF values confirm the interpretation given in terms of EUPI and DI: for ME/MV and ME/MC, the DIF values (column 5, Table 5) are generally larger than the corresponding DIs. This shows that the dissimilarity between two frontiers is larger than the dissimilarity between two optimal portfolios that might not clearly distinguish in terms of gain/loss of welfare. For ME/ML the situation is reversed: DIF values are generally smaller than the corresponding DIs between optimal portfolios. This means that the dissimilarity between the efficient portfolios in the pairs(xjME,xjML)is generally smaller than the dissimilarity between the optimal portfoliosxMEandxML. As we expect, when pairing the portfolios such that the differences between the expected returns of the portfolios in each pair are as small as possible, DIFcomvalues (Table 5, last column) are smaller than DIF for all pairs of models and all θ.In order to reveal the influence of the dataset used in computations on the results of the comparison between the ME model and the others MV, MC, ML, we repeat our calculations using an almost normal dataset, DS1. The results displayed in Panel A of Table 6 show the following: EUPI values are all very close to 1, the DIs are also substantially smaller than for DS2 and, for any fixed θ, the optimal portfolios are closer across the four models. As expected, DIF and DIFcomvalues for the more close to normal dataset DS1 (Table 5, columns 3 and 4) are smaller than those calculated for DS2 presented in columns 3 and 4 of the same table.Another observation is that the range of expected returns of the efficient frontiers is larger for DS1 compared to DS2. In order to cover the entire range of variation, we have considered alsoθ=±0.25for which we found the following results:•θ=0.25,the optimal portfolios indices (jMV, jMC, jML, jME)=(703, 689, 664, 635), and the corresponding EUPI and DI values are (1.001316; 1.008618; 1.011326), respectively (0.031896; 0.102089; 0.144104);θ=−0.25,the optimal portfolios indices (jMV, jMC, jML, jME)=(614, 599, 652, 592), and the corresponding EUPI and DI values are (1.004785; 0.997712; 1.035477), respectively (0.106961; 0.045442; 0.217212). The results obtained are in total accordance with those in Panel A of Table 6 and with the variation trends already described.We have studied two other types of preferences captured by the utility functions (17) and (18). The investor whose preferences are best captured by the utility function (17) is much favored by the use of ME model. Indeed, Panel B from Table 4 displays high values of EUPI meaning systematic gain of welfare when using ME instead of MV, MC, ML for all θ. These high EUPI values are correlated with high values of DIs reflecting important dissimilarities between the optimal portfolioxMEandxMV,xMC,xML. The same conclusions are valid for the investor characterized by the utility function (18) also. The Panel C from Table 4 displays high values of EUPI and DIs. Moreover, the optimal portfolios expected returns are shifted to bigger values for the utility (18) compared to (16) and (17). We mention that the loss aversion parameters used in simulations are:λ=5in (17) andA=6.52,B=14.7andγ=0.2in (18). The dataset used in computations is DS2.We have studied the influence of box constraints and also of short selling on the results of the comparisons for the utility function (16) with the same parameters as beforeβ=2.25andα=0.88and dataset DS1. The results are presented in Panels B and C of Table 6. Panel B of Table 6 shows that the ME model no longer differentiates as much as before from the classical models because of the diversification imposed by the tight box constraintsxi∈[0;0.15],∀i∈{1,...,10}. The EUPI values are very close to 1 showing a preference for ME, the DIs are smaller than before (between 0.2 and 5 percent), and the optimal portfolios of all models are grouped toward high values of expected returns (high order numbers) for all θ. We also consider one case of short selling allowed:x1∈[−0.25;1],xi∈[0;1],∀i∈{2,...,10},∑i=110xi=1. Compared to the case when no short selling allowed presented in Panel A of Table 6, the values in Panel C of the same table show bigger differences between ME and the other models. The EUPI values are larger and DIs show a higher dissimilarity between optimal portfolios. For example, forθ=−0.10,the DI values ofDI(xME,xML)=35.12percent andDI(xME,xMV)=16.2188percent when short selling is allowed are larger than the corresponding ones for the case short selling not allowed, 29.7407 percent, respectively 11.2065 percent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents an approach which incorporates loss aversion preferences in the Mean-Risk framework. A risk measure called ESLA calculated with the downside part of the portfolio return distribution which, we argue, is more suitable to the loss averse investor is proposed. The properties of ESLA are demonstrated, the consistence with stochastic dominance criteria is studied and relations with CVaR and LPM1 are established. Ways of implementing and testing the ME model for the case of scenario-based portfolio optimization are developed. A new methodology based on the ME model for portfolio selection with loss aversion is proposed. The ME model is tested against three widely used models, MV, MC and ML using a portfolio of ten assets from the New York Stock Exchange. The Filtered Historical Simulation method is used to process the historical data. By filtering and bootstraping, two datatsets of future weekly returns are obtained, one close to the normal distribution (DS1) and the other non-normal (DS2). The testing procedure is based on two proximity measures: EUPI which assesses the potential gain of welfare incurred by using Mean-ESLA model instead of another model, and DI which determines how much the portfolios differ in terms of their compositions. The dissimilarity between the models is tested for three classes of utility functions with loss aversion (16)–(18), for dataset DS2 and for the standard constraints (budget and non-negativity constraints). The results reveal that the optimal portfolios are not at all similar, there are significant differences between the portfolios for all utility functions. The utility function (17) gives the best results, the EUPI values are larger than 1 for all θ. Comparing the EUPI values obtained for both datasets DS1 and DS2 using the utility (17), we see that for the non-normal dataset DS2 the optimal portfolio provided by the Mean-ESLA model is preferred. We expect that results hold also for the other utility functions, given the higher similarity exhibited by (17) in the previous case. For the utility (17), the values of the dissimilarity index between frontiers confirm the interpretation given in terms of EUPI and DI. For Mean-ESLA/Mean-Variance and Mean-ESLA/Mean-CVaR, the DIF values are generally larger than the corresponding DIs showing that the dissimilarity between two frontiers is larger than the dissimilarity between two optimal portfolios (which in terms of gain/loss of welfare do not distinguish much). For ME/ML the situation is reversed: DIF values are generally smaller than the corresponding DI s. This means that the dissimilarity between the efficient portfolios in the pairs(xjME,xjML)is generally smaller than the dissimilarity between the optimal portfoliosxMEandxML. As we expect, when pairing the portfolios such that the expected returns of the portfolios in each pair is as small as possible, DIFcomvalues are smaller than DIF for all pairs of models and all θ. Another test was performed to study how the models behave when the constraints are changed. Firstly, the non-negativity constraints were replaced by a set of box constraints. As expected, as a result of shrinking the interval of variation of each weight and consequently of reducing the feasible region, the similarity increases. For the final test, it is assumed that short selling is allowed for the utility (17). As we expect, in this case the values of the dissimilarity indices increase compared with the case short selling not allowed.The previous analysis shows that the proposed model is not dominated by any of the classical models. Moreover, the optimal/efficient solutions of the ME model differ markedly from the classical models MV, MC and ML as the dissimilarity indices show and, in terms of utility, ME is frequently similar or better than the classical ones. Therefore, we can say that ME is a legitimate model and the proposed methodology provides a good framework for the loss averse investor.