@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reconfiguration of satellite orbit for cooperative observation using variable-size multi-objective differential evolution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A self-adaptive variable-size multi-objective DE for reconfiguration is proposed.The computations of coverage metrics, total fuel cost and maneuver time are detailed.Chromosome expression relies on fixed-length mechanism combined expression vector.Problem-specific operators are integrated into multi-objective DE.The algorithm optimizes the topology structure and component values simultaneously.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Satellite orbit reconfiguration,Variable-size optimization,Multi-objective differential evolution,Evolutionary computations,Estimation of Distribution Algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A novel self-adaptive variable-size multi-objective differential evolution algorithm is presented to find the best reconfiguration of existing on-orbit satellites for some particular targets on the ground when an emergent requirement arises in a short period. The main contribution of this study is that three coverage metrics are designed to assess the performance of the reconfiguration. Proposed algorithm utilizes the idea of fixed-length chromosome encoding scheme combined with expression vector and the modified initialization, mutation, crossover and selection operators to search for optimal reconfiguration structure. Multi-subpopulation diversity initialization is adopted first, then the mutation based on estimation of distribution algorithm and adaptive crossover operators are defined to manipulate variable-length chromosomes, and finally a new selection mechanism is employed to generate well-distributed individuals for the next generation. The proposed algorithm is applied to three characteristically different case studies, with the objective to improve the performance with respect to specified targets by minimizing fuel consumption and maneuver time. The results show that the algorithm can effectively find the approximate Pareto solutions under different topological structures. A comparative analysis demonstrates that the proposed algorithm outperforms two other related multi-objective evolutionary optimization algorithms in terms of quality, convergence and diversity metrics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A distributed satellite system (DSS) may be needed to perform cooperative observation to satisfy the mission requirements in the case of emergency, because the characteristics of temporary reconnaissance missions, such as earthquake relief, flood monitoring and terrorism combat, launch of a new satellite may be uneconomic. Fortunately, there are hundreds of satellites carrying out various tasks in low Earth orbit. If necessary, the existing on-orbit satellites can be optimally reconfigured as a generalized DSS which performs cooperative observation of some particular targets during a specified time period. It is desirable in most cases to expand the performance of this generalized DSS by orbital maneuvers under affordable cost.Observing some given targets within an assigned time frame is an orbit design problem. The initial orbit design can be solved from ground track points (Abdelkhalik, 2010;Abdelkhalik & Gad, 2011;Vtipil & Newman, 2010;Wall & Conway, 2009). An optimization problem in satellite constellation was constructed to pursue better revisit time (RT) or resolution according to the user requirements (Chen, Mahalec, Chen, He, & Liu, 2013;Williams, Crossley, & Lang, 2001). The number of satellites in the above orbit designs is predefined, but it may be a design variable in the satellite reconfiguration case. Therefore, it is necessary to optimize the number of satellites and specify which satellites from an alternative set to perform orbital maneuver. This is a variable-size optimization problem because the number of satellites defines the state vector length during optimization. Moreover, reconfiguration is a typical multi-objective optimization problem that requires a trade-off between the multi-mission metrics. In this study, the reconfiguration of on-orbit satellites aims to improve the coverage metrics during a short period. To avoid drastically shortening the lifetime of the satellites, the reconfiguration only relates to changing the relative locations of satellites on the initial orbit.The contribution of this study is twofold. First, three types of coverage metric are designed to assess the performance of reconfiguration: the average revisit time (ART) for single target, the total coverage time (TCT) for multi-targets and the coverage statistics based on task scheduling (CSTS) which measures performance with respect to user requirements. Then satellite reconfiguration is formulated as a multi-objective optimization problem that considers coverage metrics, fuel consumption, and maneuver time. Second, the fixed-length encoding scheme combined with expression vector in chromosome building operator, multi-subpopulation diversity initialization, mutation based on estimation of distribution algorithm (EDA) (Ferringer & Spencer, 2006), adaptive crossover and modified selection operators are integrated into the multi-objective differential evolution to manipulate variable-length chromosomes and finally optimize the topological structure (satellite combination) and component values (maneuver variables of each satellite involved in reconfiguration) simultaneously.The effectiveness of the proposed algorithm is verified by three case studies. The comparison with two other related multi-objective optimization algorithms demonstrates that the proposed algorithm performs better in terms of quality, convergence and diversity metrics defined on Pareto front.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work addresses the problem of reconfiguring on-orbit satellites for a temporary mission. Three objectives including coverage metrics, total fuel consumption and total maneuver time are considered. Since the reconfiguration topology and component values should be optimized simultaneously, a novel multi-objective optimization approach based on a fixed-length mechanism combined expression vector for implementing variable-size optimization has been constructed. This approach is based on multi-objective differential evolution (MODE) with three significant attributes:•Initially, multi-subpopulation diversity initialization was employed to produce multiple subpopulations, and each subpopulation owns the same effective length.Then, adaptive mutation operator based on EDA was adopted to improve the exploration capability.Finally, the adaptive crossover was adopted with an increasing probability as the optimization proceeds, which performs not only on design variables, but also on expression vector to find the optimal component values under different topological structures.Three case studies considering different coverage metrics were designed to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. The implementation demonstrated that VSMODE can effectively compute different satellite combinations to perform reconfiguration. The comparative results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm is better than other two variable-size algorithms. Moreover, the proposed algorithm not only provides a useful way to solve the reconfiguration problem, but also gives a framework for solving other variable-size problems.