@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The role of strategic planning in excellence management systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
EFQM model has predictive power for implementation an excellence management system.EFQM social and technical factors are positively related to organisational results.Strategic planning mediated the relationships between EFQM social and hard factors.Strategic planning process is positively related to EFQM hard factors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quality management,Strategic planning,EFQM model,Decision processes,Partial Least Squares,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper examines the role of the strategic planning process in excellence management systems (EMSs) and attempts to contribute evidence of how the efficient EMS works, by an analysis of the synergies and relationships between the critical factors of total quality management (TQM) and the organisation's results. In order to reach these objectives, the excellence model of the European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM) was used as a framework. The methodology used was the Partial Least Squares (PLS) technique. The data were collected from a sample of 225 Spanish firms, candidates for excellence awards, which have been subjected to the complete self- and external-assessment process. The results showed that the actions and the commitment of the leaders and the people to quality (EFQM enablers social factors) must be made effective through the design and implementation of a schematic of the key processes, suitable resource management and the establishment of alliances with the main suppliers and partners. Another critical issue for the success of TQM is the need to achieve integration of the quality values, objectives and practices into the strategic planning process. Moreover, the results also show how the management of the EFQM enablers technical factors differs based on the degree of excellence with which the strategic planning process is employed in the organisations which form the sample.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Total Quality Management is a comprehensive organisational management approach. This approach is based on the correct integration of certain cultural values and principles (continuous improvement, innovation and dynamism) in the strategy, structure and processes of the organisation. To put these values and principles into practice, organisations use a series of techniques, models and systems oriented towards stakeholder satisfaction and strengthening the competitiveness of the organisation. Moreover, for this management approach to achieve the desired effects, the implementation, development and improvement of a series of critical or key factors are needed. These factors must form a management system, i.e. synergies and relationships are produced between the critical factors of TQM (Bou-Llusar, Escrig-Tena, Roca-Puig, & Beltrán-Martín, 2009). Recognising and managing these synergies and relationships are fundamental for the implementation and improvement of the management system and the achievement of the planned objectives and results (Calvo-Mora, Picón-Berjoyo, Ruiz-Moreno, & Cauzo-Bottala, 2015).In the last 50 years TQM has been widely adopted (Zatzick, Moliterno, & Fang, 2012). As a consequence, numerous contributions have appeared that show how the implementation of TQM can help to achieve the objectives and to improve the performance of the organisations (Williams, Bertsch, Van der Wiele, Van Iwaarden, & Dale, 2006). There are also cases in which the implementation of TQM has not produced the anticipated results. This may be due, for example, to the effect of contextual variables, such as size, experience or the sphere of operations, which moderate the effects of the quality practices on the results (Nair, 2006; Taylor & Wright, 2003). In other cases, the research has not achieved the anticipated results due to design errors (Powell, 1995), such as inadequate selection of the sample, the indicators, or the statistical techniques used for the analysis of the data (Marín-Vinuesa, 2009).Conca, Llopis, and Tarí (2004) and Prybutok and Ramasesh (2005) differentiate three types of framework for the implementation of TQM:•Frameworks based on quality experts or gurus. This group would include the teachings and contributions of Deming, Juran, Crosby, Feigembaum, Ishikawa, Garvin, and Taguchi, among others.Excellence models or quality awards. The most representative are the Deming Prize (Japan), the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award (USA), the European Quality Award and the Ibero-American Model of Management Excellence.Models extracted from theoretical and/or empirical research that attempt to identify and develop scales of measurement for the dimensions or critical factors and the results of TQM. The works of Anderson, Rungtusanatham, and Schroeder (1994), Saraph, Benson, and Schroeder (1989) and Flynn, Schroeder, and Sakakibara (1994) were pioneering in this field.In this regard, diverse research has shown how the excellence models offer the ideal reference framework for the implementation and improvement of TQM in an organisation (Bou-Llusar et al., 2009; Kim, Kumar, & Murphy, 2010).Among the critical factors of TQM identified in the literature are: a flexible organisational culture oriented to innovation and continuous improvement; a determined commitment and leadership by the management; strategic planning; continuous improvement; a client and other stakeholder focused approach; management based on data and information analysis, as well as the management of personnel, processes and suppliers or other partners (Sila & Ebrahimpour, 2003). In this respect, Rahman and Bullock (2005) classify the critical factors of TQM as:(1)Soft aspects, corresponding to social and behavioural factors, such as an open and flexible culture, the management's commitment and leadership, the human resources management and the focus on stakeholders.Hard aspects, associated with the technical factors of the design, implementation and improvement of the quality management systems, such as the control and management processes, the use of analysis, measurement and problem-solving tools, the management of different resources and supplier management.Strategic aspects, i.e. the need to integrate the quality objectives, plans and policies into the general strategic process of the organisation. In this sense, effective TQM ensures that management adopts a strategic overview of quality and focuses on prevention of problems (Oakland, 2011).In the EFQM model, and in the excellence models in general, no explicit distinction is made between social (soft), technical (hard) and strategic factors. Brown (2002) and Bou-Llusar et al. (2009) suggest the leadership and people criteria represent the TQM social factors in the model, whereas the criteria that refer to the processes, alliances and resources reflect the technical character of TQM. Finally, policy and strategy are the most difficult criteria to classify, as they contain items which relate to both soft and hard issues (Calvo-Mora, Picón-Berjoyo, Ruiz-Moreno, & Cauzo-Bottala, 2014a). For Castresana and Fernández-Ortiz (2005, p. 37) policy and strategy criteria reflect the business strategy as a tool or instrument of integration and coordination of other business resources and capabilities.From the research point of view, studies that have the analysis and understanding of how the excellence models work as their central objective are a few. More numerous are those that analyse the management systems based on the ISO 9000 international standards or other tools related to quality management and improvement, such as Benchmarking, Six Sigma, Just in Time, Lean, Enterprise Resources Planning and the Balanced Scorecard (Dahlgaard-Park, Chen, Jang, & Dahlgaard, 2013).Topics of research on excellence models have been focused on analysing the barriers to implementation (Ritchie & Dale, 2000; Sandbrook, 2001); the criteria of the models that are considered more critical to achieving success (Kim et al., 2010; Samuelsson & Nilsson, 2002; Tutuncu & Kucukusta, 2007); the possible internal improvements derived from the application of the models (Davies, 2008); the internal structure of relationships (Eskildsen, Kristensen, & Juhl, 2001; Calvo-Mora, Leal, & Roldán, 2005); the impact on the performance or the results of the organisations (Corredor & Goñi, 2010; Nazemi, 2010); and the usefulness of identifying the more representative resources and capacities of the company, which identify the key resources for generating competitive advantages (Castresana & Fernández-Ortiz, 2005; Martín-Castilla & Rodríguez-Ruiz, 2008).In this sense, Kim et al. (2010) and Dahlgaard-Park et al. (2013) point out that there is a serious lack of attention to some topics such as policy and strategy. Strategic planning constitutes a key piece in all quality systems, since it is a fundamental factor in the initiation and development of change in the organisation which requires the whole TQM initiative (Pfeifer, Schmitt, & Thorsten, 2005). Moreover, inefficient planning, or not considering quality as a strategic question, is one of the main causes of failure in the implementation of TQM (Taylor & Wright, 2003).Rusjan (2005) points out that assessment through the EFQM model does not advise on improving weak points or preserving strengths. For Ritchie and Dale (2000), this problem would be resolved by integrating the results of the self-assessment process into the strategic planning. In this case, strategic planning should be the bridge that connects the improvement of processes with priorities that support the organisation's long term success and change (Samuelsson & Nilsson, 2002). It is important to explore these questions because the purpose of the EFQM model is to support organisations in achieving business excellence through continuous improvement, learning, creativity and innovation. In addition, when analysing the integration and adjustment of the strategic planning into a quality system, we must be aware that the critical factors do not act independently but form a management system (Bou-Llusar et al., 2009; Tarí, Molina, & Castejón, 2007). In this context, the following research questions are raised:(1)What role does strategic planning play in EMSs?Do the critical factors of TQM form a management system in the context of the EFQM excellence model?How does an efficient EMS work in practice?To answer these questions, the paper is organised as follows. First, a review is made of the literature on the relationships between the TQM social, technical and strategic factors, and their effect on an organisation's results. Second, a multiple mediating model based on the EFQM model is proposed. The results are then presented, with a discussion based on the analysis of data collected from 225 Spanish firms. This study concludes with the conclusions and limitations of the study.The EFQM model presents a framework that analyses the relationships between what an organisation does and the results that it is able to attain (Dror, 2008). The criteria that the model proposes represent the indicative elements of the degree of progression that a certain organisation follows to achieve excellence. These criteria are specified in five key implementation factors or “Enablers” (leadership, policy and strategy, partnerships and resources, people, and process), and the four remaining dimensions reflect the “Results” which the organisation attains, concerning their customers, employees, society and other key factors. The “Enablers” criteria cover what an organisation does and how it does it. The EFQM model establishes how the general performance of an organisation is reached by means of a leadership that directs and impels the policy and strategy, which will become reality through the management of people, resources, alliances and processes. As can be seen, in the EFQM model, strategy (policy & strategy criteria) is specifically included as a key factor of TQM implementation. However, no explicit mention is made of TQM social or technical type factors. Nevertheless, the leadership and people criteria correspond with TQM social factors, and the other two criteria, partnerships and resources, and processes, are associated with TQM technical factors (Abdullah, Uli, & Tarí, 2008; Brown, 2002; Reiner, 2002; Bou-Llusar et al., 2009).The literature includes numerous works that analyse the relationship between TQM practices and the results of the companies. In many cases the conclusions of these works are contradictory. Thus, no clear results are obtained regarding which factors affect the results directly or indirectly or through the mediating effect of other factors (Ho, Duffy, & Shih, 2001). Controversy also exists over which are the critical factors of a social, technical or strategic nature that have a more positive and significant influence on the results (Gadenne & Sharma, 2009). In addition, the success of TQM is conditioned by the interrelationships between the factors that form the company's quality system (Bou-Llusar et al., 2009; Calvo-Mora et al., 2005).In the EFQM model, the “Results” criteria cover what an organisation achieves, regarding their customers, employees, society and other key results. The logic of the model is based on the fact that obtaining excellent results is directly related to the leadership capacity, the strategy quality and the deployment of the model through people, partners, resources and processes (EFQM, 2010). However, the relationships between the “Enablers” and the “Results” criteria are not explicitly established. For that reason, a research model (Fig. 1) is proposed which attempts to establish the possible relationships between the social, technical and strategic factors of the EFQM model and their relationship with the results of the organisation. Also, the role of strategic planning in this context is analysed in detail. Whereas Fig. 1A depicts the total effects of the TQM social factors on both the TQM Technical Factors and the Results constructs, Fig. 1B includes the policy & strategy as a mediating variable, thereby illustrating the indirect relationships postulated in Hypotheses 2–5.The leadership of the management acts as a driving force in the implementation, development and improvement of TQM within a flexible, innovative and stakeholder oriented organisational culture. The commitment of the leaders must be shaped by objectives, strategies and plans that allow the company to obtain a greater performance (Rahman & Bullock, 2005). In this sense, the way of managing and assigning the technological, information and infrastructure resources is a key element in assessing management's commitment to quality (Fotopoulos & Psomas, 2010). In addition, in the current business environment, the management of the relationships with the main suppliers of resources, and other partners, is a key element of the strategy of any organisation (Vanichchinchai & Igel, 2011). On the other hand, the effectiveness of other TQM technical factors such as product and service design, process management and the use of quality improvement tools, requires the participation of the workers through continuous training, empowerment and teamwork. In short, the TQM social and technical factors do not act independently within a Quality Management System (QMS). On the contrary, to obtain the implementation, development and improvement of a QMS, both types of factors must be integrated effectively (Rahman & Bullock, 2005). Thus, the following hypothesis is proposed:H1EFQM enablers social factors are positively related to EFQM enablers technical factors.In the present context, TQM plays an important strategic role for organisations. The reasons are, on one hand, the possibility of reaching a sustainable competitive advantage through the implementation and improvement of quality (Zatzick et al., 2012). Powell (1995) maintains that quality is an intangible strategic resource that is difficult to imitate by competitors. Reed, Lemak, and Montgomery (1996) maintain that TQM can be used in different strategic contexts, both for obtaining a costs advantage and in differentiation. Differentiation is associated with stakeholder orientation, and costs advantage with the process orientation. Prajogo and Sohal (2006) identify that TQM is related to the generic strategy of differentiation. Whereas Zatzick et al. (2012) find that TQM is positively related to performance for cost leaders.On the other hand, quality must be considered as a basic component of the strategy of any organisation, as it guarantees its survival and growth (Deming, 1982). Thus, Oakland (2011) considers that the objectives and practices of TQM must be incorporated into the strategic plan of the organisation in a systematic manner. For Dean and Evans (1994), the integration of TQM and strategic planning into an organisation's culture and practices generates synergies that accelerate and increase the probabilities of success of the strategic process, as well as the achievement of the organisation's mission and vision in a more efficient manner.In the EFQM model, strategic planning is contemplated in the policy and strategy criterion. This criterion refers to the way in which organisations instil their mission and vision through the development and deployment of stakeholder focused strategies, policies, plans, objectives and processes. In addition, they must take into account the characteristics of the business environment and the relative internal strengths and weaknesses of the organisation (EFQM, 2010). More specifically, it is a question of analysing and assessing: (1) the process of becoming attuned to the needs and expectations of the interest groups and to the relevant information in the business environment; (2) how information is translated into ideas, statements, approaches, objectives and plans; (3) the manner in which resources are assigned and activities are programmed to reach the proposed objectives; (4) how the communication and deployment of the objectives and plans is undertaken; and (5) the effectiveness of the mechanisms for the monitoring and improvement of the strategic planning process.For Oakland (2011), the policy and strategy criterion serves as guidance, and is related to the other criteria or key management factors of the EFQM model, and it indirectly conditions the results that the company is able to attain. This is because the criteria plays a crucial role in management, as it defines the foundations of the business, the stakeholders, the market segments, the objectives, processes and resources necessary to attain the results. In addition, it is the responsibility of management to establish and to communicate the strategic direction of the organisation, as well as to try to obtain the collaboration of all the relevant people and partners, to make the mission, vision and objectives a reality (Kaynak, 2003). Finally, the strategy must be put into practice through the deployment of the key processes, the correct allocation of resources and the establishment or strengthening of alliances with the organisation's main suppliers and partners (Hung, 2006). Thus, the following hypothesis is proposed:H2The relationship between EFQM enablers social factors and EFQM enablers technical factors is mediated by the policy and strategy.In general, TQM social factors exert a positive influence on an organisation's results (Rahman & Bullock, 2005), as they establish the basis of an open culture, adaptable to changes in the business environment, and play a crucial role in the orientation towards continuous improvement (Abdullah et al., 2008). Thus, the social factors should be considered as high-priority and essential for the design and implementation of effective and efficient QMSs.The EFQM model considers that the leadership concept must be applied to the people who have decision making capacity and, through their performance and behaviour, are benchmarks for others (EFQM, 2010). The mission of the leader must be to direct and manage people and other resources in order to reach the set objectives (Dean & Bowen, 1994). In addition, the strategy must create a structure and processes that are appropriate for an effective management of people, resources and alliances (Sila & Ebrahimpour, 2005). The leadership style must be both people and task focused, based on the needs and maturity of the quality system. In short, whether an organisation fails, or achieves success, will depend, to a great extent, of the quality of its leadership (Kaynak, 2003; Nair, 2006).Human resources management is another critical element of TQM. Without the involvement and commitment of all the employees, the quality programmes and initiatives are doomed to failure (Oakland, 2011). According to the EFQM model, the results that organisations attain depend to a great extent on human teamwork and its management. People management must include aspects related to the functions and formal tasks of the workers, as well as to the interpersonal and informal relationships between the workers and of these with management. Thus, human resources practices such as teamwork, continuous training, assessment and recognition systems, empowerment and the motivation or the development of creative abilities, affect the effectiveness of quality management systems and, therefore, the results of the companies (Abdullah et al., 2008; Taylor & Wright, 2003). The positive relationship between TQM social factors and results has been confirmed by empirical works such as those of Gadenne and Sharma (2009), Powell (1995), Rahman and Bullock (2005) and Calvo-Mora et al. (2014a). Based on the above contributions, the following hypothesis is proposed:H3EFQM enablers social factors are positively related to results.Calvo-Mora, Ruiz-Moreno, Picón-Berjoyo, and Cauzo-Bottala (2014b) and Fotopoulos and Psomas (2010) suggest how certain of the EFQM enablers social factors, such as leadership or human resources, influence results indirectly through process and resource management. Rahman and Bullock (2005) point to the existence of a direct influence of social factors on results and that these factors also indirectly affect performance through hard TQM elements. Prajogo and Sohal (2006) analysed the mediating effect of TQM practices on the strategy–results relationship, and found a partial mediation in the relationship between differentiation strategy and performance measures.As mentioned previously, leadership is a very important factor for the success of TQM. Thus, the management must show its involvement through the efficient allocation of the resources that support the attainment of the objectives and the improvement of all the processes (Jabnoun & Sedrani, 2005). In addition, it is the responsibility of management to attempt to obtain the commitment and involvement of all the personnel (Tutuncu & Kucukusta, 2007) who, in turn, should be empowered to participate in decision making and improvement activities. In short, people management should be integrated into the process management approach and include aspects related to the formal functions and tasks of the workers, as well as to the personal and informal relationships between the workers and with management.With respect to process management, the EFQM model establishes that the processes are the connecting link between the other critical quality factors and the results. Thus, identifying, understanding and managing the interrelated processes as a system, contributes to the effectiveness and efficiency of an organisation. Process management is a broad concept that includes the design of the organisation's products, services and processes, the prevention of errors, the search for zero-defects and innovation (Sila & Ebrahimpour, 2003). These aspects have a direct impact on the results of any type of business (Kaynak, 2003). Organisations must also make efforts to involve the suppliers and other key partners in the internal processes, as they are a very important link in the value chain of the whole organisation (Vanichchinchai & Igel, 2011; Wang, Plante, & Tang, 2013), and therefore, will contribute to achieving better results. On the other hand, the efficient management of tangible and non-tangible resources impacts on productivity, yield and financial results (Kaynak, 2003). Thus, the following hypotheses are proposed.H4The relationship between EFQM enablers social factors and results is mediated by EFQM enablers technical factors.H5The relationship between EFQM enablers social factors and results is mediated sequentially by policy and strategy and EFQM enablers technical factors.The data were obtained from the self- and external-assessment processes followed by Spanish organisations that received excellence awards between 2003 and 2010, and which use the EFQM model as a reference. The scores are derived from applying RADAR logic (Results–Approach–Deployment–Assessment and Review) to these processes (Table 1). The elements of Approach, Deployment, Assessment and Review are applied for the Facilitating Agents or Enablers, and analyse the evidence of what the organisation is doing. The Results element is used to assess the criteria related to the results. This analyses what the organisation achieves as a consequence of the efforts made.The scoring scale of the RADAR matrices for the Enablers is divided into 5 intervals ranging from value 0 (without evidence or anecdotes) to value 100 (total evidence). For the Results, the scale also varies between 0 and 100, but the significance of the extreme values changes according to the type of result that is being analysed (trend of the results, fulfilment of objectives, comparisons with other companies, causes of the results or sphere of application). The RADAR logic is a dynamic assessment framework and a powerful management tool that provides a structured approach to questioning the performance of an organisation (Williams et al., 2006).According to data contributed by the Centres of Excellence (an Association which unites the efforts of Excellence Promoting Centres throughout Spain, and which manages the Excellence Awards of the different Spanish Autonomous Communities), the total number of organisations subjected to complete assessments during the period 2003–2010 was 355. After contacting the different regional associations, a total of 225 (63.4%) complete assessments were provided. As shown in Table 2, the sample is composed of organisations in public and private ownership, of small and medium sized enterprises (SME's) and large companies. For the purposes of this paper, and according to the definition by the European Commission, SME's will be considered to be those companies which employ less than 250 people, whose annual business volume does not exceed 50 million euros or whose annual general balance does not exceed 43 million euros.Most of works that analyse the management of an organisation through the EFQM model use scales adapted from the original model (Bou-Llusar et al., 2009; Calvo-Mora et al., 2005; Eskildsen et al., 2001). This methodology is termed “self-assessment through questionnaires”. Management personnel from the different functional departments take part in this self-assessment, and they assign individual scores which are later used in the consensus meetings to arrive at the final score for each criterion and sub-criterion of the model. These scores are the basis for identifying strongpoints and areas for improvement and for designing action plans.In this study, the data were obtained through the methodology termed “assessment through participation in excellence awards”. In this case, the scores derive from the self-assessment reports made by the companies, and which are later validated by independent experts through an external assessment. In this assessment, the evidence contributed in the self-assessment reports are analysed and visits are made to the companies to obtain the definitive scores. The reliability and validity of the measures obtained in this way have been confirmed by Pannirselvam and Ferguson (2001).The TQM critical factors and results are measured through the 9 criteria and 32 sub-criteria of the EFQM model (Table 3). In addition, due to the used methodology (“assessment through participation in excellence awards”), sub-criteria were scored on the basis of more than 200 questions or, as the EFQM model describes, “Elements to consider”. These elements set out in detail the actions taken by organisations (evidence) and the specific tools, techniques and practices that they use in relation to the sub-criteria being assessed.This study uses four variables, with the policy and strategy variable modelled as a first-order construct, i.e. these theoretical concepts are considered inferred from manifest variables or indicators. The TQM social factors, TQM technical factors and the Result variables were designed as a multidimensional construct. This means that those variables consist of a number of dimensions, and the construct is measured by such first-order factors. Specifically, the TQM social factors variable is formed by two dimensions, leadership and people; the TQM technical factors variable by the partners and resources, and processes dimensions; and the Results variable by the four results related dimensions of clients, people, society and the key results of the business. Finally, all the measures used are reflective in character.The research models depicted in Fig. 1 were tested using a variance-based structural equation modelling. Specifically, the Partial Least Squares (PLS) technique (Hair, Hult, Ringle, & Sarstedt, 2014) was applied. PLS allows the assessment of the measurement model and testing of the links proposed between constructs (Roldán & Sánchez-Franco, 2012). The choice of PLS in this study is based on the following reasons: (1) this research is focused on the prediction of dependent variables (Chin, 2010) and tackles a theory building environment (exploratory analysis) (Peng & Lai, 2012); (2) the research model is complex, both in the hypothesised relationships (direct and mediated) and the measurement model applied (large numbers of indicators, and first and second order constructs) (Peng & Lai, 2012); (3) the sample is not too large (n = 225), and following Reinartz, Haenlein, and Henseler (2009, p. 342) “PLS should be the method of choice for all situations in which the number of observations is lower than 250”; (4) scores for latent variables have been used in subsequent analysis (second order construct modelling) for predictive relevance (Chin, 2010). The software used was SmartPLS 2.0. M3 (Ringle, Wende, & Will, 2005).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present research provides several practical recommendations for organisations immersed in management processes and quality improvement according to the EFQM model, as well as for organisations which, although not formally undertaking EFQM self-assessment processes, are involved in a TQM philosophy implementation project.Firstly, although the EFQM model is a non-prescriptive framework, i.e. it can be used in different ways, the research shows its systemic character. Therefore, if an organisation attempts to attain satisfactory and consistent results over time, it must not focus its efforts solely on improving those facets of management that are distant from excellence. On the contrary, it must analyse and, where necessary, globally improve and strengthen both the management facet and the results achieved. For example, it will serve an organisation little to focus its efforts on improving or strengthening process, and resource and alliance management (TQM technical factors), if it does not have the support and involvement of the management and the workers (TQM social factors) or if these efforts are not systematically integrated into the strategic planning of the organisation.Secondly, the research emphasises the crucial role played by strategic planning in the success of an EMS; and more so today when organisations are action-oriented, and daily activity seems to be what gives direction to management. Nevertheless, excellence involves us questioning who we are and where we want to go. This is where the management and the people play an important role when establishing the organisation's mission, vision and values. Subsequently, the organisation would have to be asked what can facilitate, and what can prevent, the attainment of the mission and vision; in short, it must design its selected strategy to reach its proposed future. The strategy has to be coherent with the values, and take into account stakeholder needs and expectations, and the business environment in which the organisation's activity in undertaken. Therefore, it is essential to have updated information on what is happening outside the organisation, and on the internal indicators of the results of the internal activity. In this point it is crucial to create a systematic method for the monitoring and review of the strategy and the objectives which allows possible changes to be anticipated quickly. Accordingly, transforming strategic planning into a daily element of management involves the development of an efficient communication dynamic. However, nothing will be achieved by planning alone; it will be necessary to specify the strategic objectives and to deploy the strategy in the different organisational levels by designing a schematic of the key processes. In addition, for these processes to work, it will be necessary to involve and train the people who participate in their execution, and to have suitable allocation and management of various resources (material, financial and knowledge). Finally, the management must continuously monitor the proposed actions and the degree of achievement of the objectives. The EFQM model offers a wide variety of indicators for this purpose in the section dedicated to the assessment of the results that the organisation is reaching in terms of clients, people, society, and the key results of the business, mainly of an economic-financial nature.The interpretation of the results and conclusions of this study are subject to a series of limitations, principally of a methodological character. The first limitation is due to the technique used for the proposed model: structural equation modelling, which assumes the linearity of relationships between the latent variables. The second is related to the notion of causality. Our study considered a soft modelling approach oriented more towards prediction than causality. While causation guarantees the ability to control events, predictability only allows a limited degree of control (Falk & Miller, 1992). Notwithstanding, establishing causation is not easy in social research. Following Cook and Campbell (1979), determining causation requires demonstrating association, temporal precedence, and isolation. Statistical analysis alone cannot tentatively prove causation, because it does not establish isolation or temporal ordering (Bullock, Harlow, & Mulaik, 1994). Finally, the research design is cross-sectional instead of longitudinal. In this case, with a longitudinal study it would be possible to analyse the effects of TQM on the results in more detail, as the benefits of the management and quality improvement are appraised over the medium and long term.