@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Decline and repair, and covariate effects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modelled the failure process of repairable systems in the presence of covariates.Derived probabilistic properties of the failure and repair process for such systems.Obtained new results for age reduction models with time-dependent covariates.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Repair,Proportional intensity model,Virtual age,Maintenance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The failure processes of repairable systems may be impacted by operational and environmental stress factors. To accommodate such factors, reliability can be modelled using a multiplicative intensity function. In the proportional intensity model, the failure intensity is the product of the failure intensity function of the baseline system that quantifies intrinsic factors and a function of covariates that quantify extrinsic factors. The existing literature has extensively studied the failure processes of repairable systems using general repair concepts such as age-reduction when no covariate effects are considered. This paper investigates different approaches for modelling the failure and repair process of repairable systems in the presence of time-dependent covariates. We derive probabilistic properties of the failure processes for such systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Modelling the repair effect plays an important role in optimisation of maintenance policies. The existing methods for modelling the repair effect have not considered time-dependent covariates that can influence the failure process of systems. This needs to be studied as maintaining a repairable system does not imply that extrinsic factors quantified through covariates are also maintained. For example, a maintenance action on a system may restore the system to a younger status, but it does mean that the covariates of the system will be also brought to younger status or have the same virtual ages as the system. This causes a problem in that the argument in the baseline intensity function and the argument in the covariates are unsynchronized. Particular models such as the proportional intensity models in condition-based maintenance are becoming popular and highlighted by researchers and practitioners. It is important for maintenance policy modellers to recognise the problem of asynchronicity after repair. This problem is tackled in this paper.This is the first paper to investigate a class of multiplicative intensity models in which maintenance intervention (service, preventive maintenance, or repair) not only modifies the baseline intensity but also the arguments of covariates. The baseline intensity quantifies intrinsic factors that affect system reliability; the covariates quantify the level or value of extrinsic factors that affect system reliability. Thus we are the first to develop models of repair in which both intrinsic and extrinsic factors are influenced by maintenance intervention and in which the extent of the influence upon intrinsic factors may be different from that upon extrinsic factors.The findings of this paper include:•when the effect of the covariates on maintained systems is time-independent, existing approaches to modelling the repair effect for the baseline system can be directly applied to model that for the operational system;when the effect of the covariates on maintained systems is time-dependent and the repair effect models are based on reduction of failure intensity, existing approaches to modelling repair effect for the baseline system can be directly applied to model that for the operational system;when the effect of the covariates on maintained systems is time-dependent and the repair effect models are based on reduction of age, existing approaches to modelling repair effect for the baseline system cannot be directly applied to model that for the operational system;we develop new results to consider this last case.As we mentioned in the discussion section, our future work is to study situations when more complicated age-reduction models are applied to the baseline systems and the argument in the covariates is not synchronised with the argument in the baseline failure intensity. The difficulty here is that it is not easy to find a function that can map the argument in the baseline function to the argument in the covariates.