@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An exact solution algorithm for maximizing the fleet availability of a unit of aircraft subject to flight and maintenance requirements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an integer programming model for maximizing the fleet availability of a unit of aircraft.We develop an exact solution algorithm for solving this model.We present results evaluating the performance of this algorithm.This algorithm solves realistic problems much faster than two optimization software packages.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mixed integer programming,Fleet availability,Flight and Maintenance Planning,Exact solution algorithm,Valid inequalities,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We address the Flight and Maintenance Planning (FMP) problem, i.e., the problem of deciding which available aircraft to fly and for how long, and which grounded aircraft to perform maintenance operations on in a group of aircraft that comprise a unit. The aim is to maximize the unit fleet availability over a multi-period planning horizon, while also ensuring that certain flight and maintenance requirements are satisfied. Heuristic approaches that are used in practice to solve the FMP problem often perform poorly, generating solutions that are far from the optimum. On the other hand, the exact optimization models that have been developed to tackle the problem handle small problems effectively, but tend to be computationally inefficient for larger problems, such as the ones that arise in practice. With these in mind, we develop an exact solution algorithm for the FMP problem, which is capable of identifying the optimal solution of considerably large realistic problems in reasonable computational times. The algorithm solves suitable relaxations of the original problem, utilizing valid cuts that guide the search towards the optimal solution. We present extensive experimental results, which demonstrate that the algorithm's performance on realistic problems is superior to that of two popular commercial optimization software packages, whereas the opposite is true for a class of problems with special characteristics that deviate considerably from those of realistic problems. The important conclusion of this research is that the proposed algorithm, complemented by generic optimization software, can handle effectively a large variety of FMP problem instances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Flight and Maintenance Planning (FMP) is an important decision making problem arising on the operational level of numerous types of mission fleets, involving military or fire-fighting aircraft, rescue choppers, etc. The objective is to maximize the fleet availability of a unit of mission aircraft over a multi-period planning horizon, while also ensuring that certain flight and maintenance requirements are satisfied. Simple heuristic techniques that are used in practice to solve the FMP problem often perform poorly, generating solutions that are far from the optimum. On the other hand, the exact optimization models that have been developed to tackle the problem handle small problems effectively, but tend to be computationally inefficient for larger problems, such as the ones that arise in practice, forcing researchers to resort to heuristics for solving them.To overcome these obstacles, in this work we develop an exact solution algorithm for the FMP problem, which is capable of identifying the optimal solution of considerably large realistic problems in very reasonable computational times. Initially, the algorithm obtains a valid upper bound on the optimal fleet availability by solving a simplified relaxation of the original problem. In subsequent iterations, this bound is gradually reduced, until a feasible solution is identified. Solutions encountered along the search procedure that do not qualify for feasibility and therefore cannot be optimal are excluded from further consideration through the addition of suitable valid inequalities (cuts). The algorithm terminates when the first feasible solution that attains the current fleet availability bound is identified, which, naturally, comprises the optimal solution of the problem.A preliminary version of this paper was presented at an international conference (Gavranis & Kozanidis, 2013). With respect to that work, this paper presents additional theoretical findings, further algorithmic details, and considerably more extensive computational results. Its remainder is structured as follows. In Section 2 we summarize the related literature and we present a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation for the FMP problem in Section 3. In Section 4 we develop the proposed solution algorithm, and in Section 5 we present experimental results evaluating its computational performance. In Section 6 we discuss some interesting model extensions, and in Section 7 we summarize this work and we point to promising directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
