@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On modeling the advertising-operations interface under asymmetric competition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Profit model of N firms, each controls its advertising budget and order quantity.Both non-dominated and dominated oligopolies are considered in the analysis.Impact of changes in parameters on control variables of all rivals is examined.Impact of a change in mode of competition on performance is examined.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Advertising endogeneity,Economic order quantity,Market-share attraction models,Sensitivity analysis,Supermodular games,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Using a market share attraction structure of advertising competition and following a supermodular game approach, this article demonstrates for an asymmetric oligopoly, the directional impact of changes in model parameters on the marketing controlled variables of all rivals (advertising budgets) and the operations controlled variables of all rivals (ordered quantities). Importantly, the various changes are examined analytically, empirically and numerically in both non-dominated and dominated asymmetric oligopolies.In this regard, the results indicate that firms in a dominated oligopoly (one firm of market share larger than or equal to 50%) behave differently compared to firms in a non-dominated oligopoly (each firm of market share less than 50%) in response to changes in model parameters. Furthermore, changes in model parameters are investigated in terms of their relative influential impact on a variety of equilibrium measures. In this regard, the findings indicate that for the analyzed model the marketing parameters exert much more influence on the equilibrium measures than the operations parameters.Additionally, a change in the mode of competition from non-cooperation (oligopoly) to cooperation (joint ownership) dictates that strong asymmetric firms (of favorable marketing and operations parameters) continue advertising (but at lower levels) and weak asymmetric firms (of less favorable parameters) cease advertising altogether.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An important component in present-day modeling of marketing-mix effects is the accommodation of asymmetries in competition (Leeflang, Wittink, Wedel, & Neart, 2000, p. 286). The literature attributes unequal competition between brands in a product category to preference heterogeneity (Blattberg & Wisniewski, 1989), income effect (Allenby & Rossi, 1991), loss aversion (Hardie, Johnson, & Fader, 1993), or dominance effects (Heath et al., 2000). An assessment of alternative theories of asymmetry leads Neslin (2002, Chap. 13, p. 314) to conclude that market share is the key factor. Thus in today’s environment, the question is how, not whether, asymmetry in competition should be accommodated (Leeflang et al., 2000, p. 287). Because change is the only constant in today’s market environment, it is advantageous for a vigilant competitor to ascertain how to adapt its strategy in response to changes in the market to maintain or enhance its position (Mesak, 2003, p. 1792; Coughlan et al., 2010, p. 321).Cross-functional interface encompasses the organizational structures, tactics and policies adopted by firms to manage the information flow, the conflicts and the mutual objectives between two distinct functional areas (Moenaert & Souder, 1996). Marketing and operations as functional areas represent the key value adding areas of the modern business enterprise. It is these areas that are influential in specifying what is produced, how it is produced and actually delivering goods and services to customers. Manifest interfunctional conflict (defined by Barclay 1991 as the degree to which managers in one functional group behave in a way that frustrates another functional group) between marketing and operations is common. Marketing often assumes that production can be increased (or decreased) instantly and, in turn, tends to provide imprecise forecasts and promise short lead times. But the production schedule, once made, can be significantly inflexible. Notable examples are provided below.In early 1990, the Gillette Company (the dominant competitor in the Blades and Razors for Men category) spent millions of dollars advertising its new Sensor razor. The company underestimated the effect of its huge advertising launch, which resulted in poor volume forecasting. Retailers, faced with customers seeking the product, were unable to satisfy all of the demand. Furthermore, when customers they did find the product, they were subsequently unable to find replacement blades (Crittenden, Gardiner, & Stam, 1993). More recently, the Nintendo Wii was still hard to find almost a year after it was launched in 2006 since marketing failed to forecast such high demand. While operations attempted to triple the North American workforce and almost double the worldwide workforce to meet demand, marketing continued to advertise while the product remained in scarce supply – thus further exasperating the supply–demand imbalance.Nintendo Wii continued to be in fierce competition with its two main competitors in the non-dominated video-game consoles category: Microsoft’s Xbox and Sony’s Play Station (Rusetski, 2012). The conflict between marketing and operations has been discussed in the literature in detail (Piercy, 2007; Shapiro, 1977) and how to reduce the conflict has been also addressed (Artz, Homberg, & Rajab, 2012; Omurgonulsen & Surucu, 2008; Piercy, 2010).Since the publication of the pioneering article of Whitin (1955), several researchers developed different forms of operations-marketing interface models with the objective of integrating both functions. Eliashberg and Steinberg (1993, Chap. 18), Parente (1998), Yano and Gilbert (2004, Chap. 3), Chan, Shen, Simchi-Levi, and Swann (2004) and more recently Tang (2010) and Martinez-Costa, Mos-Machuca, and Lusa, 2013 provide lucid reviews of the literature on the subject. While several analytical models integrating the operations and the pricing and/or product assortment (product variety) in a competitive market have been published, published research integrating the operations and the advertising functions in a competitive market for which analytical findings supported by the empirical and numerical evidence are scarce.According to the Statistical Abstract of the United States (2012), aggregate advertising expenditures in the U.S. has grown to $170 billion dollars in 2010 whereas according to an US Census Bureau (2011) report, American 2010year-end total manufacturing inventories were worth $534 billion dollars. Given that individual business enterprises commit significant resources on advertising and inventory, investigating better ways of investing such large sums of money would undoubtedly be fruitful.Our investigation focuses on the development of a competitive inventory model with advertising-dependent demand. Asymmetry is accommodated by using a market share attraction model of advertising competition (Cooper & Nakanishi, 1988). The present study has three main objectives. The first objective is to investigate analytically how a firm would adapt an optimum advertising expenditure and optimum ordered quantity in response to changes in any of its own parameters, rival parameters, or the parameters that are common to all firms in an asymmetric oligopolistic market. The second objective attempts to answer a research question that has not been fully addressed before. In a dominated asymmetric oligopolistic market (where market share of one firm is larger than or equal to 50%), should rivals adjust their advertising expenditures and ordered quantities in a manner consistent or inconsistent with a non-dominated asymmetric oligopoly (where every market share is less than 50%)? The third objective is to examine the effect of the interaction between the mode of cooperation and asymmetry on the advertising policy of a given firm. A related literature review and the main contributions of the study are highlighted next.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
One main objective of this research is to examine how a firm would adapt its optimal advertising budget and the size of its ordered quantity in response to changes in its own relevant parameters and rival parameters to enhance performance in an asymmetric dominated and non-dominated competitive settings. A second main objective is to examine how the marketing-operations interface influences the advertising strategies of asymmetric firms upon a change in the mode of competition from non-cooperation (oligopoly) to cooperation (joint ownership).The analysis reveals many interesting findings compared to prior studies that impose the symmetric assumption on firms when deriving the equilibrium. From the analytical side, using a “supermodular games approach”, considered a novel application in the marketing-operations interface literature, this research derives sensitivity analyses (comparative statics) related to an asymmetric competitive inventory model with advertising-dependent demand in a coordinated setting. For non-dominated oligopolies, the behaviors of all rivals in response to changes in model parameters are shown to be symmetric. On the other hand, for dominated oligopolies the behavior of the dominant firm compared to the behaviors of its non-dominant rivals as manifested in the study of Sivakumar (2004) are shown to be asymmetric (Propositions 2 and 3).In addition, a change in the mode of competition from non-cooperation (oligopoly) to cooperation (joint ownership) dictates that strong asymmetric firms (of favorable marketing and operations parameters) continue advertising (but at lower levels) and weak asymmetric firms (of less favorable parameters) cease advertising altogether (Proposition 5). The contents of Proposition 5 (aided with the findings of Table 8) provide simple rules based on the marketing-operations interface according to which a category manager or a holding company that owns firms in the same line of business would rationalize related advertising decisions.From the empirical and numerical sides, upon estimating a market-share attraction model that accounts for advertising endogeneity using panel data related to the U.S. brewing industry, extensive numerical experiments are primarily conducted to examine the relative impact of changes in model parameters on the controlled marketing variables (advertising budgets) and the controlled operations variables (ordered quantities) together with the performance measures of market share, total inventory cost and profitability. The results of the numerical experiments indicate that changes in the unit inventory holding cost per unit time, Ch, and the ordering cost per order, Co, parameters of a firm have only significant impact on the ordered quantity and the total inventory cost of its own whereas changes in the profit margin per unit sold, γ, advertising effectiveness, β, and degree of concavity, δ, parameters of a firm possess significant impact on all of the controlled variables and the performance measures mentioned above of its own as well as its rivals. Such important findings imply that management, as a first priority, would make efforts to change parameters γ, β and δ as dictated by Table 4 in directions that would enhance performance. Therefore, managers need to be aware of circumstances that may affect the model parameters (Mesak, 2003). Notable examples are provided below.The profit margin of a competitor, γ, could change due to adoption of new technology, improved efficiency in production/operations, purchasing policies, etc. The parameters associated with the attraction function, namely advertising effectiveness, β and the attraction function shaping parameter, δ, of a competitor can be affected in two distinct manners as identified by Little (1979). In the event a firm changes its advertising copy with the objective to communicate the same information better or provide a better demonstration of their product, parameter β is likely to be affected. However, if the goal is to reposition the product and appeal to a different group of consumers, parameter δ is likely to change. Stevenson (2008) mentions that holding or carrying costs include opportunity costs associated with having funds which could be used elsewhere tied up in inventory, insurance, taxes (in some jurisdictions), depreciation, obsolescence, deterioration, spoilage, pilferage, breakage, and warehouse costs (heat, light, rent, security). A change in one or more of the above cost items would result in a change of the Chparameter. Also, Stevenson (2008) mentions that ordering costs include determining how much is needed, preparing invoices, shipping costs, inspecting goods upon arrival for quality and quantity, and moving the goods to temporary storage. A change in one or more of the above cost items would cause a change in the Coparameter. Finally, the market potential m can be affected by factors like population, average income per capita, and other factors that may influence the demand for the product (Lilien, Kotler, & Moorthy, 1992).Furthermore, coordination of the functional areas of marketing and operations by using cross-functional teams (particularly to encounter the dysfunctional effect of internal volatility) is pivotal to performance enhancement (see discussion related to Proposition 1). Management should be aware that internal volatility for high-technology firms (e.g., producers of computer related technologies) is at levels much higher than low-technology firms (e.g., producers of brewing products). Therefore, the frequency of usage of cross-functional teams in the former firms should be much higher than that for the later firms. In both types of organizations, however, firms should rely on a relatively stable formal organizational structure to promote the efficacy of cross-functional teams (Bahrami, 1992; Maltz & Kohli, 2000) as well as enhance the reliability of performance measures (Artz et al., 2012).Studying the advertising–operations interface in a competitive setting is challenging. A particular challenge for the authors has been to construct a model theoretically rich enough to capture the essential features of the situation, yet sufficiently simple to conduct reasonable rigorous theoretical, empirical and numerical analyses. Gupta, Verma, and Victorino (2006, p. 443) emphasize that the combined use of analytical, empirical and numerical research techniques offers greater insights into the issues being studied. In this regard, the model in the present study offers a framework for further research in the future.First, future research could investigate the linkage between the statements of the propositions derived analytically and empirical firms’ behaviors for several industries.Second, the present study has arrived at several results based on profit as a performance measure. Indeed, other performance measures have been used in the literature such as maximizing profit subject to market share, or subject to a certain level of consumer surplus to avoid antitrust activities (Kadiyali, Sudhir, & Rao, 2001, p. 175). Thus a plausible direction for future research would be to examine the robustness of our research findings when alternative performance measures are employed.Third, in this research work we have aggregated advertising across all media. An interesting area for future research would be to consider different advertising media of different effectiveness and examine synergy effects among them (Naik & Raman, 2003).Fourth, the current study employs a basic EOQ model within a profit maximizing framework which can be extended to incorporate inflation and taxes into account. Studies by Chandra and Bahner (1985) and Biddle and Martin (1985) could be instructional in this regard.Fifth, the present inquiry considers a deterministic market-share attraction model of advertising competition. Relaxing such an assumption by introducing a stochastic mechanism (e.g., Monahan & Sobel, 1994) would offer a plausible direction for future research.Sixth, future research would consider including other marketing variables such as price in the attraction function. In addition, the analysis could be enriched by incorporating other functions in the modeling effort such as finance (capital structure), human resources (employee turnover), research and development (new product introduction) etc.Seventh, the modeling framework developed in Section 5 could be enlarged in scope by considering the risk attitude and the bargaining power of the participating parties.Finally, the present study promotes the creation of a conducive atmosphere by which entities within and between departments of a firm would be convinced to cooperate together to make joint decisions to serve the same and higher objective (Kaplan & Norton, 2001a, 2001b).