@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The nuclear medicine production and delivery problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A nuclear medicine production and delivery problem is defined and modeled.A mixed integer programming model is developed.A large neighborhood algorithm with improvement algorithms is proposed.A benchmark problem set is developed.Computational results including a case study show that the approach performs well.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Routing,Nuclear medicine,Half-life,Production and delivery,Vehicle routing,Large neighborhood search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Half-life is a unique characteristic of radioactive substances used in a variety of medical treatments. Radioisotope F-18 used for diagnosing and monitoring many types of cancers has a half-life of 110minutes. As such, it requires careful coordination of production and delivery by manufacturers and medical end-users. To model this critical production and delivery problem, we develop a mixed integer program and propose a variant of a large neighborhood search algorithm with various improvement algorithms. We conduct several computational experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. The method when applied in a case study shows that improvement in terms of both time and cost is possible in the production and delivery of F-18.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To our knowledge, no previous work has considered the nuclear medicine production and delivery problems (NMPDP) posed by F-18, an isotope that requires scrupulous determination of manufacturing levels as well as accounting for its rapid deterioration. In this paper we develop a mixed integer programming (MIP) model and propose a variant of a large neighborhood search (LNS) algorithm with various improvement algorithms. We conduct several computational experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. We conclude that the approach will help manufacturers and the medical community produce and deliver F-18 considering both time and cost.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The detailed problem is described in Section 2. A literature review is presented in Section 3. The MIP model and our proposed approach are presented in Sections 4 and 5. Our experimental results are shown in Section 6. A case study is presented in Section 7 and our concluding remarks are presented in Section 8.The description below is based on a manufacturer that produces only radioisotope F-18 that we observed. Physicians order nuclear medicine, such as F-18, based on a specified level of radiation according to their injection plans for the medicine. The manufacture gathers a set of customer orders a day in advance, each of which corresponds to a hospital and perhaps multiple patients, and schedules delivery vehicles to visit each hospital. Each customer has a requested quantity of F-18 and time window for delivery. The end of time window corresponds to the medicine’s usage time. F-18’s half-life, 110minutes, is the elapsed time until the number of atoms reduces to the half of its initial state. To meet the specified radiation level, the quantity of medicine produced is determined based on the production time and the usage time accounting for F-18’s half-life. The production quantity must be equal todi2(li-fi)/HL, where di, li, fiand HL correspond to demand radiation quantity, use time, production termination time of order i, and the half-life, respectively.The F-18 manufacturer batches customer orders in a production run. The factory has multiple cyclotrons, each capable of multiple production runs in a day. In this paper, we divide a cyclotron’s production capacity into production runs with fixed start and end times. Management typically schedules the cyclotrons to cope with F-18’s unpredictable low yield, which results from the process’s stochastic nature. For this reason the manufacturer we observed prefers preset production runs although they may cause delivery vehicles to wait or excessive use of cyclotrons. We assume that when a production run is used, a fixed production cost occurs regardless of the production quantity, and that if no customer orders are assigned to a production run, there is no production cost for the run.In the problem, vehicles with different capacities, i.e., heterogeneous vehicles, are available for delivery from the plant to the customer stops. Time windows in which the vehicles are available are given and multiple trips per vehicle are allowed. Special packaging1International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) suggests Type A packaging, which seals F-18 with a fiberboard box, a wooden box, and a steel drum filled with supplementary radiation-blocking materials. (IAEA, 2012, Cyclotron produced radionuclides: Guidance on Facility Design and Production of [18F]Fluorodeoxyglucose(FDG), IAEA Radioisotopes and Radiopharmaceuticals Series No. 3).1protects workers and the public from radiation, and maintains product integrity. Split deliveries are not allowed and a single vehicle services a customer order.We summarize the assumptions in the model to characterize the manufacturer’s operations:–The manufacturer has K different machines (cyclotrons) with different capacity.Each machine has a fixed number of scheduled production runs with fixed start and end times.One or many production runs can be skipped when appropriate.Vehicles start and end at the manufacturing plant.Multiple trips are possible for each vehicle.Demand quantities and delivery times are specified for each customer order.A customer order is serviced by a single vehicle (split delivery is not allowed).A single vehicle can deliver a product produced in separate production runs.The end of a customer’s time window is the medicine usage time. A vehicle arriving before the customer’s earliest allowed time waits until the time window begins. Late arrival after the time window is prohibited.Production quantities are determined accounting for the half-life of F-18 and the duration between production and delivery times.The NMPDP also presents two sub-problems. Considering only the production scheduling component, it becomes a special type of bin packing problem, i.e., the production runs are modeled as bins and the customer orders are items. Since the production runs have different capacities, this problem becomes a variable-sized bin packing problem. Further, the size (production quantity) of items (customer orders) changes depending on the bin (production run) used. Thus, the production scheduling problem is a special case of the variable-sized bin packing problem (Pisinger & Sigurd, 2005).The routing component, i.e., fixing the production schedule, becomes a vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW). While vehicles leave the depot (production facility) at any time in a typical VRPTW, however, the embedded VRPTW in the problem specifies the ready times for the customer orders. The embedded VRPTW problem is similar to the pickup and delivery problem with time windows (PDPTW) (Dumas, Desrosiers, & Soumis, 1991; Lee, Ferdinand, Kim, & Ko, 2010).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper described a nuclear medicine production and delivery problem (NMPDP) in which the production quantity of the medicine, F-18, for a customer varied depending on when it was produced due to a half-life of 110 minutes, and the production time determines the vehicle’s earliest departure time from the plant to the customer. F-18’s half-life, a unique characteristic, makes this NMPDP different from other perishable product delivery, newspaper delivery, and integrated production and delivery problems.We developed a MIP model, presented a benchmark data set, and proposed a variant of a large neighborhood search algorithm with various improvement algorithms. The results showed that the proposed approach performed well on the benchmark instances. When practically applied, the proposed approach improved current practice by reducing the number of vehicles.This research suggests some further investigations. An efficient exact algorithm for the NMPDP can be pursued. Although we developed an MIP model for the problem, it could not be solved optimally for practical size problems nor could it give meaningful tight bounds. Branch-and-price-and-cut algorithms based with several valid inequalities give quite good solutions for the VRP families (Chabrier, 2006; Desaulniers, 2010; Jin, Liu, & Eksioglu, 2008). A similar approach can be pursued for the NMPDP. An efficient rescheduling algorithm is also needed. F-18’s unstable yield rate, which results in different production quantities versus expectations, suggests the possibility of reassigning the demands to the production runs and generating route solutions whenever a production run completes and the production quantity is different than expected. Moreover, a more elaborately designed bin packing algorithm could improve the solution since FFD does not guarantee feasible assignment for an instance of NMPDP which is solvable. Various bounds and relaxations also can be tested to resolve the production run assignment.