@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A tractable interest rate model with explicit monetary policy rates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper introduces a novel framework that allows for a simple pricing of various fixed-income instruments.Analytical formulas are provided for swaps, futures, swaptions, caps and floors.The model is consistent with the fact that the short-end of the yield curve is mainly driven by central-bank decisions.An application shows how the model can be exploited to infer risk-neutral probabilities of central-bank rate decisions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Yield curve,Option pricing,Regime switching,Market expectations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a novel interest rate model that presents simple analytical pricing formulas for interest rate-based derivatives, including swaps, futures, swaptions, caps and floors. Exploring the regime-switching feature of Markov chains, the proposed model focuses on discrete changes in the central bank policy rates – the main driver of short-term rate fluctuations. An empirical analysis shows that the proposed model generally outperforms other standard short-term rate models in fitting cross-sections of options prices. Moreover, the explicit nature of policy rates, to some extent, enables the model to infer risk-neutral probabilities of the central-bank rate decisions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to data collected by the Bank for International Settlements (2015), the notional amount outstanding of interest rate derivatives has been multiplied by eight over the last fifteen years. This amount is more than six times larger than world GDP in 2014, sixty times larger than that of equity-linked derivatives.Any change in interest rates affects the market value of these vast amounts of derivatives as well as the pricing of newly contracted ones. As a result, the sources of interest rate movements are highly scrutinised. This contributes to the particular attention given to central banks by financial markets. Indeed, monetary authorities steer the short-end of the yield curve by deciding on the policy rates. Moreover, the influence of central bankers is not limited to short-term rates; theoretical and empirical evidence points to a strong impact of monetary policy decisions and communication on medium to long-term rates.11See, among many others, Kuttner (2001), Rigobon and Sack (2004)Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) or Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).Despite the pervasive relationship between monetary policy and the yield curve, very few term structure models explicitly incorporate central-bank policy rates. In particular, standard models, where short-term rates typically follow Gaussian or square-root diffusions, do not accommodate the fact that most of the short-term rate fluctuations are accounted for by infrequent changes in the policy rates. This notably implies that conditional distributions of future interest rates derived from these models are not fully realistic, at least for short-term interest rates.22Consider for instance the case where the policy rate is a multiple of 25 bps and where the overnight interbank rate is always close to – and on average equal to – the policy rate. Then, the conditional distribution of future overnight interest rate should be multimodal, with modes being multiple of 25 bps. This cannot be replicated by standard models.Insofar as interest rate derivatives pricing precisely depends on these distributions, one may be concerned about the pricing ability of standard models. Nevertheless, the latter are widely used and various studies illustrate their reasonable fitting performances (e.g. Brigo & Mercurio, 2001, 2007; Gupta & Subrahmanyam, 2005; Martellini, Priaulet, & Priaulet, 2003). These comforting results are however obtained for calibration exercises performed on homogenous sets of market prices where, typically, a single class of interest rate options is present. The rare analyses that consider the ability of standard models to simultaneously price a wider variety of derivatives show less positive results (e.g. Jagannathan, Kaplin, & Sun, 2003). Arguably, a model based on more realistic interest rate dynamics may have less difficulties in matching large cross-sections of market prices. The results presented below do support this view.In this paper, I introduce a novel interest rate model where policy rates occupy the central place. An extensive and original use of Markov-switching chains makes it possible to capture the step-like dynamics of policy rates. In spite of the important number of regimes it features – typically higher than 100 – the modeling approach remains particularly tractable, offering closed-form pricing formulas for swaps, futures, swaptions, caps and floors. These formulas involve only basic algebraic operations, ensuring fast and simple model calibrations.33By incorporating policy rates, my model features more structure than other short-rate models. However, as the latter, it does not account for other factors, such as demand pressure for specific instruments, that may also affect the values of derivatives. This is beyond the scope of this paper.Based on euro-area yield and option data covering the last decade, an empirical analysis explores the fitting performance of the model. Specifically, at each date in the sample, the model is calibrated so as to fit a cross-section of swap yields and interest rate option prices (swaptions, caps and floors). The resulting fit is compared with those obtained with traditional short-rate models.44The alternative models are the Vasicek model, the CIR model, the extended CIR model (CIR++) and the extended two-factor Gaussian model. An in-depth description of these models can be found in Brigo and Mercurio (2007).The results suggest that the proposed model generally outperforms its competitors in fitting cross-sections of options prices. In a second exercise, the different models are calibrated on swaps and swaptions data only. Prices of caps and floors are then computed using the calibrated models. It appears that the cap and floor prices stemming from the regime-based model are closer to the (out-of-sample) observed prices than those derived from the other models. For instance, over the period 2010–2014, the mean absolute fitting error on cap and floor prices resulting from the present model is of 5 basis points – that is about 7 percent of the option prices – against 13 basis points – about 17 percent of the option prices – for the best of the alternative models. Hence, when it comes to price options for which no prices are available, the present model appears to be more reliable than its competitors; such a property makes the model particularly appealing for trading purposes.In an additional application, I show how this framework stands as a relevant tool to recover market expectations of monetary policy – an application that is of particular interest for central bankers and market analysts alike. Being the first model in the literature that combines (a) explicit monetary policy rates and (b) a simple calibration based on derivatives prices, this model offers a natural and convenient way to recover market-implied probabilities of future policy changes. As illustrated by Krueger and Kuttner (1998) and Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2007), certain untransformed market data – such as the Fed funds futures rates or overnight indexed swaps (OISs) – can readily be interpreted as market expectations of future policy rates. Yet, while these rates may be informative to reveal the mean path expected by market participants, they do not reflect the market views regarding possible deviations from this path. Instead, as argued in Carlson, Craig, and Melick (2005) and Emmons, Lakdawala, and Neely (2006), option prices contain useful information about the market perception of uncertainty. The last two papers use specific options, namely the options on U.S. Fed funds futures, to recover the distributions of future policy rates. Unfortunately, such options do not trade in the euro area, as in many other currency areas.55Besides, as mentioned by Emmons, Lakdawala, and Neely (2006), these futures-option contracts do not have sufficient liquidity to derive expectations more than a few months ahead.By contrast, a wide range of standard interest rate derivatives can feed my model, allowing it to capture an aggregated market view.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the literature of interest rate modeling. Section 3 sets forth the model and the pricing formulas. A basic specification of the model is explored in Section 4. Empirical exercises are presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.The framework introduced in this paper extends the family of so-called short-rate models. These models are defined through the dynamics – i.e. the transition distribution – of the short-term rate.66Comprehensive reviews of the literature on interest rate modeling are provided by Boero and Torricelli (1996), Broadie and Detemple (2004) and Schmidt (2011); influential books are those of Rebonato (1998), Shreve (2004) and Brigo and Mercurio (2007).Once this dynamics is specified, the prices of all interest rate-sensitive instruments result from the computation of the conditional expectation of discounted payoffs (see for instance Cochrane (2001), Sundaram (1997) or Shreve (2004)). The most prominent short-rate models include: the one-factor Gaussian model of Vasicek (1977), its two-factor version of Hull and White (1994) and the square-root model of Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985) (CIR hereinafter). Important extensions of these models have been proposed by Hull and White (1990), Jamshidian (1995), Brigo and Mercurio (2001) and Moreno and Platania (2015). These models feature closed-form formulas for a variety of interest rate derivatives, which explains their popularity among practitioners and researchers alike.The model I introduce below differs from the previous ones in that it explicitly incorporates policy rates. This paper provides evidence that this novel model is better at fitting large cross-sections of derivative prices. Piazzesi (2005) and Fontaine (2014, Chap. 9) also introduce term-structure models with explicit policy rates. Although the last two frameworks allow for a relatively simple computation of model-implied long-term yields, they do not offer closed-form formulas to price interest rate options. An additional drawback of these two models is that they cannot be made consistent with the existence of a lower bound for nominal yields; this may bias the pricing of interest rate instruments in a low-interest rate environment such as the one prevailing at the time of writing.77For instance, a model that does not preclude negative interest rates produces strictly positive price for all interest rate floors, even those with strongly negative strikes. The consistency of my model with a lower bound for nominal interest rates is further discussed in Section 5.6.1.Another important class of interest rate models used for derivative pricing is that of LIBOR market models. These frameworks, originally due to Brace, Gatarek, and Musiela (1997) and Miltersen, Sandmann, and Sondermann (1997), have the great advantage of being consistent with Black (1976)’s formula, that is the standard formula employed in the interest rate options market. The tractability of these models is however limited to the pricing of a pre-defined class of interest rate options (cap/floor options versus swaptions).88That is, depending on model assumptions, LIBOR models can provide closed-form formulas for (a) caps and floors or for (b) swaptions, but not simultaneously (see Rebonato and Pogudin, 2011 or Brigo and Mercurio, 2007, Chap. 6).By contrast, the model proposed in this paper offers closed-form formulas for all considered interest rate instruments and derivatives.This paper also relates to the strand of the literature investigating the dynamics of policy rates (Balduzzi, Bertola, & Foresi, 1997; Balduzzi, Bertola, Foresi, & Klapper, 1998; Hamilton & Jorda, 2002; Hu & Phillips, 2004; Rudebusch, 1995). However, this literature focuses on the very-short-term rates and the models it employs are not suited to price long-term bonds or interest rate derivatives (unless resorting to time-demanding Monte-Carlo simulations).This section presents the risk-neutral dynamics followed by the overnight interbank rate rt, and its resulting implications in terms of pricing.99In a general discrete-time finite-horizon setting, the existence of a risk-neutral measure is equivalent to the absence of arbitrage opportunities (Delbaen & Schachermayer, 1994).The short-term rate is split into two components:(1)rt=Δ′zt+ξt,where ztis a K-dimensional selection vector – i.e. all entries are set to zero except for one – and where ξtis a serially-uncorrelated random variable, the distribution of which may depend on zt. The form of the latter distribution can be general, it just has to be such that the following expectation exists:(2)E(exp(−ξt)|zt)=exp(−δ)′zt,where, by abuse of notation,exp(−δ)denotes the K-dimensional vector whose ith entry is exp (δi). The fact that ξtis serially uncorrelated implies that the short-term rate’s persistence only comes from the componentr¯t≡Δ′zt. Since Δ is not time-varying, the dynamics of the latter component takes the form of a step-like path, which is consistent with my interpretation ofr¯tas a policy rate. Vector zt, which will henceforth be referred to as the regime vector, follows a Markovian process. The matrix of transition probabilities, between dates t andt+1,is denoted byΠt+1. This matrix may depend on time, though in a deterministic way. Here, I exploit this possibility in order to distinguish between (a) those dates for which a monetary-committee meeting is scheduled, which opens the possibility of having changes in the policy rates, and (b) those for which there is no monetary policy meeting, i.e. with no possibility of policy rate changes. In the former case,Πt=Π¯and in the latter case,Πt=Π̲(say). As in Piazzesi (2005), the pricing formulas take into account the exact number of days before the next monetary policy meeting only, the subsequent meetings being assumed to take place every 30 days.1010Naturally, this periodicity can easily be modified to match the frequency of monetary policy meetings in the area into consideration. Typically, in the U.S., the average period between two FOMC meetings is of 45 days, as is the case in the euro area since January 2015.Formally, denoting byΠ(−n)the matrix of transition probabilities that prevails when the next monetary policy meeting takes place in n days, I have:Π(30k)=Π¯fork∈Z,andΠ(s)=Π̲when s is not a multiple of 30.While the pricing formulas that are developed in the next subsection are valid for any parameterization of matrices of transition probabilities, Sections 4 and 5 will propose specific examples.The proposition below introduces a general pricing formula that will be used repeatedly in the following.Proposition 3.1The price, at date t, of a security providing the payoffω′zt+hat datet+k(with 1 ≤ h ≤ k) is given by:(3)Et[exp(−rt−⋯−rt+k−1)(ω′zt+h)]=1′{∏i=k1γiΠ(−nt+i)}γ0zteδ′zt−ξt=:π(ω,nt,h,k)′zteδ′zt−ξt(say),where nt is the number of days between t and the next monetary policy meeting,1is a K-dimensional vector of ones and γi is a diagonal matrix, the diagonal of which is:(I{i=h}ω+I{i≠h}1)⊙exp{−I{i<k}(Δ+δ)},where the symbol ⊙ denotes the element-by-element product.The law of iterated expectations implies that the expectation appearing on the left-hand side of Eq. (3) is equal toEt[Et{(exp(−rt−⋯−rt+k−1)(ω′zt+h)|zt+1,⋯,zt+k}],i.e. toeδ′zt−ξtEt[(e−(Δ+δ)′zt)×⋯×(e−(Δ+δ)′zt+h−1)×([e−(Δ+δ)⊙ω]′zt+h)×(e−(Δ+δ)′zt+h+1)×⋯×(e−(Δ+δ)′zt+k−1)]if h < k andeδ′zt−ξtEt[(e−(Δ+δ)′zt)×⋯×(e−(Δ+δ)′zt+k−1)×(ω′zk)]otherwise. The result then derives from Lemma B.1 (see Appendix B).□Due to the daily frequency of the model, the effect of the termeδ′zt−ξtin the pricing formula (3) is extremely small and hence negligible.1111To illustrate this, let us consider a typically high deviation between δ′ztand ξt, of 0.50 percentage point (expressed in annualized terms). This impliesexp(δ′zt−ξt)=exp(−0.005/365)=1−1.4×10−5.Accordingly, the formula can be simplified with virtually no pricing effect by replacingeδ′zt−ξtby its conditional expectation (given zt), which equals 1 by definition of δ. This simplification is systematically used in the sequel.As a second remark, it should be stressed that regularities in the matrix product appearing in Eq. (3) can be exploited in order to optimize the computing time of this pricing formula. Specifically, the sequential calculation of the k matrix products can be avoided by regrouping terms and using matrix powers.1212First, it can be seen that most of the sequences appearing in the total product are of the form DqwhereD=(γ0Π̲)29γ0Π¯. While a naive computation of this term would involve 30q matrix products, only30+q−1products are required to compute Dq(30 for D andq−1additional products to elevate D at the power q).Proposition 3.2The price, at date t, of a zero-coupon bond of maturity τ, where τ is expressed in years, is π(1, nt, 1, 365τ)′zt. Equivalently, the annualized continuously-compounded zero-coupon yield of maturity τ, denoted by rt, τ, is given by:(4)rt,τ=−1τln(π(1,nt,1,365τ)′zt)=:πr(nt,τ)′zt,which defines function πr.This result is obtained by using Proposition 3.1, settingω=1. In this case, all the γis are equal, which implies that h does not appear in Eq. (4).□An OIS is an interest rate derivative that allows exchanges between a fixed-interest rate cash flow and a variable-rate cash flow. I consider here OIS contracts of maturities τ lower than one year; these OISs involve a single payoff.1313OIS with longer maturities involve several reset dates. This case is treated in Section 3.2.5.At maturity, the payoff received by the fixed-rate receiver is the difference between (a) the notional (say 1) inflated with the date-t OIS fixed rate, and (b) the same unit notional capitalized with the realized short-term rates.Proposition 3.3At date t, the continuously-compounded OIS rate of maturity τ is equal to the zero-coupon-bond yield rt, τ. Using the Actual/360 day-count convention, OIS rates are given by:(5)OISt,τ=360365τ[1−π(1,nt,1,365τ)]′zt.=:πR(nt,τ)′zt,which defines function πR.Let us denote by oist, τthe continuously-compounded OIS rate. At maturity, i.e. at datet+τ365,the fixed-leg payoff will be exp (τoist, τ). This payoff is predetermined at date t; its date-t value is thereforeexp(τoist,τ)exp(−τrt,τ). At maturity, the floating-rate payoff will beexp{rt+⋯+rt+365τ−1}. The date-t value of the latter payoff isEt(exp{−rt−⋯−rt+365τ−1}×exp{rt+⋯+rt+365τ−1})=1. In an OIS, the values of both legs equate at the inception of the contract (at date t). This implies thatexp(τoist,τ)exp(−τrt,τ)=1,i.e.oist,τ=rt,τ. Eq. (5) is obtained by converting the continuously-compounded rate oist, τusing the Actual/360 day-count convention (OISt, τfollows this convention.)□I denote by Rt, τthe interbank rate of maturity τ. Forτ=0.25,Rt, τcorresponds for instance to the 3-month LIBOR. These interbank rates are also equivalent to zero-coupon-bond yields and they follow the Actual/360 day-count convention. Accordingly, I have:(6)Rt,τ=πR(nt,τ)′zt.Since LIBORs act as the underlying indices of various fixed-income derivatives, function πRwill repeatedly appear in the following pricing formula.Remark that OIS and LIBOR rates are equivalent in this model. This is due to the fact that the model does not take into account credit and/or liquidity pricing effects that explain why LIBORs are higher than OIS rates with matching maturities (e.g. Taylor & Williams, 2009). Neglecting these effects is broadly consistent with the pre-crisis context, but it is at odds with the episodes of increases in the LIBOR-OIS spreads that have been observed over the last few years. In my framework, this could be handled by adding interbank credit/liquidity stress regimes that would account for changes in banks’ default intensities. This is however beyond the scope of this paper, that focuses on pure interest rate risk. In the empirical exercise (Section 5), I will simply address this by allowing for a deterministic spread between OIS and LIBOR rates.Proposition 3.4At date t, the quoted rate of the future contract on the maturity-τ interbank rate for a delivery date oft+his given by:(7)Ft,h,τ=πR(nt,τ)′{∏i=h1Π(−nt+i)}zt.Standard futures contracts are marked-to-market on a daily basis. Margins are such that, once they have been paid, the value of the contract is zero. Therefore, at date t, I have0=Et(exp(−rt)[Ft+1,h−1,τ−Ft,h,τ]),whereFt+1,h−1,τ−Ft,h,τis the margin paid (or received) on datet+1. This implies thatFt,h,τ=Et(Ft+k,h−k,τ)for any k ∈ [0, h]. Since Ft, 0, τ≡ Rt, τ, I obtainFt,h,τ=Et(Rt+h,τ)(settingk=h). It follows thatFt,h,τ=πR(nt,τ)′Et(zt+h),which leads to Eq. (7).□Let us consider a maturity-h swap involving several exchanges of fixed versus floating cash-flows, such as standard LIBOR-based swaps. For a unit notional, at every date Tiin a pre-specified set of datesT1,⋯,Th/τ(the reset dates), the fixed leg pays out the amount τst, h, τ, where (a) τ is the year fraction corresponding to the time lengthsTi−Ti−1,(b)T0=tis the inception date of the swap, (c)Th/τ=t+his its maturity date and (d) st, h, τis the swap rate. At each reset date Ti(i > 0), the floating leg paysτRTi−1,τ.1414The bulk of plain-vanilla swaps involves this “in-arrear” feature.Here, as in the remaining of this paper, I assume that τ is a multiple of the period between two policy-rate-decision meetings. This assumption, which is de facto valid for standard swaps, implies that the number of days before the next meeting is ntat each reset date, which mildly simplifies the formulas.Proposition 3.5At date t, the swap rate of maturity h, indexed on the maturity-τ interbank rate Rt, τis given by:(8)st,h,τ=(∑i=1h/τπ(πR(nt,τ),nt,Ti−1−t,Ti−t)∑i=1h/τπ(1,nt,0,Ti−t))′zt,whereTi=t+iτand, by abuse of notation, the division appearing inEq. (8)is performed element-wise.At the inception of the swap, the present values of the two legs are equal, which writes:Et[∑i=1h/τexp(−rt−⋯−rt+Ti−1)(τπR(nt,τ)′zTi−1)]=Et[∑i=1h/τexp(−rt−⋯−rt+Ti−1)]τst,h,τ.Eq. (8) directly derives from the last equation, using Proposition 3.1 for both sides.□I now turn to the pricing of European swaptions. This kind of option gives the right to its holder to enter some pre-specified underlying swap contract on a pre-specified expiry date. Plain-vanilla swaptions are written on swaps whose references are LIBORs (i.e. those swaps considered in Section 3.2.5). The maturity of the underlying swap rate is called the tenor. There are two kinds of swaptions: (a) the receiver swaption, which gives the buyer the right to receive the fixed leg of the swap and (b) the payer swaption, which gives her the right to receive the floating leg of the swap.Proposition 3.6The price, at date t, of a payer swaption of expiry datet+q,whose tenor is of maturity h and whose strike price is K is given by π[S(K, nt, τ, h), nt, q, q]′zt, where S(K, nt, τ, h) is the vector defined by:(9)S(K,nt,τ,h)=τ(∑i=1h/τπ[(πR(nt,τ)−K1),nt,(i−1)τ,iτ])+′.At the expiry of the swaption (datet+q), the option payoff is:(Et+q{∑i=1h/τexp(−rt+q−⋯−rt+q+iτ−1)[τπR(nt,τ)′zt+q+(i−1)τ−τK]})+=τ(∑i=1h/τEt+q{exp(−rt+q−⋯−rt+q+iτ−1)[πR(nt,τ)′zt+q+(i−1)τ−K]})+.Therefore, at datet+q,the payoff of the swaption is of the formS(K,nt,τ,h)′zt+q,where S(K, nt, τ, h) is the vector specified in Eq. (9). Settingω=S(K,nt,τ,h)), an application of Proposition 3.1 leads to the results.□A cap (respectively a floor) is a contract by which a seller of protection agrees to provide the buyer of protection with a positive payoff if a given reference rate exceeds (resp. falls below) a pre-specified level called the exercise rate on given future dates (the reset dates). The reference rate of plain-vanilla caps and floors are usually LIBORs, whose maturity – called tenor – is the difference between two reset dates.Proposition 3.7At date t, the price of a cap whose underlying is the LIBOR of maturity τ, of exercise rate C, and of expiry datet+his Cap(C, nt, τ, h)′zt where the vector Cap(C, nt, τ, h) is:1515Note that caps and floors are usually defined so that the initial LIBOR rate does not lead to a payoff on the first reset date, i.e. at datet+τ; that is why the sum appearing in the definition of Cap begins withi=2.(10)Cap(C,nt,τ,h)=(∑i=2h/τπ[(πR(nt,τ)−C1)+,nt,(i−1)τ,iτ]).The price of the Cap is the expected discounted value of the flows of future payoffs, i.e.:Et{∑i=2h/τexp(−rt−⋯−rt+iτ−1)(πR(nt,τ)′zt+(i−1)τ−C)+}.Settingω=(πR(nt,τ)−C1)+,an application of Proposition 3.1 leads to the result.□Obviously, floor prices are given by similar formulas, replacing vector(πR(nt,τ)−C1)+by(C1−πR(nt,τ))+in Eq. (10).As mentioned in Section 3.1, the model is essentially specified through matricesΠandΠ¯,which depict the dynamics of the policy rate that, in turn, drives the overnight interbank rate rt. The next subsection details possible specifications of these matrices. Section 4.2 comments simulations generated by this model.Recall that matricesΠandΠ¯contain the probabilities of switching from one state (regime) of the economy to another. The value of the current policy rate is one element describing the state of the economy. If it were the only one, it would imply, in particular, that the probabilities of having cuts or hikes in the policy rate depend only on the last value of the latter. This would notably be at odds with the stylized fact according to which one policy rate change is much more likely to be followed by another change in the same direction (e.g. Rudebusch, 1995). In the context of the present model, this can be accommodated by introducing different monetary policy phases. Specifically, three phases are considered: easing (E), status-quo (S) and tightening (T). At date t, a policy rate cut (respectively hike) occurs with a strictly positive probability only if monetary policy is then in an easing (resp. tightening) phase and if a rate-decision meeting is scheduled for date t.1616The definition of these phases is consistent with observed central banks’ rate-setting behavior and communication (e.g. Smaghi (2009)).If there are N possible policy rates, the regime vector ztis therefore of dimension 3N × 1 in such a model.At that stage, two probabilities have been explicitly mentioned: the conditional probabilities of having an increase and a decrease in the policy rate. Note that these probabilities will be zero inΠ, which corresponds to those dates on which no meeting is scheduled. It remains to specify the probabilities of having some changes in monetary policy phases. Positing that there can be no direct transition –i.e. between t andt+1– from E to T and from T to E, four additional probabilities are then required: E → S, S → E, T → S, S → T.The calibration ofΠ¯is illustrated in Fig. 1. Denoting by rmaxthe maximum value for the policy rater¯t,the vector Δ that corresponds to this specification of the transition-probability matrix is of the form: [0,0.25 percent, 0.50 percent,⋯,rmax,0, 0.25 percent, 0.50 percent,⋯,rmax,0,0.25 percent, 0.50 percent,⋯,rmax]'. It can be seen that the specification proposed in Fig. 1 allows only for single-tick changes in the policy rate. (This can be relaxed at the cost of introducing additional parameters governing the breakdown of the probabilities of cuts and hikes.)To complete the model specification, I need to define the distribution of ξt. As stated in Eq. (1), this variable is the deviation between the effective interbank rate rtand the policy rate. The latter policy rate (Δ′zt) corresponds here to the middle of the corridor, whose bounds are set by the central bank (see Appendix A for an introduction to the corridor system).1717As explained in Appendix A, the overnight interbank rate is often close to the middle of the corridor but can also drop to levels close to the bottom of the corridor. In my illustrative example, I will not account for such effects, which will however be dealt with in the empirical section (Section 5).To be consistent with the fact that rthas to lie within the corridor, I select a distribution with a compact support. For a corridor width of 100 bps, a possibility is for instance to take ξtequal to ηtβtwhere ηtis a zero-mean exogenous binomial variable valued in {-1 percent,1 percent} and βtfollows a Beta distribution.Finally, I posit a maximum policy rate of 8 percent, which is a level that has not been reached by the policy rates of the main monetary areas over the last 20 years.Table 1 reports the calibration of the model which are based on Figs. 2–4. Similar figures can be generated by using an interface available on the internet.1818This interface, available at: https://fixed-income.shinyapps.io/NLIR , allows the users to investigate the influence of the model calibration on model outputs, i.e. to generate Figs. 2–4 with alternative model calibrations.Fig. 2 displays a simulated path for the effective interbank rate rt, together with the policy rate Δ′zt. One can in particular see the influence of the monetary policy phases – shown in the lower panel of the figure – on the interest rate dynamics.Fig. 3 shows the term-structure of swap rates corresponding to different policy rates (0.50 percent, 3 percent and 5.5 percent) and different monetary policy phases. Naturally, the swap curve is higher during tightening phases and vice versa for easing phases. This figure also illustrates that the model can generate the usual yield-curve shapes: flat, upward sloping, hump shaped and inverse-hump shaped.Model-implied term-structures of swaption prices are displayed on Fig. 4. These prices correspond to different expirations and tenors. While option premiums appear on the left-hand panel in this figure, Black volatilities are plotted on the right-hand panel.1919In financial markets, it is common practice to price interest rate options using Black (1976)’s model. This model assumes a log-normal process for the forward rate (see e.g. Hull, 2006).This plot demonstrates the ability of the model to generate humped-shaped term-structures of Black volatilities, a phenomenon frequently observed on these markets (see Mercurio & Moraleda, 2000).I use euro-area data covering the period from January 23, 2004 to September 26, 2014 at the weekly frequency (end-of-week data; 558 dates). The data are extracted from Bloomberg; option prices are obtained from the ICAP Bloomberg page. The model is fitted on both interest rates and interest rate derivatives. Interest rates are OIS rates of maturities 1, 3 and 6 months, 1, 2, 3 and 5 years. Nine at-the-money swaption prices are used: these prices are for three different times-to-expiry (6 months, 1 year and 2 years) and for three tenors (1, 2 and 5 years). I use prices of caps and floors of three maturities (3, 4 and 5 years) and I consider four exercise rates (0.50 percent, 1.00 percent, 1.50 percent and 2.00 percent). Before 2010, only few cap and floor prices are available. From 2010 onwards, about 10 cap and floor prices are available, on average, per date. In order to cope with temporary periods of illiquidity of cap/floor prices, I remove price observations that remain unchanged for 4 consecutive trading days. Eventually, between 16 and 31 prices are fitted for each date.Despite the growing importance of OIS yields, plain vanilla interest rate options, such as those used here, are indexed on EURIBORs. As mentioned in Section 3.2.3, the present form of the model is not consistent with the existence of credit and liquidity premia in LIBOR-type rates. As a result, adjustments have to be made so as to make the approach compatible with the use of EURIBOR-based options (see Appendix C).The model presented in Section 4 is extended in order to better fit market data for all the considered dates. Note that while this extension results in an increase in the number of parameters to be calibrated – from 6 to 8 or 10 depending on the dates –, it does not imply a modification of the pricing formulas, which highlights the flexibility of the framework.First, I allow the conditional probability of policy rate hikes or cuts to depend on the level of the current policy rate. Formally, instead of assuming that the conditional probability of having hikes (cuts) in the policy rate between t andt+1is a constant parameter ph(pc), this probability is allowed to be a function of the policy rater¯=Δ′z. In order to ensure that these probabilities lie in the [0, 1] interval, I assume that they are given by logit functions:ph(r¯)=eζ1+ζ2r¯/(1+eζ1+ζ2r¯)andpc(r¯)=eν1+ν2r¯/(1+eν1+ν2r¯). For instance, hikes in the policy rate can be made relatively less frequent when policy rates are high by setting ζ2 < 0.2020In terms of coding, this leads to a change in the specification of matrixΠ¯,where the phand pcprobabilities have to be replaced accordingly by theph(r¯)andpc(r¯)ones (see Fig. 1).Second, the basic model is specified in such a way as to accommodate the shift in the position of the overnight interbank rate within the monetary policy corridor that was experienced by the Eurosystem in the fall of 2008. (See Appendix A for precisions regarding the relationship between the corridor and interbank rates.) Before then, the overnight interbank rate was, on average, close to the rate of the main refinancing operations (MRO) conducted by the ECB, the latter rate corresponding to the middle of the corridor (see top panel in Fig. 5). I consider here thatr¯tis the MRO rate. In October 2008, following the announcement and implementation of non-standard monetary policy measures that were taken in response to the financial crisis, overnight interbank rates fell to levels close to the bottom of the corridor.2121These unconventional monetary policy measures notably included the move from variable rate tender procedures in liquidity providing operations to fixed-rate full-allotment procedures (announced on October 8, 2008), whereby the ECB accommodates any demand for liquidity its bank counterparties might express at the policy rate – against eligible collateral – in unlimited amounts (e.g. Giannone, Lenza, Pill, & Reichlin, 2010).In the model, I account for this by making the distribution of ξtdepend on the MRO rater¯t. Then, sincert=r¯t+ξt(Eq. (1)), ξtis the spread between the overnight interbank rate and the MRO rate. As mentioned above, this spread is, on average, close to zero under a normal functioning of the corridor system (regime C) and negative under the floor system (regime F). Compared to the model presented in Section 4, I therefore introduce additional regimes to account for the fact that δ can take two values. (Recall that δ is the log-Laplace transform of ξtconditional on zt, which is close to the mean of ξtconditional on ztbecause the order of magnitude of ξtis 1 percent.) More precisely, all those regimes for which the MRO rate is below 2 percent are duplicated: the first group of regimes (state C) is such thatδC=0and the second group (state F) is such that δF< 0. Consistently with the fact that the switch from state C to state F was not anticipated before October 2008, I assume that the probability to exit state C is zero. This leaves us with two additional parameters to estimate only for dates after October 2008: the probability pFCto exit the floor system and δF.2222That is, I implicitly assume that state C is absorbing.To sum up, the model is calibrated by adjusting 8 parameters for each date until October 2008: pES, pSE, pTS, pST, ν1, ν2, ζ1 and ζ2 and 10 for subsequent dates (pFCand δFin addition to the 8 previous ones).To compute model-implied prices for a given date t, one requires to know the state ztof the economy. Let us recall that a regime is defined by (i) the policy rate prevailing at date t, i.e.r¯t,(ii) the monetary policy phase (E, S or T) and (iii) the functioning regime of the corridor system (C or F, as defined in the previous subsection). The policy rate, that I take equal to the MRO rate, is directly observable. As for point (iii), I consider that the floor system has been operating since October 8, 2008, that is the date on which the ECB announced important changes in its monetary policy operational framework (see Panels (a) and (b) in Fig. 5).The identification of monetary phases is based on the slope of the short-end of the yield curve, proxied by the spread between the 6-month and the 1-month OIS rates. As can be seen by looking at both Panels (a) and (b) in Fig. 5, this spread is high in tightening phases and low during easing phases. The monetary policy phase is assumed to be a tightening (respectively an easing) phase when this spread is above (resp. below) 10 basis points.2323As an alternative to this identification procedure, one could select, for each considered date, the type of monetary policy phase that provides the best fit of observed prices (for instance). The results however proved to be already satisfying with the simpler approach proposed here.This leads to the identification of monetary policy phases displayed in Panel (c) of Fig. 5.Let us denote by θ the vector of parameters required to specify the model. The model calibration is obtained by minimizing, for each date, the loss functionLdefined by:(11)L(θ)=∑s∈Ωωs(vsm−vso)2,where s denotes one of the fixed-income instruments used to calibrate the model, whose set is denoted by Ω; ωsis a weight associated with instrument s;vsmandvsoare, respectively, the model-implied and observed yields (or prices for options) associated with instrument s. In the calibration exercises, I have used weights of 1 for all options prices and 2 for the seven interest rates.2424These weights have been chosen arbitrarily in order to yield a fit deemed satisfying across the different market data. Results are fairly robust to the choice of these weights. Naturally, a user that would focus on option pricing (say) would increase option-related weights.This subsection explores the fitting performances of the regime-based model. Four alternative models are considered: the Vasicek (1977) model, the Cox et al. (1985) model (CIR), the extended CIR model (CIR++) and the extended two-factor Gaussian model (G2++). These models constitute workhorses of interest rate option pricing.2525Brigo and Mercurio (2007) provide an excellent presentation and analysis of these models.The CIR++and the G2++models notably possess the property of perfectly fitting the interest rate yield curves. This property is obtained by including a deterministic trend in the short-rate process; it is in that sense that these two models are “extended”. Two exercises are conducted; they respectively pertain to the in-sample and the out-of-sample properties of the model.The objective of the first empirical exercise is to compare the in-sample properties of the proposed model with those of traditional models. That is, for each date in the sample, the models are calibrated on all available data (swap yields, swaptions, caps and floors prices) using the calibration approach of Section 5.4.2626Regarding the CIR++and the G2++models, I simply minimize the sum of squared option pricing errors (swaptions, caps and floors) since, by construction, these models perfectly fit the yield curve.The results are presented in the upper two panels of Table 2. For each interest rate instrument (swaps, swaptions, caps and floors), two pricing error metrics are considered: the first is the root-mean-square pricing error (RMSPE), the second is the mean-absolute pricing error (MAPE). In Panel A, the pricing error metrics are averaged over the whole period (2004–2010). Panel B focusses on the second part of the sample, marked by very low interest rates (2010–2014).For the two different types of options and the two considered metrics, the proposed model provides the lowest average pricing errors. While the regime-based model does not perfectly fit the yield curve –contrary to the CIR++and the G2++models–, yields’ pricing errors are small, between 2 and 3 basis points on average. Fig. 6 displays the weekly root-mean-squared pricing errors resulting from the best three models, that are the regime-based model, the CIR++and the G2++models, over the 2010–2014 period. The upper (lower) plot presents the RMSPEs associated to swaption prices (cap and floor prices). These plots confirm that the regime-based model provides the best fit for most dates.The fact that a model provides a good in-sample fit does not necessarily imply that it can satisfyingly price “out-of-sample” instruments. The second exercise addresses that point by excluding caps and floors data from the calibration process. Out-of-sample performances of the models are then gauged by their ability to recover cap and floor prices when these are not used in the calibration.The results of this second exercise are shown in Panel C of Table 2. This exercise is carried out only on the latest part of the sample (2010–2014) because cap and floor data are scarce prior to that period. Comparing Panel C with Panel B, that cover the same time period, it appears that the fit of yields and swaptions tends to be better than in the first exercise. This is not surprising since, in this second exercise, the calibration can focus on these instruments. At the same time, the fit of cap and floor prices deteriorates. It is however remarkable to observe that the degradation of the fit is less dramatic for the regime-based model than for alternative models. For instance, while the increase in the RMSPEs on caps and floors is of 3 basis points for the regime-based model (from 3.4 to 6.4), it is of 8.8 and of 26.7 basis points for the CIR++and the G2++models, respectively. The lower plot of Fig. 7, which shows the time series of RMSPEs on caps and floors, graphically illustrates the better performance of the regime-based model. Arguably, the fact that the regime-based model possesses more structure than the other short-rate models may explain its outperformance in terms of out-of-sample fit.Theoretical as well as operational arguments point towards the existence of a lower bound on nominal yields (see e.g. Coeuré, 2015). From a theoretical standpoint, the lower bound for nominal yields should be zero. Indeed, the physical currency – an alternative investment to bonds – provides a nominal payoff of zero. However, because of nonzero (but bounded) storing cost of cash, the theoretical lower bound can be negative. From an operational perspective, in the euro area, the lower bound on yields corresponds to the lowest possible level of the deposit-facility rate.2727No bank would agree to lend to another bank at a yield lower than the one it can secure by using the ECB deposit facility (which is a credit-risk-free investment). In the euro-area, the deposit-facility rate is the lower bound of the monetary policy corridor (see Appendix A).Over the last few years, comments by ECB officials have indicated that the lowest possible deposit-facility rate is close to zero (e.g. The Economist, 2014; Draghi, 2014). The slightly negative deposit-facility rate prevailing at the time of writing, of−0.20 percent, is widely perceived as the operational lower bound.Contrary to the model introduced in the present paper, some of the alternative above-mentioned models are not consistent with the existence of a close-to-zero lower bound.2828In the present model, the lower bound on the overnight interest rate rt(=Δ′zt+ξt) is the sum of (a) the lowest possible value of ξt(recall that this distribution is arbitrary, see Eq. (2)) and (b) min (Δ).Such models are subject to severe mispricing when it comes to valuing certain options; they would typically attribute strictly positive prices to floors with a very low exercise rate.The last two rows of the three panels in Table 2 highlight the failure of some of the considered models to preclude too-low rates. These rows report the conditional probabilities, implied by the different calibrated models, of having very low short-term rates two years from the simulation date. For instance, it says that, on average over the period 2010-2014, the model-implied two-year-ahead probability of having an overnight rate below−0.60 percent was of 7.1 percent, 14.1 percent and 11.7 percent according to the Vasicek, the CIR++and the G2++models, respectively.2929One could constrain the calibration of the CIR++to preclude too-low rates. However, unreported results suggest that constraining the CIR++calibrations substantially deteriorates the fitting performances of this model.Within the present framework, the set of model-implied conditional distributions of yields is very rich. Interested readers can easily verify this by using the internet interface (see Footnote18). In particular, the model can accommodate wide ranges of skewness or kurtosis. It can also generate multimodal distributions.3030This can be obtained for instance when (a) easing and tightening phases are persistent (pEEandpTT=0.9,say), (b) pSEand pSTare large and close to each other (pSE=pST=0.45,say), (c) the current regime is the status quo one and the current policy rate is not too small or too high (4 percent, say).This is in sharp contrast with the two alternative model discussed above: All conditional distributions are Gaussian in the Vasicek and G2++cases, and gamma in CIR model.As is formally illustrated by Propositions 3.2–3.7, the prices of fixed-income instruments incorporate market expectations of future policy rates. It is a common approach, among practitioners, central bankers and academics, to use fixed-income instruments to back out such implied expectations (see e.g. Krueger and Kuttner (1998) or Gurkaynak et al. (2007)).It can be remarked that certain untransformed market data can readily be interpreted as market expectations. This is typically the case of Fed funds futures rates or overnight indexed swaps (OIS), that are often used as proxies for risk-neutral expectations of future central-bank target rates. However, while these rates may be informative to reveal the mean path expected by market participants, they do not provide information about market views regarding possible deviations from this path. For that, these rates have to be complemented with option prices and a model is then required to convert all these market data into implied probabilities. By offering simple formulas to price various fixed-income instruments, my model offers a natural and convenient way to recover such probabilities.3131These probabilities are risk-neutral in the sense that they are associated to the pricing (risk-neutral) measure. They may deviate from physical probabilities due to the existence of risk premia, see e.g. Piazzesi and Swanson (2008). Carlson et al. (2005) also use option prices to recover risk-neutral densities of future policy rates. However, as discussed in the introduction, their approach requires specific option prices that are not available in the euro-area (as in many other currency areas).Fig. 8 shows time series of model outputs. The second panel displays probabilities of changes in the policy rate. More precisely, for each date t, the chart shows the model-implied risk-neutral probabilities that, 6-month later, the policy rate stands at least 1, 2, 3 or 4 ticks above or below its date-t level. Unsurprisingly, these probabilities closely relate to the monetary policy phases prevailing at each date. The lowest panel compares the model-implied expectations of 6-month changes in the MRO rater¯tand those reported in the survey of professional forecasters published by Consensus Economics.3232These forecasts are the mean values of the respondents’ forecasts. The Consensus Forecast survey is released around the middle of the month. These survey data are available only since July 2009.This last chart suggests that both measures of policy rate expectations are closely linked.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
