@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Aggregation of scale efficiency

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We extend the aggregation theory in efficiency and productivity analysis.We derive solutions for aggregation of individual scale efficiency measures.We provide practical way of estimating scale efficiency of an industry (e.g., from DEA).The new aggregation result is coherent with previous aggregation frameworks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scale efficiency,Aggregation,Industry efficiency,Duality,DEA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this article we generalize the aggregation theory in efficiency and productivity analysis by deriving solutions to the problem of aggregation of individual scale efficiency measures, primal and dual, into aggregate primal and dual scale efficiency measures of a group (e.g., industry). The new aggregation result is coherent with aggregation framework and solutions that were earlier derived for other related efficiency measures and can be used in practice for estimation of scale efficiency of an industry or other groups of firms within it.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Analysis of economies of scale has been one of the fundamental subjects in economics, operations research and production management, both in theory and especially in practice. Indeed, the issue of attaining optimal scale of operations frequently appears among priority questions on management agendas of various types of companies, whether private or public. In this article we focus on the scale efficiency, which combines both the notion of optimal scale and the notion of (relative) production efficiency. Our particular interest is in how to appropriately measure the scale efficiency of a group—an industry consisting of firms, a firm consisting of plants, a union consisting of countries, etc.For several decades, many studies in various economics and business literature challenged the issue of proper measurement of scale economies for various contexts and for various estimators. These studies include the seminal works of Hanoch (1975), Panzar and Willig (1977), Føsund and Hjalmarsson (1979), Banker (1984), Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (1984), Färe and Grosskopf (1985), Färe, Grosskopf, and Lovell (1986), Banker and Thrall (1992), Banker, Bardhan, and Cooper (1996), Føsund (1996), Golany and Yu (1997), as well as more recent works of Føsund and Hjalmarsson (2004), Krivonozhko, Utkin, Volodin, Sablin, and Patrin (2004), Hadjicostas and Soteriou (2006, 2010), Podinovski, Føsund, and Krivonozhko (2009), Zelenyuk (2013a, 2013b, 2014), Peyrache (2013), to mention just a few.In previous studies, researchers primarily focused on the measurement of scale economies for an individual or disaggregate decision making unit (DMU). In the present work we will focus on the issue of how to appropriately aggregate such individual scale efficiency measures, or their estimates/scores obtained from these measures for individual DMUs, into aggregate measures (or aggregate scores) of scale efficiency of a group. Indeed, after obtaining many individual scale efficiency scores, researchers may truly need a proper way to summarize these many scores into one or few numbers to present to their audience concisely. Clearly, one could simply use a sample average of individual estimates—but which one: the arithmetic or the geometric? More importantly, a problem with a sample average, whether arithmetic or geometric, is that it ignores a relative weight of each DMU in the aggregation. On the other hand, while a weighted average can account for a relative weight of each DMU, a critical question arises along the use of a weighted average: Which set of weights should be used? Indeed, conclusions and related policy implications may heavily depend on the weights chosen for the aggregation. Therefore, our primary focus is on deriving the weights for the aggregation of scale efficiency measures, which has not been done in the literature so far.Studies on the aggregation problem in efficiency analysis go back to at least the seminal work of Farrell (1957), who coined the term structural efficiency of an industry. This notion was then criticized and elaborated by Føsund and Hjalmarsson (1979), who introduced the notion of efficiency of an average unit, and by Li and Ng (1995) who synthesized these latter works, considering them in the context of aggregation weights based on shadow prices. (See also a related discussion in Ylvinger (2000).) On the pure theoretical front, in their seminal work, Blackorby and Russell (1999) unveiled several impossibility theorems for a general aggregation problem of efficiency measures. One important implication of their work was that any positive result on aggregation in efficiency measurement must involve additional assumptions. This route was taken by Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) who, upon accepting certain assumptions on aggregate technology, optimization behavior and prices, and applying a revenue analogue of the fundamental theorem from Koopmans (1957), derived a solution to the aggregation problem for the output oriented Farrell-type technical efficiency measures. Similar approach was later used for deriving various aggregation results, such as aggregation of input oriented technical efficiency measures (Färe, Grosskopf, & Zelenyuk, 2004), aggregation of productivity indexes (Zelenyuk, 2006), aggregation within and between the sub-groups (Simar & Zelenyuk, 2007), aggregation of economic growth rates (Zelenyuk, 2011), aggregation of scale elasticities (Färe & Zelenyuk, 2012), but these works do not answer how the commonly used scale efficiency measures should be aggregated.In the present work, we generalize the existing approach of aggregation of efficiency measures to the context of aggregation of scale efficiency measures, such that it is coherent with and encompass previous aggregation results for the related efficiency measures. This is a new theoretical result that can be relatively easily applied in practice for obtaining aggregate scale efficiency measures from suitable estimates of the individual scale efficiency scores.The paper is structured as following: Section 2 briefly outlines the theory of measuring scale efficiency on individual level. Section 3 briefly outlines useful relationships between various efficiency measures that will be used in derivations of solutions to the aggregation problem. Section 4 proposes a solution to the aggregation problem from the perspective of mathematical (functional equations) approach. Section 5 outlines economic approach to solve the aggregation problem. Section 6 presents some special cases and Section 7 concludes.To keep our context general yet as simple as possible, let us consider a group of n decision making units (plants or firms or countries, etc.), hereafter DMUs, indexed byk=1,2,…,n. Our main focus in the paper will be on aggregate efficiencies-measures that would represent various types of efficiency of a group of DMUs (e.g., a firm consisting of plants, an industry consisting of firms, etc.). We also want such aggregate measures of a group to be related or constructed from the individual efficiency measures obtained for each DMU in such a group. Following somewhat standard notation for defining individual efficiency measures, letxk=x1k,…,xNk′∈R+Nbe a vector of N inputs that a DMU k uses to produce a vector of M outputs, denoted byyk=y1k,…,yMk′∈R+M. Furthermore, we assume that technology of a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}can be characterized by the technology set denoted byTkand defined, in general terms, as(2.1)Tk=(x,y)∈R+N×R+M:DMUkcanproduceyfromx.Equivalently, technology can be characterized via the output correspondencePk:R+N→2R+Mthat assigns to each input vectorx∈R+Na subset of all output vectorsy∈R+Mthat can be produced with this particular x, and for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}it is formally defined as(2.2)Pk(x)=y∈R+M:(x,y)∈Tk,x∈R+N.We assume that technology set satisfies standard regularity conditions of production theory (see Färe & Primont (1995)). To involve duality results, we also assume that all output sets,Pk(x), are convex for allx∈R+N,k∈{1,2,…,n}. This is a common assumption in economics, which is coherent with the principle of decreasing marginal rate of technical transformation regarding the substitution between outputs that is commonly assumed in microeconomics theory. Note, however, that for our general developments we do not assume convexity ofTk, although making such assumption is also possible (as is sometimes done in practical estimations), yet it would impose additional restrictions and so we stay free from it here.1Here, for the sake of space, we will focus on output orientation only, while the input orientation case can be derived in similar manner (in which case, instead of convexity of the output sets, one would need to assume convexity of the input requirement sets, defined asLk(yk)=x∈R+N:(x,y)∈Tk,y∈R+M).1Using these characterizations of technologies, we will focus on the output orientation in efficiency measurement, particularly focusing on the following Farrell-type or radial output oriented measure of technical (in)efficiency, formally defined for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}as(2.3)TEk(x,y)=supθ∈R++:θy∈Pk(x),(x,y)∈Tk.Incidentally, note that for any(x,y)∈Tk, we haveTEk(x,y)⩾1and we will focus only on the practical case whenTEk(x,y)<∞. Thus,1/TEk(x,y)∈(0,1], i.e., the reciprocal of (2.3) gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for full or 100% technical efficiency level, output oriented.2Note there appears to be some confusion in the literature about this measure. Some authors use the output oriented Farrell technical efficiency measure defined as a reciprocal of (2.3), which in some cases might be preferred as it immediately has a convenient scale between 0 and 1. While the derivations below can be written with this definition as well, we used definition (2.3) because it is more convenient for our derivations that follow, and may help avoiding confusions because previous works on aggregation of efficiency we refer to also used (2.3). To avoid confusions, we also refer to (2.3) as ‘Farrell-type measure’ rather than ‘Farrell measure’. We thank anonymous referee for inspiring this comment.2Originally, Farrell (1957) focused on (an input analogue of) this measure for the context of a particular case of activity analysis model. Later, in their seminal paper, Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978) resurrected Farrell’s approach and unveiled interesting dual characterization of his efficiency measure, with shadow price and shadow revenue-cost ratio interpretations, sparking a new area in operations research and econometrics and coining it as data envelopment analysis (DEA). While the DEA would be a natural estimator of (2.3), other estimators, such as regression-based methods, including stochastic frontier analysis (SFA), or a synthesis of them, such as stochastic-DEA method (e.g., see Simar & Zelenyuk, 2011) can work for our context as well. Therefore, we will consider our theoretical developments for a general case, regardless of what estimator is to be used for it. Also note that, besides not requiring convexity of T, unlike in the commonly assumed DEA context, we also allow for each DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}to have its own unique technology (with possibility to be inefficient w.r.t. it), for the sake of generality. Clearly, assuming a common technology (as is often done in practice) would be a special case, and we briefly return to it in Section 6.We will also use a dual characterization of the output correspondence and of efficiency measures-the revenue function, which for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}with an input allocationx∈R+Nis defined as(2.4)Rk(x,p)=maxy{py:y∈Pk(x)},x∈R+N,p∈R+M,wherep=(p1,…,pM)∈R+Mis the row-vector of prices corresponding to the (column) output vector y and here we will focus only on the practical case whenREk(x,p)≠0.To achieve our aggregation result, throughout this work we will focus on the output price vector p that is the same across all DMUs, which one could think of as a benchmark or a reference price vector selected for the purpose of aggregation. For example, if we consider a microeconomics context, then p could be taken to be a vector of equilibrium prices at the output markets. Alternatively, p can also be chosen to be the vector of shadow prices for the outputs for the considered group of firms (e.g., see Li & Ng (1995) for a motivation), etc. The differences in prices that one may face in practice can then be viewed as a variation or noise around these benchmark (equilibrium or shadow or other selected common) prices.3See Kuosmanen, Cherchye, and Sipiläinen (2006) and Zelenyuk (2006, 2011) for a more extensive discussion about this assumption.3Besides serving as an alternative (dual) complete characterization of technology of a DMU, due to duality theory in economics, the revenue function (2.4) also serves as the dual to the Farrell’s output oriented technical efficiency measure (2.3), given regularity conditions, convexity ofPk(x)and strictly positive output prices, and so it is often used to define the dual efficiency measures. Specifically, for a given DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}with a combination(x,y,p), the revenue (in)efficiency measure that we will use is defined as the ratio of the maximal revenue implied for(x,p)to the actual revenue that the DMU k incurred for this same combination(x,p), i.e.,(2.5)REk(x,y,p)=Rk(x,p)py,forpy≠0.Incidentally, note that for any(x,y)∈Tkandp∈R++Mwe have1/REk(x,y,p)∈(0,1], i.e., this measure of efficiency also gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for full or 100% revenue efficiency level.Now, to define the scale efficiency measures, we will use an auxiliary, CRS-hypothetical technology defined, for each DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}, as(2.6)Tˇk={δ(x,y):(x,y)∈Tk,∀δ>0},i.e.,Tˇkis the set generated fromTkas the conical closure ofTk. Intuitively,Tˇkcan be understood as the smallest CRS technology set that includes the actual technology setTksuch that the upper boundary or technological frontier ofTˇkis just tangent with that ofTk(at least at one point) and these tangent points are called the best possible scale allocations of(x,y).4Also see Frisch (1965) for discussion of the concept of technically optimal scale points.4For some technologies, such best scale allocations may be not unique as well as there might be uncountably infinite number of them. Also, it must be clear that, if an actual technology exhibits CRS (i.e.,Tk=δTk,∀δ>0), then (and only then), by construction, we haveTk=Tˇk. This type of measurement is coherent with and frequently used in the DEA approach—in a sense it is just another, more general way to write what is usually done in DEA, so that the generalization allows for other methods to be used (e.g., SFA, stochastic-DEA, etc.).Now, let us define the CRS-hypothetical output correspondence,Pˇk:R+N→2R+Mthat assigns to each input vectorx∈R+Nthe subset of all output vectorsy∈R+Mthat can be produced with this particular x if technology was given by (2.6). Specifically, for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}, it is formally defined similarly to how we defined (2.2), as(2.7)Pˇk(x)={y∈R+M:(x,y)∈Tˇk},x∈R+N.So, by construction,Pˇk(x)is an equivalent characterization of the CRS-hypothetical technology setTˇk, in the sense that, for allk∈{1,2,…,n}we have(2.8)y∈Pˇk(x),x∈R+N⇔(x,y)∈Tˇk.Furthermore, the output oriented technical efficiency measure on the CRS-hypothetical technology for an allocation(x,y)∈Tkfor DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}is given by(2.9)TEˇk(x,y)=maxλ∈R++1:λy∈Pˇk(x),(x,y)∈Tk.Note that for any(x,y)∈Tkwe haveTEˇk(x,y)⩾1and for technical purposes, to make the measurement of scale efficiency possible, we also focus on the case whenTEˇk(x,y)<∞,∀k∈{1,2,…,n}. As a result we have1/TEˇk(x,y)∈(0,1], i.e., this measure of efficiency gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for 100% technical efficiency level (output oriented) but w.r.t. the CRS-hypothetical technology rather than the original one.Similarly, the revenue function with respect to the CRS-hypothetical technology for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}would be given by(2.10)Rˇk(x,p)=maxy{py:y∈Pˇk(x)},x∈R+N,p∈R+M,while the associated revenue efficiency w.r.t. the CRS-hypothetical technology for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}facing allocation(x,y)and output prices p would be given by(2.11)REˇk(x,y,p)=Rˇk(x,p)py,forpy≠0.As it is for other efficiency measures defined above, for any(x,y)∈Tkandp∈R++Mwe have1/REˇk(x,y,p)∈(0,1], i.e., the reciprocal of (2.11) gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for full or 100% revenue efficiency level w.r.t. the CRS-hypothetical technology.Given (2.3) and (2.9) as well as (2.5) and (2.11), we can obtain primal and dual measures of scale efficiency. In particular, the primal (or technical or technology-based) scale efficiency measure for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}for an allocation(x,y)∈Tkis defined as(2.12)TSEk(x,y)=TEˇk(x,y)TEk(x,y).BecauseTk⊆Tˇk, for any(x,y)∈Tkwe haveTEˇk(x,y)⩾TEk(x,y), and therefore1/TSEk(x,y)∈(0,1],∀k∈{1,2,…,n}, i.e., the reciprocal of this measure of efficiency gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for 100% primal scale efficiency level.Similarly, the dual (or revenue based) scale efficiency measure for a DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}with an input level x and output prices p, withREk(x,p)≠0, would be(2.13)RSEk(x,p)=REˇk(x,y,p)REk(x,y,p)=Rˇk(x,p)Rk(x,p),(x,y)∈Tk,p∈R++M.BecauseTk⊆Tkˇwe haveRkˇ(x,p)⩾Rk(x,p)and therefore1/RSEk(x,p)∈(0,1],∀k∈{1,2,…,n}, i.e., the reciprocal of this measure of efficiency also gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for 100% revenue-based scale efficiency level. Note thatRSEk(x,p)is independent from the output levels, which happens due to optimization behavior over outputs involved in (2.4) and (2.10) and due to benchmarking with respect to the same actual revenue py.Our goal now is to find a proper way to aggregate the scores yielded by these individual scale efficiency measures, which we will derive with a help of important relationships and decompositions of the efficiency measures that we outline in the next section.In our further derivations we will utilize the following well-known decomposition of individual revenue efficiency measure, that hold for anyk∈{1,2,…,n},(3.1)REk(x,y,p)=TEk(x,y)×AEk(x,y,p),∀(x,y)∈Tk,∀p∈R++Mfor the actual technology and, analogously for the CRS-hypothetical technology,(3.2)REˇk(x,y,p)=TEˇk(x,y)×AEˇk(x,y,p),∀(x,y)∈Tk,∀p∈R++M,whereAEk(x,y,p)andAEˇk(x,y,p)are so-called allocative efficiency measures (output oriented), measuring inefficiency due to non-optimal (w.r.t. revenue optimization) allocation of outputs given p (see Färe & Primont (1995) and Färe & Grosskopf (2000) for more details).Because∀(x,y)∈Tkwe haveREˇk(x,y,p)⩾TEkˇ(x,y)we have1/AEˇk(x,y,p)∈(0,1],∀k∈{1,2,…,n}, i.e., the reciprocal of this measure of efficiency also gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for full or 100% of output oriented allocative efficiency level, but now w.r.t. the CRS-hypothetical technology and prices p.Furthermore, note that we can also decomposeREˇk(x,y,p)into revenue efficiency and revenue based scale efficiency, as(3.3)REˇk(x,y,p)=REk(x,y,p)×RSEk(x,y,p),(x,y)∈Tk,p∈R++M.Moreover, for any DMUk∈{1,2,…,n}, we can also decompose the individual revenue-based scale efficiency measure,RSEk(x,y,p), into technical and allocative parts, as(3.4)RSEk(x,y,p)=TSEk(x,y)×ASEk(x,y,p),∀(x,y)∈Tk,∀p∈R++M,where the latter component of (3.4) is given by(3.5)ASEk(x,y,p)=AEˇk(x,y,p)AEk(x,y,p),∀(x,y)∈Tk,∀p∈R++Mand we will refer to (3.5) as output oriented allocative scale (in)efficiency measure. Note, however, that unlike for revenue and technical efficiency measures, we cannot guarantee thatAEkˇ(x,y,p)⩾AEk(x,y,p)or vice verse, and so one cannot guarantee in general that1/ASEk(x,y,p)is within(0,1].Combining the above results, we get the following decomposition of the CRS-hypothetical revenue efficiency measure on the individual or disaggregate level(3.6)REˇk(x,y,p)=TEk(x,y)×AEk(x,y,p)×TSEk(x,y)×ASEk(x,y,p)and it holds for any(x,y)∈Tk,p∈R++MandallDMUsk∈{1,2,…,n}.In words, (3.6) decomposes the CRS-hypothetical-based revenue efficiency measure of a DMU k into four components: (i) the output oriented technical efficiency measure, (ii) the output oriented allocative efficiency measure, (iii) the output oriented technical scale efficiency measure, and (iv) the output oriented allocative scale efficiency measure. Now, the question is how to coherently aggregate all these measures from individual level into a group level, so that, preferably, such decomposition is also maintained at the aggregate level.One way to describe the problem of aggregation we face here is by formulating a goal to find a sequence of aggregation functionsf1,f2,f3,…that would relate the aggregate efficiency measures, which we denote here withRE‾ˇ,RE‾,TE‾,AE‾,RSE‾,TSE‾andASE‾, to the sets of their individual analogues. That is, we want to find some appropriate functionsf1,f2,f3,f4,f5,f6andf7, where(4.1)RE‾ˇ=f1REˇ1,…,REˇn,(4.2)RE‾=f2RE1,…,REn,(4.3)TE‾=f3TE1,…,TEn,(4.4)AE‾=f4AE1,…,AEn,(4.5)RSE‾=f5RSE1,…,RSEn,(4.6)TSE‾=f6TSE1,…,TSEn,(4.7)ASE‾=f7ASE1,…,ASEn,such that some desirable conditions on these relationships hold.While our primal focus in this paper is on aggregation equations regarding the primal and dual measures of scale efficiency, i.e., on (4.5) and (4.6), it is natural to desire that our aggregation solutions to (4.5) and (4.6) are also coherent with solutions to aggregation problems regarding the other efficiency measures. For example, it is natural to desire that the functionsf1,f2,f3,f4,f5,f6andf7are such that we are able to obtain decompositions on the aggregate level that are analogous to those we can obtain on the individual level in (3.1), (3.3) and (3.4). That is, we may wish to require that the following relationships among the aggregate efficiency measures hold(4.8)RE‾=TE‾×AE‾,(4.9)RE‾ˇ=RE‾×RSE‾,(4.10)RSE‾=TSE‾×ASE‾.In turn, these conditions (4.8)–(4.11) would also imply that we must have the following decomposition(4.11)RE‾ˇ=TE‾×AE‾×TSE‾×ASE‾,which is an analogue to the decomposition on the individual level given in (3.6).Admitting such framework implies that the aggregation problem we face here is an example of a system of functional equations. If, in addition, we require that the weights of the aggregation (denoted here withωk,k=1,…,n) remain the same in all equations of the aggregation problem, then the only solution to this problem requires that all the aggregation functions are weighted geometric means (see Aczél (1990, p. 27), Eichhorn (1978, p. 94) for more details). That is, the solution to the aggregation problem would be(4.12)RE‾ˇ=∏k=1n(REˇk)ωk,(4.13)RE‾=∏k=1n(REk)ωk,(4.14)TE‾=∏k=1n(TEk)ωk,(4.15)AE‾=∏k=1n(AEk)ωk,(4.16)TSE‾=∏k=1n(TSE)ωk,(4.17)ASE‾=∏k=1n(ASEk)ωk,(4.18)RSE‾=∏k=1n(RSEk)ωk.A weakness of such an approach, however, is that while formally answering the question about the aggregation function, this approach does not answer the question about what exactly the aggregation weights should be. A natural choice for the weights here in the output oriented or revenue-focused approach could be, for example, the observed revenue shares, i.e.,ωk=pyk/∑k=1npyk,k=1,…,n. This would be in the spirit of Farrell (1957) definition of structural efficiency of an industry. However, one could also argue that other weights (e.g., cost shares) might also be adequate. Moreover, there is no particular (economic) reason for the weights to be the same in all aggregation functions rather than being different for aggregating different efficiency measures. For example, some of the aggregation equations might have weights being the maximal (i.e., optimal w.r.t. p) revenue shares, given byRk(x,p)/∑k=1nRk(x,p), while other aggregation equations could use technically efficient shares for the aggregation, i.e.,py∗k/∑k=1npy∗k, wherey∗k=ykTEk(e.g., see a related discussion on weights in Ylvinger (2000) and Färe & Zelenyuk (2007)). In fact, in the next sections, taking economic approach will indeed yield different weights for different efficiency measures.It is worth noting here again that the issue of weights can often be even more important than the issue of aggregating functions-mainly because the aggregating functions are usually some type of averages and so usually yield similar results, especially for small variations of the scores being aggregated, while different weights can easily lead to dramatically different results and even may imply radically different policy implications. Our goal therefore is to derive some meaningful, economically compelling weights, as we do in the next section.The goal of this sub-section is to define and outline characterization of aggregate technology. This aggregate technology will then be used to derive an aggregation scheme for aggregating scale efficiency such that it is coherent with aggregation of other related efficiency measures. To achieve this goal, let us denote the input and output allocations among DMUs within a group of interest byX=(x1,…,xn), which is anN×nmatrix, and byY=(y1,…,yn), which is anM×nmatrix.A critical step here is to define a group technology-the aggregate technology of all DMUs within the group. Following Färe and Zelenyuk (2003), one natural way for our (output oriented) context is to assume the additive structure of aggregation for the output sets(5.1)P‾(X)=P‾(x1,…,xk,…,xn)=∑k=1nPk(xk),xk∈R+N,k=1,…,n,i.e., the aggregate output set is the Minkowski sum of the individual output sets.The group or aggregate revenue function can now be obtained in a fashion similar to the definitions on the disaggregated level we had in (2.4), but now with respect to the aggregate technology given in (5.1), i.e.,(5.2)R‾(X,p)=maxy{py:y∈P‾(X)},p∈R++M,xk∈R+N,k=1,…,n.Similarly as was done on the disaggregate level, in (2.5), and lettingY‾=∑k=1nykto denote the group’s total actual output vector, we can use the aggregate revenue function to measure the aggregate revenue efficiency of a group that, facing output prices p, producedY‾from an allocation of inputs X, via the following formula(5.3)RE‾(X,Y‾,p)=R‾(X,p)pY‾,forpY‾≠0.Intuitively, (5.3) is a measure of aggregate revenue efficiency of the group, that takes the maximal revenue obtainable from producing optimal (w.r.t. p) level of output and selling it at prices p, using the aggregate technology (5.1) and the matrix of input allocations X and compares it to the actual revenue of the group, given bypY‾. As other measures we considered above,1/RE‾(X,Y‾,p)gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for full or 100% aggregate or group revenue efficiency level, w.r.t. the aggregate technology (5.1).We now introduce new concepts that will help us deriving the new aggregation results. We start with the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology, defined in a similar fashion as we did in (5.1), i.e.,(5.4)P‾ˇ(X)=P‾ˇ(x1,…,xk,…,xn)=∑k=1nPˇk(xk),xk∈R+N,k=1,…,n,wherePˇk(xk)were defined in (2.7).Intuitively,P‾ˇ(X)is the CRS-hypothetical analogue ofP‾(X), constructed in the same fashion as the latter, but where the Minkowski summation is not over the original output sets but over their CRS-hypothetical analogues. Thus,P‾ˇ(X)will represent the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology.Based on this set-characterization of the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology, we can define the aggregate dual (revenue-based) characterization of technology and of efficiencies, analogous to those we did on the individual level, in (2.10), (2.11) and (2.13). Specifically, and analogous to (2.10), the aggregate CRS-hypothetical revenue function can be obtained from(5.5)R‾ˇ(X,p)=maxy{py:y∈P‾ˇ(X)},p∈R++M,xk∈R+N,k=1,…,n.Intuitively, with this CRS-hypothetical aggregate revenue function (5.5), we look at what is the maximal level of total revenue the group can obtain by selling (at prices p) output produced from the endowed input allocations X (without their reallocation across DMUs) if the technology were given byP‾ˇ(X). Similarly as in (5.2), because the adopted aggregation structure (5.4) allows for reallocation of outputs but not for reallocation of inputs, the same nature of aggregation is then inherited by the aggregate CRS-hypothetical revenue function as well as by all the efficiency measures based on it.Similarly to (2.11), the respective aggregate revenue efficiency w.r.t. the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology can be measured by(5.6)RE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)=R‾ˇ(X,p)pY‾,forpY‾≠0.Intuitively, (5.6) is a measure of CRS-hypothetical aggregate revenue efficiency of the group that takes the maximal revenue obtained from selling (at prices p) output produced from X (without their reallocation across DMUs) and compares it to the actual revenues of the group,pY‾, assuming technologyP‾ˇ(X)were feasible for this group. This latter proviso makes the entire difference between (5.6) and (5.3). Note also that1/RE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for full or 100% aggregate revenue efficiency level w.r.t. the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology.In its turn, we define the aggregate revenue scale efficiency measure of a group, analogously to those we have on the individual level, in (2.13),(5.7)RSE‾(X,p)=RE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)RE‾(X,Y‾,p)=R‾ˇ(X,p)R‾(X,p).Note thatRSE‾(X,p)is independent not only from Y and any individualykbut also from the total outputs of the group,Y‾, and total observed or actual revenuespY‾, which is due to the optimization (over outputs) involved in the construction of the revenue function as well as due to the process of benchmarking w.r.t. the same level of observed revenues,pY‾. Also note that becauseR‾ˇ(X,p)⩾R‾(X,p), we have1/RSE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)∈(0,1], i.e., this measure also gives a score between 0 and 1, with 1 standing for 100% aggregate revenue scale efficiency level w.r.t. the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology (5.4).In this sub-section we establish relationships between the disaggregate (primal and dual) scale efficiency measures and their aggregate analogues under the aggregate technology structure defined in (5.1) and (5.4). In other words, we are interested in deriving aggregation functions and aggregating weights that relate the aggregate or group scale efficiency measures with their disaggregate or individual scale efficiency measures that are commonly estimated in practice. With the derivations that follow, we will justify the use of weighted arithmetic average aggregating function, where the weights (and the aggregation function) are derived from the economic optimization behavior and specific assumptions on aggregation of technologies and on output prices. Following Färe and Zelenyuk (2003) (also see Koopmans (1957)), we have(5.8)R‾(X,p)=∑k=1nRk(xk,p)and therefore,(5.9)RE‾=RE‾(X‾,Y,w)=∑k=1nREk(xk,yk,p)ωk,whereωkis the observed or actual (revenue-based) share-weight of DMU k in its group, i.e., formally(5.10)ωk=pyk∑k=1npyk,k=1,…,n,so that(5.11)RE‾=TE‾×AE‾,where(5.12)TE‾=∑k=1nTEk(xk,yk)ωkand(5.13)AE‾=∑k=1nAEk(xk,yk,p)ωak,with(5.14)ωak=pykTEk(xk,yk)∑k=1npykTEk(xk,yk).Incidentally, note that the weights for aggregation of the allocative efficiency measures are different from those used for aggregation of the revenue and technical efficiency measures and, in particular, they account or correct for the technical inefficiency of the revenue shares used for weighting.By the same line of proof as for (5.8) (see Färe & Zelenyuk (2003, 2007)), analogous result follows for the aggregate revenue function based on the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology, i.e., we have(5.15)R‾ˇ(X,p)=∑k=1nRˇk(xk,p)and(5.16)RE‾ˇ=RE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)=∑k=1nREˇ(xk,yk,p)ωk,where the individual weightsωk,k∈{1,…,n}are the same as weights that appear in (5.9), and defined explicitly in (5.10).In words, (5.16) says that the aggregate revenue efficiency measure w.r.t. the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology, can be obtained by aggregating the individual revenue efficiency measures w.r.t. the individual CRS-hypothetical technology defined in (2.11), where the aggregating function is also the arithmetic average with individual weights given by the actual revenue shares of the individual k in the actual total revenue of its group.Furthermore, note that from (5.7), it follows immediately that(5.17)RE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)=RE‾(X,Y‾,p)×RSE‾(X,Y‾,p),i.e., we can decompose the aggregate revenue efficiency w.r.t. the aggregate CRS-hypothetical technology into two components: (i) the aggregate revenue efficiency (w.r.t. the aggregate technology) and (ii) the aggregate revenue scale efficiency.More importantly, we can obtain the aggregate revenue scale efficiency of a group,RSE‾(X,Y‾,p), from the set of its individual analogues,{RSEk(xk,yk,p)}k=1n. Specifically, combining (5.9) with (5.17) and applying some algebra, we get the following aggregation scheme:(5.18)RSE‾(X,Y‾,p)=∑k=1nRSEk(xk,yk,p)ωrk,where(5.19)ωrk=pykREk(xk,yk,p)∑k=1npykRE(xk,yk,p)=Rk(xk,p)∑k=1nRk(xk,p).Note that the weights that came out in the aggregation scheme (5.18), and described by (5.19), are different from those obtained for aggregation of revenue functions, technical and allocative efficiencies-here, they are the efficient revenue shares w.r.t. the individual revenue functions.In turn, the characterization of the aggregate revenue scale efficiency given in (5.18) and (5.19), helps decomposingRE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)even further, by employing the decomposition of the aggregate revenue scale efficiency measure into technical and allocative parts. Specifically, after some algebra, we arrive to the following system of aggregation equations(5.20)RSE‾(X,Y‾,p)=TSE‾×ASE‾,where(5.21)TSE‾=∑k=1nTSEk(xk,yk)ωrkand(5.22)ASE‾=∑k=1nASEk(xk,yk,p)ωrtskwithωrkgiven in (5.19), and(5.23)ωrtsk=Rk(xk,p)TSEk(xk,yk)∑k=1nRk(xk,p)TSEk(xk,yk).Incidentally, note again that the weights that came out in the aggregation of the primal scale efficiency measures, in (5.21), are the same as those derived for the aggregation of the dual (revenue-based) scale efficiency measures, described by (5.19). On the other hand, the weights that come out in the aggregation of allocative scale efficiency measures, in (5.22), and described in (5.23) are different from those we derived earlier for the aggregation of revenue functions or for the aggregation of technical and allocative efficiency measures, as they also account for the primal scale inefficiency.Finally, combining the statements above, we also get a desirable decomposition of the CRS-hypothetical revenue efficiency on the aggregate level—analogous to the decomposition we have on the disaggregated level that appeared in (3.6), i.e., we have(5.24)RE‾ˇ(X,Y‾,p)=TE‾×AE‾×TSE‾×ASE‾.In words, with the aggregation scheme derived from the revenue version of the Koopmans’ theorem (and given our assumptions on the aggregate technology, same output prices, standard regularity conditions, etc.), we are able to decompose the aggregate CRS-hypothetical revenue efficiency measure into four components of different types of aggregate efficiency measures, namely: (i) the aggregate technical efficiency measure, (ii) the aggregate allocative efficiency measure, (iii) the aggregate primal scale efficiency measure, and (iv) the aggregate allocative scale efficiency measure. Incidentally, note that the product of the last two gives the aggregate dual scale efficiency, while the product of the first two gives the aggregate revenue efficiency measure. We thus attained the main goal of this paper—derived a coherent and economically compelling aggregation scheme for scale efficiency measures that embraces previous aggregation results, with a natural decomposition (5.24) that is analogous to decomposition (3.6) that exists at individual level. In the next sub-section we will discuss an important issue of proper stratification that is pertinent particularly to the context of aggregating scale efficiency measures.Various types of stratification of a group into sub-groups may be motivated for various empirical contexts, e.g., private vs. public firms in an industry, foreign vs. local firms, sub-groups of firms under different regulation regimes, sub-groups of countries in different economic unions or organizations (e.g., OECD vs. non-OECD countries, EU vs. non-EU, developed vs. developing countries, etc.) Accounting for such differences in a group and adapting aggregation scheme to such stratification may be vital in practice. The issue of efficiency aggregation within a sub-group and across several sub-groups into a larger group was first analyzed in Simar and Zelenyuk (2007) for the context of aggregation of technical and revenue efficiency measures. Similar approach can be applied here as well.Importantly, even when there is no exogenous categorical variables that divide an analyzed group into distinct sub-groups, for the case of scale efficiency measurement there is a natural justification for stratifying a group of considered DMUs into potentially three sub-groups: (i) DMUs that are scale efficient, (ii) DMUs that are scale inefficient due to not exhausting the scale economies (i.e., too small to be scale efficient) and (iii) DMUs that are scale inefficient due to experiencing dis-economies of scale (i.e., too large to be scale efficient). Stratifying into these three groups, especially into the last two, and then proper aggregation within these sub-groups and between them is particularly important here because the reciprocals of the individual scale efficiency measures, whether primal or dual, give a score between 0 and 1 regardless of whether the firm is in group (ii) or in group (iii). In other words, the standard individual scale efficiency measures we considered above are not indicative of the source or cause of the scale inefficiency and ignoring this fact in producing the aggregate scale efficiency scores, whether primal or dual, would lead to missing important information about the scale economies. To do a proper aggregation, one should first stratify the estimates into the three groups and then apply the aggregation formulas derived above to aggregate the scale efficiency scores of DMUs within each of these three sub-groups separately. The resulting aggregate efficiency scores of sub-groups can then be aggregated into a larger group that consists of all or some of the sub-groups, using proper between-weights—the weights that would ensure hierarchical consistency of aggregation, as discussed in more details in Simar and Zelenyuk (2007).It is now worth considering some interesting special cases for our aggregation problem. First of all, note that if all DMUs exhibit (or are to be measured with respect to) the same technology then the formulas derived above can still be applied without any changes.Secondly, note that for all the types of efficiency measures considered here, except the allocative scale efficiency component, the aggregate efficiency is equal to one (i.e., 100% efficiency of the certain type) if and only if each individual efficiency score is equal to one.Thirdly, note that each DMU in the group exhibits CRS technology if and only if(6.1)TEkˇ(x,y)=TEk(x,y),∀k∈{1,….,n}or, if and only if(6.2)Rkˇ(x,p)=Rk(x,p),∀k∈{1,…,n}and therefore, if and only if(6.3)RSE‾=TSE‾=1.This is an important indication property of a scale efficiency measure that one may want an aggregate scale efficiency measure to satisfy.Fourthly, if none of DMUs exhibits output oriented allocative inefficiency w.r.t. the original output set and w.r.t. its CRS-hypothetical technology (i.e., whenAEk=AEˇk=1,∀k∈{1,….,n}), then we haveASE‾=1and therefore(6.4)RSE‾=TSE‾which in turn will imply(6.5)RE‾ˇ=TE‾×TSE‾.Although having no allocative inefficiency is a sufficient condition for the dual and primal (individual and aggregate) scale efficiencies to coincide, it is certainly not a necessary condition. Indeed, a much weaker condition for the dual and primal (individual and aggregate) scale efficiencies to yield equivalent results for any DMU k is for the technology of this DMU k to be output scale homothetic (see Zelenyuk (2014)), i.e. to satisfy the following property(6.6)Pk(x)=Hk(x)Pˇk(x),x∈R+N,whereHk(x)is a finite real-valued semi-continuous functionHk:R+N→R+1such thatHk(x)∈(0,1],∀y∈R+M. Intuitively, the structure of the individual technology of the type given by (6.6) assumes that the output set can be decomposed (in the multiplicative way) into the CRS-hypothetical output set, constructed from the originalPk(x), and an appropriate scaling factorHk(x)that, in general, may depend only on the scale and the mix of inputs described by x.With some algebra, it can then be shown (see Zelenyuk (2014)) that a DMU k has output scale homothetic technology (6.6) if and only if(6.7)TEk(x,y)=Hk(x)TEkˇ(x,y),∀(x,y)∈R+N+Mor, equivalently,(6.8)Rk(x,p)=Hk(x)Rkˇ(x,p),∀x∈R+N,p∈R++M.Therefore, an output scale homothetic technology is equivalent to saying that(6.9)TSEk(x,y)=RSEk(x,p)=1/Hk(x),∀(x,y)∈R+N+M,p∈R++M,i.e., whenever the original output set differs from its CRS-hypothetical analogue by a scaling factor (the size of which may vary over the scale or mix of inputs). In other words, wheneverPk(x)is a radial adjustment ofPkˇ(x)by some factorHk(x), we have exact equality of the primal and the dual individual scale efficiency measures.In turn, if every DMUk∈{1,…,n}exhibits output scale homothetic technology as in (6.6), then(6.10)RSE‾=TSE‾=∑k=1n(Hk(xk))-1ωrk,i.e., the aggregate primal and dual scale efficiency measures are also equal.Finally, in case information on output prices needed to compute the aggregation weights is unavailable, additional assumptions can be imposed to derive price-independent weights (see Färe & Zelenyuk (2007) for details).In this paper we developed a theory for aggregation of scale efficiency measures across DMUs (firms, industries, countries, group of countries, etc.). The derivation is based on assuming optimization behavior, additive aggregation structure on the output sets and the same (e.g., equilibrium) output prices across all DMUs. An advantage of the resulting aggregation scheme (and aggregation weights, in particular) is that it is not ad hoc but derived from certain assumptions coherent with economic theory, and coherent with previous aggregation results.This paper is just the first layer of theoretical foundation for analyzing aggregate scale efficiency measures. Its goal was to provide mathematical structure with economic theory foundation for such aggregation. The next layer shall be a statistical foundation. Indeed, besides presenting an average of results, researchers and practitioners are often interested in some measures of spread of the sample, such as the standard deviation, coefficient of variation, and interquartile range, as well as in the possibility to use some statistical testing procedures for inferring on various hypotheses. A hypothesis of an interest, for example, might be whether the true aggregate scale efficiency for a particular sub-group is different from unity (i.e., 100% efficiency) or some other level of interest. Another hypothesis of interest might be whether the aggregate scale efficiency scores are equal across different sub-groups or not, or across time for the same sub-groups, etc. Estimating characteristics of the sampling distribution of a statistic for a weighted mean where weights are random variables as well and related testing is a challenging task. A potential solution here would be to adapt the bootstrapping approach proposed in a different context by Efron (1979). This is a subject in itself, in some way similar to the recent work of Simar and Zelenyuk (2007) for bootstrapping the aggregate efficiency scores obtained via the DEA method, and we leave it for further research.It is also worth noting that the derived weights (and the theory in general) may not be unique and perhaps better weight (and theories in general) could also be derived-and we hope this particular work will stimulate this to happen. A natural extension to the present work that might generate different weights would be to allow for reallocation of inputs between DMUs in the technology aggregation structure and one of the ways to do this is to adapt the approach of Nesterenko and Zelenyuk (2007) to the case of aggregation of scale efficiencies.Another interesting research question is an extension of the presented theory to the intertemporal context—to measure changes of aggregate scale efficiency over time, as a component of aggregate Malmquist productivity index or other indexes, by extending the work of Zelenyuk (2006).Similar aggregation theories can also be developed for the case when efficiency measures are based on other functions, e.g., hyperbolic distance function, the directional distance functions, etc. and these would be other natural paths for related future research (see Färe, Grosskopf, & Zelenyuk (2008) and Bobykin & Zelenyuk (2010) for some related results).Overall, we believe that the aggregation solution with economic theory justification derived for the aggregation of scale efficiency in this paper must serve as a very useful platform for future applied as well as theoretical work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
