@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The expected value of the traceability information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Traceability systems can improve consumer confidence and supply chain profit.Traceability systems can be enabled by innovative technologies such as RFID.Quantitative models for the economic traceability systems assessment are needed.Automated traceability systems profit overcomes the profit in the absence of such systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Traceability systems,Quality control,Supply chain optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent regulations on agri-food traceability prescribe traceability throughout the entire supply chain, in order to ensure consumers’ safety and product quality. This has led producers and retailers to consider the opportunity to improve the firm's reputation and consumer confidence through the implementation of traceability systems designed not only to satisfy the legal requirements, but also to track the quality of the products through the supply chain for optimization purposes. However the actual implementation of such systems depends on the possibility of gathering specific information related to the product quality. Nowadays, innovative and non invasive technologies such as the Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) allow the automatic real time collection of data, thus enabling the development of effective traceability systems. In such context the expected value of traceability is a fundamental issue concerning the economic analysis of costs involved in such an investment and the optimal granularity level of implementation. This paper aims at evaluating the expected value of the implementation of traceability systems for perishable products like fruits and vegetables, and its profit. The study presents a mathematical stochastic approach for optimizing the supply chain profit and establishing the optimal granularity level (namely the Economic Traceability Lot) when a RFID solution is adopted. In particular, the supply chain profit in the presence of RFID traceability system has been calculated and compared with the expected profit in absence of such a system, and the results confirm the importance of the specific characteristics of the supply chain in determining the optimal configuration of the traceability system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The optimization of the logistic operations for perishable products is a research topic which has attracted a significant interest due to the recent regulations on traceability aimed to ensure the consumers about the quality and safety of foods.According to the ISO 9001:2000 standard, supply chain traceability is the ability to trace the history, application or location of an entity by means of recorded identifications (EC Regulation no. 178/2002; Nguyen, 2004), throughout the entire supply chain. In practice, supply chain traceability is an integrated end-to-end process, in which all the supply chain members contribute to optimize the tracking activity, which is achieved when the actors involved keep records of suppliers and customers and exchange this information along the entire supply chain (Cimino et al., 2005;Opara, 2004). Supply chain traceability has become a legal obligation within the EU since 1st January 2005, therefore it has attracted considerable attention in the last years. Moreover the food companies must consider the significant expenditure required to implement a traceability system as a long-term strategic investment to create consumer confidence both in the company image and in the specific product. On the other hand it has been pointed out the importance of synchronizing the activities of all partners in the supply chain in order to improve the effectiveness of supply chain operations. In this context the implementation of systems facilitating information sharing on various activities and the coordination between internal and external partners within the chain is enforced (Gunasekaran & Ngai, 2004). In addition to systematically storing information that must be made available to inspection authorities, other requirements for traceability exist besides the mere legal conformity: the members of the supply chain should in fact consider the opportunity of improving food safety and quality in order to increase the market value of products (Food Chain Strategy Division, Food Standards Agency, 2002). For this purpose, the data recorded must univocally identify the products flowing through the supply chain and provide several other information as for example, the quantity or nature of products, the weight, the remaining quality or their deterioration level, etc. In this context a proper design of a traceability system may allow to limit the product recall only to the products actually affected by contamination (Pouliot & Sumner, 2008). Such design relates not only to the procedures to be implemented and the standards to be observed but also to the optimal size of the batch to be tracked along the chain. However the design, implementation, and management of an efficient traceability system for food products is a difficult task since their quality is frequently conditioned by the harvesting means, transformation processes, transporting ways, and storage conditions (De Cindio, Longo, Mirabelli, & Pizzuti, 2011), making the data gathering and management a difficult task.When a traceability system is implemented the supply chain members can be interested in getting not only the information required by the legal regulation but also additional information concerning the product quality in order to increase consumers’ fidelity and market value. In fact when the products managed are perishable a traceability system can be usefully employed to monitor the product quality by detecting and recording the factors responsible of the deterioration processes. Given the importance that environmental parameters have in keeping of product quality level during postharvest phases, they have gained the attention of researchers. Brash, Charles, Wright, and Bycroft (1995), for example studied the relation between the respiration rate expressed in terms of CO2 emissions of a product stored at fixed temperature and its quality in terms of Shelf Life (SL) of asparagus; Zheng and Wolff (2000), focused on the relation between remaining quality, expressed in terms of product deterioration rate, and ethylene production in some varieties of melon. They showed a linear relation between the ethylene emission and the postharvest decay rating assessed through a visual inspection of products. Liu, Kakihara, and Kato (2004) studied the internal ethylene production during the postharvest phase of some varieties of melons determining their relation; Gabler (2005) found a distinct relationship between time dependency of the gas concentration and remaining quality at examinations of lettuce and other fruits. The literature about the relationship between the temperature and the quality of a product is very extensive. See for example Taoukis, Koutsoumanis, and Nychas (1999), Corbo et al. (2004), Limbo, Torri, Sinelli, Franzetti, and Casiraghi (2010), Aiello, La Scalia, and Micale (2012), that proposed some methodological approaches to the study of the relation between the product quality and the temperature history of products. Further studies in the field of quality monitoring and traceability concern the intelligent packaging allowing evidencing the non-conformity by means of a sensor-based detection technology (see for example Lee & Rahman, 2014, chap. 8; Puligundla, Jung, & Ko, 2012; Zhuang, Barth, & Cisneros-Zevallos, 2014, chap. 18). Such techniques generally rely on the assessment of the actual level of environmental conditions inside the packaging and the discarding criteria are based on a fixed threshold identifying a maximum level of the environmental parameter concentration allowed.In this context recent pervasive and non invasive technologies such as the Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) facilitated the task of data acquisition by allowing the automatic gathering of information needed to the traceability system thus reducing the traceability costs (Dabbene & Gay, 2011). As reported by Sari (2010), RFID have been proven to improve the supply chain performance in several application fields. Shah Jaymeen, and Murtaza Mirza (2008)observed that the automated collection and transmission capabilities provided by the RFID allow enhancing information sharing and collaboration between supply chain partners. Gandino, Montrucchio, Rebaudengo, and Sanchez (2009)reported that the adoption of an automated traceability system based on RFID technology allows increasing the efficiency of the traceability management by reducing the labor cost. In particular one of the most important issues to be faced in the adoption of a traceability system is the appropriate level of traceability to implement and the costs due to the automated traceability system consequently. A survey about the use of RFID in agriculture for environmental detection can be found in Ruiz-Garcia and Lunadei (2011). The availability of real-time data has a major influence on the optimal ordering quantity and the optimal time of promotion decision. An information system, viewed from an infrastructural and managerial perspective, has various elements such as identification and collection of relevant data elements, communication and processing of the data at regular intervals etc. (Raghuram & Rangaraj, 2003). RFID technology is an emerging trend in this field and is mainly used for product identification, collection and communication of relevant data. The use of non invasive technologies like RFID in conjunction with predictive models such as that above mentioned can be easily coupled to determine the remaining quality of a product at any stage of the supply chain thus enabling proper withdrawal of non conforming ones.This paper considers an RFID-based methodology for inventory control of perishable products such as fruits and vegetables. RFID technology requires very little or no handling of items and is therefore well suited for inventory control of perishable products. The technology also helps in updating the inventory status in real time without product movement, scanning or human involvement.In the present paper the attention is focused on the possibility to implement such an automated traceability system for monitoring the quality level of products. The traceability system considered makes use of an RFID system for the real-time detection of food quality depending on environmental parameters. More specifically the paper focuses on the study of the economic impact of an advanced traceability system enabled by the RFID technology on a supply chain delivering perishable products like fruits and vegetables which are harvested and then sent to the retailer who will sell them to the target market. The aim of the study is to demonstrate how a properly designed traceability system can improve the efficiency of the supply chain thus generating a value, rather than being a mere cost, which is generally the perception of supply chain managers and actors. In particular the paper tackles the problem of determining the optimal granularity level of an automated traceability system through a mathematical modeling of the related costs and benefits. The effects of the inherent uncertainties are also taken into account in a general stochastic formulation aimed at determining the configuration that maximizes the expected value of the traceability system.The paper analyzes a simple supply chain composed by a producer who provide for the harvesting and collecting of products and a retailer and determines the configuration for the traceability system to be profitable for the supply chain. The goal of the study is to show that the implementation of a properly designed traceability system based on advanced technologies not only improves the quality and safety of products, but it can also be a profitable investment for the supply chain. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 faces the problem of cost of traceability systems and introduces the topic of granularity of a traceability system and the choice of the optimal batch size; Section 3 provides a brief introduction on RFID technology; Section 4 relates to the proposed methodology; Sections 4.1 and 4.2 present the approach formulation; Section 5 illustrates a numerical application of the approach; Section 6 reports the conclusions.One of the main features that affects the cost and the practicability of traceability systems is the level of granularity. Following the definition formulated by Karlsen, Dreyer, Olsen, and Elvevoll (2012), granularity refers to the size of a traceable unit and the number of the smallest traceable units necessary to make up the traceable unit at a specific granularity level. As reported by Angeles (2005), usually the traceability levels considered are three: pallet, case or item-level. The main advantage of the item-level compared to the pallet level is the accuracy of information provided. By consequence with item level traceability in the case of recall it will be possible to reduce the number of products discarded since a lesser number of items will be withdrawn. On the other hand the finer the traceability, the higher will be the cost of the system and the amount of data to be processed. Karlsen et al. (2012)underlined that usually coarse granularity can be used when the risk of contamination is low, or when requirements for controlling production processes are less stringent, while finer granularity is recommended otherwise. As reported by Dabbene and Gay (2011), the granularity generally arises from a combination of tradition, short-term convenience and use of available facilities. Only in a few cases granularity is the result of a formal analysis and optimization in the supply chain. The amount of data to be collected is a main consequence of the granularity level chosen and it can require a strong effort by companies which carry out the manual record of the data. In this case an electronic and automated data recording system can be of great help in managing data needed (Karlsen, Donnelly, & Olsen, 2011). In this field the RFID lends itself as a suitable technology to achieve the goal of traceability.It is nowadays generally recognized that sensing and communication technologies are mature enough to develop advanced traceability systems, although their diffusion is limited due to the perception of high implementation costs. As remarked by Gandino et al. (2009), the diffusion of traceability systems is not homogeneous between the firms. They observed that the most advanced agricultural enterprises recognize an important role to the Information Communication Technology (ICT) and use spontaneously a traceability system, which is generally characterized by high efficiency and automation. On the other hand Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) usually use non-digital systems relying in manual ones due to the limited scale of their operations, necessity of heavy investment and nature of their manufacturing process (Nishantha, Wanniarachchige, & Jehan, 2010). In this context major obstacles to the successful implementation of automated traceability systems are the necessity of costly investments, reluctance to change, lack of skills. Nevertheless, tracing and tracking capabilities may be crucial for example to reduce the cost of recalls (Bechini, Cimino, Marcelloni, & Tomasi, 2008). Such characteristics determine the appropriate traceability level and affect the cost and benefit correspondingly (Asioli, Boecker, & Canavari, 2011). Traceability costs are also dependent on the regulatory environment, the technology adopted, the complexity of the supply chain and the amount of data required (Dabbene & Gay, 2011). Following the classification given in Asioli et al. (2011), traceability costs can be divided in implementation and maintenance/operation costs. Both types of costs belong to the following five categories: “Time and effort” required to workforce, administration and management to implement the traceability system, “Equipment and software” needed, “Training”, “External consultants”, “Materials” and “Certification and audits”. Generally speaking costs related to “Time and effort” as well as costs related to “Training” and costs for “External consultants” essentially depend on the specialized skills and knowledge of human resources necessary for system implementation and use (Theuvsen & Hollman‐Hespos, 2005) and on the skills already present in the firm. Dessureault, Henson, Herath, and Sparling (2006)proposed a similar classification of traceability costs even if they underline the poor importance of “External consultants”, “Purchase of software” and “Ongoing training” in both the implementation and operation/ maintenance costs and the strong impact of the labor intensive logistic operations such as the supervision time, the cost of monitoring suppliers and the costs of regular inspections/audit.Among operation costs, the identification and monitoring costs can constitute an important issue in relation to the type of technology employed for the unique identification of products. Such costs are related to the label identifying the product and to sensor used for quality monitoring (if any). Recently Meyer, Främling, and Holmström (2009)pointed out that the gradual reduction in the cost of RFID technology made it possible to track and trace not only expensive products but also small and cheap ones. However the cost remains one of the major obstacles in the diffusion of the RFID technology in agriculture. Zhu, Mukhopadhyay, and Kurata (2012)report that currently the passive Ultra High Frequency (UHF) tags sell for about 10 cents US Dollars (USD) each, which can be a very high cost for agricultural products.In this sense the core of the traceability design process is to realize a system offering the right degree of information at an acceptable cost (Cheng & Simmons, 1994). This involves a right choice of the traceable unit to be monitored in order to set up the optimal traceability level maximizing the total profit of the supply chain.RFID is a technology which has recently gained the attention of industry due to its wide potential of application in different fields (see for example Zhu et al., 2012). RFID tags can be divided in three types: passive, semi passive (or semiactive) and active. Passive tags do not have a battery; they use the energy that the electromagnetic wave from the reader induces in the antenna to power up the chip and to transmit the data back to the reader. Passive tags reflect energy from the reader or receive and temporarily store the energy in order to generate the tag response to the reader. Since they do not have a proper source of power the lifetime is almost unlimited. An active tag has its own power source, typically a battery, to run the chip and to transmit the data to the reader. An active tag allows very low-level signals to be received and can still generate high-level signal to be transmitted back to the reader. The active tag lies in sleep-mode until it gets a wake-up signal from the reader. As soon as the tag gets the wake-up signal the data carrier gets into operating mode. After the completion of the data transaction the tag gets into sleep-mode again. Because the active tag has a battery onboard they can transmit data without requiring a reader to power them. They have therefore much longer reading range then a passive tag (few meters vs hundreds of meters). On the other hand because they have a battery they have finite lifetime. Active tags, also incorporate a memory, a battery and a clock to record sensor data in memory at constant intervals. Semi-passive, or semi-active tags, also have an onboard battery. The battery in this case is only used to power the sensor and recording logic (to operate the chip). In fact, unlike active tags, semi passive tags are not able to initiate communications with the reader. Like the passive tag it uses the energy in the electromagnetic field to wake up the chip and to transmit the data to the reader. Sometimes semi-passive tags are equipped with a sensor enabling the detection of environmental factors (like temperature, humidity, light and concentration of gases).Each RFID system operates within a given frequency range. The frequency range in which a RFID system operates determines key capabilities and limitations in the system. For example, the higher the frequency, the shorter the wavelength and the harder for a radio signal to go around or through obstacles to reach a receiver.Table 1highlights that passive and semi- passive/active tags can be proper employed for the purpose of traceability in supply chains. In fact a RFID tag “follows” the item moving along the supply chain, allowing the dynamic monitoring of products from the production site to the consumer thus enabling producers, logistics groups and costumers to trace their goods at any time. The possibility to embed RFID tags with temperature, humidity, solar irradiation, gas and/or shock sensors, incorporating sensing capabilities allows to measure both physical and chemical parameters (see for example Vergara et al., 2007). Ruiz-Garcia and Lunadei (2011) who addressed the use of RFID in the specific field of agriculture report that active and semi-passive tags are usually employed to collect temperature information. Other semi-passive tags outfitted with sensor allow to detect humidity, shock/vibration, light, pH and concentration of gases, such as acetaldehyde or ethylene.Such parameters can be proper translated into quality attribute of products by means of mathematical models as can be found for example in Giannakourou and Taoukis (2003a, 2003b) who proposed a mathematical model for the assessment of the SL of frozen green vegetables following the Arrhenius Law.The unique identification associated to each tag allows the identification of individuals’ items thus combining quality management with the inspection function. This allows to know either the localization of a batch in every stage of the chain and its current quality conditions. Consequently the RFID enables to develop an automated traceability system for the granularity level required and perform an inspection system of the entire production. The positive impact of RFID applications in traceability systems has been proven with regard to both the identification and movement tracing of products (Kim & Sohn, 2009, Piramuthu, Farahani, & Grunow, 2013). The fundamental question for the adoption of such automated traceability systems is whether they can create a value justifying their investment and how the RFID value can be measured. The problem which arises, hence, is to determine the optimal granularity level of the traceability system (optimal number of units for a batch) which maximizes the profit of the entire chain. For this purpose it is necessary to consider the costs incurred by the chain when the traceability system is implemented (e.g. infrastructural costs related to devices employed for the identification and quality monitoring) and to determine the conditions which allow to improve the supply chain performance in terms of profit achievable if compared with the case in which the traceability system is not adopted.The determination of the optimal batch size for tracking and tracing purposes is a topic recently investigated in the literature. Researchers in this field focused on additional costs incurred by automatic traceability systems implementations, which represent a disadvantage for organizations involved in the supply chain. Lakshmi, Chalasani, and Boppana (2011) discussed the conditions under which, for example, a RFID implementation is beneficial compared to a non-RFID implementation for existing inventory models. They argue that, in most cases, changes to an organization's inventory model are required for a RFID implementation to be beneficial. Lee and Lee (2010) propose a supply chain RFID investment evaluation model based on the classic economic order quantity (EOQ) in which three unique RFID investment factors of ordering efficiency, Just-In-Time (JIT) efficiency, and operating efficiency are considered. These factors can be translated into beneficial achievable through the adoption of the RFID technology. The authors argue that the automatic data gathering provided by RFID will reduce the amount of manual counting operations and determine the optimal order quantity that must be associated to an RFID device for item level identification. Another topic addressed by the literature is the traceability of processed food which seems to be an expensive process due the fact that in this case different lots of various raw materials are combined into batches distributed through various points of sale (Zhang, Zhang, Shen, Zhang, & Weisong, 2009). Zhang et al. (2009)studied the problem of the batches recall and traceability systems, showing that the effectiveness of such systems relates not only to the process information but also to the reduction of the batches dimension in case of recall. They studied the information flow and risk transmission in food supply chains and proposed a dynamic programming model for the risk transmission problem in a Chinese dumpling factory, employing RFID to identify and transfer traceable information. Dupuy, Botta-Genoulaz, and Guinet (2005) proposed a model aiming at minimizing the quantity of products recalled reducing the batch dispersion by limiting the batch size. Ogasawara and Yamasaki (2006)reported a cold chain solution that uses RFID tags with embedded temperature sensors. They also introduced a temperature-managed traceability system that contributes to effective risk management by easily enabling consistent temperature management throughout transportation processes. Bollen, Riden, and Cox (2007)analyzed the fruit supply chain and proposed a mixing model able to assign the probability for a fruit in a mixed batch to origin from a specific bin. The model developed assigns the probabilities of bin origin to individual fruit at the point they are packed into their final packs. Wang, Li, O'Brien, and Li. (2010) faced the problem of simultaneous optimization of batch dispersion and risk. In the paper, an integrated optimization model is developed in which the product safety related traceability factor is employed to develop an optimal production plan. The model aims to improve traceability and manufacturing performance by simultaneously optimizing the production batch size and batch dispersion with risk factors. Piramuthu, Wochner, and Grunow (2014)studied the impact of the item-level tagging at the retailing stage showing that, under certain conditions, item-level RFID tagging of items that cost less than an RFID tag has the potential to generate significant benefits to the retailer. The literature analyzed substantially focuses on the possibility to adapt traditional deterministic inventory models to the necessity of including the technology costs of detection, by quantifying the information that can be drawn from the implementation of the traceability system consisting not only in the identification of batches. However the literature mentioned seems to neglect the importance of knowledge of the quality level of the batch tracked and how this information can be effectively employed in the logistic processes. For example, in the intermediate levels of the supply chain, the use of a traceability system giving information about the quality level allows to perform an acceptance test by determining which batches to send to the final destination and which batches to discard thus reducing the impact of non conforming batches on the total profit of the supply chain. The present paper aims at overcoming the gap of the existing models by presenting a profit model for the assessment of the optimal granularity level of the traceability system when the supply chain is composed by a producer and a retailer which make use of the traceability system. The model proposed includes the costs related to the automatic inspection of batches and determines the conditions under which the supply chain profit can be optimized making convenient the adoption of a traceability system. A comparison will be made with the supply chain in absence of such a system.In the present study the use of an automated traceability system is considered, for monitoring the residual quality of products in a supply chain composed by a producer and a retailer.The approach considered involves an acceptance test of the production where the units with a quality attribute higher than a fixed threshold will be shipped from the producer to the retailer and sold on the target market. The batches that do not pass the acceptance test will be forwarded to an alternative market at a salvage value (see Fig. 1). The only activities relating the supply chain considered are the harvesting, collecting and the transportation one and no transformation activity is required along the chain.The approach is based on the assumption that each batch contains products coming from a production process which produces a known percentage of deteriorated products. In particular, the probability that a single product is deteriorated is known, thus the probability a batch contains a fixed number of deteriorated products can be easily determined. The decision of forwarding the entire batch to the subsequent level of the supply chain is hence based on an acceptance test, which relies on the inspection of the batch, the determination of the number of deteriorated units, and finally on the comparison of such number with a pre-established threshold. Such an approach is consistent with the EU regulation 153/2011 in terms of implementation of rules covering the fruit and vegetables sector. It is recognized by the OECD members saying that in performing inspection test on samples “When defects are detected, the inspector shall ascertain the respective percentage of the produce not in conformity with the standard by number or weight”. In order to extend such procedure to the entire production it must be based on an automatic inspection system, since manual inspection of each batch is unpractical and extremely expensive. However, there is a consistent literature nowadays which describes the relationship between the quality of a product and some chemical or physical parameters. It is for example well known that environmental parameters mostly involved in products deterioration are the temperature, the relative humidity, the solar irradiation and atmosphere composition in terms of CO2, O2 and ethylene concentration, which characterize the micro climate around the product at any postharvest stage and contribute to determine its quality. In fact harvested produce continues to respire throughout its postharvest life and the respiration rate can be determined by detecting the O2 consumption rate and/or CO2 production rate. Because this process occurs from harvest to table, compounds that affect plant flavor, sweetness, weight, turgor (water content), and nutritional value are lost. In addition, storage conditions affect respiration, with higher temperatures leading to a faster rate of respiration. Because of the significant effect of temperature on respiration, a harvested product should be quickly brought to its optimal storage temperature. A study conducted by UCD university shows that a delay beyond 1 hour in the storage of strawberries in refrigerated room reduces the percentage of marketable fruit of 20 percent (Reinhardt, 2008). Another important factor that affects the product quality in postharvest phases is represented by ethylene production. It triggers specific events during a plant's natural course of growth and development, such as ripening. Through this action, it induces changes in certain plant organs, such as textural changes, color changes, and tissue degradation. Some of these changes may be desirable qualities associated with ripening; in other cases, it can bring damage or premature decay (Silva, 2010).As discussed before, it is nowadays possible to equip each batch with a technological control unit, which monitors some specific parameters, representative of the deterioration level of the products inside the batch, thus providing a reliable measure of the quality level of the entire batch (see for example Piazzi et al., 2011, Shrestha, Agarwal, Phoha Vir, & Varahramyan, 2009).Such parameters can therefore be read automatically by means of a proper RF based communication infrastructure involving a smart tag attached to the bin and reader devices located in the warehouse gates. In such sense, the methodology here proposed relies on RFID technology as enabling technology for effective traceability systems. The proposed approach, hence, takes into account the beneficial/costs introduced by the technology. Benefits are referred to the cost saving allowed by the technology. In fact the possibility to identify a product and the information related to its actual quality level allows the early detection of non conforming units and their withdrawal thus avoiding transport cost of products unsuitable for the target market. Knowing the actual residual quality level also allows to redirect such non conforming products in an alternative market (e.g. processed foods) thus generating a salvage value rather than a disposal cost. This residual value, together with the reduction of the disposal costs, may provide the financial leverage to cover implementation costs of the RFID infrastructure. As stated before, these costs are essentially constituted by infrastructural costs which are fixed costs and operational/maintenance costs which are variable costs. The impact of these costs will increase as the granularity of the traceability system increases; therefore the problem of the Economic Traceability Lot corresponding to the optimal granularity level of the system arises. In particular, in the following paragraph, the tradeoff between the variable costs of the RFID infrastructure and the economic benefit deriving from knowing the residual quality of products is addressed with the aim of establishing the optimal granularity level of the system.In this section we present a stochastic approach to determine the optimal level of granularity taking into account the costs of the traceability system and the intrinsic parameters of the production process. The approach is referred to a two echelons supply chain, where each batch is shipped to the subsequent stage, if the quality level is acceptable, or it is delivered to a secondary market at a salvage value if the quality is inadequate to the target market. The proposed approach does not consider the technical issues related to the automatic inspection procedure, and assumes that the detection system RFID based can provide a reliable measure of the deteriorated products inside the batch. A perfect control procedure is hence assumed, which ensures that all deteriorated batches are always detected and non deteriorated units are always correctly identified.According to this assumption, only the batches that pass the quality compliance test are shipped to the subsequent level of the supply chain. The approach is therefore referred to a population of size P divided in batches of size n. The percentage of deteriorated units in P is p (that is the percentage of units which have a residual quality below the acceptance threshold) and the expected number of the deteriorated units in a batch is n × p. Coherently with the assumption that each product in P has the same probability p to be deteriorated, let th be the batch acceptance threshold, which is the maximum allowable percentage of deteriorated units in the batch which determine the acceptance or the rejection of the batch. Increasing the acceptance threshold (i.e. the number of allowable non conforming products in each batch), a higher quantity of deteriorated products will be forwarded to the subsequent step of the supply chain. The products in the batch rejected (both non deteriorated and deteriorated) are addressed to an alternative market where they are sold at a salvage value. The total value of the salvaged products, proportional to the number of products in the batches that do not pass the acceptance test, decreases when the threshold increases and for fixed threshold decreases when the batch size increases if p < th and increases as the batch size increases if p > th. The products sent to the retailer in the target market will incur in a transport cost proportional to the amount of products shipped. Since the quantity of products shipped increases when the acceptance threshold raises, the cost of transport increases with the threshold. It can also be shown that such quantity increases with the batch size if p < th and decreases as the batch size increases if p > th.Since for fixed threshold the retailer will also receive deteriorated products, he will incur in a disposal cost, proportional to the quantity of products disposed. This quantity decreases with the acceptance threshold and, for fixed threshold, increases with the batch size when p < th and decreases as the batch size increases for p > th.The application of RFID technology involves costs due to the use of tags and sensors employed for identification and detection. Assuming that a tag is attached to each batch, this cost will be proportional to the number of batches formed and it is independent from p and th.The revenue resulting by products sold is proportional to the amount shipped. The revenue increases with the threshold. For p < th the revenue increases as the batch size increases, while for p > th the revenue decreases as the batch size increases. Finally the total profit is always increasing with the batch size for p > th while for p < th the profit function has a maximum which increases as p comes close to th.In the following a mathematical approach will be discussed modeling the flow analyzed in Fig. 1 and the profit achievable by the supply chain in presence of such a system will be compared with the case in absence of the traceability system in order to show that an optimal granularity level can be found in relation to the specific context analyzed.The following notation is used:P: total product quantity,p: percentage of deteriorated units in the total production P,n: batch size,x: a random variable representing the number of non conforming items in a batch whose dimension is n × p,ntag: number of tags required,th: threshold identifying the percentage of deteriorated units present in the batch which determine the withdrawal of the batch from the producer, i.e. the fixed probability of accepting/rejecting a batch,Cd: unit disposal cost,Ctr: unit transport cost,Ctag: unit tag cost,Sv: unit salvage value,Pr: unit price,R: probability of rejecting a batch of size n when more than n × th deteriorated units are present. R can be formalized as follows:(1)R=P(x>th×n)=1−P(x)where P(x) represents the probability of accepting a batch and depends from the probability distribution of deteriorated units in the batch.It is assumed that the entire batch which does not pass the test is not forwarded to the subsequent step of the supply chain and all the products inside are salvaged with a residual value representing the possibility of selling the product as a low quality product for different scopes (e.g. processed foods, etc.). It is a common practice in the food chain that partially deteriorated units are sold at alternative markets at discounted prices. Such an aspect has been tackled by several authors with reference to the optimal batch dimension (see for example Mishra & Shah, 2008; Venkateswarlu & Mohan, 2011, Tripathy & Pradhan, 2012, Venkateswarlu & Mohan, 2013).From (1) the expected number of products which do not pass the test for fixed th and p can be determined:Expectednumberofrejectedproducts=R×n×Pn=R×PConsequently, the Expected Total Salvage valueTSvTreferred to all the products that do not pass the acceptance test can be calculated as:(2)E(TSvT)=Sv×R×PThe Expected value of the Total Transport costTCtrTis:(3)E(TCtrT)=Ctr×P×(1−R)From (1) we can determine the maximum number of deteriorated units d in the rejected batches, as the probability of having th × n deteriorated units in the batch:(4)d=F−1(P(th))×σ+μwhere μ and σ represent the mean and the standard deviation of the deteriorated units in the batch, respectively, and F−1 the cumulative standard distribution.Summarizing the formulation just seen the acceptance test consists in fixing the probability of accepting/rejecting the batch identified by the threshold th and determining the number of deteriorated units needed to reject the batch which depends from the unknown batch size.Consequently the minimum number of non deteriorated units c in the rejected batches is:(5)c=n−dConservatively we assume that c = n − nc, considering that the actual number of non deteriorated products discarded will not be lower than c.The expected number of products that reach the destination is:(6)(1−R)×PThe expected number of good products that reach the destination is:(7)(1−p)×(1−R)×PThe expected number of bad products that reach the destination is:(8)p×(1−R)×PThe Expected value of the Total Disposal costTCdTis referred to all the deteriorated products that reach the final destination, which is the entire number of deteriorated in the population (P × p) minus the number of deteriorated units which are preventively removed from the supply chain in the batches that do not pass the acceptance test (sold at a salvage value rather than at the disposal cost):(9)E(TCdT)=Cd×(P×p−d×Pn×R)Considering that all deteriorated units and all non deteriorated products present in the batches rejected will be disposed (either at the producer or at the retailer).The Expected value of the Total device costTCITis:(10)E(TCIT)=Ctag×PnThus the Expected value of the Total Cost in presence of traceability TCT is:(11)E(TCT)=E(TCtrT)+E(TCdT)+E(TCIT)Considering that deteriorated units are inadequate for the sale, the number of products unsold is the sum of all deteriorated units plus the non deteriorated products inside the rejected batches. The Expected value of the Total Revenue in presence of traceability TRT, is therefore:(12)E(TRT)=Pr×(P×(1−p)−c×Pn×R)The Expected value of the Total Profit in presence of traceability ΠT is:(13)E(ΠT)=E(TRT)−E(TCT)+E(TSvT)=Pr×(P×(1−p)−c×Pn×R)−Ctr×P×(1−R)−Ctag×Pn−Cd×(P×p−d×Pn×R)+sv×R×PIn the case in which the traceability system is not adopted Eqs. (3), (9), (11), (12) and (13) can be rewritten as:(14)E(TCtrNT)=Ctr×P(15)E(TCdNT)=Cd×P×p(16)E(TCNT)=E(TCtrNT)+E(TCdNT)(17)E(TRNT)=Pr×P×(1−p)(18)E(ΠNT)=E(TRNT)−E(TCNT)=Pr×P×(1−p)−Ctr×P−Cd×P×pIn this case the costs and the revenue are constant and independent from the batch size, as Eqs. (14)–(18) confirm.Both in the cases of traceability and no traceability system adopted the objective function is to maximize the Total Profit by considering that in the case of traceability such quantity can be dependent from n, and an optimal “traceability” size can be determined consequently. Since:(19)ntag=Pnthe optimization to respect to n also allows to determine the optimal ntag to be attached to the batches.In the next section a numerical application of the approach here illustrated is proposed. At first the analytical conditions ensuring the effectiveness of the traceability system with respect to the case in absence of traceability is considered in the case in which p = th and the device cost Ctag is null.Thus the general case is considered with p ≠ th and Ctag ≠ 0. Since in this case a closed form of the expression (13) is difficult to find dependently on the probability distribution of non-conforming units, a graphical solution is proposed showing the conditions ensuring the presence of an optimal profit in the case in which the traceability system is enforced.Finally a sensitivity analysis relying once again on graphical solution is proposed showing the impact of the costs variation on the optimal profit, the optimal batch size and the Optimal Tag Number.In order to develop a numerical application of the approach above proposed the probability of exceeding the threshold in the batch has been represented by a binomial random variable X in which the acceptance probability is equal to the sum of probability that by executing n tests the number of non conforming products observed is less than n × th:(20)P(x≤th×n)=∑k=0th×n(nk)pk(1−p)n−kThe probability a batch fails the test can be calculated from (1) as follows:P(x>th×n)=1−P(x≤th×n)Since the computation of binomial distribution becomes difficult when the size of batch increases, in order to simplify the calculation a continuous approximation of the binomial distribution has been employed:(22)X∼N(μ,σ)=N(n×p,(n×p)×(1−p))The probability a batch passes the test can be expressed through the Student’s t-distribution as follows:(23)P(x)=P(x/ν)=∫−∞xΓ(ν+12)Γ(ν2)1νπ1(1+t2ν)ν+12dtwhere ν corresponds to the degrees of freedom,t=x−μσ/n,x=n×th.In such conditions, if the percentage of deteriorated units p and the threshold th are equal, and the device cost is considered null a trivial case is obtained.In such conditions, in fact, the profit function in presence of the traceability system (13) is independent from the batch size. The value of the traceability information compared to the case in absence of such a system can be derived comparing the single cost/revenue of the two profit functions:(24)E(TCtrNT)=Ctr×P>E(TCtrT)=Ctr×P×(1−R)(25)E(TCdNT)=Cd×P×p>E(TCdT)=Cd×(P×p−d×Pn×R)(26)E(TRNT)=Pr×P×(1−p)>E(TRT)=Pr×(P×(1−p)−c×Pn×R)Eqs. (24) states that the expected transport cost always reduces when a traceability system is enforced, as in fact some batches will eventually be salvaged at the producer. Coherently, the disposal cost incurred by the retailer (Eq. (25)) in the case of traceability will decrease with the enforcement of the traceability system; in fact the disposal cost is related only to the fraction of deteriorated units in the batches sent to the retailer. Finally, Eq. (26) states that the revenue in absence of the traceability system is greater than that achievable with the traceability system. In order to establish the value of the traceability system the two profit functions (13) and (18) must be compared and the break-even point determined:(27)E(ΠT)≥E(ΠNT)(28)−Pr×cn+Ctr+Cd×dn+sv≥0The analysis proceeds by considering the general case in which the tag cost is non null and the percentage of deteriorated units is different from the fixed threshold. In such case the existence of a break-even point making affordable the traceability system depends upon the batch size and on the cost/price parameters of Eq. (13). It can be showed that an optimal profit can be found maximizing the profit in presence of the traceability system and that such a profit is greater than that in absence of such a system as given in Fig. 2. Fig. 2 shows that E(ΠT) function is initially increasing until a maximum is reached; then it decreases to a minimum value, and finally becomes asymptotically equal to the profit in absence of traceability system. The Economic Traceability Lot can hence be determined which maximizes the total profit.Once the Economic Traceability Lot has been determined, the proper setting of the cost/price parameters can be determined by posing the condition of Eq. (27) and determining the value of each parameter making affordable the traceability system. For such purpose a further analysis has been carried out in order to examine how the Maximum Profit, the Economic Traceability Lot and the corresponding Optimal Tag Number are influenced by the input parameters (the costs/price, the threshold and the percentage of non conforming). A sensitivity analysis has been performed by varying each factor at a time and keeping the other fixed.Initially the influence of the disposal and transportation costs (Cd, Ctr) has been addressed by considering a variation range between 0.01 and 0.31 and the corresponding results are given in Figs. 3and 4respectively. Figs. 3 and 4 show that the increasing of Cd and Ctr costs cause a decreasing in the Total Profit and in the Economical Traceability Lot with a consequent increasing of the Optimal Tag Number.Subsequently, the salvage value (Sv) has been varied between 0.01 and 0.31 and the cost of tags (Ctag) between 0.01 and 0.51, and the corresponding results are given in Figs. 5and 6.Fig. 5 shows that the increasing in Ctag costs causes a decreasing in the Total Profit and an increasing in the Economical Traceability Lot with a consequent decreasing of the Optimal Tag Number. Fig. 6 shows that the increasing of the Sv causes an increasing of the Total Profit and a decreasing in the Economical Traceability Lot which corresponds an increasing in the Optimal Tag Number. Fig. 7shows that the increasing in the price Pr causes an increasing in the Total Profit and a contemporary increasing in the Economic Traceability Lot which corresponds a decreasing in the Optimal Tag Number.A final analysis involved the variation of p and th between 0.01 and 0.95 has been carried out and the corresponding results related to the Economical Traceability Lot reported in Figs. 8–11.Figs. 8 and 9show that the Total Profit decreases as the p value increases. In particular for p < th (Fig. 8) the Total Profit function has a maximum (Optimal Traceability Lot) increasing with the p value to which corresponds a decreasing Optimal Tag Number. For p > th the profit function is always increasing (Fig. 9). Figs. 10and 11show that the Total Profit decreases as the th value increases. In particular for th < p the profit function is always increasing (Fig. 10) while for th > p (Fig. 11) the Total Profit function has a maximum (Optimal Traceability Lot) decreasing with the increasing of the th value to which corresponds an increasing in the Optimal Tag Number.The output of the sensitivity analysis in terms of the range of the Economical Traceability Lot and the Optimal Tag Number for each of the tests performed are reported in Table 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The study presented focuses on the economic analysis of a traceability system with the aim to show that a traceability system can represent an effective guarantee for the consumer and simultaneously a tool to increase the supply chain efficiency and its returns. In order to achieve this goal the traceability system must be properly designed considering the intrinsic characteristics of the supply chain itself. Nowadays, innovative technologies based on real-time detection of environmental parameters offer the opportunity to implement automatic quality monitoring through the supply chain. The information on the quality level allows the proper selection of products destination based on their remaining quality; such products can hence be sold at the target market or at an alternative one rather than disposed to the landfill.In this context a proper methodology is required to determine and maximize the value of such information. The paper presents a stochastic mathematical approach to determine the value of the information generated by the traceability system compared to the operational cost of automatic data gathering performed via the RFID technology. The results show that the implementation of a traceability system can actually generate a profit for the supply chain when the infrastructure is properly designed with respect to its granularity level.The numerical analysis shows in fact that the profit function achieves an optimal value in correspondence to an optimal granularity level which ultimately defines the optimal quantity to track (Economic Traceability Lot).The proposed approach, however, is based on simplifying assumptions (such as perfect inspection of the RFID). In such context the first and second type errors consisting in accepting a deteriorated batch and rejecting a non-deteriorated one should be considered and their impact on the optimal batch size should be further investigated. Moreover the present approach considers the impact of variable implementation costs consisting in the tag cost on the profit function. However the approach can be further extended by considering fixed infrastructural costs thus employed for investment decisions.