@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Part sojourn time distribution in a two-machine line

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An analytic formulation for the part sojourn time distribution in a 2-machine line.Machines are unreliable and the buffer is finite.The analytic formulation is verified with Little’s law.Numerical experiments are provided to illustrate the shape of the distribution.The analytic formulation is also applied to a given buffer of a long line.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sojourn time,Two-machine transfer line,Unreliable machines,Production line,Finite buffer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The time that a part may spend in a buffer between successive operations is limited in some manufacturing processes. Parts that wait too long must be reworked or discarded due to the risk of quality degradation. In this paper, we present an analytic formulation for the steady-state probability distribution of the time a part spends in a two-machine, one-buffer transfer line (the part sojourn time). To do so, we develop a set of recurrence equations for the conditional probability of a part’s sojourn time, given the number of parts already in the buffer when it arrives and the state of the downstream machine. Then we compute the unconditional probabilities of the part sojourn time using the total probability theorem. Numerical results are provided to demonstrate how the shape of the distribution depends on machine reliability and the buffer size. The analytic formulation is also applied to approximately compute the part sojourn time distribution in a given buffer of a long line. Comparison with simulation shows good agreement.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In some manufacturing processes, the time that a part may spend in a buffer between successive operations is limited. This time is called waiting time, delay time, queue time, or sojourn time. Parts that wait too long must be reworked or discarded due to the risk of quality degradation. Such parts reduce the throughput of the manufacturing systems and lead to significant scrap cost. Consequently, understanding part sojourn time is crucial. The probability distribution, rather than just the mean, or just the mean and standard deviation, is important because a factory’s profitability requires that no more than a specified percentage of the parts are scrapped. This issue is important in several industries, including the semiconductor, food, chemical, and steel industries.The contribution of this paper is a procedure to calculate the probability distribution of the time that a part spends in the buffer of a two-machine production line. It is based on a model which is well suited for industry.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the remaining of this section, we offer industrial examples where sojourn time is important (Section 1.1), describe the problem we are solving (Section 1.2), and review literature on this topic (Section 1.3). Section 2 describes the production line model used in this study and provides a precise definition of sojourn time. The analysis of the steady-state part sojourn time distribution and the derivation of the equations that determine it are discussed in detail in Section 3. Section 4 presents numerical results for two-machine systems. We show that different machine parameters and buffer sizes can lead to very different probability distributions of the sojourn time. Section 5 describes the application of these results to buffers in long lines. We summarize the paper and suggest future work in Section 6.Sojourn time is important in many industries. Rostami, Hamidzadeh, and Camporese (2001) and Kim and Lee (2008) report that the time that a semiconductor wafer spends in a processing module within a cluster tool should be limited. Kim, Lee, Lee, and Park (2003) point out that when the delay at any low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) process step exceeds 20 seconds, the wafer surface deteriorates (because of excessive exposure to residual gases under high temperature), and it is scrapped. Robinson and Giglio (1999) say that a baking operation must be started within 2 hours of a prior clean operation. If more than 2 hours elapse, the lot must be cleaned again. Lu, Ramaswamy, and Kumar (1994) study scheduling policies for semiconductor fabs that are intended to reduce the mean and variance of cycle time. They indicate that the shorter the period that wafers are exposed to aerial contaminants while waiting for processing, the smaller the yield loss.The production of fresh food, such as bakery products and yogurt, is tightly regulated by strict requirements on hygiene and delivery precision. Short sojourn time is essential to the quality of the product in order to meet these requirements. Liberopoulos and Tsarouhas (2005) report the problem of scrapping work-in-process (WIP) due to long sojourn time in an automated pizza transfer line. They discovered that the scrapping of material results in 5 percent drop of the line efficiency. A similar issue can be found in Liberopoulos and Tsarouhas (2002) for a manufacturer of bakery products and snacks. Similarly, the typical production sequence of yogurt includes mixing/standardizing of milk, pasteurization, fermentation, cooling, addition of fruit additives and packaging. The sojourn time before packaging should not exceed a certain upper bound to ensure product quality.According to Liberopoulos, Kozanidis, and Tsarouhas (2007), an upper limit of the sojourn time is a crucial consideration in the thermosetting plastics industry. When a failure occurs in the molding phase, the material in the process step just upstream may be polymerized or cured. If this lasts too long, the trapped material must be scrapped because the polymerization process is irreversible. Lee and Allwood (2003) report a similar phenomenon in temperature-dependent processes where machine interruptions can cause WIP to cool down, which leads to quality problems after production restarts.Exposing parts for a long time to certain environmental factors, such as humidity, heat, or acidity, is a cause of quality deterioration in the metal processing industry. Katok, Serrander, and Wennstrom (1999) discuss aluminum can transfer lines and mention that in the washing stage, cans are cleaned with acids to remove the cooling fluids and lubricants from preceding process steps. Cans that wait in the washer for too long will be overexposed to the acids. This affects their surfaces and, as a consequence, the quality of the graphics applied by the printer.In this paper, we derive the sojourn time distribution for production lines with two unreliable machines, constant operation times, and a finite buffer. Our approach first finds the steady-state conditional probability of the part sojourn time given the position of a part and the state of the downstream machine when it enters the buffer. It uses the conditional probability distribution and the law of total probability to obtain the unconditional probability distribution of the part sojourn time.The paper presents the exact part sojourn time distribution for two-machine one-buffer production line systems. Numerical results vary dramatically as a function of the machines’ reliability parameters. It also shows some examples of long lines where our approach is used to find good approximations for the probability distribution of the sojourn time in a given buffer of a long line. This can lead to a better understanding of how part sojourn time in a buffer is affected by machine parameters and buffer sizes of a line.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we develop an analytic formulation for the part sojourn time distribution in two-machine one-buffer production lines. The numerical experiments of Section 4 show that the finiteness of the buffer is an important determinant of the sojourn time distribution. In most cases, the distribution has two high probability sojourn times: a short time that occurs when the buffer is empty and a long time when the buffer is full. The numerical experiments of Section 4 also illustrate how the distribution is profoundly affected by the characteristics of the machines, especially which machine is the bottleneck.The experiments of Section 5 suggest that the accuracy of the distribution may be good enough for practical line design even for a system that does not satisfy the assumptions that the derivation is based on. In other words, the mean time to fail and mean time to repair appear to be the dominant characteristics that determine the sojourn time distribution.Comparisons with simulation show that the minimal value of τ such that p(T ≤ τ) ≥ .95 is approximated very well by the approach described here, and that the mean and standard deviation are approximated less well. This may be due to the fact that higher moments are more volatile and harder to determine than lower moments. A probability is a zeroth moment of a distribution, while the mean and the square of the standard deviation are first and second moments.This paper describes a first research step. The following paragraphs describe several research directions that will lead to practical use in designing production lines.•More cases should be examined to verify that the approach described here is of practical value for line designers. Such a study should examine how the accuracy of the long line approximation is affected by the length of the line, the existence and locations of bottlenecks, the number of bottlenecks, the sizes of the buffers, the frequency and durations of blocking and starvation, the differences among the machines (such as short frequent failures versus long infrequent failures), and other factors. Such results will provide useful insights on part sojourn times for production line practitioners.Sojourn time distributions can be developed for other two-machine lines. There are a wide variety of discrete-time, discrete material two-machine line models in the literature, including the model of Tolio, Matta, and Gershwin (2002) that allows machines to have multiple binary failure modes and the model of Gershwin and Fallah-Fini (2007) that allows the machines to have general Markov reliability models. There are also continuous time, continuous material (fluid) models including Gershwin and Schick (1980), Alvarez Vargas, Dallery, and David (1992), Yeralan and Tan (1997), and Tan and Gershwin (2009). The machines of the last paper have general Markov reliability and speed models. Such models can represent two-stage lines with multiple parallel machines in each stage as well as more complex systems. In addition to widening the class of two-machine models that can be analyzed, this may improve the accuracy of the sojourn time estimate in buffers in long lines (as in Section 5).There may sometimes be benefits for operating a buffer with a last-in first-out (LIFO) (or other) discipline. The analysis described in this paper should be done for such cases.It may be of interest to develop analytic methods for calculating production rate, expected inventory, and sojourn times in buffers for long production lines where parts are scrapped or reworked when a sojourn time is too long.Another important extension is to integrate the part sojourn time distribution into transfer line optimization problems. For example, consider the problem of choosing buffer sizes to maximize profit subject to constraints on the production rate and on the time that parts spend in buffer i*:maxNΠ(N)=AP(N)−∑i=1k−1biNi−∑i=1k−1cin¯i(N)subjecttoP(N)≥P*p(Ti*≤τ)≥δN≥Nminin which the decision variables are the buffer sizes Ni, Π(N) is the profit, A, bi, and ciare revenue and cost coefficients, i* is a buffer in which the sojourn time must be limited, τ is the maximum allowable time in that buffer, δ is the fraction of parts that are acceptable (i.e., need not be scrapped or reworked), and P* is the target production rate. Some preliminary work has been conducted (Shi 2012) by extending the buffer allocation algorithm of Shi and Gershwin (2009) which maximizes profit subject only to the production rate constraint.It will be valuable to study the total time that a part spends in a tandem production line (its lead time) with three or more machines. This is of great practical importance because manufacturers must promise early and accurate delivery dates to their customers. They lose customers when their delivery promises are too far in the future, or if they fail too often to keep those promises.