@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A data analytic approach to forecasting daily stock returns in an emerging market

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A data analytic approach is proposed for stock market prediction.The proposed decision support system effectively uses fewer variables.Higher prediction accuracy is achieved compared to the literature.Sophisticated data analytics methods present capability to capture nonlinearity.This generic methodology is applicable to the other emerging markets as well.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Prediction/forecasting,Stock market return,Business analytics,Borsa Istanbul (BIST 100),Istanbul Stock Exchange (ISE),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Forecasting stock market returns is a challenging task due to the complex nature of the data. This study develops a generic methodology to predict daily stock price movements by deploying and integrating three data analytical prediction models: adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems, artificial neural networks, and support vector machines. The proposed approach is tested on the Borsa Istanbul BIST 100 Index over an 8 year period from 2007 to 2014, using accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity as metrics to evaluate each model. Using a ten-fold stratified cross-validation to minimize the bias of random sampling, this study demonstrates that the support vector machine outperforms the other models. For all three predictive models, accuracy in predicting down movements in the index outweighs accuracy in predicting the up movements. The study yields more accurate forecasts with fewer input factors compared to prior studies of forecasts for securities trading on Borsa Istanbul. This efficient yet also effective data analytic approach can easily be applied to other emerging market stock return series.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is a well-known fact that forecasting stock market return series is a difficult task in most financial markets, but because of the obvious payoff for success, both academicians and practitioners pursue this endeavor. One of the most widely accepted financial theories of the last half-century has been the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) (Fama, 1965). The EMH states that a market is efficient if prices fully reflect available information, with different forms of efficiency dependent on the relevant information set. Efficient markets “rule out the possibility of trading systems based only on (the assumed information set) that have expected profits or returns in excess of equilibrium profits or returns” (Fama, 1970, p. 385). The coexistence of forecasting and the EMH is precarious, because successful methods will lead to trades and prices which ultimately neutralize the forecasting procedure; constant-parameter models, such as regression or time series models will not work due to their assumed stationary (Timmermann & Granger, 2004).An even more formidable assumption for the stock return generation process for forecasters is the random walk model, which assumes that successive price changes are independent and identically distributed. Several studies have shown that the serial correlation of financial time series often is economically and statistically insignificant (Hawawini & Keim, 1995), consistent with the random walk model. The random walk model is also consistent with the weakest form of the EMH, where the information set is the past return history of the financial asset.Recently, the field of behavioral finance has presented the greatest challenge to the EMH, in which researchers document a number of departures from the rational optimizing behavior. Lo (2007) presents an excellent summary of the EMH, including numerous challenges and defenses of the theory as well as offering his vision of an evolutionary alternative which may be friendlier to prospective forecasters. Forecasters may also do better in emerging markets, with reduced trading and increased impediments to information flow. Lagoarde-Segot and Lucey (2008) mention a number of conditions proposed by various researchers that may reduce market efficiency: reduced liquidity, low degree of competition, lack of market transparency, and greater political or economic uncertainty.In this paper, three data analytic models are used, i.e. adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS), artificial neural networks (ANNs), and support vector machines (SVMs) to forecast the daily returns of the BIST 100 Index trading on Borsa Istanbul (BIST).11The Borsa Istanbul is a result of a 2013 merger of the Istanbul Stock Exchange (ISE), the Istanbul Gold Exchange, and the Derivatives Exchange of Turkey.An ANN incorporates a large number of parameters which allows learning the intrinsic non-linear relationship presented in time series, increasing their forecasting capabilities (Haykin, 2008; Specht, 1990). A fuzzy inference system (FIS) is a rule-based decision support system that uses fuzzy logic instead of Boolean logic in its knowledge base and derives conclusions from user inputs and fuzzy inference processes (Kandel, 1991); fuzzy rules and membership functions make up the knowledge base of the system. An ANFIS is a combination of both an ANN and fuzzy logic (Malhotra & Malhotra, 2002). An SVM is a supervised learning algorithm, which may perform regression or classification using a priori defined categories (Lu & Wang, 2010; Vapnik, 1998).ANNs are popular artificial intelligence-based data mining tools due to their superior prediction performance. For example, ANNs are widely used in forecasting the following: ATM cash demand (Venkatesh, Ravi, Prinzie, & Van den Poel, 2014), wind speed (Cao, Ewing, & Thompson, 2012), foreign exchange rates (Sermpinis, Theofilatos, Karathanasopoulos, Georgopoulos, & Dunis, 2013), intraday electricity demand (Kim, 2013), and financial failure (du Jardin & Séverin, 2012). Desai, Crook, and Overstreet (1996) used ANNs in building credit scoring models on the data of credit consumers from three credit unions in Southeastern United States for the period 1988 through 1991. Their results show that among other statistical techniques, ANNs performs better, especially in predicting bad credit.Based on the data sample of 220 manufacturing firms, Zhang, Hu, Patuwo, and Indro (1999) indicated that ANNs again perform significantly better than traditional regression methods when solving real problems such as bankruptcy prediction, while Lacher, Coats, Sharma, and Fant (1995) revealed that ANNs are able to achieve better results in estimating future financial health of a firm. Fethi and Pasiouras (2010) discussed the applications of various artificial intelligence techniques, such as ANNs, decision trees, and support vector machines, in bank failure prediction, assessment of bank creditworthiness, and underperformance. Kumar and Ravi (2007) also examined the application of the same techniques in their study of the bankruptcy prediction issues faced by banks and firms during the 1968–2005 period. Results from the study by García-Alonso, Torres-Jiménez, and Hervás-Martínez (2010) indicated that ANN models, specifically product-unit neural networks, have shown the most accurate gross margin predictions in the agrarian sector. On the other hand, Piramuthu (1999) pointed out some disadvantages of ANNs such as long training process in developing the optimal model or lack of explanation on how the solution was produced by the ANN.Fuzzy logic has also been used in business related applications. Omero, D'Ambrosio, Pesenti, and Ukovich (2005) developed a multiple-attribute decision support system based on fuzzy logic for evaluating the performance of single economic organizations. Ordoobadi (2008) used fuzzy logic as a tool for decision makers to make more informed decisions regarding their investment in advanced technologies. Ho et al. (2008) developed fuzzy rule sets for enhancing performance in a supply chain network. Malhotra and Malhotra (2002) and Akkoc (2012) demonstrate that a three-stage hybrid ANFIS, which combines an ANN with fuzzy logic, can even eliminate the disadvantages of the pure ANN data analytic method. Overall, studies generally showed that the expert decision systems outperform the traditional forecasting techniques, such as regression, moving average, or auto-regressive models (Haefke & Helmenstein, 1996; Kuan & Liu, 1995; Refenes, Zapranis, & Francis, 1994).Several studies applied expert decision systems to stock returns in the developed markets of the United States or Europe. The S&P 500 Index was the focus of a numerous studies (Armano, Marchesi, & Murru, 2005; Casas, 2001; Tsaih, Hsu, & Lai, 1998). The German DAX is forecasted by Rast (1999) and Siekmann, Gebhardt, and Kruse (1999). Ettes (2000) and Setnes and Van Drempt (1999) modeled the returns on the Amsterdam stock exchange. Fernandez-Rodriguez, Gonzalez-Martel, and Sosvilla-Rivero (2000) and Pérez-Rodríguez, Torra, and Andrada-Félix (2005) modeled the returns on the Madrid stock exchange. Lam (2001) forecasted stock returns on the Hong Kong stock exchange. Leigh, Paz, and Purvis (2002) used feed-forward neural network to forecast the NYSE Composite Index. Abraham, Nath, and Mahanti (2001) and Chen, Dong, and Zhao (2005) forecasted the Nasdaq 100 Index. Pai and Lin (2005) employed a hybrid model composed of ARIMA and SVM to predict the stock prices of ten leading companies in the US. In a similar fashion, Wang, Wang, Zhang, and Guo (2012) proposed a composite forecast for the DJIA Index using ARIMA, back propagation neural network, and exponential smoothing models. These stock and index returns are located in countries classified as developed markets.Research on the value of data analytics to predict stock price movements in emerging markets is fewer in number although it is now growing. There is evidence that emerging markets behave differently than in the developed markets (Bhattacharya, Daouk, Jorgenson, & Kehr, 2000). As mentioned above, there is also the hypothesis that financial markets in emerging markets lack the conditions to fully support efficiency as defined by the EMH, which provides greater incentives to forecast returns. Some data analytic-related studies for the European emerging markets includes Walczak (1999) and Wikowska (1995) for the Polish stock exchange index and Koulouriotis, Diakoulakis, Emiris, and Zopounidis (2005) for the Athens stock exchange. Baek and Cho (2002) forecasted the Korean stock index. Chen, Leung, and Daouk (2003) predicted the Taiwan stock index. Cao, Leggio, and Schniederjans (2005) and Yiwen, Guizhong, and Zongping (2000) studied the Shanghai stock market. Wang et al. (2012) used ARIMA, back propagation neural network, and exponential smoothing models to forecast the Shenzhen Integrated Index and DJIA Index using ARIMA. Patel, Shah, Thakkar, and Kotecha (2015) compare four prediction models (ANN, SVM, random forest, and naive-Bayes) via ten technical parameters using a stock trading dataset, for indexes trading on the Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange of India.Research on BIST securities based on data analytics is also limited. Some pioneer studies were conducted by Altay and Satman (2005), Diler (2003), Yümlü, Gürgen, and Okay (2005), and Kara, Boyacioglu, and Baykan (2011). Diler (2003) and Yümlü et al. (2005) deployed only ANNs as their prediction models, neither of which yielded satisfactory accuracy results. Altay and Satman (2005) also utilized ANNs and compared its results to conventional linear regression model. Kara et al. (2011) used ANN and SVM classification models and compared their performances in predicting the direction of movement in the daily BIST 100 index. Ten technical indicators were selected as input variables of the utilized models. Their results were better than that of their pioneers. To the best of our knowledge, there is no other study based on data analytical techniques to predict the BIST 100 index.The BIST (formerly known as Istanbul Stock Exchange) was established on December 26, 1985 for the purpose of ensuring that securities are traded in a secure and stable environment, and commenced to operate on January 3, 1986. It has contributed to the development of Turkish capital markets and the Turkish economy since the date of its establishment. The BIST 100 (a.k.a. Borsa Istanbul 100 Index or BIST 100 National Index) is a market-weighted index of 100 companies selected from national market, real estate investment trusts, and venture capital investment trusts, and has been calculated on a daily basis since October, 1987. Although there are many other indices that are calculated by the BIST, the BIST 100 is the most widely used index to capture the overall BIST market performance.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes materials and methods used in this paper. Section 3 presents the experimental results and discusses them. The study is concluded in Section 4, along with suggestions of future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It is a very complicated decision to buy or sell a stock since there are many factors that might affect the stock price values. A generic data analytic approach is developed in this study with the integration of different forecasting techniques and the study shows that the performance of the stock price forecasting can be effectively performed by using ANFIS, ANN, and SVM. This paper is unique in that only six factors have been tapped as input variables to forecast the BIST 100 index, while most of the previous studies in general used 10 or more input variables. Moreover, there are some examples like Olson and Mossman (2003) and Zorin and Borisov (2002), which use 59 and 61 input variables, respectively. Considering the fact that data collection and consolidation constitutes a significant amount of decision making via data analytic modeling, such a parsimonious model would be more attractive to the decision makers. It is a well-known fact that it is very critical to decrease the number of input variables required in forecasting in order to simplify the complexity of the model to achieve parsimony and hence decrease the computational time and in turn expedite the decision making process. Additionally, increasing the number of variables to be used in forecasting would in turn render them harder to access and/or collect. The contribution of this study can mainly be attributed to its flexible methodology (as outlined in Fig. 1) and applicability to similarly behaving emerging markets. Financial analysts can easily modify the input variables set and utilize the rest of the proposed methodology steps within their own individual setting as well. Since the data analytic models are capable of discovering non-trivial, implicit, previously unknown, but potentially useful information in the data, they would hypothetically help extract such knowledge from other emerging markets’ behavior as exemplified via Turkish economy in this case.This paper not only provides simplicity for forecasting BIST stock exchange values with only six input variables, but it also achieves significantly better forecasting performance in terms of the accuracy rates compared to the previously published studies which used BIST stock exchange data. It has outperformed the accuracy results of Altay and Satman (2005), Diler (2003), and Yümlü et al. (2005). Moreover, it yielded comparable results to that of another more recent study conducted by Kara et al. (2011). Although all these studies, including ours, have examined the BIST stock exchange data over different time spans, they all reveal and reinforce the fact that Turkish economy is sui generis, i.e. it has its own unique characteristics, due to high volatility that stems from unstable social structure and political fracture.The Borsa Istanbul (a.k.a. Istanbul Stock Exchange), located in Turkey, is considered an emerging (developing) market according to the list compiled by the World Bank. As stated in the paper, emerging markets are more likely to be less efficient in an efficient market hypothesis sense. In other words, it is more likely that the price of trading assets may not fully incorporate all the publicly available information, consequently making it more plausible that forecasting future stock price movements can lead to a trading advantage. As stated in Lagoarde-Segot and Lucy (2008), trading in emerging markets may be less efficient due to less liquidity, less trading competition, less transparency, greater political and/or economic uncertainty, and less “culture of equity”, meaning that not everyone is used to stock ownership, and the ones that are interested may react slowly. Occasionally markets do get reclassified. Greece has moved from emerging to developed status and then back to emerging over the last 15 years. However, in the short term Turkey is expected to maintain its “emerging market” status since our study covered an 8 year period of both up and down markets; this data analytic methodology would be expected to sustain its applicability to continue into the near and intermediate future. The main characteristics that makes the BIST an exemplar for emerging markets is the political and economic uncertainty. Although Turkey is in the world's top twenty with respect to most economic measures such as GDP, with strong growth through 2012, over 2013, both the Turkish lira as well as the BIST indices lost value, and so Turkey's relative GDP, while still in the top twenty, has fallen recently. This is mostly due to both the internal and external political uncertainty. With some corruption charges continuing in the country, these conditions transfer to the trading market and conditions which contribute toward greater market inefficiencies, which actually make conditions easier for forecasting. Although it is not intuitive, greater market efficiency makes a resulting stock price series more like a random walk, since new information gets transmitted into prices instantaneously, and new information will impact prices randomly. If the BIST is taken as an exemplar for emerging markets, the hybrid forecasting approach developed in this paper would be expected to work in other emerging markets.The financial integration exists in across the globe is evident from both casual empiricism as well as scholarly writings (Fisher & Palasvirta, 1990). In particular, the transmission of stock market fluctuations often flows between markets in the developed countries, and from the developed markets to the emerging markets. Fisher and Palasvirta (1990) demonstrated that a high statistically significant interdependence exists between 23 stock indices representing a variety of developed and emerging markets, with U.S. stock prices leading the rest of the world. Given this evidence, it makes sense to use a U.S. index in the forecasting of the BIST 100. Directional movements in the U.S. indices, such as the DJIA, the Nasdaq Composite, or the S&P 500 mirror each other closely.Future research might include incorporating more data analytical models, such as decision trees or Bayesian networks, to be compared against the ones used in this study. It is also essential to verify and validate the viability of the proposed method via various other stock markets in different countries. Moreover, a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) could be created which uses the outlined methodology of this study to render the decision making process more usable for financial experts in the field. Moreover, some other evaluation metrics of model performance, such as Pesaran and Timmermann (1992), can be considered to rank order the models in terms of their predictive performance (Pesaran & Timmermann, 1992).