@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pricing and assortment decisions for a manufacturer selling through dual channels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study pricing and assortment decisions in dual-channel supply chains.The channels used by the manufacturer are its direct channel and a retailer.We find that the retailer prefers items with low demand variability.In contrast, the manufacturer prefers the retailer to carry high-variability items.Consequently, the manufacturer charges a lower wholesale price for those items.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pricing,Retailing,Supply chain management,Assortment planning,Dual channel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In many supply chains, the manufacturer sells not only through an independent retailer, but also through its own direct channel. This work studies the pricing and assortment decisions in such a supply chain in the presence of inventory costs. In our model, the retailer offers a subset of the assortment that the manufacturer offers through its direct channel. We model the customer demand by building on the nested-logit model, which captures the customer’s choice between the manufacturer and the retailer. This model produces several insights into the optimal pricing strategies of the manufacturer. For example, we find that variants with high demand variability will carry a lower wholesale price. Furthermore, we characterize scenarios in which the manufacturer’s and retailer’s assortment preferences are in conflict. In particular, the manufacturer may prefer the retailer to carry items with high demand variability while the retailer prefers items with low demand variability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a supply chain setting, the pricing of an assortment is a critical decision not only for the seller itself, but also for its supplier. This pricing question becomes even more critical in supply chains where the manufacturer is both a supplier to and competitor of the retailer. Take the relationship between Sony and Best Buy as an example; specifically the Sony VAIO E line of laptop computers. Sony’s direct channel (SonyStyle.com) sells, at the bare minimum, 30 different configurations for the Sony VAIO E Series laptop. Naturally, a Best Buy store will not be able to offer nearly as many configurations. Motivated by such channel relationships, in this work we consider the pricing and assortment selection problems that arise in a supply chain where the manufacturer uses “dual channels”, that is, a supply chain where the manufacturer sells directly to the customer as well as selling through a retailer.The marketing literature suggests that a store’s assortment is almost as important as its price profile and location in driving the store traffic, see, for example, Zhang, Kushwaha, Steenburgh, Farris, and Irvin et al. (2009) and the references therein. Hence, in this paper, we model the customer’s choice of channel as a function of the assortment and prices offered by both channels. In particular, we use the nested-logit model to capture the consumer choice: The customer first chooses the channel she wants to purchase from (if any) and, subsequently, decides which product to purchase from her chosen channel. This demand model allows us to account for the effect of both channels’ assortments and prices on the demand observed by each channel.There are several assumptions one can make regarding who carries inventory in this dual-channel structure and where. In keeping with the motivating example, we consider a manufacturer (e.g. Sony) who sells a build-to-order product through its direct channel while meeting the orders from the retailer. As for the retailer (e.g. Best Buy), it is assumed that it keeps inventory of the final (assembled) products and meets the observed demand with this inventory. Because the retailer must make stock level decisions before observing the customer demand, there exists the possibility of demand-inventory mismatch at the retailer. Hence, our model accounts for the inventory-related costs associated with the demand-inventory mismatch at the retailer. We assume that when the customer demand seen by the retailer exceeds the retailer’s inventory level, the retailer is allowed to procure additional products from the manufacturer. For example, if the demand of a specific VAIO laptop computer is greater than the amount Best Buy had in stock, then Best Buy could order additional units from Sony to meet the excess demand.A strength of this model is that it allows us to analyze the effect of inventory-related costs on the pricing decisions. We find that the selling prices charged by the manufacturer’s direct channel and the retailer follow an equal effective margin property similar to that described in Rodríguez and Aydın (2011). In addition, in this paper, we characterize the optimal wholesale prices the manufacturer charges to the retailer. For example, we find that, everything else being equal, the manufacturer will charge lower wholesale prices for variants with larger demand variability.We use our model to study if the manufacturer benefits from selling through two separate channels. In practice one can find both success and failure stories about engaging in dual (or hybrid) sales channel strategies. For example, although Dell has been very successful selling directly to customers, in 2006 it saw its profits and market share decline significantly. The reaction to this decline came in 2007, when Dell successfully embraced a hybrid strategy by adding resellers to their channel mix. In contrast, by 2008, Gateway, another computer business, moved from engaging in dual sales channels to only selling indirectly to customers. Inspired by these examples, in this work we investigate the benefits of engaging in dual-sales channels.For a build-to-order manufacturer and a retailer engaging in dual sales channels, another relevant question is what assortment to offer through the retailer. More often than not, the retailer offers only a subset of what the manufacturer’s direct channel offers as indicated by the Sony VAIO example discussed earlier. Depending on the power structure in the supply chain, the retailer’s assortment can be decided by the retailer itself or it could be dictated by the manufacturer. We study both options. Moreover, we study different sequences of decision-making that allow various scenarios regarding the timing of assortment and pricing decisions.We first explore problems where there is no limit on the number of variants to carry. In such cases, we find that if the manufacturer’s pricing decisions precede the retailer’s assortment selection, both the retailer and the manufacturer will be best off by offering every available product. However, if the retailer’s assortment selection precedes the manufacturer’s pricing decisions, then the retailer may strategically leave certain variants out of its assortment.We then study cases where there is a limit on the size of the assortment. When there is a limit on the size of the retailer’s assortment, we find that the manufacturer and the retailer may disagree about which product to sell through the retailer, because the manufacturer prefers products with higher demand variability while the retailer prefers products with lower demand variability.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the following section we review the related literature. Section 3 describes the model. The pricing problem is analyzed in Section 4 and the benefit of adding an indirect channel is analyzed in Section 5. In Section 6 we explore the assortment decisions. Finally, Section 7 summarizes the results and contributions. The proofs are provided as an online supplement.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
