@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A branch-and-price algorithm to solve the integrated berth allocation and yard assignment problem in bulk ports

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the integrated berth allocation and yard assignment problem in bulk ports.The objective is the minimization of the total service time of all the vessels.We present a branch-and-price algorithm to solve the combined optimization problem.The algorithm is tested using real-life-inspired data from a bulk port.We obtain near-optimal solutions to instances containing up to 40 vessels.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maritime logistics,Large scale optimization,Branch and price,Integrated planning,Bulk ports,Mixed integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this research, two crucial optimization problems of berth allocation and yard assignment in the context of bulk ports are studied. We discuss how these problems are interrelated and can be combined and solved as a single large scale optimization problem. More importantly we highlight the differences in operations between bulk ports and container terminals which highlights the need to devise specific solutions for bulk ports. The objective is to minimize the total service time of vessels berthing at the port. We propose an exact solution algorithm based on a branch and price framework to solve the integrated problem. In the proposed model, the master problem is formulated as a set-partitioning problem, and subproblems to identify columns with negative reduced costs are solved using mixed integer programming. To obtain sub-optimal solutions quickly, a metaheuristic approach based on critical-shaking neighborhood search is presented. The proposed algorithms are tested and validated through numerical experiments based on instances inspired from real bulk port data. The results indicate that the algorithms can be successfully used to solve instances containing up to 40 vessels within reasonable computational time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Maritime transportation is a major channel of international trade. In the last decade, the shipping tonnage for dry bulk and liquid bulk cargo has risen by 52% and 48% respectively. The total volume of dry bulk cargoes loaded in 2008 stood at 5.4 billion tons, accounting for 66.3% of total world goods loaded UNCTAD (2009). The proper planning and management of port operations in view of the ever growing demand represents a big challenge. A bulk port terminal is a zone of the port where sea-freight docks on a berth and is stored in a buffer area called yard for loading, unloading or transshipment of cargo. In general, the bulk terminal managers are faced with the challenge of maximizing efficiency both along the quay side and the yard. From the past research, it is well established that operations research methods and techniques can be successfully used to optimize port operations and enhance terminal efficiency. However while significant contributions have been made in the field of large scale optimization for container terminals, relatively little attention has been directed to bulk port operations.Bulk terminal operations planning can be divided into two decision levels depending on the time frame of decisions: tactical level and operational level. Tactical level decisions involve medium to short term decisions regarding resource allocation such as port equipment and labor, berth and yard management, and storage policies. In practice, these decisions could be based on “rules of thumb” in which the experience of the port managers plays an important role, or alternatively more scientific approaches based on operations research methods could be in use. The operational level involves making daily and real time decisions such as crane scheduling, yard equipment deployment and last minute changes in response to disruptions in the existing schedule. This paper focuses on the tactical level decision planning for the integrated berth and yard management in the context of bulk ports. We focus in particular on two crucial optimization problems in the context of bulk port terminals: The Berth Allocation Problem (BAP) and the yard assignment problem.The tactical berth allocation problem refers to the problem of assigning a set of vessels to a given berthing layout within a given time horizon. There could be several objectives such as the minimization of the service times of vessels, the minimization of the port stay time, the minimization of the number of rejected vessels, and the minimization of the deviation between actual and planned berthing schedules. There are several spatial and temporal constraints involved in the BAP, which lead to a multitude of BAP formulations. The temporal attributes include the vessel arrival process, the start of service, the handling times of vessels, while the spatial attributes relate to the berth layout, the draft restrictions and others. In a container terminal, all cargo is packed into containers, and thus there is no need for any specialized equipment to handle any particular type of cargo. In contrast, in bulk ports, depending on the vessel requirements and cargo properties, a wide variety of equipment is used for discharging or loading operations. Thus, the cargo type on the vessel needs to be explicitly taken into consideration while modeling the berth allocation problem in bulk ports. The tactical yard assignment problem refers to decisions that concern the storage location and the routing of materials. This affects the travel distance between the assigned berth to the vessel and storage location of the cargo type of the vessel on the yard, and furthermore determines the storage efficiency of the yard. Thus, the problems of berth allocation and yard management are interrelated. The start and end times of vessel operations determine the workload distribution and the deployment of yard equipment such as loading shovels and wheel loaders in the yard side. Moreover, berthing locations of vessels determine the storage locations of specific cargo types to specific yard locations, which minimize the total travel distance between the assigned berthing positions to the vessels and the yard locations storing the cargo type for the vessel. Similarly, the yard assignment of specific cargo types has an impact on the best berthing assignment for vessels berthing at the port. In this study, we present an integrated model for the dynamic, integrated berth allocation problem and yard assignment in the context of bulk ports. Few scholars have investigated this problem in the context of container terminals, and there is no published literature for bulk ports. We present an exact solution algorithm based on branch-and-price and a metaheuristic approach based on critical-shaking neighborhood search to solve the combined large scale problem. Numerical experiments based on real-life-inspired port data indicate that the proposed algorithms can be successfully used to solve even large instances.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this research, we study the integrated problem of berth allocation and yard assignment in context of bulk ports. In the past, few scholars have attempted to study the berth allocation problem in integration with the yard assignment problem in the context of container terminals, while in the context of bulk ports the problem has not been studied at all. The specific issues in bulk port operations that necessitate the need to devise specific solutions for bulk ports are emphasized in this study. An exact solution algorithm based on branch-and-price and a metaheuristic based on critical-shaking neighborhood search are proposed to solve the large scale integrated problem of berth allocation and yard assignment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that proposes an exact solution method to solve the large scale problem in the context of port operations planning, since all the previous studies in the context of container terminals use only metaheuristic methods to solve the problem.The mathematical formulation of the integrated berth allocation and yard assignment problem is complex and extensive, however there is still scope for improvement. An important assumption in our model is that each vessel carries only a single type of cargo. In order to model and solve the problem for multiple cargo types, the location of each cargo type on the vessel needs to be explicitly modeled which would require the modification of some of the existing constraints in the current formulation as well as addition of some new constraints. Another possible extension of the current work is to account for the uncertainty in arrival times of the vessels and delays in handling operations due to factors such as breakdown of handling equipment including conveyors and pipelines and/or mobile harbor cranes. In the proposed exact solution method, the major source of the time complexity has been identified as the solution of the sub-problems in the column generation framework. Thus it may be worth investigating the reduction in the solution time of the sub-problems by using heuristic methods such as dynamic programming, instead of using exact methods and optimization solvers. There is also scope to obtain sub-optimal integer solutions in a more time efficient manner by using heuristic methods (GRASP for instance) instead of using the branch and bound algorithm proposed in this study. Finally more sophisticated techniques such as dual stabilization and dynamic constraint aggregation to speed up the convergence of the column generation process need to be studied and implemented in a way such that they exploit the structure of the specific problem under examination.