@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal ordering for a probabilistic one-time discount

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new model that captures the uncertainty of one-time discounts and generalizes previous work.An insightful analysis of the optimal policy.The optimal policy is shown to be one of four intuitive non-dominated policies.Numerical illustrations that provide additional insights on the problem and the solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,One-time discount,Special purchasing,Economic order quantity,,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We develop a model for a one-time special purchasing opportunity where there is uncertainty with respect to the materialization of the discounted purchasing offer. Our model captures the phenomenon of an anticipated future event that may or may not lead to a discounted offer. We analyze the model and show that the optimal solution results from a tradeoff between preparing for the special offer and staying with the regular ordering policy. We quantify the tradeoff and find that the optimal solution is one of four intuitive policies. We present numerical illustrations that provide additional insights on the relationship between the different ordering policies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A basic premise in most inventory management models is that the unit-price is constant. Suppliers, however, are often under pressure to increase sales or reduce inventory levels. As a result, they tend to offer discounts so that retailers will be inclined to order larger quantities than usual. From a retailer’s point-of-view, this may constitute an opportunity to benefit from higher sales margins.For example, consider a retail chain selling a commodity, the behavior of which is relatively static. As the Olympics approach, the retailer identifies a special purchasing opportunity caused by potential overstocking of the commodity at suppliers operating in the vicinity of the hosting city. Such opportunity entails uncertainty, and its materialization is not guaranteed. The retailer faces a tradeoff between reducing stocks prior to the event to benefit from the discounted offer and risking higher inventory costs if the offer does not materialize. It is this tradeoff that we wish to resolve in our work.The supplier also may not know for sure if the discount will be possible. Moreover, she may be reluctant to share information as it will obligate her. Thus, from the retailer’s perspective, quantifying the potential savings that might be gained from preparing for a special purchasing opportunity can shed light on the effort and cost that it is worthwhile to invest in obtaining this information. In Lee, So, and Tang (2000), the authors show the impact the variability of demand has on the value of information. In our paper, we show that even in an otherwise deterministic setting, the possible occurrence of a one-time unit-price discount is influential.We use the economic order quantity (EOQ) model as our modeling framework. Even though the model relies on a set of simple and restrictive assumptions, its simplicity and robustness (in the sense that a relatively large deviation in the estimation of the model’s parameters results in a relatively small deviation in the objective function value) makes it a widely used tool.We develop a model that depicts a system in the EOQ setting in which the retailer predicts that at a known point of time, a one-time special purchasing opportunity may occur with a certain probability. We analyze the optimal replenishment policy in such a setting, and characterize its structure. We then show that the optimal replenishment policy is one of four intuitive policies, which can be found and evaluated using closed-form expressions. Finally, we provide additional insights on the relation between the different policies through numerical illustrations.The unit-price discount is extensively studied in the literature (see, e.g., Goyal, Srinivasan, & Arcelus, 1991 and Ramasesh, 2010). The setting we study in this research is unique in the sense that we tackle a one-time probabilistic discount, which can happen at a known time in the future. The next section provides a comprehensive review of this topic.The rest of this work is organized as follows: After reviewing the literature in Section 2, we formulate our problem in Section 3. In Section 4 we analyze the model and derive an optimal solution. In Section 5 the results are visualized and studied using numerical illustrations. In Section 6 we discuss several extensions to our work. Finally, in Section 7, we highlight the main findings and suggest further research directions. To aid readability, the technical proofs are presented in Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
