@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A model enhancement heuristic for building robust aircraft maintenance personnel rosters with stochastic constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We solve a personnel planning problem with stochastic delays in demand arrival times.A model enhancement algorithm is proposed that combines simulation and optimization.Our model can ensure a specified service level when stochasticity is introduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Model enhancement,Aircraft maintenance,Stochastic optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a heuristic approach to optimize staffing and scheduling at an aircraft maintenance company. The goal is to build robust aircraft maintenance personnel rosters that can achieve a certain service level while minimizing the total labor costs. Robust personnel rosters are rosters that can handle delays associated with stochastic flight arrival times. To deal with this stochasticity, a model enhancement algorithm is proposed that iteratively adjusts a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model to a stochastic environment based on simulation results. We illustrate the performance of the algorithm with a computational experiment based on real life data of a large aircraft maintenance company located at Brussels Airport in Belgium. The obtained results are compared to deterministic optimization and straightforward optimization. Experiments demonstrate that our model can ensure a certain desired service level with an acceptable increase in labor costs when stochasticity is introduced in the aircraft arrival times.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To ensure safety in aviation, aircraft should be maintained regularly and carefully. Constructing a good workforce schedule is therefore essential to make sure that all aircraft will be maintained thoroughly in time. In the aviation industry, different forms of maintenance exist. We distinguish A-, B-, C- and D-checks, line maintenance, hangar maintenance, scheduled and unscheduled maintenance, etc. (Van den Bergh, De Bruecker, Beliën, & Peeters, 2013). In this paper we focus on the line maintenance which includes pre-flight inspections, transit checks, daily checks (visual inspection of the aircraft, fluid level checks, general security checks, emergency equipment checks and cleanliness of the flight deck checks), weekly checks and on-call assistance (Beliën, Demeulemeester, & Cardoen, 2012).Scheduling aircraft maintenance personnel at an aircraft maintenance company entails some special problems. First, the workforce scheduling problem is heavily constrained by labor union agreements. Second, the management of the company must decide itself when exactly the maintenance should take place between the arrival and departure of the aircraft. Hence, the timing of the workload is an extra decision in the scheduling problem. Third, aircraft do not always fly on schedule and sometimes arrive with a delay. When the workforce scheduling does not anticipate delays in arrival time, the scheduled capacity may be insufficient to maintain all aircraft in time.This paper focuses on this latter problem and presents a technique to obtain robust aircraft maintenance personnel rosters that minimize the total labor costs. Because aircraft arrive with stochastic delays, we define the stochastic robustness of these rosters as their ability to ensure a certain service level; i.e., to ensure that on average at least a certain percentage of the flights can be maintained before their scheduled time of departure (STD). To obtain this stochastic robustness, we propose a model enhancement (ME) heuristic that iteratively enhances a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model by adding constraints based on information resulting from simulation experiments.We illustrate our model using real life data from Sabena Technics, a large aircraft maintenance company located at Brussels Airport in Belgium.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
