@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An object-coding genetic algorithm for integrated process planning and scheduling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An object-coding GA is proposed for integrated process planning and scheduling.Operation sequences are used to represent chromosomes.An inferior selection mechanism is adopted for parent selection.A simplified version of crowding is proposed for replacement.A population degeneration is introduced to preserve population diversity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Process planning,Jobshop scheduling,Genetic algorithm,Object-coding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Process planning and jobshop scheduling problems are both crucial functions in manufacturing. In reality, dynamic disruptions such as machine breakdown or rush order will affect the feasibility and optimality of the sequentially-generated process plans and machining schedules. With the approach of integrated process planning and scheduling (IPPS), the actual process plan and the schedule are determined dynamically in accordance with the order details and the status of the manufacturing system. In this paper, an object-coding genetic algorithm (OCGA) is proposed to resolve the IPPS problems in a jobshop type of flexible manufacturing systems. An effective object-coding representation and its corresponding genetic operations are suggested, where real objects like machining operations are directly used to represent genes. Based on the object-coding representation, customized methods are proposed to fulfill the genetic operations. An unusual selection and a replacement strategy are integrated systematically for the population evolution, aiming to achieve near-optimal solutions through gradually improving the overall quality of the population, instead of exploring neighborhoods of good individuals. Experiments show that the proposed genetic algorithm can generate outstanding outcomes for complex IPPS instances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Both process planning and scheduling functions are responsible for the efficient allocation and utilization of resources in manufacturing systems. Generally, these two functions are conducted sequentially (Usher & Fernandes, 1996). Process planning determines the selection and sequence of production operations, and essential manufacturing resources including machines and tools. The purpose of scheduling is to allocate the jobs and operations to limited manufacturing recourses in accordance with the process plan.The dynamic manufacturing environment is susceptible to disturbances such as machine breakdowns, rush order arrivals and order cancellations. These uncertainties will cause deviations to the original process plans and schedules, and will affect the performance of a manufacturing system (Kumar & Rajotia, 2003). To cope with the unexpected disturbances, it is necessary to revise the process plan and the schedule dynamically. Integrated process planning and scheduling (IPPS) is proposed to integrate the process design, resource allocation and scheduling into a cohesive function to enhance the manufacturing feasibility and performance (Chryssolouris, Chan, & Suh, 1985).For a manufacture order to produce n jobs (parts) on m machines in a jobshop or similar kind of flexible manufacturing environment, an IPPS system intends to generate the process plans for all n parts and the overall job-shop schedule concurrently, with the aim to optimize a manufacturing objective such as makespan. Massive research has been done respectively in the fields of process planning and jobshop scheduling. In contrast, there is only a limited number of research on IPPS. Due to the combination of the two optimization problems and the flexibilities in the manufacturing systems, large-scale IPPS problems are difficult to be solved with analytical approaches. Researchers have attempted to solve IPPS problems with various approximate approaches, for instance, evolutionary algorithms, tabu search, simulated annealing and ant algorithms. The authors’ research group has investigated on the applications of multi-agent system (MAS) in IPPS. Recently, work has been conducted on the combination of MAS and metaheuristics in solving IPPS problems. This hybrid approach is to adopt the excellent search ability of metaheuristics and autonomy of agents for dynamic adaptation in the manufacturing environment. A MAS structure has been designed to support a variety of metaheuristics for process planning and scheduling/rescheduling in dynamic manufacturing environments. For instance, an enhance ACO algorithm has been established to demonstrate the applicability of the hybrid MAS-ACO solution approach for IPPS problems. In addition to ACO, a novel genetic algorithm (GA) has also been implemented in the MAS architecture to evaluate the hybrid MAS-GA approach for IPPS. Descriptions on the design and implementation of the MAS architecture are available in Zhang et al. (Zhang, Wong, & Fung, 2013). This current paper presents details of the GA-based IPPS solution approach. The GA is denoted as an object-coding genetic algorithm (OCGA). In essence, the classical GA has been enhanced in three aspects to cater for the IPPS problem domain: (1) real objects (machining operations in IPPS) are used to represent chromosomes, and corresponding genetic operations are proposed; (2) an unusual selection method, based on the inferior selection mechanism, is adopted to give inferior solutions more chances to reproduce; (3) a simplified version of crowding is proposed to cater for the object-coding representation and release the selection pressure; and (4) a population degeneration mechanism is introduced to further preserve the population diversity.The rest of the paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 is a review of relevant literature on GA implementation in process planning and scheduling; representation of the IPPS problem is presented in Section 3; the OCGA algorithm is elaborated in Section 4; experiments and results on benchmark problems are displayed in Section 5; the last section is the conclusion which restates the findings and suggests future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
