@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Real-time order tracking for supply systems with multiple transportation stages

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A system with a manufacturer, retailer, and multiple transport stages is studied.The model evaluates the value of real-time information on system operating cost.The expected cost of system operation is computed using a stochastic model.Retailer ordering policies with and without tracking information are studied.It is shown that real time tracking information can yield significant cost savings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic processes,Shipment tracking,Stochastic lead time,Information sharing,Markov chain,Value of information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a stochastic model that evaluates the value of real-time shipment tracking information for supply systems that consist of a retailer, a manufacturer, and multiple stages of transportation. The retailer aggregates demand for a single product from end customers and places orders on the manufacturer. Orders received by the manufacturer may take several time periods before they are fulfilled. Shipments dispatched by the manufacturer move through multiple stages before they reach the retailer, where each stage represents a physical location or a step in the replenishment process. The lead time for a new order depends on the number of unshipped orders at the manufacturer’s site and the number and location of all shipments in transportation. The analytic model uses real-time information on the number of orders unfulfilled at the manufacturer’s site, as well as the location of shipments to the retailer, to determine the ordering policy that minimizes the long-run average cost for the retailer. It is shown that the long-run average cost is lower with real-time tracking information, and that the cost savings are substantial for a number of situations. The model also provides some guidelines for operating this supply system under various scenarios. Numerical examples demonstrate that when there is a lack of information it is better for the retailer to order every time period, but with full information on the status in the supply system it is not always necessary for the retailer to order every time period to lower the long-run average cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Advances in information technology now make it possible to obtain data to track order status in real time through all the stages in a supply system. This data can potentially be used to track partial orders and shipments even at the item level. The value of this tracking information is, however, not adequately understood. The lack of a firm understanding can lead to incorrect decisions on when, where, and to what extent these technologies should be deployed, presenting a challenge – and an opportunity – for quantitative methods to model and analyze the value of real-time information.This paper develops a stochastic model to evaluate the value of real-time order tracking information in a supply system. The supply system consists of a retailer, a manufacturer, and multiple stages of transportation. The retailer aggregates demand for a single product from his end customers and places orders on the manufacturer. The replenishment process between the manufacturer and the retailer is not instantaneous.There are delays incurred at the manufacturer’s site and there are transportation delays. The manufacturer’s lead time, the time it takes the manufacturer to fulfill an order placed by the retailer, is a random variable that is affected by the number of orders outstanding at the manufacturer’s site. Products shipped by the manufacturer pass through a series of transportation stages before the retailer receives them. Each transportation stage can represent a physical location for shipments or a step in the delivery process. During a given time period each shipment moves through a random number of stages in the supply system. The transportation lead time for a shipment is a random variable that depends on the distribution of shipments at the various stages. The total lead time is the sum of the manufacturing and the transportation lead times.The stochastic model presented in this paper analyzes the long-run average cost for the retailer based on the orders he places with the manufacturer each time period. The retailer uses “real-time” information to decide how much to order in the sense that his decision is made based on the state of the system at that point in time. The model can be used to provide guidelines for operating this supply system under various scenarios.The model also quantifies the value of real-time order tracking information in terms of the associated cost savings. The cost savings with real-time tracking information is substantial for a number of scenarios. The cost savings gained by the retailer from the use of such tracking information can be shared with the manufacturer.The presence of real-time tracking information also affects the manner in which the retailer places orders on the manufacturer. Numerical examples are used to demonstrate that when there is a lack of information it is better for the retailer to order every time period, but with full information on the status in the supply system it is not always necessary to order every time period to lower the long-run average cost.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a stochastic model to evaluate the value of real-time information on supply status at both the manufacturer’s process and the transportation channel. In this model the order lead time is assumed to be dependent on the distribution of the locations of outstanding orders and the number of unshipped orders at the manufacturer’s site. Shipment congestions are explicitly modeled.With the optimal myopic ordering policy, the long-run average cost for the retailer is higher when he does not have any information available. The numerical examples indicate that the cost savings are especially significant when real-time tracking information and the manufacturer’s shipping policies are available. The paper shows that when the retailer has partial or no information, it is better to order every time period. When full information on the supply system is available there are situations where the retailer does not need to order every time period to lower his expected total cost. Instead, the retailer adjusts his ordering policy based on the information available to him.The paper assumes a myopic ordering policy for the retailer and the shortage cost. It would be of interest to investigate the value of information in case of lost sales. Another assumption in this paper is that orders do not cross in time. Although the model discussed in this paper has the potential to model orders crossovers explicitly, it appears that the lead time does not get affected by the status of shipments in the supply system. As noted by Robinson, Bradley, and Thomas (2001), with order crossovers it is better to use the shortfall distribution instead of the distribution of demand during the lead time. The approach used in this paper has the potential to model the shortfall distribution making it possible to study the order crossover case. It would thus be of interest to apply this approach to the problems addressed by Bradley and Robinson (2005) and Hayya, Bagchi, Kim, and Sun (2008).Exhibits 1 and 2.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.01.062.Supplementary data 1