@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Consumer returns policies with endogenous deadline and supply chain coordination

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study consumer returns policies under which consumers’ valuation depends on both the refund amount and the length of the return deadline.An analytic model is employed to study the retailer strategies of return deadline, including return prohibition, life-cycle return and fixed return deadline.We put forward a new differentiated buy-back contract contingent on the return deadline to coordinate the supply chain.Extensions on some specific behavioral factors such as moral hazard, inertia return, and external effect are investigated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Consumer behavior,Product returns,Return deadline,Buy-back contract,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers returns policies under which consumers’ valuation depends on the refund amount they receive and the length of time they must wait after the item is returned. Consumers face an uncertain valuation before purchase, and the realization of that purchase's value occurs only after the return deadline has passed. Depending on the product lifecycle length and magnitude of return rate, a retailer decides on strategies for that product's return deadline, including return prohibition, life-cycle return, and fixed return deadline. In addition, the influence of the return deadline on consumers’ behavior and the pricing and inventory policies of the retailer are systematically investigated. Moreover, based on the analysis of consumer return behavior on a traditional buy-back contract, we present a new differentiated buy-back contract, contingent on return deadline, to coordinate a supply chain consisting of an upstream manufacturer and a downstream retailer. Finally, extensions on some specific behavioral factors such as moral hazard, inertia return, and external effect are investigated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In today's society, consumer returns are increasing drastically because consumers are taking advantage of the retail industry's slogan that the “consumer is king.” Today's consumers have more requirements for product attributes and they are more vigilant about return policies (Shulman, Coughlan, & Savaskan, 2010, 2011). Because of the increasing number of products released in the market, consumer uncertainty has also increased; the volume of available retail goods dictates whether a particular product is deemed suitable for individual consumer preferences. Hence, the main reason for consumer returns is no longer product quality issues. Instead, a number of other reasons generate product returns, including installation difficulties, product performance incompatibility with consumer preferences, and buyer remorse (Kumar, Guide, & Van Wassenhove, 2002). If an unconditional 100 percent money-back guarantee is offered, a retailer should expect frequent product returns. Ferguson, Guide, and Souza (2006) first observed False Failure Returns (FFR), defined as products with no functional or cosmetic defect that are nonetheless returned by consumers. Mainly, FFR results from consumer uncertainty over the valuation of a product before purchase, and other uncertainties such as a product not satisfying consumer expectations, the consumer's difficulty in understanding how to use a product, or the consumer's regret over an impulse purchase (Su, 2009; Shulman et al., 2011). Based on a study conducted by Shear, Speh, and Stock (2002), US consumer returns amount to more than $100 billion each year, of which FFRs account for 80 percent (Lawton, 2008). Recently, many firms have enacted standard practices to consider FFR; retailers want to improve their service level and to eliminate consumer losses from uncertain estimations over sold products. For example, vendors like Toys“R”Us, Wal-Mart, and Amazon encourage FFR or unconditional returns, and these return services are offered to the consumers with return deadlines of either 15, 45, or 90 days11For more details, refer to http://www.toysrus.com, http://www.walmart.com, and http://www.amazon.com.for different products from various vendors.Although encouraging FFR improves consumer satisfaction, it increases the risks for retailers at the same time. In addition, it also generates huge volume returns, which adversely affects the retailer's inventory and ordering strategies. Furthermore, it directly influences the production schedule of upstream manufacturers. Meanwhile, a large quantity of returns leads to a reduction in the marginal profit of the retailer given that returns are usually resold at discounts. Under such circumstances, consumers have no risk. Even though FFR is practiced by many vendors, most of the vendors have started tightening their generous return policies (Earnest & Uribarri, 2007; Li, Xu, & Li, 2013). Generally, when a consumer returns a product, the retailer may charge a restocking or handling fee, or they may ask the consumer to pay the shipping fee for returns. This unconditional return policy is currently adopted by Walmart.com and Taobao.com etc.22For the return policy adopted by Amazon.com, refer to “Returns Are Easy” term http://www.amazon.com/gp/css/returns/homepage.html/ref=hy_f_4. For Taobao.com's return policy, refer to http://www.tmall.com/?spm=1.6659421.754904973.1.RKFLOD.In addition to the above fee, the retailer may also set up a fixed return deadline and accept only products returned within that specified period. These fees and fixed return deadline requirements are similar to “hassle” costs and punishments imposed on consumers (Shulman, Coughlan, & Savaskan, 2009). When consumers view the shipping fee of the returned product as relatively expensive, or find the product economically nonviable for return by the fixed deadline, they may instead decide to hold on to it. In this way, pricing strategy, refund policy, and return deadline strategy temper consumer decision-making regarding impetuous purchases by introducing potential misgivings about the expenses they may incur, with an end result of reducing the occurrence of FFR (Shulman et al., 2009).Due to the wide range of product categories offered in the market, various retailers calculate return expenses differently. For electronic items, for example, the Apple store charges 10 percent of the selling price as restocking fee, whereas Bestbuy.com charges 25 percent on household appliances. The return expense of some pasta products is pegged at 15 percent. For products with different lifecycles, retailers in other industries set return deadlines of varying lengths. For example, at Sears, the return deadline is 120 days for most of the items, 90 days for fine jewelry, and 60 days for electronics and beds,33For more details, refer to http://www.sears.com.whereas at Wal-Mart, 90 days for most items, 45 days for PC accessories, 30 days for cameras, and 15 days for PCs and cell phones. In general, a short return deadline is generally applied to seasonal products with a short lifecycle; the best example would include fashion items. Conversely, a relatively long return deadline is applied to more durable goods.Based on the above-mentioned practices, in this paper we focus on retailer pricing and refund policies. Moreover, we study the return deadline and inventory policy of the retailer for products with different lifecycles. In addition, this work concentrates on the management of returned and unsold products. In practice, when the retailers receive the returned product, they redirect the product to their forward suppliers through some cooperation mechanisms, such as a kind of supply contract. It is evident from the literature that there exists many types of contracts to achieve supply chain coordination, but none addresses the issues related to the return deadline constraints. In consideration of this issue, we investigate the efficiency of several buy-back contracts related to decentralized supply chain coordination within return deadline constraints.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We briefly discuss the current literature and the contributions of this paper in Section 2. Section 3 presents the research problem on consumer purchasing, return behavior, and retailer pricing policies. In Section 4, we formulate the basic model and derive the optimal refund policy, return deadline, and inventory policy. In Section 5, we examine the effect of several buy-back contracts on supply chain coordination. We explore some extensions in Section 6 including behavioral factors like moral hazard, inertia return behavior, and external effect. The concluding remarks and possible directions for future research are provided at the end of the paper. To simplify our exposition: (i) we use “he” and “she” to represent the retailer and consumer, respectively throughout this paper, and (ii) all proofs are provided in Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper studied the dependence of consumer valuation on the return deadline set by retailers. Specifically, the longer the return deadline, the better the consumer valuation. The uncertainty valuation is resolved only after a trial period. Through perceptive valuation, consumers decide whether to keep or return the product within the return deadline. Given this foundation, we have examined the optimal pricing, refund, and inventory policy of the retailer. Moreover, the decision of setting return deadlines was also discussed. Using this model, the following findings are presented.The optimal refund of the retailer is the salvage value of the product rather than the full refund policy, unless the product value does not diminish. Through constraints of the fixed return deadline set by the retailers, only consumers whose valuations are less than the selling price can return products. Due to such constraints, the selling price of the retailer is higher than that when the return service is not offered. However, the relationship between the selling prices with or without return deadline constraints depends on the product lifecycle.The return deadline strategy of the retailer depends on the product lifecycle and the consumer return rate. When the consumer return rate is low, the retailer provides an indefinite return deadline. Otherwise, the return deadline of the retailer depends on product lifecycle. Conversely, retailers implement an indefinite return deadline strategy for products with a short lifecycle, and a fixed return deadline for products with a moderately long lifecycle. With a sufficiently long product lifecycle, the return deadline of the retailer depends on the comparison between the profits gained by offering indefinite and fixed deadlines.Furthermore, we accounted for the efficiency of three types of buy-back contracts. When the salvage value is constant, the traditional buy-back contract fails to stimulate supply chain coordination, whereas the differentiated buy-back contract realizes coordination. Furthermore, when the product salvage value is related to the return deadline, differentiated buy-back contracts also present diminishing efficiency. On the basis of these observations, we introduced a differentiated buy-back contract depending on the return deadline. This contract enables supply chain coordination.Moreover, this investigation was extended to include specific consumer behaviors. First, we studied the case of moral hazard and inertia return behavior. Specifically, moral hazard prompts retailers to reduce the selling price at a value lower than the salvage value. Moreover, given that the retailer focuses on consumers with higher valuations, inventory is also reduced. Meanwhile, the return inertia increases refunds and retailer inventory. The external effect was also considered. Not all negative network externalities worsen the performance of the retailer.There are some limitations of this paper and possible avenues for future research. First, in our model, we assume that the retailer knows about product status and market conditions. However, in reality, it is difficult for manufacturers to distinguish products returned from consumers and surplus products from retailers beyond the selling season. Hence, it would be interesting to extend this analysis to investigate how to deal with this problem. For a more comprehensive set of information questions that await research in this area, we direct the reader to Shulman et al. (2009) and to Bhargava and Chen (2012).Clearly, more researches in other product categories are also needed, as discussed in the introduction. Retailers of different categories calculate return expenses in a different way, and they offer different return policies. This paper limits itself to electronic products, so accounting for other categories of product enables us to investigate how product heterogeneity may need different return policies.Third, in practice, some returned units re-enter the distribution channels through remanufacturing activities, like repackaging, refreshment, and refurbishment. The quality of remanufactured units is as good as new and these get the same coverage in terms of warranties and service contracts. Besides, for products not returned beyond the return deadline, consumers can also sell them in secondary markets. Such analysis will help us to provide deeper insights into reverse supply chain management. Oraiopoulos, Ferguson, and Toktay (2012) provided a good starting point for this secondary market problem.In addition, in this study we have not modeled any multi-agents and dynamics that affect demand and returns. Future research into this issue, which can include competition and intertemporal demand effects, and in turn affect the consumers’ purchasing and return behavior, is required to study the role of retailing competition and strategic behavior. In recent work, Shulman et al. (2010, 2011) addressed multi-retailer issues; similarly, Ofek, Katona, and Sarvary (2011) addressed multichannel retailers, and Bandyopadhyay and Paul (2012) addressed the multiple supplier issue. Moreover, Mukhopadhyay and Setaputra (2007) addressed a dynamics problem, considering product return caused by a quality problem and not FFR behavior. Although all of these studies have briefly involved competition and multi-period problems, our review shows that consumer return behavior has not been deeply explored, which influences the consumer's purchasing and return decisions dramatically. This prediction may be analyzed using game theory and dynamic programs, which could present interesting opportunities for future research.