@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrated bank risk modeling: A bottom-up statistical framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identify a general model to represent banking interactions.Assess banking solvency in both the long-run as well as in the short period.Represent risk sources from the macro-economic and the bank-specific perspectives.Develop a statistical framework to integrate credit, interest rate and liquidity risks.Outline risk issues that policy makers and risk managers should consider.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk integration,Macro-economic factors,Scenario generations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the last few years, according to the evolution of financial markets and the enforcement of international supervisory requirements, an increasing interest has been devoted to risk integration. The original focus on individual risk estimation has been replaced by the growing prominence of top-down and bottom-up risk integration perspectives. Following this latter way, we bring together different approaches developed in the recent literature elaborating a general model to assess banking solvency in both the long-run (economic capital) as well as in the short period (liquidity mismatching). We consider banking capability to face credit, interest rate and liquidity risks associated to macro-economic shocks affecting both assets and liabilities. Following the perspective of commercial banks, we concentrate on information available in the risk management practice to propose an easy to implement statistical framework. We put in place this framework estimating its scenario generation parameters on Italian macro-economic time series from 1990 to 2009. Once applied to a stylized commercial bank, we compare the results of our approach to regulatory capital requirements. We emphasize the need for policy makers as well as risk managers, to take into account the entire balance sheet structure to assess banking solvency.assets value at time tassets value change due to shocksasset liquidity inflows for period q⩽hasset loss corresponding to −ΔAloss due to defaults for the period hequity value at time teconomic capital, expected shortfalleconomic capital, value at riskliquidity haircut for obligor iincome for the period hliabilities value at time tliabilities value change due to shocksliability liquidity outflows for period q⩽hliquidity mismatchingnet interest for period hprobability of default for obligor iperforming net interest for period hpresent valueinterest rate for node d at time thealth index for sector sliquidity shrinkage at time tindicator function for obligor imacro-economic variables at time tshocked macro-economic variables

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
At the beginning of the last decade, the Northern Rock bank had a business which involved borrowing heavily in the UK and international money markets, extending mortgages to customers based on this funding. At the same time, the bank was active in re-selling these mortgages on international capital markets. In August 2007, when the global demand from investors for mortgages was falling away, the lack of money raised through capital markets meant that Northern Rock became unable to repay loans from the money market. The bank received a liquidity support facility from the Bank of England, but was unable to raise from the money market. This led to panic among individual depositors who feared that their savings might not be available. The result was a bank run. Depositors lined up outside the bank to withdraw all of their savings as quickly as possible, particularly since everyone else was doing the same.In order to avoid the above described issue, banks are required to have an adequate capital structure. According to Kretzschmar et al. (2010), banking economic capital can be defined as the amount of resources that a financial institution requires in order to operate as a solvent concern at a specified confidence level over a given time horizon. Usually, the economic capital is set equal to a percentile of the bank loss distribution (value at risk, VaR) or the expected value of losses exceeding a given threshold of the same distribution (expected shortfall, ES). At the same time we emphasize that an adequate liquidity structure is required to ensure banking solvency. For this reason we distinguish between a long run banking solvency (i.e., economic capital) and the short term capability to face liquidity issues (i.e., liquidity mismatching).Aiming to compute the economic capital for regulatory issues, banks usually adopt a modular approach. In the modular approach the loss distribution due to credit risk, market risk, operational risk and so on, are computed individually. The economic capital is obtained as a sum of independent risk measures. Thus, considering that a portfolio is exposed to different imperfectly correlated risks, a question arises: is the sum of capital buffers set against these risks smaller than the sum of individual risks? Breuer et al. (2010) discuss this problem in the context of market and credit risk assessment for the banking and trading book. They show that in some cases the risk measure of the total portfolio can be higher than the sum of the independent risk measures. In order to aggregate different risks, dependencies have to be considered. Thus, a key issue is to identify financial activities which are affected by the same risk factors and are subject to risks over the same holding period.The most intuitive approach to integrate risks is to follow the top-down approach. According to this approach, a function is employed for linking the distributions of profit and losses resulting from different risk types. It is evident that some crucial assumptions are required to merge different risks into an overall economic capital measure (Rosenberg and Schuermann, 2006). The key element is the choice of the joint distribution function to be exploited to merge individual risks and to estimate parameters even in the case where there are few data.An alternative way to integrate risks is to follow the so-called bottom-up approach. The goal pursued through this approach is to overwhelm the above described difficulties studying interactions among risk factors and evaluating their impact on the banking financial activities. The most recent literature due to Grundke (2009), Alessandri and Drehmann (2010), Drehmann et al. (2010), Grundke (2010) and Kretzschmar et al. (2010) concentrate on these mechanics showing how to integrate risks focusing on alternative specific assumptions. Following the bottom-up approach, the aim of our paper is to build a bridge between the above mentioned literature and the risk management practice. Remarking the importance of the assumptions underlying the above mentioned approaches, we consider a very general asset and liability environment where credit, interest rate and liquidity risks are jointly considered. We propose a statistical framework which enhances the most familiar risk management tools (e.g., Monte Carlo simulations, regressions, copulas and so on) allowing to consider all elements which concur to build up the economic capital. We apply this framework to a stylized commercial bank where credits are investigated at the debtor level, while liabilities are examined at an aggregated level. Focusing on cash flow grids, we emphasize the impact of asset and liability mismatching on the overall banking solvency.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the topic and in Section 3 we explain the motivation of our research. In Section 4 we describe the integrated risk modeling on which we build up the statistical framework described in Section 5. In Section 6 we apply our analysis to a stylized commercial bank. Section 7 contains concluding remarks and directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
