@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Forecasting the volatility of crude oil futures using intraday data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High-frequency data are used to forecast the volatility of WTI oil futures.Eleven pseudo long memory time series (HAR) models are estimated.Jumps and semivariances are found to be useful in fitting data in-sample.They do not significantly improve the forecast accuracy out-of-sample.A simple HAR model is not outperformed by any more sophisticated alternatives.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Volatility forecasting,Crude oil futures,Realized variance,Jumps,Realized semivariance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We use the information in intraday data to forecast the volatility of crude oil at a horizon of 1–66days using a variety of models relying on the decomposition of realized variance in its positive or negative (semivariances) part and its continuous or discontinuous part (jumps). We show the importance of these decompositions in predictive (in-sample) regressions using a number of specifications. Nevertheless, an important empirical finding comes from an out-of-sample analysis which unambiguously shows the limited interest of considering these components. Overall, our results indicates that a simple autoregressive specification mimicking long memory and using past realized variances as predictors does not perform significantly worse than more sophisticated models which include the various components of realized variance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent literature suggests that high-frequency data are useful for predicting future volatility. Moreover, the decomposition between the continuous and the jump component, on the one hand, and negative and positive intraday returns, on the other hand, may also help to obtain a better accuracy of forecasts. Finally, considering a possible leverage effect might also improve the forecast of volatility, as far as the market of interest exhibits this particular feature. In the present study, we simultaneously consider all these characteristics to provide a large-scale empirical analysis of the forecasting accuracy of various time series models derived from the innovative HAR (Heterogenous Autoregressive) specification proposed in Corsi (2009). The eleven models under consideration deliver forecasts of the cumulative volatility from 1 to 66days (three months considering only trading days). The analysis is conducted in-sample, and more importantly, out-of-sample for the front-month WTI futures contract quoted on the NYMEX-CME over the period 1987–2010, totalizing 5732 trading days. Our results indicate that considering the various components of the realized variance only contributes to improve the in-sample fit but does not represent a significant improvement in an out-of-sample framework.There is ample evidence in the econometric and mathematical finance literatures of an economic value in forecasting volatility using intraday data. Important contributions in this field are Fleming, Kirby, and Ostdiek (2003), who demonstrate the importance of intraday data for portfolio choice in a three-asset framework (see also Bandi, Russell, & Zhu (2008)). Competitive forecasts of future volatility also have direct applications in risk management activities. Giot and Laurent (2004), and more recently Clements, Galvao, and Kim (2008), make use of realized variance for VaR computation. More generally, better forecasts of volatility can help to ameliorate the density forecast using, for instance, the recent methodology developed in Maheu and McCurdy (2011) possibly with asymmetric features as in Hua and Zhang (2008). In addition, most of the stochastic processes used in modeling oil returns (see Geman, 2005) rely on a stochastic volatility hypothesis (see Wong & Lo, 2009) which necessitates a precise estimation of the volatility process that could be improved using tick-by-tick data. Finally, intraday data also find interesting applications in the field of option pricing. Intraday data can help to improve option pricing using the information content of these data as daily data have been used in the past to price option using GARCH models (see Duan (1995) and Heston & Nandi (2000)). For instance, the recent option pricing model in Stentoft (2008) also relies on intraday data to price derivatives with an increasing precision and Yang, Bandi, and Russell (2008) highlight the information content of intraday data when the economic metric of option trading profits is used. Corsi, Fusari, and La Vecchia (2013) show that intraday data significantly improve the pricing of options using an HAR-type model.In this paper, we analyze the forecasting accuracy of several time series models including jumps and/or semivariance measures that are computed from intraday transaction data. Jumps have a long history in finance but have generally been estimated from daily data.1Among major contributions see Andersen, Benzoni, and Lund (2002), Pan (2000), Chernov, Gallant, Ghysels, and Tauchen (2003), Eraker et al. (2003) and Eraker (2004). Collectively taken, these papers emphasize the importance of jumps for asset pricing.1We use the asymptotic theory developed in Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (BNS hereafter) (2004) to detect jumps in high frequency returns. Semivariance measures, as part of the larger class of downside risk measures, also have a long history in finance and operational research. Early contributions by Choobineh and Branting (1986) and Josephy and Aczel (1993) propose optimal estimators for semivariance. Ang, Chen, and Xing (2006) consider semivariance in an asset pricing model to illustrate its relevancy in pricing financial assets. Huang (2008) relies on semivariance in a portfolio choice exercice in the same vein as Markowitz (1959) (see also Markowitz (2013) for a recent update of the state-of-the-art in modern portfolio theory). Interestingly, Grootveld and Hallerbach (1999) call into question the empirical difference between considering variance or semivariance for portfolio selection. In the present paper, we consider realized semivariances that are the high-frequency counterpart of commonly-used semivariances estimated from daily data. Further note that we only compare models that use high-frequency data as their superiority is now well-established in the financial forecasting literature after Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2003).2The superiority of high-frequency-based models is empirically demonstrated in Martens and Zein (2004) for the case of crude oil (and in very many other papers for other assets) and we do not reinvestigate the issue of comparing GARCH forecasts with forecasts from intraday data in the present paper.2Note also, that we keep the issue of comparing our results with forecasts from implied volatility for future work.3For previous contributions see Jorion (1995), Christensen and Prabhala (1998), Fleming (1998) and Day and Lewis (1993) among others. An excellent survey of this question is in Christoffersen, Jacobs, and Chang (2013, chap. 10).3Some results on this topic are presented in Martens and Zein (2004) for the case of crude oil and Koopman, Jungbacker, and Hol (2005) for other asset classes, but these two papers do not consider the various components of the realized variance as we do.There are several motivations behind our present study. First, we assess the forecast of volatility for the most traded commodity around the world and we do so using the most traded commodity futures contract. Second, our results have implications for the management of oil contingent claims as well as for risk management activities (see Giot & Laurent (2003) and Cabedo & Moya (2003)) and portfolio selection where commodities play an increasingly important role in recent years. Third, we investigate the importance of disentangling jumps, that are present in oil futures returns, from the continuous component in line with Andersen, Bollerslev, and Diebold (2007) (ABD hereafter) for traditional assets and Tseng, Chung, and Huang (2009) for oil, as jumps are indeed present in oil price data. This is an important issue as jumps are perceived very differently (‘bad volatility’) from the Brownian part (‘good volatility’) and their forecasting power is still under intense debate (see Corsi, Pirino, & Renò (2010)). Fourth, we will be able to compare our results for crude oil with those for individual stocks and a stock index that are developed in Patton and Sheppard (2011), thereby shedding more light on the robustness of their results.From a methodological standpoint, we use HAR-type models along with realized semivariances and signed jumps as in Patton and Sheppard (2011). We compare these models with earlier specifications proposed in Corsi (2009) and ABD. We show that the new models only lead to small improvements for volatility forecasting that are visible in-sample but not out-of-sample. We provide a thorough analysis of the out-of-sample performance of all models (and compare their performance) for all horizons from 1 to 66days, i.e. 1day to 3months that are relevant horizons for practitioners. The quality of out-of-sample predictions is assessed using QLIKE which is a robust measure (in the Patton’s (2011) sense that will be explained later) when the variable of interest is noisy. The QLIKE measure is used along with the so-called Diebold–Mariano statistic to test for out-of-sample predictability. There are various way to test for volatility forecastability. Bellini and Figà-Talamanca (2005) improve the methodology of Christoffersen and Diebold (2000) to develop run tests. Bellini and Figà-Talamanca (2005) also discuss possible alternative using the recent realized variance concept developed in Andersen et al. (2003). We opt for the QLIKE measure that is highly relevant in our setting.To provide a sketch of our main results, we note that there seems to be only a small or no improvement in-sample in considering more sophisticated models including jumps and other components. The most important empirical finding is that, out-of-sample, there is no statistical improvement in using these models and the genuine model by Corsi (2009) provides results that are at least as good as other models. The best in-sample fit is for horizons that are between 30 and 40 trading days (i.e. one month and a half). While our results cannot be generalized to other time series and only hold for the given data, our out-of-sample evidence seriously calls into question the interest of considering various components of the realized variance for volatility forecasting.The plan for the paper is as follows. In the next Section, we briefly review the relevant literature. In Section 3, we present the estimator of realized variance and some extensions that can be used to detect jumps or compute semivariances. Section 4 presents the genuine HAR model and its various extensions that will be used to understand the role of each component of the realized variance. We also report in Section 4 the results of our in-sample analysis. We discuss the out-of-sample forecasting performance of all models in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.The modeling of the crude oil futures returns volatility has been examined in a number of contributions with, most of the time, daily data and GARCH specifications. Sadorsky (2006) provides a thorough empirical analysis of the modeling and forecasting of WTI crude oil, heating oil #2, unleaded gasoline, and natural gas front-month futures contract over the period 1988–2003 (1990–2003 for natural gas). The author finds evidence of good performances of a number of GARCH-type models that are able to significantly beat the random walk model. The result is expected in light of the well-known persistent behavior of volatility. We improve upon the empirical analysis of Sadorsky (2006) as we use intraday transaction price data that convey much more information than daily (closing price) data.Sadorsky and McKenzie (2008) extend the Sadorsky and McKenzie’s (2008) contribution and investigate the forecast of volatility for different asset classes including WTI front-month futures using daily data along with a number of time-series models. Most promising specifications are the power autoregressive and GARCH models which perform well depending on the forecast horizon under consideration. In particular, power autoregressive models are better in predicting volatility at short horizons while GARCH-type models have superior performance for longer-horizon forecast. The intuition behind this empirical finding is the great persistence of power transformations of absolute returns well-acknowledged since Ding, Granger, and Engle (1993). Similar findings are provided in Mohammadi and Su (2010) which shows the superiority of the APARCH model compared with standard GARCH or EGARCH models.Kang and Yoon (2013) investigates the long-memory properties of three time-series of front-month energy futures contract (the same as in Sadorsky (2006)) volatility relying on a number of long-memory models. As such, they also extend the analysis in Kang, Kang, and Yoon (2009).4Kang et al. (2009) use different GARCH models to forecast the oil price volatility and succeed in modeling the long-memory behavior of volatility which is common to most of the financial series. Wei, Wang, and Huang (2010) refine the analysis in Kang et al. (2009). Mohammadi and Su (2010) also consider the GARCH behavior of crude oil prices.4The authors find that their models based on daily data provide good in-sample fit for conditional volatility. As for the out-of-sample performance of the competing models, no model emerges as a leading forecasting model based on Diebold–Mariano pairwise comparison. Note that these different studies rely on a very noisy proxy for conditional volatility, namely the squared daily returns. Nomikos and Pouliasis (2011) follow Fong and See (2002), who show that regime shifts are clearly present in the data and dominate GARCH effects, and use Markov switching specifications to model the volatility of crude oil (and derivatives) prices. The model seems to perform quite well in-sample, but the well-known difficulties of Markov-switching models for forecasting purpose raises the issue of the potential out-of-sample performance of these specifications.Other noteworthy contributions use option-implied information from options on WTI futures.5As mentioned in the Introduction Section, we do not consider option-implied data in this paper but provide some references for the case of crude oil for the sake of completeness.5An early reference is Kroner, Kneafsey, and Claessens (1995) where daily data on futures and option prices are used to estimate implied standard deviations and GARCH models. The authors find that a combination of implied volatility and historical information outperforms predictions from a single source. Agnolucci (2009) provides an analysis of volatility forecasting also using the implied volatility as a predictor compared to GARCH forecasts and obtains similar results to Kroner et al. (1995). The main weakness of these contributions is that they extract option-implied volatility using an inversion of the well-known Black–Scholes model that may not be valid for data at hand.6In particular, the data-generating-process may include stochastic volatility and/or jumps that are not compatible with Black–Scholes assumptions.6The availability of intraday (transaction or quote) data for investment purpose in recent years has led many researchers to develop an interest for these data and conduct academic research with these new tools. Among potential applications, the forecast of volatility is by far the most important domain of application.Early attempts to model and forecast volatility using intraday data are Taylor and Xu (1997), Andersen and Bollerslev (1997, 1998), Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Ebens (2001), Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys (2001), Andersen et al. (2003), Martens (2002), Koopman et al. (2005) and Giot and Laurent (2007). Most of these papers compare volatility forecasts from GARCH models with those from high-frequency data. The literature on forecasting using realized measures is nicely surveyed in Andersen, Bollerslev, Christoffersen, and Diebold (2006, chap. 15). The main empirical finding is that these models, even based on simple autoregressive structures such as the HAR provide much better results than GARCH-type models. The central improvement appears to come from the fact that GARCH models only use daily data while HAR models use the much larger information that is contained in intraday data.Intraday data also have become available for futures commodity markets and a few papers have use these data for academic purpose. Wang, Wu, and Yang (2008) provide an early analysis of the unconditional behavior of distributions for oil and gas futures for quite a short period (1995–1999). Their analysis mainly provides evidence of long memory and near-normality of log transform of realized variance. Using recent nonparametric jump detection methods, Sévi (2014) extend their results and shows that normality of daily standardized returns can be formally achieved as soon as jumps are taken into account as theory would require. This second feature would lead to a modeling of RV using log transform so as to obtain more normal residuals. We do not rely on the log transformation of our RV measures following Patton and Sheppard (2011) and for reasons developed below. Another use of intraday data for oil futures is in Duong and Kalev (2008) who investigate the maturity (Samuelson) effect in commodity futures markets. Chevallier and Sévi (in press) make use of realized and implied volatility for oil futures to compute the variance risk premium and show the usefulness of this concept for the purpose of oil price forecast. For the sake of forecasting, we are only aware of two papers considering intraday data. Martens and Zein (2004) rely on ARFIMA models and, closest to our study, Tseng et al. (2009) follow a strategy similar to ABD. The authors fit the HAR-CJ model using the realized-range as an alternative to the so-called realized variance. We extend their analysis in a number of directions. First, we use a variety of HAR-type models that have different properties from the standard HAR-CJ specification. Second, we detect jumps using two different estimators and show the importance of using an alternative to the bi-power variation as this last measure is biased in small samples. Third, and most importantly, we develop a large-scale out-of-sample analysis of the various models under consideration which is the relevant criterion for validating a forecasting model.In what follows, the main quantity of interest will be the daily variance of oil futures returns that will be estimated using the realized variance. For a given day t, the realized variance is computed as the sum of squared intraday returnsrt,jat a given sampling frequency1/M:(1)RVt,M=∑j=1Mrt,j2The estimated realized variance heavily depends on the choice of the1/Mfrequency.7In what follows, we assume that1/Mis the sampling frequency for all the estimators that will be used.7This aspect will be further discussed in the empirical section. As frequency tends to infinity (if intraday observations are available as often as desired), i.e. using in-fill asymptotics arguments:(2)RVt,M→∫t-1tσs2ds+∑j=1J(t)κ2(tj)in probability.when the log-pricesptconsists of a continuous and a pure-jump component.8We assume thatpτ=∫0τμsds+∫0τσsdWs+Jτwithμa locally bounded drift process,σa strictly positive cádlág process and J a pure-jump process.8Eq. (2) illustrates that volatility, which is by nature a latent variable, is made “observable” by the theory of quadratic variation. The next question is how to disentangle jumps from the continuous component. BNS (2004) first tackle this issue by proposing the bi-power variation (BPV) measure, which is computed as the scaled summation of the product of adjacent absolute returns. Formally, BPV is defined as follows:(3)BPVt,M=ξ1∑j=1M-1|rt,j||rt,j+1|whereξp≡2p/2Γ1/2(p+1)Γ(1/2)=E(|Z|p)denotes the mean of the absolute value of standard normally distributed random variable Z. The BPV is a consistent estimator of integrated volatility, and allows to decompose the realized variance into its diffusive and non-diffusive parts. As the sampling frequency increases, the presence of jumps should have no impact, because the return representing the jump is multiplied by a non-jump return which tends to zero asymptotically. This is true in case of rare jumps, when the probability of two consecutive jumps is negligible.Nevertheless, the BPV has major drawbacks in empirical applications. First, in practice, the sampling frequency is not high enough to eliminate the influence of jumps. Indeed, the adjacent return does not tend to zero and thus multiplying the large (jump) intraday return results in an upward bias of the BPV. Second, the presence of zero-return that are multiplied twice (with the previous and the next intraday return) leads to a downward bias of the BPV. Some alternative jump-robust measures have been proposed in the literature to deal with the aforementioned issues (see Corsi et al. (2010) for a discussion). Among them, the median realized variance (MedRV) from Andersen, Dobrev, and Schaumburg (2012) is very promising, as it has better properties in realistic settings and remains intuitive and easy to implement. The MedRV estimator reads as follows:(4)MedRVt,M=π6-43+πMM-2∑j=2M-1med(|rt,j-1|,|rt,j|,|rt,j+1|)2With the MedRV estimator, the impact of jumps completely vanishes except in the case of two consecutive jumps (which is extremely rare at the sampling frequencies used in empirical applications). In addition, the estimator is more robust to the occurrence of zero-returns except when many zero-returns are likely to be consecutive, which is not the case in the very liquid oil futures market. We thus decide to consider the MedRV as a competitive alternative for our analysis and will provide, for the sake of comparison, all our results for both the BPV and the MedRV estimators.The difference between RV and a jump-robust estimator such as BPV or MedRV provides, when it is statistically significant, an estimate of the sum of squared jumps∑j=1J(t)κ2(tj)which have occurred during the period under investigation. Note that a small estimated value for a jump component may not actually come from jumps but be a variation due to the continuous path of the stochastic process and the presence of jumps has thus to be formally tested. BNS (2004, 2006) develop such a testing framework using asymptotic theory on realized variance and multipower variations. We use the adjusted jump ratio statistic, which has proven to have reasonable power against several empirically realistic calibrated stochastic volatility jump diffusion models and the best empirical properties in Huang and Tauchen (2005), to detect jumps in our study. The test statistic for day t reads:(5)ZJBPV(t,M)=M(RVt,M-BPVt,M)RVt,M-1(ξ1-4+2ξ1-2-5)max{1,TQt,MBPVt,M-2}1/2withTQt,Mthe realized tripower quarticity which writesTQt,M=Mξ4/3-3∑j=1M-2|rt,j|4/3|rt,j+1|4/3|rt,j+2|4/3and converges in probability to the integrated quarticity. TheZJBPVstatistic follows a standard normal distribution and allows formal testing for the presence of jumps.A similar test may be developed with alternative jump-robust estimators of realized variance.9Theodosiou and Z̆ikes̆ (2011) and Dumitru and Urga (2012) provide a very complete treatment of existing jump detection tests as well as their relative performance in case of microstructure noise and/or jumps. In light of the good properties of the MedRV-based test, we focus on this estimator as an alternative to the BPV estimator.9In particular, we are interested in the present paper with the extension of the adjusted jump ratio statistic to the MedRV estimator. Using limit theory in Andersen et al. (2012), the test may be adapted to the MedRV estimator as follows:(6)ZJMedRV(t,M)=M(RVt,M-MedRVt,M)RVt,M-10.96max{1,MedRQt,MMedRVt,M-2}1/2withMedRQt,Man estimate of the integrated quarticity obtained using the same methodology than for MedRV. Precisely,MedRQt,M=3π9π+72-523MM-2∑j=2M-1med(|rt,j-1|,|rt,j|,|rt,j+1|)4. Theodosiou and Z̆ikes̆ (2011) show by means of many simulations and empirical analysis that this test has better properties in the presence of jumps of finite or even infinite activity and zero-returns. If disentangling jumps from the continuous component helps in forecasting the volatility of oil futures returns, we are particularly interested in investigating whether the better properties of the test based on MedRV compared to BPV will translate in an improvement in volatility forecasting as well.When the ZJ statistic is significant, then the difference between the RV and the BPV or MedRV is too large for being a realization of a Brownian motion and should be considered as a jump. Thus, the jump component for say, the BPV estimator, is defined as:(7)Jt,α(M)=[RVt,M-BPVt,M]×I[ZJBPV(t,M)>Φα]whereI[.]is the indicator function which identifies the significance of theZJBPV(t,M)statistic in excess of a given critical value of the Gaussian distributionΦα. The jump component is similarly defined using the MedRV estimator. In our analysis, we work with a significance threshold equal to 0.999 which is a well-accepted value in the literature, but we checked that jump detection thresholds equal to 0.99 or 0.95 provide quite similar estimates of jumps.The jump component is then defined as:(8)Ct,α(M)=BPVt,M×I[ZJBPV(t,M)>Φα]+RVt,M×I[ZJBPV(t,M)⩽Φα]In words, in case of a jump, the squared jump component equals the difference between RV and BPV and the continuous component equals the BPV. In case of no jump, the jump component is naturally zero and the continuous component equals the RV. This formalization ensures that in both case, the sum of the squared jump component and the continuous component equals the RV.Patton and Sheppard (2011) show the importance of the realized semivariance developed in Barndorff-Nielsen, Kinnebrock, and Shephard (2010) for volatility forecasting. The intuition behind this estimator is simple and follows the long-standing tradition of semivariance estimators beginning with Markowitz (1959). The negative realized semivariance estimator is defined as:(9)RSVt,M-=∑j=1Mrt,j2×I[rt,j<0]Similarly, the positive realized semivariance estimator is computed as:(10)RSVt,M+=∑j=1Mrt,j2×I[rt,j>0]From both these estimators, Patton and Sheppard (2011) define signed jumps as the difference between positive and negative realized semivariances:(11)ΔJt,M=RSVt,M+-RSVt,M-An important aspect of this approach is that it does not consider the significance of jumps using procedures such as in Huang and Tauchen (2005) or ABD among others. Nevertheless, because the aim of the paper is in investigating forecast accuracy, this is of no importance.This paper uses tick-by-tick (transaction) price data from the NYMEX-CME for the front-month futures contract. Alternative crude oil benchmarks may be considered as in Sadorsky (2006), Kang et al. (2009), Kang and Yoon (2013) and Mohammadi and Su (2010), among others, where the authors rely on alternative US markets and/or international crude oil markets. However, the WTI contract strongly remains the most traded commodity futures throughout the world and most of oil-based derivatives are priced with respect to this contract. In addition, the WTI is the reference for most of investors involved in energy commodities and enters in the GSCI and other commodity indices that are widely traded worldwide. The full sample period is from January 1987 to December 2010. After removing days with a shortened trading session or too few transactions, we obtain 5732 daily observations.10Our cleaning of the data follows ABD.10Before computing realized variance, three choices have to be made. First, to deal with the so-called microstructure noise issue (see Hansen & Lunde (2006)), kernel-based methods, pre-averaging or sub-sampling may be used. We reproduced all our estimations with the two-times scale estimator in Zhang, Mykland, and Aït-Sahalia (2005) and results were found to be similar qualitatively and quantitatively, possibly due to the high liquidity of the oil market for which the microstructure noise is a quite minor problem, so we only report estimates using the genuine realized variance estimator in Eq. (1) in the present paper.Second, calendar sampling may be replaced with business-time sampling, i.e. sampling every n transactions rather than every s seconds. We choose calendar sampling because (i) it is much more used in the literature and (ii) the asymptotic properties of business sampling schemes are clearly less well-known.Third, a sampling frequency has to be selected. Theory suggests that returns should be computed at the highest possible frequency, so that estimators converge asymptotically towards the true conditional volatility following in-fill asymptotics arguments. However, it is well-known since Andersen and Bollerslev (1997), Andersen and Bollerslev (1998) and Taylor and Xu (1997) that microstructure noise (due to price discreteness, bid-ask spread, non-synchronous trading, etc.)11See, again, Hansen and Lunde (2006) for a thorough discussion of this issue and Andersen, Bollerslev, and Meddahi (2011) for a theoretical and empirical analysis of the impact of microstructure noise on the forecast of realized variance. To deal with this issue, we use staggered versions of BPV and MedRV as advocated in Huang and Tauchen (2005).11may impact the realized variance estimator at high frequency. To deal with this issue while making our results comparable with the rest of the literature, we follow the 5minute ’rule-of-thumb’ which is a quite conservative choice in light of the evidence in Chevallier and Sévi (2012) who show that higher frequencies may be chosen for the highly liquid WTI front-month futures contract.12To keep the paper self-contained, we report in Fig. 1 the volatility signature plot which provides the average of our three realized estimators at various sampling frequencies.12Additionally, recent research by Liu, Patton, and Sheppard (2012) shows that the standard 5-minute realized variance measures is difficult to beat in forecasting exercises.The nominal oil price, daily returns and realized variance computed from 5-minute intraday returns are plotted inFig. 2. We observe evidence of heteroscedasticity with clusters of volatility in 1990 (Iraq war), 1996 and the boom and bust of 2008–2009 (note that the volatility is much higher during the decreasing phase during than the increasing one). Sample autocorrelations for the realized variance of crude oil and S&P 500 futures, which is reported for the sake of comparison, are plotted in Fig. 3. Interestingly, autocorrelations appear to decay hyperbolically as it is expected for long-memory processes. We observe that long memory is more evident in the case of the stock index. In Fig. 4, we plot the autocorrelations for both positive and negative realized semivariances. It is evident that negative realized semivariance is much more serially correlated than the positive one. In summary, we may expected good performances in forecasting the realized variance and a different behavior from the negative and positive realized semivariances.Signed jumps are plotted in Fig. 5, from which we do not observe any particular pattern. Importantly, signed jumps do not appear to cluster in time. In addition, the average level of signed jumps magnitude seems to be rather constant over time, which is a significant feature for such a long period of time.Our empirical approach adopts the HAR model developed in Corsi (2009). This model has been successfully applied in a number of recent contributions including ABD, Liu and Maheu (2009), Corsi et al. (2010) and Maheu and McCurdy (2011), among many others. The main feature of this model is that it can be estimated using standard ordinary least squares (OLS) but succeeds in reproducing long memory, an important empirical characteristic of volatility processes. In fact, the HAR model is a superposition of short-memory processes that is equivalent to a pseudo long-memory process.Bollerslev and Wright (2001) emphasize the long-memory behavior of the volatility series and suggest a methodology which consider this stylized fact along with daily data and allows to produce volatility forecasts that significantly outperform standard volatility predictions from time-series models. Martens and Zein (2004) use ARFIMA model and intraday data to deal with the long memory issue in the volatility time series. Investigations of the long memory feature of commodity volatility series also is in Baillie, Han, Myers, and Song (2007), Chen, Daigler, and Parhizgari (2006), Elder and Serletis (2008) and Wang, Wu, and Wei (2011) where the authors rely on GARCH model extensions to deal with the long memory modeling issue. The authors show empirically that GARCH-class models are only able to replicate long memory that is present in financial time-series under restricted circumstances. A recent paper of Liu and Wan (2012) also highlights the long-range dependence in volatility measures for Shanghai fuel oil futures returns. Arouri, Lahiani, Lévy, and Nguyen (2012) show that long-memory and structural breaks are important features of crude oil markets. Martens, van Dijk, and de Pooter (2009) also show the critical importance of long-memory for modeling the volatility of the S&P 500 futures.To facilitate the presentation of the models, we now drop the sampling frequency from the notation of realized estimators. Let us first consider the following notation for the average realized variance over the period[t+1,t+h]:RVt+1,t+h=h-1[RVt+1+RVt+2+…+RVt+h]Using this notation, and as a basis for our analysis, we consider the HAR-RV model which is derived from Corsi’s (2009) original specification:(12)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1RVt+β5RVt-1,t-4+β22RVt-5,t-21+εtwhereεtis an unpredictable error term. Our HAR-RV model differs from the HAR specification in Corsi (2009, Eq. (8)) in two dimensions. First, our model relies on the realized variance when Corsi (2009) uses the realized volatility (the square root of the realized variance). This choice is motivated by the fact that Andersen et al. (2007) find similar results when using the realized variance, the realized volatility or the logarithm of realized volatility when estimating the HAR model parameters. Consequently, recent literature, including Patton and Sheppard (2011) among others, often disregards the nonlinear transformations of the realized variance which does not provide evident added value. Second, the lag structure in our model is slightly different from the one in Corsi’s (2009) HAR model as we avoid overlapping terms in explanatory variables. This reparametrization is drawn from Patton and Sheppard (2011) and allows for direct interpretation of the effect of each term through its estimate, which is not the case with overlapping terms. In the rest of the paper, we refer to the “original Corsi’s model” for the specification in Eq. (12) despite we use realized variance and a different lag structure.In words, the HAR model considers the modeling of the realized variance over the period[t+1,t+h]using as predictors the one-day, one-week and one-month lagged averaged realized variances. The model follows the heterogenous structure of Müller, Dacorogna, Davé, Olsen, and Pictet (1997). Importantly, with this model, we are interested in the forecast of the cumulative realized variance over a given period which is a quantity of interest for most investors and derivatives practitioners. In particular, recent variance swaps are indexed on the realized variance over a period of interest which corresponds to a cumulative quantity in terms of realized variance.An relevant issue in specifying an HAR model is the lags that should be considered. In particular, is the one-day, one-week and one-month lag originally advocated in Corsi (2009) optimal? Craioveanu and Hillebrand (2008) investigate this issue. The authors systematically analyze a number of alternative lag structure and conclude in favor of the original structure proposed in the genuine Corsi’s (2009) HAR model. While the results in Craioveanu and Hillebrand (2008) do not use oil price data as an input, we adopt the one-day, one-week, one-month lag structure in the empirical part of the paper.13Further work may consider alternative structure as robustness check but we doubt that our results could be significantly modified.13Simple and intuitive extensions of the HAR model are suggested in ABD where nonlinear forms of the original structure are estimated. In particular, the authors consider the logarithmic and square-root analog of the HAR. The motivation for these nonlinear forms comes from the near-log-normality of realized variance. We follow Patton and Sheppard (2011), who recommend to avoid the use of power or log transform for Mincer-Zarnowitz-type regressions at they could lead to an asymptotic distorsion of the test, and only estimate linear forms of the HAR model. Also, as in Patton and Sheppard (2011), we use Weighted Least Squares (WLS) to limit the role of periods of high variance. To do this, we start with the estimation of the model using OLS and then consider the fitted value from that model as the weights in the WLS estimation. From now on, we only use WLS for both in and out-of-sample estimation.We now present the eleven time series models that will be estimated and compared in and out-of-sample.14For each model,εtis assumed to be an unpredictable error term.14For each model, we also provide basic comments so as to situate the model in the literature and the empirical results related to the model:Model 1 – HAR-RV The HAR-RV is the original specification in Corsi (2009) (see Eq. (12)).Model 2 – HAR-RV-J The HAR-RV-J is the first model in ABD (Section 4, Eq. 11), where the simple HAR model is completed with a jump component using the one-day lagged squared jump. Using this model, the main finding in ABD is thatβSQJis negative and significant. Recently, Corsi et al. (2010) have shown that a more accurate jump detection test allows to find significant predictability for the jump component but with a positive sign.(13)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1RVt+β5RVt-1,t-4+β22RVt-5,t-21+βSQJJt+εtModel 3 – HAR-CJ The HAR-CJ model is the ultimate specification in ABD (Section 6, Eq. 26) where continuous and squared jumps components are separated at different horizons. This is also the model used in Tseng et al. (2009) using oil data. Recall that in our work we use the convention in Patton and Sheppard (2011) so that there is no overlap between lags for the different component of the HAR model. As such, our model is slightly different from the model in ABD.(14)RVt+1,t+h=β0+βC1Ct+βSQJ1Jt+βC5Ct-1,t-4+βSQJ5Jt-1,t-4+βC22Ct-5,t-21+βSQJ22Jt-5,t-21+εtModel 4 – PS The PS model is the basic specification in Patton and Sheppard (2011) (Eq. (17)) which decomposes the one-day lagged realized variance into a positive and negative component using realized semivariances. The main result in Patton and Sheppard (2011) is the high significance of negative realized semivariance and the insignificance of positive one.(15)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1-RSVt-+β1+RSVt++β5RVt-1,t-4+β22RVt-5,t-21+εtModel 5 – PSlev The PSlev model is similar to the PS model except that it includes a possible inverse leverage effect. The leverage effect can be captured using the specification in Martens et al. (2009) or Patton and Sheppard (2011) which are quite easy to use. The PSlev model is specified in Eq. (18) in Patton and Sheppard (2011) and mainly checks whether the superior significance of negative realized semivariance does not come from a leverage effect.(16)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1-RSVt-+β1+RSVt++γRVtI[rt<0]+β5RVt-1,t-4+β22RVt-5,t-21+εtExtensions of this model to consider a possible leverage effect with a 5 or 22days horizons have also been estimated but do not provide interesting empirical results.Model 6 – HAR-RSV The model HAR-RSV uses the heterogenous structure of the genuine HAR over negative and positive RSV (this is the model in Eq. (19) in Patton and Sheppard (2011). The model assumes that positive and negative realized semivariances can have different forecasting power at different lags.(17)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1-RSVt-+β1+RSVt++β5-RSVt-1,t-4-+β5+RSVt-1,t-4++β22-RSVt-5,t-21-+β22+RSVt-5,t-21++εtModel 7 – CG As a benchmark for their study based on nonparametric estimators, Chen and Ghysels (2011, Eq. (7)) propose a version of the HAR-RSV model that includes the one-day lagged squared jump component in the spirit of ABD. This is the model CG in our study.(18)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1-RSVt-+β1+RSVt++β5-RSVt-1,t-4-+β5+RSVt-1,t-4++β22-RSVt-5,t-21-+β22+RSVt-5,t-21++βSQJJt+εtModel 8 – HAR-RV-SJ The HAR-RV-SJ model introduces the notion of signed jumps as defined in our Eq. (11). The model is similar to the HAR-CJ model of ABD except that the squared jump component is replaced with the signed jump as advocated in Patton and Sheppard (2011, Eq. (21)).(19)RVt+1,t+h=β0+βJΔJt+βCCt+β5RVt-1,t-4+β22RVt-5,t-21+εtModel 9 – HAR-CSJ Model HAR-CSJ is a new specification where we consider signed jumps over a longer interval than one day.15Tauchen and Zhou (2011) also develop an empirical model based on the characteristics of jumps in financial time series. But the authors consider the jumps quite differently. First, they are interested in estimating jump distribution characteristics (mean, volatility, intensity). Second, they are interested in significant jumps in the sense of Huang and Tauchen and, as such, need a very large sample (at least two years) to estimate the distribution characteristics.15Our methodology, following the definition of signed jumps developed in Patton and Sheppard (2011), allows to consider jumps over short period of time and in addition, takes into account the signs of the jumps.(20)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1JΔJt+β1CCt+β5JΔJt-1,t-4+β5CCt-1,t-4+βJ22ΔJt-5,t-21+β22CCt-5,t-21+εtModel 10 – HAR-RV-SJd The HAR-RV-SJd model is Eq. (22) in Patton and Sheppard (2011). The model discriminates between positive and negative signed jumps:(21)RVt+1,t+h=β0+βJ-ΔJtI[ΔJt<0]+βJ+ΔJtI[ΔJt>0]+βCCt+β5RVt-1,t-4+β22RVt-5,t-21+εtModel 11– HAR-CSJd Model HAR-CSJd is our second new specification where we discriminate between positive and negative signed jumps at various horizons:(22)RVt+1,t+h=β0+β1J-ΔJtI[ΔJt<0]+β1J+ΔJtI[ΔJt>0]+β1CCt+β5J-ΔJt-1,t-4I[ΔJt-1,t-4t<0]+β5J+ΔJt-1,t-4I[ΔJt-1,t-4>0]+β5CCt-1,t-4+β22J-ΔJt-5,t-22I[ΔJt-5,t-21t<0]+β22J+ΔJt-5,t-21I[ΔJt-5,t-21>0]+β22CCt-5,t-21+εtNote that in this last specification,ΔJt-1,t-4is not computed as the difference between positive and negative RSV over the 4days of interest but as the sum of signed jump over either days where they are positive or days where they are negative. As such, we avoid to hide the importance of signed jumps during a given period. In this case, aggregation may be detrimental.We may expect that the forecast of volatility may be improved using additional predictors such as the day-of-the-week (see Martens et al. (2009) for an application to the S&P 500 futures) or maturity effects as we deal with futures contracts. We tried to consider the day-of-the-week effect, and in particular the ‘Wednesday effect’ that might be present in WTI crude oil market due to the release of oil stocks level by the Department of Energy (DoE) each Wednesday.16The release of oil stocks sometimes takes place on other days of the week which makes the day-of-the-week effect a special-day effect as for instance in the analysis of Kim (2013).16We found this effect insignificant and so do not report results including this variable here. We also considered the maturity effect or Samuelson effect, the widespread view that the volatility of futures returns should be higher near maturity. This also is insignificant as may be expected from the recent contribution by Duong and Kalev (2008) who showed the absence of maturity effect for WTI crude oil futures using intraday data.Table 1provides a typology of the eleven models that are analyzed in the present study. Recall that all models including jump and continuous components will be estimated with both BPV and MedRV for the sake of comparison. With all these models in hand, we are now able to compare their empirical forecasting performance first in an in-sample predictive regression and then in an out-of-sample exercise.In contrast with ABD, we estimate the model for all h=1–66 when the authors only estimate the models forh=1,h=5andh=22. This, of course, provides a more precise picture of the predictive power of the various components under consideration. Additionally, it allows to improve our understanding of whether a given component does add information and, of so, when it does.We first address the issue of comparing models in-sample, i.e. the relative performance of models specified in Eqs. (12)–(22) An overall performance comparison is visible from Fig. 6where allR2are plotted for forecast horizons varying from 1 to 66days. Interestingly, from this plot we observe that slightly different models deliver very different performances withR2going from a low 10–15% to a high 45–50% for the best specifications.17Overall, the explanatory power in our study is in line with the one in Andersen et al. (2007). More precisely, it is similar to the explanatory power the foreign exchange spot market (DM/$), and higher than for the interest rate futures market (30-year US Treasury yield) but lower than for the equity futures market (US S&P 500 index).17In addition, we note that the ranking of the various models is preserved for different forecast horizons, i.e. we do not observe significant crossing lines in this plot. Finally, an important feature of Fig. 6 is thatR2are first increasing and then decreasing for longer forecast horizons. The turning point is not the same for all models. Some of them exhibit their bestR2forh=20when it ish=50for other models. We note that most of the models generally have quite stableR2for horizons going from 20 to 60days.Reporting all estimates for the different models at various horizons is not feasible and would have only a very limited interest. However, to get a better picture of the significance of parameters, we report in Tables 2 and 3the estimated parameters for all models with a forecast horizonh=10. This horizon is illustrative of the main features of the various models. These Tables allow to draw finer conclusions about the relative importance of the various coefficients of each model. In particular, we will be able to understand the additional information content of the jump and signed components such as signed jumps and signed semivariances. We will also be able to conclude about the interest of considering the MedRV estimator of realized variance in place of the BPV estimator. In addition, the various parameters for four important specifications are plotted in Figs. 1–4 of the Supplemental appendix to give a more precise view of the value of parameters for various forecast horizons. For each of these four models, we plot the estimates as well as their t-stat to gauge the level and significance of the coefficients at different horizons.From Table 2, we observe that all the coefficients in the basic HAR-RV model are highly significant. From Fig. 1 of the Supplemental appendix, we note that this feature is verified for all horizons. This is a common finding in empirical literature using the HAR model due to the well-known (and discussed in Section 2 and the introductive part of Section 4) long memory behavior of volatility. The explanatory power for the HAR-RV specification is roughly in line with the one in ABD. The HAR-RV-J model (columns 2 and 3 of Table 2) leads to a significant increase in the explanatory power (around 10%). This is due to the inclusion of the squared jump component as an additional predictor. This new variable is highly significant at all horizons (see Fig. 2 of the Supplemental appendix for a plot of the parameters using the MedRV to detect jumps) and the estimate is unambiguously negative. This is an important result which is in line with the findings in ABD and contrasts with the recent results in Corsi et al. (2010) who find a positive and significant effect of the jump component when measuring the squared jump using their new threshold estimator.18The intuition behind the empirical result in Corsi et al. (2010) is that jumps are generally associated with an increase rather than a drop in volatility. The specific feature and the sign of jumps that may be more often negative in commodity markets may explain our findings.18Here, we show that the squared jump component is highly significant with both the BPV, which is known to be biased in small samples but also with the MedRV which does not exhibit this weakness. We can thus conclude than in the oil futures market, jumps significantly reduce the impact of lagged volatility that is a highly persistent component and this effect exists for horizons going from 1day to three months.The results for the HAR-CJ model are given in the columns 4 and 5. The explanatory power of the regressions are higher than for the HAR-RV-J model from a rough 8–10%. As in ABD, the lagged squared jump components are not significant, except for very short horizons in the case of one-day and one-week lagged jump components and for longer horizons in the case of one-month lagged jump component. This can be observed from Fig. 3 of the Supplemental appendix where the estimates for the HAR-CJ using the MedRV estimator to estimate the jump component is used. In unreported estimations, we find a similar profile for the squared jump components estimated from the BPV. As in the literature examining other asset markets, the continuous component represents most of the relevant information for predicting future volatility and the squared jump components have no additional value. These results do not contradict our findings for the HAR-RV-J model as in this latter we do not use the continuous component but the realized variance as a predictor along with the one-day-lagged squared jump component. When we disentangle the jump from the continuous component, there is no more additional information in the jump component as far as predicting future volatility is concerned.The column 6 of Table 2 reports the results for the PS model of Patton and Sheppard (2011). Importantly, theR2is the same as for the standard HAR-RV model thereby indicating that the decomposition between positive and negative semivariances does not contribute to improve the fit of the predictive regression. This is a particular characteristic of the WTI market as Patton and Sheppard (2011) find a betterR2for their model than for the HAR-RV when studying the Spyder, an exchange-traded-fund that replicates the S&P 500 stock index. An additional, and important, feature of the oil market is that the positive realized semivariance is highly significant for all horizons up to two months (see top panel in Fig. 4 of the Supplemental appendix). This is at odds with the results in Patton and Sheppard (2011) for the Spyder as the authors find an insignificant positive realized semivariance in similar regression to ours. Our intuition behind this result is the particular characteristic of the commodity markets where a crisis situation is more often related to high prices (high positive returns) rather than to low prices (high negative prices) which explains the “inverse leverage effect” generally acknowledged in these markets (see Geman, 2005).19Nomikos and Andriosopoulos (2012) evaluate a number of stochastic models for energy spot prices and provide empirical evidence of a “leverage effect” for WTI while some other energy futures markets exhibit an “inverse leverage effect” as advocated in Geman (2005).19We check in column 7 with the PSlev model that a possible leverage (or inverse leverage) effect does not affect our estimates for realized semivariances. This is not the case in our empirical application.The last three columns of Table 2 report results for the HAR-RSV model and an extension of this model suggested in Chen and Ghysels (2011) which includes the one-day-lagged squared jump component. As for the HAR-RSV model, we observe that all the coefficients are highly significant. This is true for lagged negative realized semivariances but also for positive ones. If we compare this model with the genuine HAR-RV model, we note a higher explanatory power due to the decomposition of the variance into its two signed parts. Then, adding the one-day-lagged squared jump component to the analysis leads to a remarkable increase in the explanatory power as it was the case when switching from the HAR-RV model to the HAR-RV-J model. Again, we observe the importance of the jump component either using BPV or MedRV to detect and measure this component, at least when the continuous component is not considered as a predictor.Table 3 reports results for models 8–11 (see Table 1), i.e. models including signed jumps components as advocated in Patton and Sheppard (2011). The results for the HAR-RV-SJ model are reported in the first two columns of Table 3. We observe that the estimate for the signed jump component is significant at the 5% level and that the explanatory power of the model is similar to the HAR-RV-J’s one. This indicates that there is no specific gain in-sample in considering signed jumps. In addition, from columns 5 and 6 of Table 3, we also conclude that there is no additional increase in explanatory power when signed jumps are considered separately depending on their sign. Nevertheless, we observe that positive signed jumps are highly significant when negative ones are insignificant which is in line with our previous remark on the importance of considering the commodity markets differently from other financial assets. Here, a positive jump in price is associated with future lower volatility while there is no correlation between negative signed jump and future volatility.In the HAR-RV-SJ model, we decompose the continuous component from the signed jumps at daily, weekly and monthly lags. In fact, we adopt a heterogenous structure as is the case for RV in the genuine HAR model. Our results for this model where the continuous component is estimated either with BPV (column 3) or MedRV (column 4) show that the one-day and one-week lagged signed jumps are insignificant. Conversely, the one-month-lagged signed jump component along with the three continuous components are significant at the 1% level and lead to the highestR2of our study with 32% at a 10-day horizon and around 45% for horizons higher than one month and a half. This result highlights the information content of signed jumps when the latter are measured over a sufficient period of time, as evidenced in Tauchen and Zhou (2011). Daily and weekly measures of signed jumps appear to be too noisy to have some predictive power in our setting where future realized variance is the object of interest. Finally, the estimates for the HAR-CSJd model are provided in columns 7 and 8 of Table 3. We note that the signed jump components are insignificant, in contrast with the continuous components, except for the one-month lag where the positive signed jumps are highly significant. We obtain aR2that is in line with that of HAR-CSJ and HAR-RV-J models as can be observed from Fig. 6.As a summary of our results from the in-sample analysis, we conclude that the additional explanatory power of signed jumps as advocated in Patton and Sheppard (2011) is limited in the WTI oil futures market. In particular, the HAR-RV-J model developed in the seminal study by ABD delivers results that are as good as more sophisticated models in our predictive regression and significantly better than (i) models that ignore the jump component and (ii) models that decompose the realized variance into its positive and negative part. In the next section, we will compare our models in an out-of-sample analysis so as to validate or invalidate in-sample conclusions.In this Section, we analyze the out-of-sample performances of the eleven models. As such, we investigate the real forecasting performance of the models whose in-sample fit as been tested in the previous Section. Out-of-sample analysis is the only way to gauge the forecasting performance in this particular “volatility horse race” (Giot & Laurent (2007)) and to conclude about the additional predictive performance of the various components of the realized variance.As is common in the forecasting literature, we rely on the Diebold–Mariano–White (DMW) statistic developed in Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West (1996) (see Patton & Sheppard (2009) for an excellent survey on this topic). The use of this statistic, which compares the forecast ability of two (possibly nested) competing models, requires a loss function that is a measure of the difference between the realized value and the forecast in a pseudo out-of-sample forecasting environment. Because we do not observe volatility but rather use a proxy that is imperfect in nature, we need to consider a robust loss function in the sense of Patton (2011), that is, a loss function which ranks two competing forecasts similarly whether the ranking is done using the true conditional variance or some conditionally unbiased volatility proxy. Patton (2011) demonstrates the robustness of the Q-LIKE loss function that is defined as follows:L(σˆ2,f)=logf+σˆ2fwith f the volatility point forecast andσˆ2is the proxy for the conditional volatility.Let us consider two forecast models A and B. At each point in time t, the difference in loss functions for the two models is computed as:dt,{A,B}=L(σˆt2,ftA)-L(σˆt2,ftB)Then, a DMW test of equal predictive accuracy is a simple Wald test that the expected value of this difference is zero. The number of daily observations in our sample isT=5732and we use a rolling window framework20See West (2006) who motivates the choice of a rolling, recursive or fixed window scheme.20with estimation windows ofw=1000observations. Thus, with h-steps forecasts from 1 to 66days, we are left withτ=T-w-66+1=4667predictions for each horizon. The loss can be computed for each day and is averaged to yield the mean loss for each model at horizonh=1,…,66. The losses are also used to compute the HAC long run variance following Newey and West (1987) procedure with a lag chosen to behmax∗0.15due to the overlapping nature of our exercise. The DMW statistic is then given by:DM-QLIKEτ,{A,B}=d¯t=1,…,τ,{A,B}Σ^τ/τwithΣ^τan estimator of the asymptotic standard deviation ofΣτ=var[τd¯t=1,…,τ,{A,B}]. Martens et al. (2009) and Patton and Sheppard (2011), among many others, use this measure to evaluate their forecasts.21Martens et al. (2009) also use a series of other measures like the Model Confidence Set that are better suited when the number of models is quite large.21The statistic is standard normal and permits an easy comparison of pairs of models at each horizon.We report DMW statistics for various forecasting horizons in Tables 4–9. The interpretation of the figures in the Tables is as follows. The reported statistic compares the model whose name is given in the headline with the model whose name is given in the head-column. A positive statistic indicates that the latter outperforms the former. Significant statistics are highlighted in bold fonts. For instance, in Table 4, the reported 3.3026 in the first column indicates that the HAR-RV-J model significantly outperforms the HAR-RV model for the one-day forecast horizon. Another example is the −2.2020 reported in the third column, which indicates the superiority of model HAR-RV-J over the PS model.Table 4, which reports results forh=1, indicates that forecasts from the HAR-RV models are significantly dominated by most of the other models. As could be expected from the in-sample analysis, the forecasting performance of the HAR-RV-J model is very good as it outperforms most of other models, often significantly, and is never significantly outperformed. The HAR-CJ model also has good relative forecast accuracy, but not as good as the HAR-RV-J model. Other more sophisticated models including signed variances or signed jumps do not exhibit interesting performances at this one-day horizon.Considering the one-week horizon, we observe from Table 5 that no model is statistically superior to others. Except an anecdotal significant statistic indicating the better performance of the PS model over the HAR-RV-J model, we can conclude that at this horizon, all models deliver comparable forecasting performances. This was not expected from the in-sample analysis whereR2were between a low 15% and a high 27%.Conclusions for the two-week forecast horizon are quite different as the HAR-RV and the PS models seem to deliver forecasts that are significantly better than other models. We observe in Table 6 that these two models are never dominated by others and often significantly dominate other models. A comparison between this pair of models leads to an insignificant 0.5172. For longer horizons, one model exhibits very interesting forecast performance. This is the genuine HAR-RV model which is never beaten at the one, two and three-month horizons. This result is surprising for two reasons. First, the HAR-RV has modest in-sample fit when compared to more sophisticated models such as the HAR-CJ, the CG, the HAR-CSJ or the HAR-CSJd models. This points to the well-known in-sample over-fitting which does not translate into good out-of-sample forecasts. Second, the HAR-RV model is a very innovative model but it remains relatively simple when compared to its successors initiated in ABD and many other recent contributions. Despite the fact that more complicated specifications have good out-of-sample performance, they never outperform the HAR-RV which is our preferred model for all horizons except the one-day ahead. These results are corroborated in further empirical analysis, using alternative loss functions that are also discussed in Patton (2011), whose results are reported in a supplemental appendix (available on-line). Collectively taken, our results indicate that the HAR-RV is a very attractive model for all loss functions, thereby showing that our empirical findings are not linked to the use of a particular loss function.To summarize, our findings show that, while in-sample performance can be dramatically improved using the decomposition between jumps and the continuous component and negative and positive realized semivariances, these decompositions does not lead to significant improvements out-of-sample in oil markets. This important empirical fact is not tested in previous papers where no out-of-sample analysis is conducted. It may the case that for other assets that have been studied previously, such as FX, S&P 500 futures, and T-Bonds futures, an artificial importance has been given to the jump component for forecasting purpose. Such an analysis is, of course, far beyond the scope of the present paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
