@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Master surgery scheduling with consideration of multiple downstream units

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Master Surgery Schedules (MSS) assign block operating room time to surgical specialties.Model to calculate distributions of the number of patients in the ICU and the wards depending on a MSS.Cost functions for downstream units based on these distributions.Exact and heuristic algorithms to find MSS that minimize costs in downstream units.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Resource allocation,Master surgery scheduling,Ward and ICU occupancy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a master surgery scheduling (MSS) problem in which block operating room (OR) time is assigned to different surgical specialties. While many MSS approaches in the literature consider only the impact of the MSS on operating theater and operating staff, we enlarge the scope to downstream resources, such as the intensive care unit (ICU) and the general wards required by the patients once they leave the OR. We first propose a stochastic analytical approach, which calculates for a given MSS the exact demand distribution for the downstream resources. We then discuss measures to define downstream costs resulting from the MSS and propose exact and heuristic algorithms to minimize these costs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to an aging society and technological progress, the demand for health care services is rising in industrialized countries (Hay, 2003; OECD Indicators, 2011). At the same time, cost cuts and human resource shortages lead to increasing pressure on hospital resources. Therefore, the importance of optimizing the usage of scarce resources in hospitals is self-evident. The most expensive resource in most hospitals is the operating room (OR) (Guerriero & Guido, 2011). ORs are clearly connected with other “downstream” resources, for example, the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), the intensive care unit (ICU), and the general patient wards, hereafter referred to as “wards”. Anderson, Price, Golden, Jank, and Wasil (2011) show that a high level of utilization in hospital wards leads to a higher discharge rate of patients, which might reduce the quality of care. On days with high patient inflow to the ICU the danger of readmissions (Baker, Pronovost, Morlock, Geocadin, & Holzmueller, 2009) and the probability of rejected ICU requests (McManus et al., 2003) strongly increases. Therefore, downstream units should also be considered in surgery planning for medical reasons. When planning the operating rooms and the downstream units, decision makers face a trade-off between the high complexity of a holistic view and the danger of suboptimal solutions resulting from focusing on isolated units (Vanberkel, Boucherie, Hans, Hurink, & Litvak, 2010).Many hospitals use a so-called block-booking system when planning surgeries. In this system a medical specialty, e.g. urology, is assigned to blocks denoting a specific amount of time, e.g.a day, in one OR. These blocks can be combined into cyclical master surgery schedules (MSS), where every block is repeated after a fixed cycle, e.g.every two weeks. In planning and scheduling, problems can be categorized according to levels of a decision hierarchy (Hans, van Houdenhoven, & Hulshof, 2011): The strategic, tactical, offline-operational (i.e.planning in advance) and the online-operational (i.e. reacting/monitoring) level. In block-booking systems, decisions are made on all hierarchical levels. At the strategic level the number of blocks assigned to the specialties during a MSS cycle is determined. At the tactical level, OR-days are allocated to specialties in an MSS, such that the strategic allocation is met. At the operational level, patients are scheduled (offline) and rescheduled in case of emergencies or unexpected changes (online). An overview of OR planning may be found in Hans and Vanberkel (2011).In the paper at hand, we discuss the tactical MSS problem, concentrating on the effect the MSS has on the patient flow to downstream inpatient care units. Surgeries performed in each block of the MSS create a flow of patients through the ICU to the ward, or directly from the OR to the wards, before they leave the hospital. As the PACU is part of the OR department in many hospitals, we exclude this unit in our tactical problem and denote the ICU and the ward as downstream units. This paper concentrates on the inpatient flow because outpatients leave the hospital the day of surgery and thus require only OR capacities. We define a model to calculate the distributions of recovering patients in the downstream units expected from the MSS. Based on this, we propose an approach for planning the MSS with the objective to minimize downstream costs by leveling bed demand and reducing weekend bed requests.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief overview of the relevant literature. Section 3 presents an algorithm for calculating the distribution of recovering patients in the downstream units – ICU and multiple wards. Section 4 offers a generic model to determine optimal MSSs and a discussion of relevant objective functions to determine downstream costs. In Section 5 we present a branch-and-bound algorithm and different heuristics to minimize these costs. We test the algorithms in Section 6 in an experimental investigation using data from a Dutch hospital. Finally, we discuss managerial implications, limitations, and potential extensions of our study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
