@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal policies for a delay time model with postponed replacement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Optimal maintenance policies for a delay time model with a novel assumption.Our novel assumption: postponed replacement upon defect identification.Almost all previous research efforts assume instantaneous replacement.Benefits: 1 – Better utilize system life, 2 – allow time to prepare maintenance resources.Optimal policies for cases with both deterministic and random delay time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,Delay time models,Inspection optimization,Replacement optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We develop a delay time model (DTM) to determine the optimal maintenance policy under a novel assumption: postponed replacement. Delay time is defined as the time lapse from the occurrence of a defect up until failure. Inspections can be performed to monitor the system state at non-negligible cost. Most works in the literature assume that instantaneous replacement is enforced as soon as a defect is detected at an inspection. In contrast, we relax this assumption and allow replacement to be postponed for an additional time period. The key motivation is to achieve better utilization of the system’s useful life, and reduce replacement costs by providing a sufficient time window to prepare maintenance resources. We model the preventive replacement cost as a non-increasing function of the postponement interval. We then derive the optimal policy under the modified assumption for a system with exponentially distributed defect arrival time, both for a deterministic delay time and for a more general random delay time. For the settings with a deterministic delay time, we also establish an upper bound on the cost savings that can be attained. A numerical case study is presented to benchmark the benefits of our modified assumption against conventional instantaneous replacement discussed in the literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Most engineering systems suffer from unexpected failures due to degradation, operational and environmental conditions such as random shocks, or operator abuse. Maintenance activities consist of corrective and preventive measures taken in order to minimize the serious consequences of unexpected failures. Planning maintenance activities can be a very challenging task due to a plethora of factors, including the randomness of failure processes, scarcity of maintenance resources, and complexity of engineering systems. The cost of maintenance activities represents one of the key drivers of an organization’s total costs. Maintenance costs typically account for 15–60% of the total value of the end product (Mobley, 2002). The current work belongs to the body of literature on maintenance optimization models, an area that focuses on developing mathematical and analytical models to determine optimal maintenance policies. There are numerous research efforts within this area that address important maintenance decisions such as replacement, inspection, repair, and maintenance scheduling. In this paper, we focus on optimizing inspection and replacement decisions. In particular, we develop a mathematical model to determine the optimal inspection and replacement policy for a system under delay time.Delay time is a concept that was first introduced by Christer (1982). It is defined as the time lapse from the occurrence of a defect in the system up until failure. In other words, after a defect occurs, the system can stay operational for an additional time interval, denoted as the delay time. In this paper, we assume failures are self-announcing while defects are not. Failure requires an immediate corrective replacement at cost cf. The system can be inspected at any time at cost cs. Upon inspection, the system is identified as being either in a “normal” or “defective” operating state. If the system state is identified as normal, no action is required. On the other hand, if inspection identifies the system as being in a defective state, a preventive replacement of the system is triggered at cost cp<cf−cs. Within these settings, the delay time can be regarded as a window of opportunity for performing preventive replacement before failure occurs. The decision under consideration is to determine optimal inspection intervals such that the long-run average cost of the system is minimized.The main contribution of this paper is developing a delay time model (DTM) to determine the optimal policy for a single-component system under a novel assumption: postponed replacement. The majority of the works in the literature on DTM make the common assumption that the system is replaced instantaneously upon the identification of a defect at an inspection (Christer & Lee, 2000; MacPherson & Glazebrook, 2011; Wang, 2009). In contrast, we allow replacement to be postponed for an additional time interval. The benefit of this is twofold: first, better utilization of the system’s useful life is achieved, since it can still be operated for an additional period of time before replacement. Second, it provides an opportunity to efficiently schedule and plan scarce maintenance resources, such as material and labor. The latter aspect is captured by modeling the preventive replacement cost as a non-increasing function of the postponement interval. An interesting trade-off arises between these benefits and the drawback that postponement increases the probability of a defect accumulating into a failure.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we survey the relevant literature on DTM. In Section 3, we review a base-case model with a deterministic delay time under the assumption that replacement is performed instantaneously after detecting a defect. The optimal policy under this setting is presented. Next, we introduce the postponed replacement assumption to this model and derive the optimal policy in Section 4. A numerical case study is presented in Section 5 to validate the model and highlight the benefits of the modified assumption. The analytical and numerical results are generalized in Section 6 to settings with a random delay time. Finally, Section 7 presents concluding remarks and highlights directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
