@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mixed-width aisle configurations for order picking in distribution centers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a novel mixed-aisle configuration for order picking.Two rules are presented to generate feasible mixed-aisle designs.Analytical space and throughput models are developed for such configurations.A cost-based optimization model is developed to determine optimal aisle-width.Throughput, space and labor costs, and storage area are critical determinants.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Logistics,Warehousing,Order picking,Aisle configuration,Picker blocking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Space required for the order picking area and labor required to perform the picking activity are two significant costs for a distribution center (DC). Traditionally, DCs employ either entirely wide or entirely narrow aisles in their picking systems. Wide aisles allow pickers to pass each other, which reduces blocking, and requires fewer pickers than their narrow-aisle counterpart for the same throughput. However, the amount of space required for wide-aisle configurations is high. Narrow aisles utilize less space than wide aisles, but are less efficient because of the increased likelihood of congestion experienced by pickers. We propose a variation to the traditional orthogonal aisle designs where both wide and narrow aisles are mixed within the configuration, with a view that mixed-width aisles may provide a compromise between space and labor. To analyze these new mixed-width aisle configurations, we develop analytical models for space and travel time considering randomized storage and traversal routing policies. Through a cost-based optimization model, we identify system parameters for which mixed-width aisle configurations are optimal. Experimental results indicate that annual cost savings of up to $48,000 can be realized over systems with pure wide or narrow aisle configurations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A vital operation in a distribution center (DC) is order picking, the fulfillment of customer orders by retrieving customer requested items from storage locations. Order picking is arguably the most expensive operational activity constituting upwards of 50% of a DC’s total operating costs (Tompkins, White, Bozer, & Tanchoco, 2003). Additionally, the layout of the picking area is critical to efficient operations and customer service (Coyle, Bardi, & Langley, 1996). In the ongoing quest to maximize profits, decision makers would naturally look to their order picking system (OPS) for any opportunity to increase efficiency and lower costs. One such opportunity, which ultimately leads to a cost effective OPS, comes in the form of an optimally designed picking area.Designing an optimum OPS for a DC depends on several system parameters, such as aisle layout, storage system configuration, storage policy, picking method, and picking strategy. From an aisle layout standpoint, traditional DCs utilize either entirely wide or entirely narrow aisles in their picking systems. Wide aisles allow pickers to pass each other, reducing blocking and requiring fewer pickers to meet the required system throughput (orders/hour or items/hour). The space required for wide-aisle configurations is, however, relatively high. Narrow aisles utilize less space than wide aisles, but are less efficient because of the high likelihood of congestion experienced by pickers. Space required for the picking area and labor required to perform picking are, therefore, two significant costs for a DC’s OPS. Through our conversations with warehouse managers we have observed that traditional approaches focus on minimizing either space (when the cost of land is high and the cost of labor is low) or labor (when the cost of land is low and the cost of labor is high), instead of integrating the two objectives.In the past few years alternate aisle arrangements have been proposed that improve upon the traditional layout of the picking area. The Fishbone and Flying-V layouts designed by Gue and Meller (2009) potentially offer higher throughput or reduced costs by adding non-horizontal (or vertical) cross-aisles. These designs are beneficial to unit-load warehouses where only one item is picked during a pick tour, but do not offer significant improvements when picking a batch of orders resulting in multiple items per pick tour. For such OPS, we propose a variation to the traditional orthogonal aisle designs where both wide and narrow aisles are mixed within the system (see Fig. 1). This specific layout incorporates both narrow- and wide-aisle sections (A–E) in each of the four aisles (1–4). We anticipate that the mixed-width aisles may provide a good compromise between space and labor; i.e., less blocking compared to pure narrow aisles due to the ability of pickers to pass each other in the wide sections and less space compared to pure wide aisles due to the inclusion of narrow sections.Through this research we evaluate the potential savings in total cost that could be realized through the use of mixed-width aisles. Our research is of significance to OPS designers and managers because it not only provides general analytical models that can be used to determine the optimal aisle width (whether wide, narrow, or mixed), but it also helps compare the three alternatives.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin by reviewing existing research in Section 2 and develop rules to identify feasible mixed-width aisle configurations in Section 3. In Sections 4 and 5, we discuss our analytical space and throughput models. We present an optimization model and a solution approach for identifying the optimal aisle configuration in Section 6. Section 7 discusses our experimental results and Section 8 offers managerial insights. We summarize our findings in Section 9.Extensive research has been performed in the area of order picking system design and operation. Rouwenhorst et al. (2000) discussed order picking design and control problems in terms of long, medium, and short term decisions such as sorting systems for long term, layout, equipment and workforce capacity for medium term, and workforce assignment for short term. In the situation where the probability of visiting every aisle for one or more picks is close to 1.0, traversal routing policy is close to optimal under randomized storage policy (Petersen & Aase, 2004). Roodbergen and Vis (2006) developed a model to optimize the layout for a warehouse’s order picking area while minimizing the average distance a picker traveled. This model was based on fixed routing policies and found that for high pick densities, the traversal routing policy was best suited for layouts with an even number of aisles. The review article by Gu, Goetschalckx, and McGinnis (2007) identified order picking planning problems relating to batching, routing and sequencing, and sorting and provided various decision support models and solution algorithms to aid in the design process. De Koster, Le-Duc, and Roodbergen (2007) indicated that most current research points at travel as the component which takes up the majority of a picker’s time, and as such, continued to discuss layout designs, storage assignments, zoning, batching and routing methods in terms of minimizing distances. Roodbergen, Sharp, and Vis (2008) considered systems that utilized cross-aisles and developed a model that minimized a picker’s travel distance by optimizing the layout of one or more blocks of parallel aisles. This model was developed for systems that employed a randomized storage policy and a traversal routing policy.A critical factor that could affect the total travel time is picker congestion, typically modeled as picker blocking. Blocking is attributed to either the inability of the pickers to pass each other in the aisle (because the aisles are narrow) or not being able to pick at a pick-column when someone else is picking there. The former is referred to as in-the-aisle blocking, while the latter is referred to as pick-column blocking. Gue, Meller, and Skufca (2006) were the first to evaluate the impact of varying pick densities on in-the-aisle blocking in a picking system that was comprised of pure narrow aisles. They found that as the pick density increased, or picking became busier, congestion decreased. Skufca (2005), a co-author on Gue et al. (2006), extended these blocking models by developing analytical expressions to estimate blocking with k workers traveling at an infinite speed in a continuous loop and picking at most one stock keeping unit. Pan and Shih (2008) investigated picking operation performance in a system that involved multiple pickers in a warehouse. Using their proposed throughput model, they found that a random storage policy generally utilizes the picking area more uniformly (as compared to a policy that places less frequent items in more distant locations), thus increasing throughput.Parikh and Meller (2009) developed analytical models which estimated picker blocking in systems with aisles wide enough for passing. They considered two cases, deterministic pick time (where only one SKU is picked at a pick-column) and non-deterministic pick time (where one or more SKUs are picked at a pick-column), and concluded that blocking is significantly less in wide aisles than in narrow aisles. For narrow aisles with non-deterministic pick time, Parikh and Meller (2010a) indicated that blocking experienced by pickers could actually be a concern as the system gets busier. Using these models, Parikh and Meller (2010b) developed a cost-based optimization model to determine the optimal height of a one-pallet-deep storage system for order picking systems that employ person on-board order picking equipment (e.g., an order picker truck).Hong, Johnson, and Peters (2012a) argued that decreasing travel length does not guarantee a shorter retrieval time due to picker blocking. They subsequently developed a route selecting order batching model to solve large scale order batching problems in multi-picker systems. Building upon their previous work, Hong, Johnson, and Peters (2012b) developed an integrated batching and sequencing procedure for narrow aisle systems that minimizes both travel distance and time blocked. Experimental results showed that the consideration of blocking in their models offered substantial benefits and played a vital role in maximizing picker utilization. Recently, Hong, Johnson, and Peters (2013) revisited the Markov chain modeling framework used previously in the literature, and were able to derive closed-form expressions for blocking for the case when walk speed is infinite.Pan and Wu (2012) argued that previous studies on the evaluation of the throughput time that measure order picking efficiency by travel distance are only adequate for single picker operations because congestion never takes place in such systems. Realizing that blocking can be an issue in multiple picker systems, they developed a throughput model for a picker-to-parts narrow aisle system accounting for the likelihood of picker blocking. They concluded that the concentration of high demand items in certain aisles inevitably causes congestion in a multiple picker environment, significantly affecting the efficiency of the picking process. In another work, Pan, Shih, and Wu (2012) addressed the storage assignment problem in a picker-to-parts narrow aisle system. They presented a storage assignment policy that improves the order picking efficiency by considering congestion resulting from multiple pickers in a warehouse.While current literature discusses optimal storage and travel policies, very little literature exists that addresses optimal aisle-width, and none that addresses the notion of mixed-width aisles within a single picking area. We expect to fill this gap by proposing this novel aisle configuration and developing analytical models for space and travel-time. Additionally, we present an optimization model to determine the optimal mixed-width aisle configuration for given system parameters, thus creating a valuable tool for decision makers to utilize in order to better design picking areas.We characterize a mixed-width aisle configuration by two variables: the ratio of wide-aisle sections to narrow-aisle sections (r) and the number of consecutive pick columns in a wide-aisle section (lw). We define a section in terms of consecutive pick-columns with the same width. Both r and lwhelp in determining feasible mixed-width aisle configurations. Table 1summarizes the notation used in our model.For example, given a system where the total number of pick columns (s) is 40 and the number of aisles (a) is 4 (10 pick columns per aisle), the combination of r=1 and lw=2 would produce the configuration shown in Fig. 1, where the wide section A (2 pick columns) is followed by the narrow section B (2 pick columns), followed by the wide section C, and so on. Suppose lw=10 for the same system, then the wide and narrow sections would span the entire aisle and follow a wide-narrow-wide-narrow aisle configuration. If r=0.333, then the aisle configuration would be 1 wide aisle followed by 3 narrow aisles. Following this logic, a configuration with r=0 (lw=0) would translate to all narrow aisles, while a configuration with r=∞ (lw=s) would translate to all wide aisles.Not all combinations of s, a, r, and lwproduce realistic or feasible designs. When certain combinations of r and lware used, the aisle configuration may create an erratic traversal route for pickers, which eventually becomes impossible to follow as the number of aisles increase. This can be seen in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 3(a). The following rules derive feasible, repeating, mixed-width aisle configurations:Rule 1: If r≠1, thenar+1must be an integer and lwmust equalmrsa, where mr must be an integer and m must be a factor ofar+1.Rule 2: If r=1, then lwmust be equal to an integer multiple or even factor ofsa.Rule 1 ensures that sections of wide aisles and subsequent sections of narrow aisles must be whole aisles when the aisle configuration is not composed of 50% wide and 50% narrow aisles (i.e., r≠1). This can be visualized in Fig. 2, which illustrates both feasible and infeasible configurations when r=3≠1. According to Rule 1, m must be a factor of a/(r+1)=4/(3+1)=1; i.e., m=1. Therefore, lwmust then equal mr(s/a)=(1)(3)(32/4)=24, which is not the case in Fig. 2(a). As a result, the layout of the picking area progressively worsens as the number of aisles increases until the picker’s path is ultimately obstructed. In Fig. 2(b), where lw=mr(s/a)=24 for m=1, the travel path is well-defined and unobstructed for pickers to easily traverse through the picking area.An additional condition in Rule 1 is that a/(r+1) must be an integer to ensure that the pattern of wide and narrow aisle is feasible. For example, if a=10 and r=4, then 10/(4+1)=2 (an integer) and so the resulting mixed-aisle pattern could be either WWWWNWWWWN (a repeating pattern of 4 wide aisles followed by a narrow aisle where m=1) or WWWWWWWWNN (8 wide aisles followed by 2 narrow aisles where m=2). Similarly, if r=1/4, then we could have WNNNNWNNNN or WWNNNNNNNN, for which 10/(1/4+1)=10/(5/4)=8 (an integer). But if a=10 and r=3, then 10/(3+1)=2.5 (not an integer) for which a feasible mixed-width aisle configuration does not exist.Rule 2 allows for mixed-widths within an aisle only when r=1; i.e., the configuration is 50% wide aisle and 50% narrow aisles. Fig. 3 illustrates both feasible and infeasible configurations when r=1. According to Rule 2, lwshould be an integer multiple or even factor of s/a=40/4=10. In Fig. 3(a), lw=6≠factor of 10 and so the layout of the picking area progressively worsens as the number of aisles increases until the picker’s path is blocked. In Fig. 3(b), lw=2=factor of 10, resulting in a clear travel path which is easily traveled by the picker.The above two rules provide a quick way to identify feasible designs and serve as inputs to the analytical models presented next.The analytical space model we develop in this section can be used for both single-width and mixed-width aisle configurations.Fig. 4illustrates a mixed-width aisle configuration along with the parameters used in our space calculation. An expression to determine the unused space, which results as pick-columns need to be offset in mixed-width aisles, is presented later in this section. The total required space for a single-width aisle configuration is given by(1)Q=(aaw+2apd)(al+2cw),where al=(s/(2a))pwfor a system with a single storage level (e.g., in manual systems). For a mixed-width aisle configuration, awmust be replaced by an expression that accounts for both the wide aisle and narrow aisle sections. This expression, which converts aisle width for a single-width configuration into a weighted average of aisle widths for a mixed-width configuration, is given by(2)aw=awwrr+1+awn1-rr+1.Substituting (2) in (1) gives the following general space model applicable to wide, narrow, and mixed-width aisles:(3)Q=(2cw+al)2apd+aawwrr+1+awn1-rr+1.For example, in a pure narrow configuration,r=0,aw=awn. Similarly, in a pure wide aisle configuration,r=∞,aw=aww. Reducing and simplifying (3) for either case gives us(4)Q=aalaw+2aalpd+2(aawcw+2apdcw),which is identical to the expression presented in Parikh and Meller (2010b).As shown in Fig. 5, mixed-width aisle configurations require more space than narrow aisle configurations, but less than wide aisle configurations. Also shown are configurations with mixed-widths within the aisles, which occur when lw<s/a (i.e., when the number of pick columns in a wide aisle section is less than the total number of pick columns in an aisle). Note that the total space for all r=1 mixed-width (lw<s/a) aisle configurations is identical regardless of the value of lw. As seen in (3), space is impacted by r and is independent of lw, with the following exception: mixed-widths (lw<s/a) result in offset racks, and offset racks increase the length of the picking area by half a pick column depth, pd(see Fig. 4). Due to offset racks, the space required for configuration with r=1 and mixed-widths (lw<s/a) is larger than mixed-width configurations with whole aisles (lw=s/a).Modifying (3) to account for offset racks in configurations with mixed-width (lw<s/a) aisles, as shown in Fig. 4, gives us(5)Q=2cw+s2apw2apd+aawwrr+1+awn1-rr+1+0.5αpd,whereαis a binary parameter that may be expressed asα=1,iflw<s/a,0,iflw⩾s/a.Unused space occurs in configurations with mixed-width (lw<s/a) aisles and is found behind the narrow section pick columns in the first and last aisle. This was illustrated in Fig. 4, which showed a configuration where s=40, a=4, r=1, and lw=2.Unused space is the product of half the pick column depth, pd/2, the pick column width, pw, and half the number of pick columns in an aisle, s/2a. When the number of aisles in a configuration is odd and the number of pick columns on each side of an aisle are odd, the number of offset pick columns that create unused space is one less than half the number of pick columns in an aisle. To account for this, a binary parameter is used to subtract a “half pick column” from the equation. The unused space for a mixed-width aisle configuration (with lw<s/a) can be calculated as(6)Qunused=s4a-0.5βpwpd,where β is a binary parameter that may be expressed asβ=1,ifaisoddands/2aisodd,0,otherwise.Since unused space only appears in the first and last aisle, it appears that for a r=1 configuration, the most unused space would be seen in layouts with a low number of aisles, and unused space would then decrease as the total number of aisles increases.Fig. 6(a) shows the relationship between the number of aisles and the total amount of space required for a mixed-width configuration, where r=1 and lw=2. Notice the slight dip in the required space for a<10 aisles. Initially, as the number of aisles increases, the total required space decreases. This is because the reduction in aisle length leads to a substantial decrease in the overall depth of the configuration as compared to the increase in aisle length that is attributed to the addition of aisles. As the number of aisles increase, the reduction in configuration-depth due to the reduction in aisle length becomes minimal in comparison to the addition in configuration-length due to the additional aisles. Fig. 6(b) indicates the corresponding percentage of unused space, which tends to 0 as the number of aisles increases.Having developed the analytical space model, we now focus on estimating the total amount of time each picker spends traversing the picking area in a single pick tour.The number of pickers (k) required to satisfy the required throughput for a system (Λreq) is based on both the throughput of each picker as well as the blocking experienced by each picker. The throughput generated by each picker, assuming that no blocking or idle time is experienced, is referred to here as the theoretical pick rate (λ) and is given by(7)λ=3600E[I]E[T]items/h.The expected total time required is the sum of the expected total travel time and the expected time to pick E[I] items.(8)E[T]=E[Ttravel]+E[Tpick],whereE[Tpick]=E[I]tp.We now present a model to estimate E[Ttravel].The estimated travel time, E[Ttravel], associated with the pick tour is based on the travel path followed by a picker through the aisles. The travel path is broken into four parts as follows: (i) travel through the aisles, (ii) travel through the cross-aisles, (iii) travel to and from the depot, and (iv) time to circle back toward the depot when the configuration has an odd number of aisles. For a manual system with randomized storage policy and traversal routing, E[Ttravel] can be estimated through expressions (9)–(13), which generalize the expressions presented in Parikh and Meller (2010b). The binary parameter γ, expressed asγ=1,ifnumberofaisles(a)isodd,0,otherwise,is used in the total time calculation to ensure that E[Tcircle] is included only when the number of aisles is odd. Total travel time is thus expressed as(9)E[Ttravel]=E[Taisles]+E[Tcross]+E[Tdepot]+γE[Tcircle].We estimate E[Taisles] and E[Tcross] based on the number of aisles (a), the length of an aisle (al), the cross-aisle width (cw), and the walking speed of the picker (vh); similar to Parikh and Meller (2010b). That is,(10)E[Taisles]=alavhand(11)E[Tcross]=cw(a+1)vh.The travel time to and from the depot is based on the number of aisles (a), the depth of a pick column (pd), the single aisle width (aw), and the walking speed of the picker (vh). Substituting (2) for awto account for mixed-width aisles gives(12)E[Tdepot]=2awwrr+1+awn1-rr+1(a-1)+2pd(a-1)vh.When picking systems have an odd number of aisles, pickers exit the last aisle on the opposite end of the depot, thus requiring them to return to the depot via circling around the last aisle. The additional travel time required to circle around the last aisle is captured by E[Tcircle] and is given by(13)E[Tcircle]=al+2awwrr+1+awn1-rr+1+2pd+cwvh,where (2) is substituted for awto account for mixed-width aisles.Fig. 7illustrates that the expected total travel time required for a pick-tour increases as r increases. We had earlier indicated that as r increases the total required space increases (see Fig. 5(b)). Intuitively, both these observations make sense. Recall that r=0 for pure narrow configurations and r=∞ for pure wide configurations. As r increases, the size of the configuration increases, thus increasing the amount of time to travel. Expression (7) indicates that the theoretical pick rate is inversely proportional to the total travel time and so as r increases, E[T] decreases. Based on total space and travel time patterns, Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 7, maximum benefits can be realized when r<5.It is worth noting that picker productivity may be lower due to blocking, which we discuss next.A picker may experience one of two types of blocking: pick-column blocking and in-the-aisle blocking. Pick-column blocking occurs when two or more pickers need to pick at the same location. In-the-aisle blocking is only experienced in narrow aisles and occurs when one or more pickers are unable to pass someone who is actively picking (Parikh & Meller, 2009). When a picker is blocked, they experience idle time and as a result are less productive. Because blocking is prominent in high-throughput systems, its productivity-reducing effect must be accounted for when calculating a system’s actual throughput. We developed a generic simulation model that can simulate any of the three aisle-widths, pure wide, pure narrow, and mixed, to estimate the average blocking experienced by pickers.Our simulation model uses concepts similar to those previously researched on blocking where the picking area was modeled as one circular aisle (Gue et al., 2006; Parikh & Meller, 2009) in order to mimic the traversal routing strategy followed by each picker. In the simulation, pickers alternate between wide aisle sections and narrow aisle sections as defined by lwand r. In this model, a picker visits each pick-column and decides whether or not a pick is required. If a pick is not required, then the picker moves onto the next pick-column. To model pick-column blocking in wide aisle sections, we allow the pickers to pass each other in the aisles. For example, let us consider a situation where Picker 1 is picking at a pick-column and at the same time Picker 2 approaches. If Picker 2 does not need to pick at that pick-column, then he is allowed to bypass that specific pick-column, as the aisles are wide enough to allow passing. However, if Picker 2 does need to pick at that pick-column, then he must wait at that pick column until Picker 1 is finished picking and is considered blocked (i.e. pick-column blocking). In narrow aisle sections, as passing is not allowed in the aisles, even if Picker 2 does not need to pick at this pick-column, he must wait in the aisle until Picker 1 finishes picking at that pick column (i.e. in-the-aisle blocking). Blocking per picker was measured both in the narrow and wide aisle sections and represented as B(r, lw, k, u, tp:tw), which refers to the average time each picker is blocked during a pick-tour.Notice that the blocking function, B(.), for mixed-width aisle systems is dependent on five factors: the ratio of wide to narrow sections (r), the number of consecutive pick columns in a wide section (lw), the number of pickers (k), the pick-density (u), and the pick time to walk time ratio (tp:tw). To estimate blocking via our simulation models for a specific mixed-width aisle configuration (r, lw), we derive the values of k and u for a given set of system parameters. The value of k is obtained by dividing the required throughput Λreqby the pick-rate of each picker λ, which is based on the travel-time model and the required space as dictated by r, s, and a. The procedure to estimate u for the given expected number of items picked during a pick tour (E[I]) and the total number of pick columns for a system (s) is the same as detailed in Parikh and Meller (2009). For a given tp:twratio, we continue to increment the value of k (pickers) and measure blocking until the system throughput is met.Fig. 8shows blocking curves for varying lwand k values for a configuration where s=400, and a=10. For this configuration, lw=40 results in full aisles of a single width and all others result in mixed-widths (lw<s/a) within an aisle. When lw=2(=4), wide aisle sections are very small (similar to Fig. 1), allowing pickers a very limited opportunity to pass before entering a narrow section. This limited opportunity reduces the effect of passing in wide aisles and behaves more similar to a pure narrow-aisle configuration, hence the higher blocking. This phenomenon is shown in Fig. 8, where we see the highest blocking for lw=2, followed by lw=4 and then lw=10, 20, and 40. The largest lwvalues (lw=40, 20, and 10) show blocking curves that are virtually identical where the two smallest lwvalues (lw=4 and 2) show substantially higher blocking. We interpret this to mean that the actual number of pickers needed to meet a required throughput would be the same for lw=40, 20, and 10 with potentially higher numbers of pickers needed for lw=4 and 2. We conclude from this that the lowest cost will favor higher lwvalues for this mixed-width aisle configuration.Recall from Section 4 that all mixed-widths (lw<s/a) for a system have the same required total space. Also recall that total space for mixed-width (lw<s/a) aisles is larger than the total space required for mixed-width (lw=s/a) aisles due to offset racks. If lw=40, 20, and 10 all have the same number of pickers, and lw=40 has the smallest required space, then we can conclude that lw=40 will have the lowest total cost. Generalizing this for all configurations, we conclude that configurations where r=1, whole aisle configurations (lw=s/a) will always be the optimum configuration (even though it might not be the optimum r value for the configuration).We now present an optimization model and solution procedure for determining the optimal aisle-width that minimizes the total system cost.The objective of our cost-based optimization model is to minimize the total system cost. The following two components make up the system’s cost: space and labor. Required space for an aisle configuration is based solely on physical layout, while labor is determined based on the theoretical pick rate of each picker and the amount of blocking experienced by each picker.The optimization model used to determine the optimal aisle configuration for a given system is presented below.(14)Minimize:C(r,lw)Subjectto:a=spw2almax(15)lw=mrsa,ifr≠1;lw=factorofsa,ifr=1(16)Q=2cw+s2apw2apd+aawwrr+1+awn1-rr+1+0.5αpd(17)kλ[1-B(r,lw,k,u,tp:tw)]⩾Λreq(18)lw,k,a∈Z+andr,Q,B(.),λ⩾0The main decision variables for this model are r and lw, while k, a, Q, B(.), and λ serve as additional (internal) variables towards cost calculations as explained below. The objective of the model is to minimize the total system cost C(r, lw), which is the sum of the cost of space and the cost of labor. That is, C(r, lw)=QCQ+kCk. Through (14) we ensure that the number of aisles in the system does not exceed the maximum allowable length. Through (15) we ensure that optimal lwconfigurations are considered by limiting lwto whole aisle values. The total space required is calculated in (16). Constraint (17) guarantees that the required throughput for the system is met, where B(.) is determined using the simulation model for estimating blocking discussed earlier. Constraints (18) indicate bounds on the decision variables in the discussion.For the sake of brevity, this model is written as a single mathematical programming formulation. However, Constraints (15) decompose the problem into a hierarchy of subproblems based first on the value of r and then on the feasible values of lw. Our solution procedure, described in Section 6.2, exploits this fact. Note that the objective function is composed of space costs and labor costs. Because all other variables in (16) are parameters, total required space, Q, is essentially a function of r. For a given amount of blocking, B(.), the amount of labor, k, needed to meet the required throughput is dependent on the theoretical pick-rate of a picker (see (17)), which is ultimately a function of r and lw; see (8). Blocking, B(.), is also dependent on r and lw, as they determine the frequency of occurrence and duration of time each picker spends in wide and narrow aisle sections. However, blocking is also impacted by the total number of pickers in the system. If k number of pickers working at 1−B(.) efficiency do not meet the required throughput, then more pickers are required, but increasing the number of pickers increases the amount of blocking experienced, possibly requiring even more pickers to meet the throughput.Though our optimization model has features similar to that of the model presented in Parikh and Meller (2010), there are a few key differences. The model in Parikh and Meller assumed narrow aisles (i.e., r and lwwere fixed; r=0 and lw=s/a), and the objective was to determine the optimal storage level, g, since they considered a semi-automated system. In our model, we lay the foundation for analyzing mixed-width aisles by first considering manual order picking systems (i.e., g=1) for which r and lware decision variables. As a result, the blocking experienced by each picker, B(.), is no longer dependent on g (like in Parikh and Meller, 2010), but is instead dependent on the frequency with which pickers pass through narrow aisles (with likely high congestion) and wide aisles (with likely low congestion) as determined by r and lw. Additionally, our optimization model is decomposed into a hierarchy of subproblems; we first decompose based on the value of r (r=1 and r≠1), and then for each of these two subproblems, we decompose further based on the feasible values of lw.To solve the optimization model presented above, we present a formal solution procedure below.Our proposed solution procedure helps determine the optimal aisle-width (whether pure narrow, pure wide, or mixed-width) for a given set of system parameters.For each feasible r and lwvalue, follow the steps below:Step 1: Calculate the number of aisles in the picking area, usinga=spw2al, whereal⩽almax.Step 2: Estimate the total travel time, E[T], using (8) in Section 5.Step 3: Calculate the theoretical pick rate (λ) using (7) in Section 5.Step 4: Calculate the theoretical number of pickers required from the theoretical pick rate, wherektheo=Λreqλ. Setk=ktheo.Step 5: Estimate the percentage of time each picker is blocked, B(r, lw, k, u, tp:tw), using the simulation model discussed earlier in Section 5.1.Step 6: Calculate the actual throughput, Λact=λk[1−B(r, lw, k, u, tp:tw)]. If Λact<Λreq, then set the actual number of pickers to k=k+1 and repeat Steps 5 and 6 until Λact⩾Λreq.Step 7: Calculate the total required space (Q) as defined by (16).Step 8: Calculate total system cost (labor and space).The optimal aisle-width would be the one that corresponds to the lowest total system cost across these feasible designs.To illustrate how the above solution procedure could be used, consider a system with s=400, pick column dimensions pd=pw=5 ft, and a maximum allowable aisle-length of 105 ft. From Step 1 we calculate the number of aisles as ⌈9.52⌉=10 aisles. Besides all narrow and all wide aisle configurations, possible mixed-width aisle configurations range from 1 wide aisle with 9 narrow aisles up to 9 wide aisles with 1 narrow aisle. Therefore, all feasible r values are 0 (0/10), 0.1111 (1/9), 0.25 (2/8), 0.4286 (3/7), 0.6667 (4/6), 1 (5/5), 1.5 (6/4), 2.333 (7/3), 4 (8/2), 9 (9/1), and ∞ (10/0). For a specific value of r, say r=0.25, we determine the corresponding feasible values of lw. Per Rule 1, lw=mr(s/a)=m(0.25)(400/10)=10m. Since m is a factor of a/(r+1)=10/(0.25+1)=8, possible m values include 1, 2, 4, and 8. Recall, however, that mr must be an integer (Rule 1), therefore m can only assume the values of 4 and 8, making the feasible values for lwas 40 and 80. For a feasible configuration with r=0.25 and lw=40 (i.e., a total of 2 wide and 8 narrow aisles, arranged as WNNNNWNNNN) and known system parameters, we can calculate E[T] as 719.8s (Step 2). If E[I] is 30 items and the required throughput is 2500items/h, then the theoretical pick rate, λ, equals 150.04items/h and the theoretical number of pickers, ktheo, equals 17 (Steps 3 and 4). Using our simulation model we estimate the average time each picker is blocked, B(0.25, 40, 17, 6.98, 10:1.5), to be 10.04% (Step 5). From (17) the corresponding throughput is 17×150.04×(1−0.1004)=2300.1<2500items/h. Since the throughput must be met, we increment the number of pickers by 1 and estimate the corresponding blocking. After 2 iterations, with 19 pickers, we estimate B (0.25, 40, 19, 6.98, 10:1.5) to be 11.06%. Using (17) again, we find that the corresponding throughput now is 2,535 (⩾2500)items/h, thus satisfying the constraint (Step 6). Total space for this system is 19,200ft2 (Step 7). The corresponding annual labor cost is $570,000 (Ck=$30,000/picker) and space cost is $57,600 (CQ=$3/ft2) (Step 8).Essentially, we first identify feasible designs and then prune the search space for given storage policy and throughput level using findings presented in Sections 4 and 5 before employing our solution procedure. We now present results of our experiments to identify optimal aisle-widths for a variety of system alternatives using our proposed analytical and optimization models.The optimization model presented earlier was used to determine the optimal aisle configuration for specific system parameters. Table 2lists the levels and values of all the parameters used in our experiments. Approximately 810 experiments were conducted for a manual system with randomized storage and traversal routing. We used Rules 1 and 2 discussed earlier to identify feasible mixed-aisle configurations. The results are presented in the following tables.Table 3shows the parameter values generated for the various alternatives for a system where s=400, a=10, and Λreq=2500. These parameters include total system space, total estimated time, the theoretical pick rate of each picker, the blocking experienced by each picker, and the total number of pickers required to meet the required system throughput considering blocking.Table 4shows a detailed cost comparison for each evaluated r-value for a system where s=400, a=10, and Λreq=2500. Where optimal, mixed-width aisles showed cost savings of $1,200 to $48,000 over pure wide aisles. Mixed-width aisle configurations were optimal in systems where s=400 and 1000 for both 2500 and 3750 throughputs. For all other combinations, pure narrow or pure wide configurations were optimal. In many cases, multiple r values required the same number of pickers to meet the required throughput. In these situations, the r value with the least amount of space was always optimum.Tables 5 and 6show the optimal aisle configuration as well as the total system cost for s=400 and 1000 systems, respectively. For example, from Table 5 where Λreq=2500 and a=10, at Cs=$1/ft2 and Ck=$20,000/yr, the optimal aisle configuration is r=4; i.e., 4 wide aisles followed by 1 narrow aisle followed by 4 wide aisles followed by 1 narrow aisle, with a total cost of $382,800. For the same system where Cs=$10/ft2, the optimal aisle configuration is r=N; i.e., 10 narrow aisles, with a total cost of $560,000. Multiple r values are listed as optimal when the lowest system cost is shared by multiple system configurations. Through Table 7we illustrate the sensitivity of the optimal aisle configuration to the cost of space. That is, with an increase in the cost of space, there is a gradual progression from wide to mixed-width to narrow aisles. This makes intuitive sense as when the cost of space increases, the total space cost would dominate the total labor cost, thus driving the design towards all narrow.The above experimental study has helped us to derive managerial insights when configuring aisles for OPSs. Recently, Wallace-Finney and Parikh (2011) found that system size (s), space cost (CQ), and required throughput (Λreq) all had high degrees of influence, with conflicting directions of patterns (wide to narrow vs. narrow to wide), on determining optimal aisle width. Our evaluation of the mixed-width aisle combinations, in conjunction with pure wide and narrow under randomized storage and traversal routing, suggest the following:•Mixed-aisles are more desirable for systems with a larger number of storage locations;Mixed-aisles are more desirable for systems with a larger number of aisles;Mixed-aisles are less desirable for systems with lower throughputs;Mixed-aisles are more desirable for systems with lower space costs; andMixed-aisles are less desirable for systems with lower labor costs.It is worth noting that the optimum aisle configuration could change if the system size changes due to aggregation or disaggregation of storage locations, the throughput change due to growth or decline, or the cost of land fluctuate due to inflation or recession. Decision makers should make sure their projections of these values are strong in order to ensure a robust OPS design.The main contributions of this paper are the introduction of the mixed-width aisle configuration as an option to the OPS design process, and the corresponding analytical models for space and travel time. Our derived models are general enough for evaluating pure narrow and wide aisles. The travel time model was developed for a traversal routing policy which is best suited for systems that employ a randomized storage policy.To illustrate the use of these models, and analyze the potential benefits of a mixed-width aisle configuration, we developed a cost-based optimization model to determine the optimal aisle configuration for specific OPSs. The objective of this model was to minimize the total system cost which was divided into two components, space and labor. Results indicated that mixed-width aisles are optimal for certain systems with randomized storage and traversal routing policies and produce cost savings over pure wide or narrow aisle systems of up to $48,000 annually.We believe that the above results are promising and lay the foundation for future research that may consider other storage and routing policies. For example, consider class-based storage where wide aisles are used for Class A items and narrow aisles for Class B and C items. Intuitively, this will likely reduce worker congestion in the busy area (Class A) and effectively use the space in less busy areas (Class B and C). New travel-time and blocking models would need to be developed for such analysis. Additional research could also explore the impact of variability of picker throughput on aisle design. Doing so will allow us to evaluate the full potential of mixed-width aisle configurations for order picking in distribution centers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
