@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid MTO-MTS production planning: An explorative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In hybrid production, the MTS order-up-to-level should depend on the MTO state.More MTS inventory should be produced when there are no MTO orders.A dedicated planning approach for hybrid production leads to savings of up to 65 percent.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Production,Planning,Hybrid production,MTO-MTS production,Markov Decision Process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Research on the planning and control of combined make-to-order/make-to-stock or hybrid production systems often takes a typical MTO or MTS perspective. We examine the benefits of a hybrid planning approach without priority for either MTO or MTS. We develop a Markov Decision Process model for a two-product hybrid system to determine when to manufacture MTS and MTO products. Contrary to earlier studies with this approach, this study includes a positive lead time for MTO products. We characterize optimal policies and show how decisions should be based on both inventory level and backlog state of MTO products. Especially discriminating between states with and states without backlog of MTO orders is shown to be important in determining whether to increase MTS stock. Savings of up to 65 percent are achieved compared to policies that prioritize MTS or MTO.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Technological developments in manufacturing systems increasingly allow companies to manufacture different products on the same production facility, as indicated by Iravani, Liu, and Simchi-Levi (2012), Altendorfer and Minner (2014), and others. Also more hybrid production systems have emerged, combining make-to-order (MTO) and make-to-stock (MTS) production. Low-valued, standardized products with regular demand will often be made to stock, allowing demand to be satisfied instantly. For high-valued and/or customized products with irregular demand, stocking can be expensive or even impossible and these are typically produced to order (see e.g. Van Donk, 2001).Planning of a hybrid production system is not straightforward, because planning and control decisions are significantly different for MTO and MTS production. MTO products must be manufactured before a prespecified due date and production planning and control focuses on the timing and/or sequencing of the operations. MTS production aims at prevention of stock-outs, whilst limiting the inventory holding costs. Therefore, performance criteria in MTS production planning are usually cost-based.The planning and control of production systems have received considerable attention in the literature. However, as Soman, Van Donk, and Gaalman (2004) indicate, most research in this field assumes either pure MTS or pure MTO. Research on the planning and control of hybrid production systems is limited, and often still takes the perspective of either the MTO or the MTS products as a starting point. For instance, Chang, Pai, Yuan, Wang, and Li (2003) and Wu, Jiang, and Chang (2008) modify existing planning methods designed for MTO products by letting a separate MTS process generate ‘MTS-orders’, and Soman, Van Donk, and Gaalman (2006) modify existing planning methods for MTS products by replacing the run-out time of MTS products by the remaining lead time allowance of MTO products. Carr and Duenyas (2000) and Iravani et al. (2012) consider contract manufacturers who produce on an MTS basis for contracted and hence more important customers, and on an MTO basis via other sales channels. They analyze basic two-product models in which the lead time allowance of MTO is not included, and use a Markov Decision Process (MDP) to determine whether MTO or MTS should be produced and whether new MTO orders should be accepted and rejected, based on the MTS inventory level and the amount of MTO orders. Despite the latter studies providing more insight into optimal hybrid policies, we notice a lack of an approach that fully does right to MTS and MTO characteristics. We discuss the literature on the planning of hybrid production systems more extensively in Section 2.In this paper, we investigate the benefits of a hybrid planning method for hybrid production systems, i.e. a planning method that takes the state of both product types into account in deciding which product to manufacture. The main difference with earlier contributions is that our study is not driven by either an MTO or an MTS perspective. Moreover, we allow a positive lead time for MTO production, as typically applies in practice. We follow the modeling approach of Carr and Duenyas (2000) and Iravani et al. (2012) and propose a simple model with two products, one manufactured on an MTO basis and one manufactured on an MTS basis. We use a discrete-time Markov Decision Process to find which product should be manufactured in each period based on the MTS inventory level, the amount of MTO orders in the system, and the remaining lead time allowance of these orders. We provide insight into the optimal policies that result from the model, where the consideration of lead times turns out to be important, and compare these with two benchmark policies that both prioritize one of the two product types. We show that significant savings can be obtained, which motivates the development of sophisticated planning procedures for real-life hybrid production cases.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the relevant literature. Section 3 formulates the model of the production system as a Markov Decision Process and Section 4 describes the resulting optimal policy structure. Section 5 compares the performance of our optimal planning procedure with two policies that are based on one of the two production systems. Conclusions and directions for future research are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
