@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A decomposition approach for the General Lotsizing and Scheduling Problem for Parallel production Lines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel solution heuristic for the General Lotsizing and Scheduling Problem for Parallel production Lines is presented.The idea is to iteratively decompose the parallel-line problem into a series of single-line problems.The new heuristic improves already existing approaches.Large practical applications can now be solved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Heuristics,Simultaneous Lotsizing and Scheduling,Production,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel solution heuristic to the General Lotsizing and Scheduling Problem for Parallel production Lines (GLSPPL). The GLSPPL addresses the problem of simultaneously deciding about the sizes and schedules of production lots on parallel, heterogeneous production lines with respect to scarce capacity, sequence-dependent setup times and deterministic, dynamic demand of multiple products. Its objective is to minimize inventory holding, sequence-dependent setup and production costs. The new heuristic iteratively decomposes the multi-line problem into a series of single-line problems, which are easier to solve. Different approaches for decomposition and for the iteration between a modified multi-line master problem and the single-line subproblems are proposed. They are compared with an existing solution method for the GLSPPL by means of medium-sized and large practical problem instances from different types of industries. The new methods prove to be superior with respect to both solution quality and computation time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Management concepts sometimes repeat. Currently seems to roll another “wave of lean management”, preaching that inventories are waste. Inventories would blur a clear view on mistakes which are made in production planning. Thus, inventories should be reduced. All drivers that necessitate inventories should be eliminated by means of investments. This makes sense in many industries, but not in all. Some industries utilize expensive, automated machines. These cannot easily be replaced by newer ones allowing automated changeovers and thus generating almost no setup times or setup costs. They apply a machinery, which has grown over time. It consists of many machines which show a similar functionality, but have been purchased successively over one or several decades. There are, e.g., some older machines, which are less efficient, and a few newer ones, which are more efficient.An example is the consumer goods industry. There are often only a few production stages (like Make and Pack) with only one of them being a bottleneck. However – due to the above reasons – several heterogeneous, parallel production lines can be found on this bottleneck stage. Parallel means that these lines show a similar functionality, i.e., they can be used alternatively to produce (more or less) the same products. Heterogeneous means that they, nevertheless, do not need to be identical. This concerns production speeds, production coefficients, production costs, setup costs and setup times. Both setup costs and times may even be sequence-dependent. The individual work stations of a production line are usually connected by an automated transport system with a fixed cycle time. Thus, each production line can be considered as a single planning unit.We focus on this kind of industries, more concretely on short- to medium-term production planning and scheduling in this kind of industries. Typically, many final items can be assigned to a few setup families. They have to be produced on stock on basis of demand forecasts. These demand forecasts are assumed to be deterministically known for several planning periods (e.g., weeks or months) of a finite planning horizon (e.g., a quarter or even a year). Thus, demands can dynamically vary per setup family and time period. Backlogging is not allowed. Changeovers between items of the same family are negligible. However, changeovers between items of different setup families may incur high, sequence-dependent changeover costs and changeover times. There is only a single bottleneck stage within the flow shop production system. However, this stage consists of several parallel, heterogeneous production lines with scarce capacity. The production lines share the same functionality, i.e., they can alternatively be used to fulfill the setup families’ demands. Producing earlier than in the demanded periods incurs inventory holding costs. These inventory holding costs are in a crucial conflict with the setup costs. But also the heterogeneous production costs of the different lines may play an important role.Thus, the planning problem is to find a schedule specifying the sizes, sequences and timing of the production lots on the different production lines. The overall costs are to be minimized. The demands of the different setup families are to be satisfied. And the limited capacities of the production lines are to be respected. Note that there is a strong interdependence between the lotsizing and the sequencing (or – in general – scheduling) part of the problem. To calculate feasible lotsizes, the capacity has to be respected. Because of the sequence-dependency of setup times, the sequence of the lots influences the available net capacity. However, deciding about the sizes of the lots also means deciding about the number of the setups. The number of setups again influences the available net capacities. Because of this crucial interrelationship, both the sizing and the scheduling of the production lots should be done simultaneously.In the meantime, there is a rich body of literature on this so-called “Simultaneous Lotsizing and Scheduling” (SLS). General reviews on SLS are given by [15,45]. In contrast, the reviews of [31,28,40,9] rather concentrate on the lotsizing part of the problem and not so much on the integration of both aspects. Because of its flexibility and because of its quite general applicability for practical problems (see Section 5.3), in the following we focus on the General Lotsizing and Scheduling Problem for Parallel production Lines (GLSPPL, [38]). A solution heuristic for the GLSPPL has also been proposed in [38]. However, its scalability for large problem instances is not really satisfying. As Section 2 will show, there was further research on extensions of the GLSPPL and on related SLS problems. However, there still seems to be a lack of and a need for better scalable solution methods for the original GLSPPL.The aim of this paper is to introduce such new solution heuristics for the original version of the GLSPPL. The new heuristics will be better scalable to larger problems of practical relevance. The basic idea is to iteratively decompose the multi-line GLSPPL into a series of single-line problems. These single-line problems can quite efficiently be solved by a heuristic presented in [37]. Different approaches of decomposing the multi-line problem and of iterating between a modified multi-line master problem and the single-line subproblems are proposed. They are compared by means of practical problem instances of different types of industries. Examples are consumer goods production, health care industry, acrylic glass production and label printing.The next section summarizes the literature on SLS models and methods for heterogeneous production lines and sequence-dependent setup times. Section 3 presents the original GLSPPL as proposed in [38]. In Section 4, the new solution methods are introduced. After describing the basic idea of the iterative procedure, a decomposition approach based on priority rules and another approach based on an aggregation of the multi-line problem are explained. Section 5 shows the results of the computational tests. Both medium-sized and large practical problem instances are considered.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
