@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Public policy structuring incorporating reciprocal expectation analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper proposes a method of structuring public policy by incorporating reciprocal expectation analysis.The proposed method visualizes the roles and perceptions of stakeholders in the public policy process.It derives three types of relationship among stakeholders from the feasibility analysis.It proposes three tests of feasibility to reach the agreement: information-sharing, bargaining, and reframing tests.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Problem structuring,Cognitive map,Public policy,Reciprocal expectation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a method of structuring public policy by incorporating reciprocal expectation analysis. The proposed method is characterized by three components: identification of the problem structure perceived by stakeholders using cognitive maps, policy structuring analysis with a value–driver matrix and a reciprocal expectation matrix, and feasibility analysis of agreements among the stakeholders. The three types of relationship among stakeholders are derived from the feasibility analysis, which are “Dosho-imu”, “Isho-imu”, and “Domu”. Three tests of feasibility to reach the agreement are then proposed: “information-sharing test”, “bargaining test”, and “reframing test”. A case study is presented, applying the method to strategic transportation planning in the Kanto region of Japan. Finally, the potential functions of the proposed method in practice are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Generally, public policy is created to solve explicit or implicit social problems. In most cases, the public policy maker, such as the government or public agency, proposes and implements the public policies addressing social problems. The social problems tackled often affect a large number of people and arise from within a complicated structure with many interrelated factors. However, the perception of social problems may differ across participants. Therefore, in order to achieve successful outcomes, public policy makers need to understand these different perceptions and analyze the problem structure from a multidisciplinary viewpoint. This is particularly critical when more participants are involved in the social system of interest, because it becomes more challenging for public policy makers to fully comprehend the range of viewpoints. Indeed, inaccurate speculation and the misunderstanding of participants’ perceptions of social problems may lead to a deadlock in reaching agreements. A well-designed and sophisticated method for understanding a participant’s problem perception and its feedback to the stakeholders may contribute significantly to better planning and management of the social system.In public policy studies, knowledge “in” public policy process is typically differentiated from knowledge “of” public policy process (Lasswell, 1971). Knowledge “in” public policy process is aimed at solving public policy problems, whereas knowledge “of” public policy process is aimed at analyzing public policy process. In the knowledge “in” public policy process, problem structuring is widely recognized as one of the preconditions of problem solving, particularly when different stakeholders have competing problem definitions (Bardach, 1981; Dunn, 2004). The appropriate method should be selected in public policy process, depending on the policy context (Dryzek, 1983; Linder & Peters, 1985; Bonrow & Dryzek, 1987).In recent decades, a range of participatory and interactive methods called problem structuring methods (PSMs) have been developed, especially in Europe, as complements to traditional quantitative OR methods, rather than their alternatives (Ackermann, 2012; Mingers, 2011; Paucar-Caceres, 2011), in order to support group decisions in scenarios characterized by “practical problems” (Ravetz, 1971), “wicked problems” (Rittel & Webber, 1973), “messes” (Ackoff, 1979), and “swamp conditions” (Schon, 1987). These are methods for decision making in the presence of multiple actors, multiple perspectives, incommensurable and/or conflicting interests, important intangibles, and key uncertainties (Mingers & Rosenhead, 2004). Additionally, mixing of PSMs is an area of increasing interest (Howick & Ackermann, 2011). This paper adds a new method to the body of research related to PSMs in the context of public policy. As with conventional PSMs, the present paper highlights the agenda-setting stage, including the problem definitions in the public policy process. This stage represents a critical process in which policy makers search for potential policy options based on the broad range of information collected from the multiple actors under conditions of major uncertainty. The present paper also highlights the decision-making stage for problem solving, using a feasibility analysis of agreements.This case-oriented paper includes the proposal of a new method, which is characterized by three components: identification of the problem structure perceived by stakeholders, policy structuring analysis, and feasibility analysis of agreements among stakeholders. First, the cognitive map approach is used to identify the problem structure. In particular, semi-structured interviews are utilized to collect information from the stakeholders. Second, a value–driver matrix and a reciprocal expectation matrix are developed in the policy structuring analysis. Finally, these matrices are used to assess the feasibility of agreements among the stakeholders. The paper categorizes the types of relationships among the stakeholders into three types. It should be noted that the evaluation of impacts of the policy option is out of our scope. A number of methods have been developed to evaluate the impacts of options from the viewpoints of plural criteria, including analytic hierarchy process (Saaty, 1980).The paper is organized as follows: the motivation and goals of the paper are presented in Section 1. Section 2 presents the literature review. Section 3 describes the proposed method. Section 4 details an empirical case study with the proposed method and a discussion of the case study. Finally, Section 5 discusses the implications of these results for public policy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The contribution of this paper to public policy studies is threefold: the visualization of the roles and perceptions of stakeholders in the public policy process; the derivation of the three types of relationship between stakeholders: “Dosho-imu”, “Isho-imu”, and “Domu”; and the proposal of three tests of feasibility for reaching agreements among stakeholders: “information-sharing test”, “bargaining test”, and “reframing test”.Further research issues in this area are summarized as follows. First, this paper does not attempt to demonstrate the superiority of our method to other approaches. The application of multiple methods to the same case is required to compare their performance. Second, in the feasibility analysis of agreements among stakeholders, it is implicitly assumed that the expectations shown by the stakeholder are not biased. It is possible that stakeholders present their strategic opinions for achieving better payoffs by guiding the discussions/negotiations into a specific direction, particularly when they face tough conditions. Thus, our analysis may be more suitable for strategic planning or policy-making processes in which less serious conflicts are expected. Third, the proposed method does not deal with how to solve problems, although it helps in the comprehension of the problem structure, the generation of policy options, and the assessment of feasibility of the policy options. For instance, the proposed method may identify the policy that makes one stakeholder better off but makes others worse off. This requires the decision maker to make trade-off decisions and open these up for further consideration. In order to examine such issues, it is necessary to set a priority rule that weights the social values involved and impacts a decision. Methods combining the comprehensive impact evaluation of the policy options with the feasibility analysis shown in our method may be required to solve problems. Fourth, although our method proposes three tests of feasibility for reaching an agreement among stakeholders, it does not outline the exact mechanism for reaching agreements. Thus, further studies should explore the mechanism for reaching agreements from the three types of relationship using the three proposed tests. Game theory and drama theory may contribute to this endeavor. Fifth, although citizens should be involved in the public policy making process, they are not included as a stakeholder in our case study. Although we actually tried to collect the opinions of some citizens in a specific region, their answers may not necessarily be representative of all individuals in the Kanto region. This does not mean, however, that the citizens’ opinions have been entirely neglected in our analysis, as they have been indirectly reflected in the responses of some stakeholders who were interviewed, including the local governments and transportation operators.