@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Profit criteria involving risk in price setting of virtual products

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
For a multiplicative demand the optimal price is identical for any increasing utility function.For an additive demand, pricing strategies are presented for three profit criteria: expectation, target and percentile.Showing how to calculate the non-dominated set of criteria values that can aid in selecting the preferred price.A risk-averse retailer does not necessarily set a lower price than a risk-neutral one.Our results are extended to a two-echelon supply chain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pricing,Multiple criteria,Risk,Supply chain management,Decision analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work deals with pricing of “virtual” products, i.e., products that a retailer can supply after demand has been realized. Such products allow the retailer to avoid holding costs and ensure timely fulfillment of demand with no risk of shortage. Demand is commonly price-dependent and uncertain, and we seek to maximize each of three criteria: expected profit, the likelihood of achieving a profit target, and the profit for a given percentile. Simultaneous multiple criteria are also explored. Two forms of demand uncertainty are considered in the analysis: the multiplicative form, where, due to stochastic dominance, all the investigated profit criteria—and, in fact, any utility function of the profit—can be optimized simultaneously; and the additive form, where stochastic dominance cannot occur. Under the multiplicative form of demand, the property of stochastic dominance is shown to hold in a two-echelon supply chain (comprising both the supplier and the retailer) and in a centralized system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The last decade has seen a rapid increase in the market share and variety of intangible products. This increase is largely a result of the proliferation of digital platforms for content consumption, as well as the development of the internet as a direct channel for delivering goods and transferring payments (Waelbroeck, 2013). Sales of intangible products can generate substantial revenues: For example, a recent article in Time magazine noted that in a one-day national promotion, the website LivingSocial grossed more than 11million dollars from the sales of $20 Amazon.com gift cards, sold for $10 each (Tuttle, 2012). Yet it seems that the development of pricing models has not kept pace with that of the market. Traditional models, formulated primarily for the pricing of tangible products, fail to capture key properties of intangible products and are therefore of limited utility to the digital retailer. In particular, many of the parameters incorporated into traditional models are superfluous for products that are not held in inventory and can be produced (or delivered) in infinite quantities and in a negligible amount of time—after demand has been realized. We refer to such products as “virtual” products. Examples of virtual products include (1) smartphone applications that are sold online; (2) licenses to download and use software for a calendar year (e.g., SAS, Maple); (3) gift cards being sold at a discount online (e.g., http://www.groupon.com/ about); (4) electronic newspapers, books, music, TV programs and movies to be downloaded from the net for a fee; and (5) club/association memberships that are sold for a calendar year (e.g., professional societies).Seeking to fill the gap in the literature, herein we construct a pricing model for virtual products. We assume that demand is influenced not only by retail price but by many other, more minor, factors and therefore is stochastic in nature. The uncertainty in demand is translated into uncertainty of profits, and the criterion for maximization is therefore a random variable. We suggest that in selecting a criterion for maximization, it is necessary to take into account the decision maker’s approach to risk. The most commonly used criterion of profit is the expectation (see, e.g., Dana, 2001; Gerchak, 2012; Granot & Yin, 2008; Van Mieghem & Dada, 1999); the selection of this criterion assumes that the decision maker is risk neutral, i.e., has a linear utility function. Only a non-linear utility function can capture risk considerations with regard to profit. In the absence of a utility function (as discussed later) other profit criteria that do consider risk can be used. Herein we consider three criteria: expectation, the probability of achieving a given target, and the profit for a given percentile.In addition to proposing a model that is tailored to virtual products, this paper makes three primary contributions. First, we present methods for deriving prices that maximize each of the three profit-related criteria mentioned above. It is possible that none of these criteria, by itself, captures the preferences of the retailer. As a consequence, our second contribution is providing means for the decision maker to select wisely his or her preferred price when considering several profit criteria. This is done by constructing a set of profit criteria values that are not dominated, and identifying the prices that yield these values (referred to as the set of “efficient” prices). Third, this paper shows that under certain assumptions of demand uncertainty, one price optimizes all profit criteria.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the related literature. Section 3 introduces the problem formulation and presents different optimization criteria that may express the retailer’s profit preferences. In Section 4, we consider this problem assuming a multiplicative demand form and show that there is an optimal price whose profit is stochastically dominant. In Section 5, we analyze the additive demand form, for which we show that stochastic dominance of profits does not exist. We analyze the retailer’s pricing decision under various optimization criteria and perform a sensitivity analysis. Then we provide a means to establish a non-dominated set of criteria values that can aid the retailer in selecting a preferred price. We illustrate this technique using numerical examples. Section 6 provides two extensions of the multiplicative demand case: a two-echelon supply chain and limited capacity. We conclude in Section 7 with implications and directions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
