@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
First- and second-price sealed-bid auctions applied to push and pull supply contracts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze simple auction and contract formats in a newsvendor procurement decision.We show the superiority of a first-price push auction.The influence of risk aversion is investigated.Allocation of profits between the retailer and suppliers is shown depending on different parameters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Purchasing,Auctions/bidding,Push and pull supply contracts,Risk aversion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigate a newsvendor-type retailer sourcing problem under demand uncertainty who has the option to source from multiple suppliers. The suppliers’ manufacturing costs are private information. A widely used mechanism to find the least costly supplier under asymmetric information is to use a sealed-bid reverse auction. We compare the combinations of different simple auction formats (first- and second-price) and risk sharing supply contracts (push and pull) under full contract compliance, both for risk-neutral and risk-averse retailer and suppliers. We show the superiority of a first-price push auction for a risk-neutral retailer. However, only the pull contracts lead to supply chain coordination. If the retailer is sufficiently risk-averse, the pull is preferred over the push contract. If suppliers are risk-averse, the first-price push auction remains the choice for the retailer. Numerical examples illustrate the allocation of benefits between the retailer and the (winning) supplier for different number of bidders, demand uncertainty, cost uncertainty, and degree of risk-aversion.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past decades there has been a trend towards outsourcing the production of goods and services. For example, manufacturers in the automotive industry spent an average of65%of their costs on goods and services from external suppliers. In order to minimize procurement costs, many companies purchase via reverse auctions and use online bidding systems. The Volkswagen Group, for instance, has a purchase volume of over75.4billion Euro and has been using electronic reverse auctions as one standard tool in global procurement since 2003 (Sanz, Semmler, & Walther, 2007). Due to the high amount of transaction volumes traded through reverse auctions, their design is critical and poses important challenges. In comparison to traditional purchasing methods, reverse auctions allow for high cost savings when used correctly (Tunca & Wu, 2009).Current business practice shows that fixed quantity procurement auctions are predominately used, even though they are not always optimal, especially under demand uncertainty. There exist many practical auction examples where demand can be adjusted after the price has been determined (Li & Scheller-Wolf, 2011; McAdams, 2007) and flexible auctions receive increasing attention. For example, taking the newsvendor as the simplest single-product problem under demand uncertainty, the optimal order quantity for a retailer (buyer) depends on the purchasing price and it is not appropriate for treating these procurement problems as simple single-unit auctions. It has already been shown that abandoning fixed quantity auctions and allowing the possibility of adjusting quantities after procurement prices are known results in lower purchasing prices (Hansen, 1988) and enables higher profits for the purchasing company (McAdams, 2007). However, allowing to adjust quantities after observing prices makes the computation of optimal bidding strategies more complex.Although there are many possibilities for allocating demand risk within a supply chain, the two extremes of push and pull contracts are simple and easy to implement. Because their only parameter is the wholesale price, they find higher acceptance in practice than complex multi-attribute auctions (Elmaghraby, 2007; Li & Scheller-Wolf, 2011). Under a push contract, the retailer has to decide about the purchasing quantity before demand is known and the manufacturer produces the order quantity. The retailer bears all the risk of ordering too many or too few. Under a pull contract, the retailer postpones the order until demand is known. In this case, the supplier bears all the demand risk and must produce or build capacity when demand is still uncertain (e.g. Cachon, 2004). If the retailer or the suppliers are risk-averse, there is an additional benefit from using push or pull contracts as an effective instrument to shift demand risk within the supply chain.We analyze and compare simple auction and contract formats in a newsvendor sourcing problem under information asymmetry about the suppliers’ manufacturing cost and flexible order quantities. We therefore evaluate the allocation of profits from the retailer’s, the suppliers’, and the entire supply chain’s perspective. The options considered for auction design are the two most prominent first- and second-price auctions. For contract design, we limit the choice to simple pure push and pull contracts. We extend the work of Li and Scheller-Wolf (2011) by (1) additionally including first-price auctions, (2) enforcing supply contract compliance by introducing a common outside procurement option, and (3) risk-averse decision makers either on the supply or retail side. We show the dominance of first-price auctions and clear preferences of a push contract under risk-neutrality and full contract compliance. Furthermore, the numerical results show the impact of competition (number of bidders), cost and demand uncertainty, and the degree of risk-aversion on supply chain efficiency and profit allocation in the supply chain through the investigated auction and contract formats. The contribution to the literature is therefore the application of known formats and results from auction theory to the supply contracting problems and enabling the comparison of different format-contract setups under risk-neutral and risk-averse decision making.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: We review the relevant literature in Section 2. Section 3 describes and analyzes the model in detail. The influence of risk aversion is discussed in Section 4. Section 5 presents an example with closed form solutions, followed by numerical studies in Section 6. Section 7 contains concluding remarks and suggestions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
