@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Competition for cores in remanufacturing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Competition between an OEM and an IO both in the sales market and core acquisition.Acquisition price of the OEM only depends on its cost structure.Remanufacturing becomes (more) profitable option when OEM can maintain its market share.Remanufacturing is beneficial for OEM when consumers strongly prefer to return cores to OEM.When consumers have lower willingness to pay for the remanufactured products remanufacturing becomes less profitable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Remanufacturing,Competition,Nash equilibrium,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study competition between an original equipment manufacturer (OEM) and an independently operating remanufacturer (IO). Different from the existing literature, the OEM and IO compete not only for selling their products but also for collecting returned products (cores) through their acquisition prices. We consider a two-period model with manufacturing by the OEM in the first period, and manufacturing as well as remanufacturing in the second period. We find the optimal policies for both players by establishing a Nash equilibrium in the second period, and then determine the optimal manufacturing decision for the OEM in the first period. This leads to a number of managerial insights. One interesting result is that the acquisition price of the OEM only depends on its own cost structure, and not on the acquisition price of the IO. Further insights are obtained from a numerical investigation. We find that when the cost benefits of remanufacturing diminishes and the IO has more chance to collect the available cores, the OEM manufactures less in the first period as the market in the second period gets larger to protect its market share. Finally, we consider the case where consumers have lower willingness to pay for the remanufactured products and find that in that case remanufacturing becomes less profitable overall.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The importance of sustainable and environmental processes has increased over the last fifty years, as industrialization and population growth have increasingly burdened the environment. To reduce this burden, European companies have been made legally responsible for collecting their end-of-life products and adopting the sustainable production strategy of product recovery (recycling and remanufacturing). In other countries where firms are not legally bound to collect used-products, many still do so because of the economic benefits (Kaya, 2010).Remanufacturing is defined as the process of bringing used products to a like-new functional state with warranty to match. The steps of a remanufacturing process are: collecting the used/discarded items, disassembling those items into their parts, cleaning and inspecting each part, and finally reassembling the parts and testing the remanufactured products to function as if they were new.Remanufacturing has numerous benefits for the original equipment manufacturers (OEMs). These include savings in labor, material and energy costs; shorter production lead times; balanced production lines; new market development opportunities, and a positive, socially concerned image (McConocha & Speh, 1991). Adopting remanufacturing as a part of production strategy allowed Caterpillar to create a new market among contractors who cannot afford to purchase a Caterpillar product outright (Gutowski et al., 2001). In the 2008/2009 financial year, Fuji Xerox Australia remanufactured more than 230,000 equipment parts, equating to a $6million cost-saving compared to sourcing new parts (http://www.fujixerox.com.au/about/media/articles/613).There is also an encouraging market for remanufactured products in the U.S. According to U.S. International Trade Commission, production of remanufactured products in the U.S. increased from $37.3billion in 2009 to $43.0billion in 2011 (http://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4356.pdf).Despite of the numerous benefits, many firms have reservations about adopting a remanufacturing strategy related to concerns about internal cannibalization and external competition. Starting with the first, when consumer populations for new and remanufactured products overlap, selling remanufactured products may reduce new product sales (even if different marketing channels are used). Firms may consider this situation undesirable as it can cut revenues, even if the profit margin of a new product is less than that of a remanufactured product. Internal cannibalization is not a concern for an OEM if new and remanufactured products are perceived as the same to customers (Atasu, Guide, & Van Wassenhove, 2010, Bulmu et al., 2013), such as refillable containers and single-use cameras. Also, in Japan Fuji Xerox incorporated reused components in new products. Thus, all products may include reused components and there is no distinction between new and remanufactured products (Matsumoto & Umeda, 2011).External competition is the other major issue for firms. If an OEM does not offer a remanufactured version of a popular product (because of cannibalization concerns), independent operators (IOs) may enter the market and compete for returns and a share of the market. In this case, the OEM faces external competition rather than internal cannibalization, or both if the OEM itself also remanufactures products. Guide Jr (2000) estimates for instance that 95% of the remanufacturing programs are not managed by the original producers. In the mobile phone and automobile parts remanufacturing industry, for instance, independent operators have a clear dominance. Kodak also competes with IOs today to collect and remanufacture the single-used cameras. Moreover, as Atasu et al. (2010) state, it is very difficult for OEMs to enter the remanufacturing market after it becomes dominated by IOs. Thus, remanufacturing decisions and the positioning (pricing) of remanufactured products are crucial for OEMs. However, there is a lack of analytical tools for guiding firms in those decisions. As Ferguson and Toktay (2006) and Atasu, Sarvary, and Van Wassenhove (2008) state, most of the firms today do not have a clear understanding of how to adopt remanufacturing and position a remanufactured product.In this paper we analyze the effect of competition between one OEM and one IO on the optimal production and pricing strategies. Our aim is to find the optimal strategies for the agents in the case of competition and to determine the effect of competition on the remanufacturing strategy. We determine the optimal manufacturing and remanufacturing decisions for an OEM and an IO in a two-period setting.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The next section reviews the closely related literature and explains our contribution. Section 3 describes the model in detail and in Section 4 we characterize the optimal policy for periods 2 and 1. A numerical study is conducted in Section 5 to understand the effect of each parameter on the optimal solution and to gain insights into the effect of remanufacturing on the total production in both periods and on the OEM’s profit. In Section 6, we consider the case where new and remanufactured products are sold at different prices and conduct a numerical study similar to that in Section 5 to understand how different selling price for products change the effect of parameters on the optimal solution. Finally, in Section 7, a brief summary of the findings and managerial insights is provided, and avenues for further research are discussed.In this section, we review the literature and point out key differences with our study.There are numerous studies on closed-loop supply chains and remanufacturing in the current literature. Fleischmann et al. (1997) provide a review for early studies and Guide Jr and Van Wassenhove (2009) describe the evolution of the research on closed-loop supply chains. Souza (2013) provides a review and a tutorial of the literature on closed loop supply chains. He classified the literature in terms of strategic, tactical, and operational issues. Tang and Zhou (2012) provide a review of recent studies (between 1995 and 2012) in closed loop supply chain literature based on a framework of planet, people and profit. Another recent survey is on production planning and control for remanufacturing which is conducted by Junior and Filho (2012).Competition in remanufacturing is a growing branch in the remanufacturing literature. Heese, Cattani, Ferrer, Gilland, and Roth (2005) study a model of two OEMs and determine the conditions for the OEMs to sell remanufactured products along with original products, also taking product substitutability into account. Atasu et al. (2008) also consider direct OEM competition and include market growth in their two-period setting. They assume that cores can be collected at a fixed price, but in our study we assume that acquisition prices for used products are decision variables.Ferguson and Toktay (2006) consider competition between a single OEM and a single IO in a two-period model. They assume that an IO will only consider entering the market if the OEM decides not to remanufacture itself. They argue that this is reasonable when the OEM enjoys a brand advantage for its remanufactured product over the entrant’s product or if the OEM enjoys a first-mover advantage in the recovery of the cores needed for remanufacturing. Majumder and Groenevelt (2001) also consider the competition between a single OEM and a single IO in a two-period setting, and assume that the shell allocation mechanism is exogenous, i.e., the fractions of returns to the OEM and IO are fixed. Ferrer and Swaminathan (2006) extend the model of Majumder and Groenevelt (2001) to a multi-period setting. Different from these contributions, in our model, the OEM and 3rd party remanufacturer compete with their acquisition prices for cores.Webster and Mitra (2007) and Mitra and Webster (2008) also analyze a two-period game theoretic model that captures the competition between a single OEM and a single IO. Building on the previous two-period model studies, both studies examine the effect of legislations and regulations on the remanufacturing activities. Webster and Mitra (2007) study the effect of take-back laws on the remanufacturing activities by considering two different implementations of take back laws, namely, (i) the OEM has the control over the returns sold to IO and (ii) the OEM has no control over the returns sold to IO. Mitra and Webster (2008) analyze the effect of government subsidies on remanufacturing activities. In both studies it is assumed that the OEM does not take part in remanufacturing activities.Debo, Toktay, and Van Wassenhove (2005) investigate joint technology selection and pricing decisions for new and remanufactured products. They derive the manufacturer’s optimal remanufacturing decisions as well as conditions on the viability of remanufacturing. They also extend their results to the case of competing remanufacturers. They assume that the price of used remanufacturable products depends only on the supply of such products. So, different from our model, all parties offer the same acquisition price, and all available (remanufacturable) cores are acquired.In this study, we consider the competition between an OEM and an IO in a two-period setting. We model the decision process as follows. At the beginning of period 1, the OEM decides on the number of products to manufacture, q1n. Returned products are not yet available in that period. At the start of the second period, both the OEM and the IO decide on the acquisition prices for returned products, soand si, respectively. After obtaining the returned products, both decide on the number of returns to remanufacture in period 2, namely q2oand q2i. At this point the OEM also decides on the number of products to manufacture, q2n. Obviously, the number of remanufactured products by the OEM and IO are restricted by the number of products returned to them, roand rirespectively.For modeling the demand functions, we adopt the same utility-based approach as Debo et al. (2005) and Ferguson and Toktay (2006) where each consumer uses at most one product and has willingness to pay for that product, θ, which is uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. In the first period, only new products are offered with selling price p1 and the utility of a consumer for buying a new product is U1=θ−p1. If the market size of the first period is M1, the quantity sold in that period, q1nbecomes q1n=M1(1−p1). Then, letting δ1=1/M1, we can derive the inverse demand function as follows,(1)p1=δ1(M1-q1n).In the second period, both manufactured and remanufactured products are sold. In the main part of this study, we assume that consumers cannot distinguish between the new and remanufactured products, i.e., consumers view the remanufactured products as perfect substitutes of new ones. As stated before, in practice, this holds for some products (such as single-use cameras, refillable cylinders and Fuji Xerox products in Japan), but obviously not for all products. Although in the main body of the study we consider indistinguishable new and remanufactured products, in Section 6, we relax this assumption and consider different selling price for the new and remanufactured products.Using the same argument above, the selling price for this period, p2 is derived in terms of the amount of new products offered by the OEM, q2nand remanufactured products offered by the OEM q2oand by the IO, q2i, as(2)p2=δ2(M2-q2n-q2o-q2i),where M2 is the market size in period 2, and δ2=1/M2.To make the problem non-trivial and allow profitable manufacturing and remanufacturing for the OEM, we assume that the cost of manufacturing new products, cnis less than δ2M2 and, greater than the remanufacturing cost for the OEM, co, i.e. δ2M2>cn>coand δ1M1>cn.We also assume that the number of products manufactured by the OEM in period 2 is positive. This will hold in most real-life settings, as the number of remanufacturable returns is typically insufficient to switch fully from manufacturing to remanufacturing. We remark that the analysis for the case without manufacturing in the second period is similar to the one that we will present, but will be omitted as this case is unrealistic and not as insightful.Competition for return is modeled by modifying the commonly used demand attraction model. This model can be derived axiomatically based on simple assumptions about consumer behavior (Luce, 1959). It is a popular model for modeling competition for demands and, as we will argue, is also suitable for modeling competition for returns in the following adapted form,(3)ro=βq1nαosoαoso+αisi+γ,(4)ri=βq1nαisiαoso+αisi+γ,where 0<β⩽1, αo>0, αi>0, γ⩾0.This generalizes the demand attraction model in two ways. First, the additional parameter βis introduced as it may not be possible to collect and remanufacture all items that were manufactured in the first period, even at very high acquisition prices (Debo et al., 2005 & Geyer et al., Geyer, Van Wassenhove, & Atasu, 2007). Second, αoand αiare positive rather than negative, as higher acquisition prices lead to more returns. We remark that, similar to the demand attraction model, our return attraction model can be generalized by using power functions instead of linear functions. However, as price-return sensitivity is already modeled via αo, αiand γ, and to keep the analysis tractable, we do not consider this generalized form.A list of notations is given in Table 1. The objective of both the OEM and the IO is to maximize their total profit, which is calculated as the difference between the sales revenue and the acquisition and production costs. In the next section, we will determine the Nash equilibrium for these two players and show that it is unique.In this section, we determine the optimal policies for both players. We start in Section 4.1 by determining the unique, as it turns out to be, Nash equilibrium for the OEM and IO in period 2, given any value of q1n. Furthermore, we obtain insights from an analytical sensitivity study. In Section 4.2, we show that the total profit over both periods for the OEM is concave in q1n, and determine the first order optimality condition.The OEM’s profit in period 2 is(5)Π2o=p2(q2n+q2o)-cnq2n-coq2o-soro.The IO only operates in period 2 and IO’s profit is given by(6)Πi=Π2i=p2q2i-ciq2i-siri.An important observation from (5) and (6) is that neither player has an incentive to acquire returns that will not be remanufactured, as they can increase their own profits by acquiring fewer returns at a higher price. Therefore, our search for Nash equilibria can be restricted to solutions where q2o=roand q2i=ri. Such solutions are completely characterized by the set of production quantities (q2n,q2o,q2i). The corresponding acquisition and sales prices result from (2)–(4).From (3) and (4), and by using q2o=roand q2i=ri, we get(7)αosoαisi=q2oq2i.Using (2)–(4), it is easy to see that profit function (6) is concave in q2i. Also, (5) is jointly concave in (q2n,q2o). (See Online supplementary.) Hence, there exists a unique Nash Equilibriumq2n∗,q2o∗,q2i∗given by the following first-order conditions:(8)M2-2q2n∗-2q2o∗-q2i∗-cn/δ2=0,(9)M2-2q2n∗-2q2o∗-q2i∗-co/δ2-2so∗/δ2=0,(10)M2-q2n∗-q2o∗-2q2i∗-ci/δ2-2si∗/δ2=0.The unique Nash equilibrium that results from these conditions is given in Theorem 1. From now on, all the proofs are put into Online supplementary.Theorem 1The production quantities and acquisition prices for the unique Nash equilibrium are given by(11)so∗=cn-co2,(12)q2i∗=a+b+3βq1n-Δ1/26,(13)si∗=q2i∗(αoso∗+γ)αiβq1n-q2i∗,(14)q2o∗=αoso∗αoso∗+γβq1n-q2i∗,(15)q2n∗=12M2-cn/δ2-2βq1nαoso∗αoso∗+γ+αoso∗-γ2αoso∗+γq2i∗.An interesting observation from Theorem 1 is that the acquisition price for cores by the OEM only depends on the cost difference cn−cobetween manufacturing and remanufacturing. So, the OEM’s acquisition price is independent from that of the IO, and in this respect the OEM does not compete for cores. This result can be explained as follows. For any given demand structure, the marginal production cost must be equal to the marginal revenue (giving a marginal profit of zero) for the optimal solution. Therefore, as long as there is still production of new products in the second period, the total production (i.e., new and remanufactured) is not affected by the acquisition price and associated number of returns, since the marginal cost of producing one additional new product must remain unchanged. It is also obvious that the acquisition price must be less than cn−c0 for remanufacturing to be profitable for the OEM. However, the fact that the optimal acquisition price is exactly half of that “maximum saving per return” results from our modeling of the competition for cores.The complexity of the expressions in Theorem 1 for the other decision variables in period 2 does not allow us to directly obtain further insights into their dependency on q1nand on the model parameters. Therefore, we obtain such insights analytically and numerically. We start by analyzing the impact of q1non the optimal decisions in period 2 in Theorem 2.Theorem 2The sensitivity of the optimal decision variables for period 2 with respect to q1nis as follows:(i)q2i∗is increasing in q1nand0<q2i*′<β;q2n∗is decreasing in q1nandq2o∗is increasing in q1n;q2n∗+q2o∗is decreasing in q1n;q2n∗+q2o∗+q2i∗is increasing in q1n;so∗is constant in q1n;si∗is decreasing in q1n.Results (i) and (ii) from Theorem 2 are intuitive. A larger number of available cores leads to more returns for both the OEM and the IO. To compensate for the increased number of remanufactured products in the market, the OEM manufactures less new products. As (iii) shows, the total production by the OEM in period 2 decreases. However, the OEM and IO together sell more products in period 2, as stated in (iv), and the OEM loses market share. We have already discussed the independency of the OEM’s acquisition price from q1n(and the other decision variables), and (v) is included for completeness. Result (vi) shows that the IO exploits a larger availability of cores by offering a lower acquisition price.So, we know from Theorem 2 that increased manufacturing in the first period leads to an increased amount of remanufacturing by both the OEM and the IO in the second period. Theorem 3 shows further that an increase in q1nleads to an increased share of returns for the OEM, and to a reduction in remanufacturing relative to the number of available cores.Theorem 3q2i∗(βq1n)is decreasing inq1n,q2o∗(βq1n)is increasing in q1n, andq2i∗+q2o∗(βq1n)is decreasing in q1n.We next examine the relationships between the acquisition pricessi∗andso∗and between the remanufactured quantitiesq2i∗andq2o∗.Theorem 4(a) We have(16)si∗>so∗,ifq1n<qˆ1n;=so∗,ifq1n=qˆ1n;<so∗,ifq1n>qˆ1n,whereqˆ1nem is uniquely determined by(17)q2i∗αoso∗+γαiβqˆ1n-q2i∗=so∗.(b) We have(18)q2i∗>q2o∗,ifq1n>q̃1n;=q2o∗,ifq1n=q̃1n;<q2o∗,ifq1n<q̃1n,whereq̃1nis uniquely determined by(19)q2i∗αoso∗+γαiβq̃1n-q2i∗=αoso∗αi.(c) If αo⩾αi, thenqˆ1n⩾q̃1n. Otherwise,qˆ1n<q̃1n.As Theorem 4 shows, the acquisition price offered by the OEM can be both larger and smaller than that of the IO, and the same holds for its returns market share. There are threshold values for the production of new products in period 1, above which the OEM offers a higher acquisition price and acquires more cores than the IO in period 2.In Section 5, we will derive further sensitivity results in a numerical study. Next, we derive the optimal decision for the first period (given the optimal policies in period 2).Using Theorem 1, the total profit for the OEM can be written as(20)Πo(q1n)=δ1(M1-q1n)q1n-cnq1n+Π2o∗(q1n),where(21)Π2o∗(q1n)=δ24M2-q2i∗2-cnδ22-cnq2n∗-cn+co2q2o∗.The following theorem states that Πois concave and provides the first order condition for finding the optimal value of q1n.Theorem 5Under the condition(22)4M2M1>β2+6β2abM2(1-co)(a+b-3βM1)3,the total profit Πofor the OEM is strictly concave in q1n, and the first order condition is given by(23)δ1(M1-2q1n)-cn-δ22q2i∗′M2-q2i∗+coαoso∗+cnγ2αoso∗+γq2i∗′+βcn-co2αoso∗γαoso∗+γ=0.Due to the complexity of the optimality condition for q1nin Theorem 5, this does not provide direct insights. However, we can analytically derive the effect of M1 on the optimal production quantities and acquisition prices. We find that an increase in M1 leads to more manufacturing in period 1, and to more remanufacturing and less manufacturing in period 2. Also, higher manufacturing implies more available cores and the acquisition price of the IO decreases. (See Supplementary material.) In Section 5, we will derive further insights from a numerical study. In that numerical study, we compare the profit of the OEM under two scenarios: with remanufacturing and without remanufacturing. The comparison allows us to answer the question how remanufacturing in a competitive market affects the bottom line of the OEM.As stated before, the optimality condition for q1ngiven in Theorem 5 is too complex to obtain direct insights. In this section, our objective is to obtain insights regarding both the individual and combined effects of parameters on the production decisions and profitability of remanufacturing. To achieve that, we consider a full factorial design with three different values for 8 parameters (M1,M2,β,αo,αi,cn,coand ci) namely, low, medium and high while keeping the value of γat 0.3. All parameter values are listed in Table 2.In total this gives 6561 potential data scenarios, but we only retained the scenarios for which manufacturing and remanufacturing both take place. Based on the filtered data, we depicted the average quantities for each parameter when it is low, medium and high values of parameters (from left to right) in Fig. 1.From Fig. 1, we find that larger market M1 in period 1 leads to more manufacturing q1nin that period. This implies that more cores are available in period 2, which leads to more remanufacturing by both the OEM and IO, and less manufacturing by the OEM. An increased production cost leads to lower manufacturing levels in both periods and less remanufacturing in the second period. The reason is that costly manufacturing of new products leads to less production in the first period, which implies fewer available cores in period 2. Low β values also mean fewer returns and less remanufacturing in period 2. We see that there is a symmetry in the effects of the parameters on q2oand q2i. For instance, higher remanufacturing cost for the OEM or lower remanufacturing cost for the IO implies that the OEM is less competitive on remanufacturing, which results in less remanufacturing by the OEM and more by the IO. In the reverse case, i.e., when remanufacturing is more costly for the IO and/or less costly for the OEM, the IO remanufactures less and OEM remanufactures more. In Fig. 1 we also see that the collection coefficients αoand αihave a significant effect on the remanufacturing quantities. An increase in αoor a decrease in αimakes it easier for the OEM to acquire cores relative to the IO, and therefore leads to more remanufacturing and less manufacturing by the OEM in the second period and less remanufacturing by the IO. On the contrary, the IO remanufactures more if αois low and/or αiis high. Also when αiis high, the OEM produces less in the first period to provide fewer cores to the IO.From Fig. 1, we also observe that a larger market size in period 2 leads to more production in period 1. The reason is that more manufacturing in the first period increases the availability of cores in the second period, and thereby the potential cost savings from remanufacturing. Even though q1nincreases with M2 on average, there are some instances where we observe the opposite. In Fig. 2, we analyze the change in the average production amount in the first period with respect to M2 and αowhen the IO has a high collection coefficient (αi=100). We find that when it is difficult for the OEM to collect the available cores (αo=0.01), an increase in the market size in the second period leads to a lower manufacturing level q1n, which reduces the market share of the IO in the second period.The effect of parameters on the acquisition prices is presented in Fig. 3. Note from this figure that, as stated in Theorem 4, the acquisition price of the OEM can be both larger and smaller than that of the IO. As expected, the acquisition price for the IO decreases if his cost of remanufacturing increases. It also decreases if the cost of remanufacturing for the OEM increases, as that leads to a lower acquisition price from the OEM and hence less competition for cores. An increase in cnmakes remanufacturing more profitable for the OEM, which therefore increases its acquisition price (as also follows from Theorem 1). The increased competition forces the IO to also raise its acquisition price. An increase in the market size in period 2 implies that a higher sales price can be achieved, to which the IO reacts by raising its acquisition price so that it obtains more cores. This also provides further explanation for the, earlier discussed, counter-intuitive result that the OEM produces less new items in the first period if M2 increases. The IO raises the acquisition price if M2 increases, thereby increasing its market share, and hence the OEM lowers q1nto protect its market share.Remanufacturing allows the OEM to reduce its production cost. However, it also allows the IO to take over part of the market. So, what is the overall effect of having a remanufacturing option on the OEM’s profit? This question is especially relevant if the OEM can prevent remanufacturing by for instance not designing for remanufacturing or making frequent changes to a product as done by Lexmark, a well-known toner cartridges manufacturer. Lexmark offers pre-bates to customers that are sure to return used cartridges. More recently, Lexmark changed the design of its product by installing a chip to avoid remanufacturing by third parties.We address the above question by comparing the OEM’s profit with remanufacturing as determined in previous sections to the maximum profit without remanufacturing that is determined next. For the non-remanufacturing model, the OEM’s profit is given byδ1(M1-q1n)q1n+δ2(M2-q2n)q2n-cn(q1n+q2n).It is easy to see that the optimal manufacturing quantities areq̃1n=M1(1-cn)2,q̃2n=M2(1-cn)2.The corresponding optimal profit is given by(24)Π̃o=(M1+M2)(1-cn)24.In Fig. 4we analyze the effects of parameters on the average percentage gain. The percentage gain for the OEM from remanufacturing is calculated as100Πo∗-Πõ/ΠõwhereΠõis given as in (24). As depicted in Fig. 4, remanufacturing is not a profitable option for the OEM when the cost benefit of remanufacturing is less pronounced (high remanufacturing cost or low production cost) and it is difficult for the OEM to collect available cores (low αoor high αi). Also, the gain first increases then decreases with market sizes M1 and M2. This is again due to the fact that competition is more intense in period 2 as more cores are available and the market is bigger in the second period.After discussing the individual effects of the different model parameters, we turn to their combined effects. Fig. 5depicts the combined effects of parameters on gain. The percentage gain is sorted in decreasing order in Fig. 5 where positive values are colored gray in the “gain” column. For the parameters, black cells represent high values and white cells represent low values. For readability, medium values are not included in this figure. We find that approximately the top 25% gain is reached when αois high and the lowest 25% gain is obtained when αiis high indicating that these parameters pay a crucial role. Remanufacturing is seldom beneficial when the remanufacturing is relatively costly for the OEM. Additionally, when the OEM has an advantage on core acquisition, the gain is particularly high, if market sizes for period 1 and 2 are similar. The explanation is that in such cases, there is sufficient market in period 2 to sell a relatively large number of remanufactured products compared to the total production over the life cycle. If the market in period 2 is much higher than in period 1, all available cores can still be remanufactured, but relatively few cores are available and the profit gain is smaller. The gain is generally even smaller or negative if the market size is much larger in period 1, as many returns arrive “too late” in the sense that the market is already declining. Finally, the low gains are observed when it is more likely for the IO to collect fewer available cores (high β) and the cost benefit of remanufacturing is less significant (low cn).In this section, we relax the assumption that new and remanufactured products are indistinguishable, and instead assume that consumers have different willingness to pay for new and remanufactured products. We mainly consider the case where the remanufactured products of the OEM and IO are sold at the same price, but at the end of this section we discuss the case where consumers have higher willingness to pay for the OEMs remanufactured product.A consumer of type θ (i.e., willingness to pay for new product equal to θ) has willingness to pay for the remanufactured product equal to Ψθ, where 0⩽Ψ⩽1. Then the inverse demand functions can be written as follows:p2n=δ2(M2-q2n-Ψ(q2o+q2i)),p2r=δ2Ψ(M2-q2n-(q2o+q2i)).The derivation for these functions is provided in Appendix A. The OEM’s profit in period 2 is(25)Π2o=p2nq2n+p2rq2o-cnq2n-coq2o-soro.The IO only operates in period 2 and its profit is given by(26)Πi=Π2i=p2rq2i-ciq2i-siri.As in the case with indistinguishable new and remanufactured product, neither player has an incentive to acquire returns that will not be remanufactured. Therefore, q2o=roand q2i=ristill hold. Additionally, similar to the previous case, the profit function (26) is concave in q2i, and (25) is jointly concave in (q2n,q2o). (See Supplementary material.) Hence, there exists a unique Nash Equilibriumq2n∗,q2o∗,q2i∗given by the following first-order conditions:(27)δ2M2-2q2n∗-2Ψq2o∗-Ψq2i∗-cn=0,(28)δ2ΨM2-2q2n∗-2q2o∗-q2i∗-co-2so∗=0,(29)δ2ΨM2-q2n∗-q2o∗-2q2i∗-ci-2si∗=0.Using (27) and (28), we find the optimal acquisition price offered by the OEM as follows:(30)so∗=cn-co2-(1-Ψ)δ2M2-2q2n∗2.Note that in this case,so∗depends not only on the cost structure but also on the market size and the optimal manufacturing amount in the second period. Since the manufacturing amount affects the prices of new as well as remanufactured products, the marginal revenue from remanufacturing is different from the case with identical new and remanufactured products discussed in the previous sections. This explains whyso∗no longer depends on cnand coonly. Finding the analytical optimal solution for the second period is complex in this case, and thus we conduct a numerical study. Subramanian and Subramanyam (2012) compare on line prices of new and remanufactured products, and find that Ψ ranges from 0.60 to 0.85. Thus, in the numerical study we take Ψ=0.75 and for other parameters we use the values shown in Table 2. Fig. 6depicts the average values for the decision variables when new and remanufactured products sold at the same price (represented by non-filled bars on left) or sold at different prices (represented by filled bars on right).From Fig. 6, we observe similar trends for both situations concerning the effects of parameters on the production quantities. For the acquisition prices, we find that both acquisition prices are lower when the remanufactured products are sold at lower prices. This is due to the fact that the marginal value for selling a remanufactured product will be lower when the remanufactured products are indistinguishable.In Fig. 7, we analyze the change in the average production amount in the first period for both cases with respect to M2 and αowhen the IO has a high collection coefficient (αi=100), as we did in Section 6. Also for the case of differently perceived new and remanufactured products, we find that when it is difficult for the OEM to collect the available cores (αo=0.01), an increase in the market size in the second period leads a lower manufacturing level, q1n, in period 1, in order to reduce the market share of the IO in the second period.Fig. 8compares the average percentage gain when new and remanufactured products are sold at the same price (represented by non-filled bars on left) or sold at different prices (represented by filled bars on right). We find that in general the percentage gain is smaller when the remanufactured products are distinguishable. Also, the change in the percentage gain with different values for each parameter is similar for distinguishable and indistinguishable remanufactured product cases.Fig. 9depicts a special case in Fig. 8 where αi=100, i.e., it is easy for IO to collect the available cores. We find that for the situations where remanufacturing is not profitable (compared to manufacturing only), the profit loss decreases when the products are sold at different prices.So far, in this section, we assume that consumers have different willingness to pay for new and remanufactured products where consumers have the same willingness to pay for the OEM’s and IO’s remanufactured product. However, it is also possible that a consumer has higher willingness to pay for the OEM’s product. To obtain insights for this situation, we assume that the new and remanufactured products of the OEM are sold at the same price, p2n, and the remanufactured products of the IO is sold at a lower price, p2r, and we conduct a numerical study using the same parameter values shown in Table 2 and take Ψ=0.75. The details of the analysis and the results of the numerical study are provided in Appendix D. (See Supplementary material.) We observe that also for this case, the optimal acquisition price for the OEM only depends on its cost structure. We compare the optimal production quantities and acquisition prices in this case with the main case where new and remanufactured products are sold at the same price. We find that the effects of the parameters on the optimal production quantities and acquisition prices are similar. The average gain in this case is more than the case that the OEM’s remanufactured products are also sold a discounted price. This implies that the effects of the parameters on the optimal production quantities and profitability of remanufacturing is similar when the remanufactured products of the OEM and IO are sold at different discounted prices.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
