@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computationally efficient evaluation of appointment schedules in health care

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider the evaluation and construction of patient appointment schedules.Efficient algorithm based on a discrete-time queueing model and Lindley’s recursion.Exact moments of waiting and idle times using only a finite set of probabilities.Outperforms simulation, ideal for optimisation and real-time scheduling applications.Visualisation of schedule’s performance between already fixed appointments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic Programming,Scheduling,Queueing,Complexity theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider the problem of evaluating and constructing appointment schedules for patients in a health care facility where a single physician treats patients in a consecutive manner, as is common for general practitioners, clinics and for outpatients in hospitals. Specifically, given a fixed-length session during which a physician sees K patients, each patient has to be given an appointment time during this session in advance. Optimising a schedule with respect to patient waiting times, physician idle times, session overtime, etc. usually requires a heuristic search method involving a huge number of repeated schedule evaluations. Hence, our aim is to obtain accurate predictions at very low computational cost. This is achieved by (1) using Lindley’s recursion to allow for explicit expressions and (2) choosing a discrete-time (slotted) setting to make those expressions easy to compute. We assume general, possibly distinct, distributions for the patients’ consultation times, which allows to account for multiple treatment types, emergencies and patient no-shows. The moments of waiting and idle times are obtained and the computational complexity of the algorithm is discussed. Additionally, we calculate the schedule’s performance in between appointments in order to assist a sequential scheduling strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Because of its social and economic interest, the problem of scheduling a hospital’s outpatients into the consultation session of a physician has received a lot of attention over the last sixty years. Many studies are motivated from a specific practical situation and aim at improving the organisational procedures in a particular (part of a) hospital (Babes & Sarma, 1991; Reinus et al., 2000; Zonderland, Boer, Boucherie, de Roode, & van Kleef, 2009; Harper & Gamlin, 2003). Clearly, practical settings differ considerably in terms of medical practice, organisation, regulations, administrative demands or limitations, preferences of patients or medical staff, management issues, etc. However, very often the underlying problem is largely the same and can be formulated as follows. Consider the practice of a physician who consults patients during a time interval of a certain length called a session, for example a 4-hour session from 8am to 12am every weekday. The physician is assisted by a nurse or secretary at the administration desk who is responsible for taking the calls of patients who wish to see the physician during the session of a particular day. The administrator must decide whether a calling patient can be admitted to that session and if so, at what time during the session the patient should arrive, i.e. what the appointment time of the patient is. All appointments are fixed before the session starts. The physician arrives at some point during the session, which is not necessarily the beginning. Given the session’s length and the number of patients, a ‘schedule’ consists of both the patients’ appointment times and the physician’s arrival time.Since patients are consulted one by one in their appointed order, the patients in the waiting room behave as a FIFO (First-In First-Out) queuing system with the physician as service facility. The time required to serve a single patient is the consultation time, comprising all actions by the physician devoted only to that patient such as examination, looking up test results, giving advice, writing prescriptions, updating files, and discussions. Prior to the session, consultation times are known stochastically only but can be assumed to be independent. The arrival process consists of scheduled patient arrivals at deterministic time points. Hence, evaluating a session amounts to the study of a queuing system conditioned on a certain sample path for the arrivals, which is known as an appointment system (Hassin & Mendel, 2008). A patient arriving to the session at its appointed time can encounter two possible situations: either the physician has finished the consultations of previous patients or he has not. In the former case the physician has been without work since the departure of the last patient, whereas in the latter case it is the new patient who has to wait. As such, for each appointment there is either an idle time for the physician or a waiting time for the patient. As long as there is uncertainty on the consultation times when making the schedule, it is impossible to avoid both idle and waiting times although they can be controlled to a large extent by changing the schedule. In short, the aim of this paper is twofold.•First, under rather general conditions, we devise an algorithm for evaluating a given schedule based on the consultation time distributions of the patients. The algorithm is in discrete time and produces the mean and variance of the waiting and idle times as a performance prediction. Its complexity is kept minimal by computing only the change of these moments from one patient to the next.Second, we visualise the schedule’s ‘virtual’ performance in order to assist sequential scheduling of patients. That is, at any time point we calculate (mean and variance of) the so-called remaining work and running idle time. These virtual values become ‘real’ if an additional patient were to be scheduled at that time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed an analytic approach for evaluating appointment schedules on finite sessions that allows to obtain accurate results with very low computational complexity. By imposing a discrete-time setting and using Lindley’s recursion, we show that only a limited setWof waiting time probabilities needs to be calculated in order to obtain the moments of patient waiting times and physician idle times. Additionally, we propose two new metrics that can assist in scheduling the patients sequentially: the mean remaining work and mean running idle time envelopes, which characterise the average performance of the schedule in each slot of the session. All necessary calculations are arranged in an efficient algorithm that requiresKtmax2/6+O(tmax2)floating-point multiplications for a typical schedule of lengthtmaxand with K equidistantly spaced patients. The fact that the evaluation can be done very fast, makes our approach an ideal candidate for use in optimisation studies.Future work will focus on extending this algorithm for the case where patients are unpunctual to some degree, i.e. patient k arrives atτk+νkwhereνkis a random variable that can take both positive and negative values. In the case of advance scheduling we aim at efficient search strategies and heuristics to find either optimal or close-to-optimal schedules, while for sequential scheduling simple but efficient scheduling rules are needed. In both cases we will also look at ways to make the schedule robust against other uncertain events, like e.g. the possibility that the physician is called away for an emergency.