@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of customer lifetime value and marketing expenditure decisions through a Markovian-based model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The study proposes a methodology to find optimal promotion campaign to maximize CLV.Bank customers are divided into segments in terms of their profit levels.The impact of different campaigns on different segments is analyzed by using MDP.Potential customer values of banking customers are predicted.In-depth interviews were carried out with experts from eleven leading Turkish banks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Customer lifetime value,Forecast models,Markov decision process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The general aim of this study is to provide a guide to the future marketing decisions of a firm, using a model to predict customer lifetime values. The proposed framework aims to eliminate the limitations and drawbacks of the majority of models encountered in the literature through a simple and industry-specific model with easily measurable and objective indicators. In addition, this model predicts the potential value of the current customers rather than measuring the current value, which has generally been used in the majority of previous studies. This study contributes to the literature by helping to make future marketing decisions via Markov decision processes for a company that offers several types of products. Another contribution is that the states for Markov decision processes are also generated using the predicted customer lifetime values where the prediction is realized by a regression-based model. Finally, a real world application of the proposed model is provided in the banking sector to show the empirical validity of the model. Therefore, we believe that the proposed framework and the developed model can guide both practitioners and researchers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent times, firms have been increasing their focus on establishing and maintaining good customer relations during the customers’ life in the firm (Haenlein, Kaplan, & Beeser, 2007), and hence, researchers and practitioners have realized the importance of the lifetime value of customers. Customer lifetime value (CLV) can be defined as the present value of all future profits obtained from a customer over the life of his or her relationship with a firm (Gupta et al., 2006). Researches on optimal marketing decisions with the objective of maximizing CLV and also predicting the potential CLV, have been scarce. In addition, those studies were based on many assumptions and mostly did not present empirically valid models since they are mostly theoretical (Jain & Singh, 2002). Furthermore, they concentrated on the optimal marketing strategy for companies that offer only one type of product or service such as internet usage and flight tickets. Hence, they used recency–frequency–monetary (RFM) variables to define the different market segments based on CLV (Ching, Ng, Wong, & Altman, 2004; Labbi & Berrospi, 2007). However, this may not be appropriate for companies offering more than one type of product or service. In fact, for the latter case, many RFM values exist and this makes it impossible to apply the former models.The aim of this study is, thus, to develop a simple model to guide future marketing decisions via Markov decision processes for a company that offers several types of products. This is realized by using predicted potential customer values and making prediction through a regression-based model. The resulting model will determine the segments of customers based on their profitability values. For this purpose, we use the customer pyramid approach, which segments the customers according to their contributions to the profitability of the company. Finally, in order to show its empirical validity, the proposed model is applied to a specific bank that offers a wide range of services and products. Thus, this study aims to eliminate the important drawback of previous CLV-based studies, which consider general indicators rather than industry-specific attributes. This real world application of the proposed framework is another important contribution to the literature because the applicability of the previous studies is generally questioned. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no study about the integration of the planning of future marketing with potential CLV predictions. Therefore, we believe that the proposed framework and the developed model can guide both practitioners and researchers.Section 2 gives a summary of the previous studies. Section 3 presents brief information on Markov decision processes and Section 4 provides the proposed framework. Fifth section demonstrates the proposed framework with an application in the banking sector. The last section presents conclusions and areas for future research.Studies on the use of CLV for marketing decisions can be grouped based on division of the calculations (measurements) of CLV into two broad categories: those that solely predict CLV and those that maximize CLV. Most of the studies that only predict the potential CLV are based on many assumptions (e.g. Aeron, Bhaskar, Sundararajan, Kumar, & Moorthy, 2008; Chan, Ip, & Cho, 2010; Jain & Singh, 2002; Venkatesan, Kumar, & Bohling, 2007). In addition, as mentioned by Jain and Singh (2002), the empirical validation of many models is lacking (e.g. Chin Liu, Petruzzi, & Sudharshan, 2007; Ho, Park, & Zhou, 2006). Jain and Singh (2002) also state that most CLV models do not include demographics and product usage variables, which are crucial and should be considered in the CLV prediction models. Furthermore, most of the models trying to predict CLV deal with deterministic cash flow streams from the customers (e.g. Berger & Bechwati, 2001; Ryals & Knox, 2005). Our review of the studies about the prediction of CLV shows that regression-based forecast models, despite their simplicity, perform better (Benoit & Van den Poel, 2009; Donkers, Verhoef, & de Jong, 2007; Malthouse & Blattberg, 2005). These models also eliminate the drawbacks mentioned by Jain and Singh (2002) by considering many variables simultaneously. In the studies that purely predict CLV, the variables are as follows: the type and intensity of product ownership (Gelbrich & Nakhaeizadeh, 2000; Haenlein et al., 2007); the customer activity level (Haenlein et al., 2007; Jain & Singh, 2002); the age and demographic/lifestyle variables (Haenlein et al., 2007); acquisiton–retention expenses and probabilities (Jain & Singh, 2002); recency values (Jain & Singh, 2002; Shih & Liu, 2003); frequency values (Borle, Singh, & Jain, 2008; Gelbrich & Nakhaeizadeh, 2000; Shih & Liu, 2003); purchasing probabilities (Donkers et al., 2007); income of the customer (Gelbrich & Nakhaeizadeh, 2000); lifetime of the customer (Borle et al., 2008) and monetary values. In fact, the purchase amounts and values are the common variables/indicators used in all of the studies.A second group of studies on CLV are based on its application areas. Within this group, studies about optimization problems related to CLV are scarce and include Ching et al. (2004), Jonker, Piersma, and Poel (2004), Labbi and Berrospi (2007), Piersma and Jonker (2004) and Venkatesan et al. (2007). The first four studies use stochastic dynamic programming, whereas Venkatesan et al. (2007) use Bayesian decision theory. The application areas for these studies are advertising and promotion decisions, optimal mailing policy, customer selection for marketing actions, optimal promotion strategy and mailing frequency problems.Our review of these studies shows that the determination of optimal promotion with the objective of maximizing customer lifetime value is still underutilized. This is because the previous studies solved the optimization problem for companies that offer only one type of product or service (e.g. internet usage, flight tickets) and because some of them concentrated only on one type of marketing action. Additionally, the previous studies generally determined the segments, which are called states in a stochastic dynamic problem, via RFM variables as the indicators of CLV.Contrary to the previous studies, which deal with companies offering only one type of product, more than one RFM value exists when the number of products offered increases. Furthermore, there might be differences in terms of the number of products owned by each customer. In this case, it becomes impossible to create a standard RFM variable for each customer. To overcome this problem, this study determines the different states by using customer values for a company that offers more than one type of product.All firms are usually aware that their customers differ in profitability, and they generally divide their customers into different segments based on the profitability of each customer. The traditional classification has often been called the “80/20 rule” – 20% of customers produce 80% of sales or value to the company. Zeithaml, Rust, and Lemon (2001) claim, however, that this “best” (20%) and “remaining” (80%) customer division is rarely sufficient. They add that, once a system has been established for categorizing customers, multiple levels can be identified, motivated and served and can then be expected to deliver differential levels of profit. They propose a framework called the Customer Pyramid that contains four levels (Zeithaml et al., 2001). Storbacka (1997) also proposes dividing the customer base into four groups. The bottom segment consists of the 20% least profitable customers, the second segment consists of the next 30%, the third includes the next 30% and, finally, the top 20% constitutes the most profitable segment. Since RFM based segmentation is not considered to be suitable for companies offering more than one type of product, Customer Pyramid based segmentation is used in this paper.Stochastic dynamic programming and Markov Decision Processes (MDP) have a long history in CLV studies (Morrison, Chen, Karpis, & Britney 1982; Pfeifer & Carraway, 2000; Rust, Lemon, & Zeithamal, 2004). Stochastic programming is a framework for modeling optimization problems that involve uncertainty. Stochastic programming models take advantage of the fact that probability distributions governing the data are known or can be estimated. The goal here is to find some policy that is feasible for all possible data instances and maximizes the expectation of some function of the decisions and the random variables. More generally, such models are formulated, solved analytically or numerically, and analyzed in order to provide useful information to a decision-maker (Ross, 2000).Stochastic dynamic programming is roughly introduced here, the interested reader is referred to (Puterman, 2005) for more details. In the area of stochastic dynamic programming, one should keep one property of the dynamic programming algorithm, namely that there will be one decision for each state in each stage, but it will no longer be possible to plan for the whole period ahead of time. Decisions for all but the first period will depend on what happens in the mean time (Kall & Wallace, 1994). It is considered that a dynamical system that stochastically evolves in time depending upon your decision and it is assumed that time is discrete and has finitely or infinitely many time steps (Gelly, Mary, & Teytaud, 2006).MDPs, also referred to as discrete stochastic dynamic programming or stochastic control problems, are models for sequential decision making when outcomes are uncertain. MDPs allow the introduction of uncertainty into the effects of actions, the modeling of uncertain exogenous events, the presence of multiple, prioritized objectives, and the solution of nonterminating process-oriented problems (Atkeson, Moore, & Schaal, 1997). MDPs can be viewed as stochastic automata in which actions have uncertain effects, inducing stochastic transitions between states, and in which the precise state of the system is known only with a certain probability. In addition, the expected value of a certain course of action is a function of the transitions it induces, allowing rewards to be associated with different aspects of the problem rather than with an all-or-nothing goal proposition (Borrero & Akhavan-Tabatabaei, 2013). Finally, plans can be optimized over a fixed finite period of time, or over an infinite horizon, the latter is suitable for modeling ongoing processes. These make MDPs ideal models for many decision theoretic planning problems (Boutilier, Dearden, & Goldszmidt, 2000).In the Markov Decision Processes (MDP), at each time step, the process is in some state s, and the decision maker may choose any action a that is available in states. The process responds at the next time step by randomly moving into a new state s′, and giving the decision maker a corresponding reward Ra(s,s′). The probability that the process chooses s′ as its new state is influenced by the chosen action. Specifically, it is given by the state transition function Pa(s,s′). Thus, the next state s′ depends on the current state s and the decision maker’s action a. But given s and a, it is conditionally independent of all previous states and actions; in other words, the state transitions of an MDP possess the Markov property. Markov decision processes are an extension of Markov chains; the difference is the addition of actions (allowing choice) and rewards (giving motivation). Conversely, and ignoring rewards, if only one action exists for each state, a Markov Decision Process (MDP) reduces to a Markov chain. Following these definitions, the problem of solving the optimal promotion strategy can be fitted into the framework of stochastic dynamic programming models (Winston, 1994).The problem of solving the optimal promotion strategy can be fitted into the above explained framework since the companies try to find optimal policies which maximize their profitabilities under some uncertainty and probability.The general aim of this study is to develop a simple, applicable model, using predicted potential customer values, that provides a guide for future marketing decisions. Under this general aim, the specific objectives are:1.to determine the variables that are significant for measuring customer potential values in the banking industry,to develop a model that measures the customer potential values,to develop a guide indicating the future marketing strategies for customers based on the estimated potential CLVs.Although CLV is the value of a customer’s entire lifetime with the company, forecasts in the literature usually focus on a short time period (Donkers et al., 2007; Gurau & Ranchhod, 2002; Malthouse & Blattberg, 2005; Mulhern, 1999) because the models incorporating predicted future purchases for a long time period are subject to a great deal of forecasting error (Mulhern, 1999). Also, most companies focus their marketing plans on the next year. For this reason, as is the case in Malthouse and Blattberg (2005) and Donkers et al. (2007), the proposed framework tries to estimate the value of the customer for a short time period, namely one year. For this purpose, the variables used in the previous studies, together with the additional indicators derived from our exploratory research through in-depth interviews, are analyzed based on a regression model similar to those of Benoit and Van den Poel (2009), Donkers et al. (2007) and Malthouse and Blattberg (2005). Expert opinion has assisted the discovery of additional variables that are relevant to both the banking industry and Turkey as a country.The proposed framework is composed of the following steps:The variables that are going to be used in the annual customer value prediction model and the aims of the CLV maximization model are determined according to the exploratory study and literature survey.In addition to the literature review, in-depth interviews are conducted with experts in the banking industry in order to develop an industry-specific CLV model. CLV measurement is easier and more applicable for companies that maintain continuous relationships with a substantial percentage of customers and can thereby customize marketing “investments”, at least to some extent, across customers. Such companies include hotels, airlines, credit card companies, banks and financial service providers, companies that sell over the internet, telecommunications companies, cataloguers, retail stores with “loyalty/frequent-shopper” programmes, publishers and computer companies that sell direct to consumers. These kinds of companies are operating mostly in service industries and are also called database marketing companies in the literature (Malthouse & Blattberg, 2005). We selected the banking sector for this study and conducted in-depth interviews with experts from 11 banks operating in Turkish banking industry. In order to reveal the use of CLV in this sector, eight of those banks are deposit banks while three of them are non-deposit banks. Among those banks, seven are privately owned and four are foreign banks.The data corresponding to the selected variables are derived from the database for the years (2008 and 2009) under consideration.Using the determined variables, three regression models are built by artificial neural network (ANN) and least square estimation (LSE) based regression methods. Eighty percent of the data is taken as the train set and 20% as the test set (Hassoun, 1995; Montgomery, Peck, & Vining, 2007).The predictive accuracies of the models are calculated by the hit-ratio criterion (Duman, Ekinci, & Tanrıverdi, 2012). This performance measure is selected in order to compare the results with those of the previous studies of Donkers et al. (2007) and Malthouse and Blattberg (2005), which used the same criterion. As one of the aims of CLV analysis is to ascertain the most profitable customers, the hit ratio is calculated based on the grouping of customers into the top 20% and bottom 80% profitability segments. Following industry experience, the most profitable 20% of the customers are assumed to generate 80% of the profits. Once the values of the customers are predicted via the regression model, the ratio of the predicted top 20% of customers versus the actual top 20% of customers and the ratio of the predicted bottom 80% of customers versus the actual bottom 80% of customers are found.Customers are clustered according to the customer pyramid approach and the clusters are set as states. Mean customer values are calculated for each state.The clusters are formed based on the annual profit values of customers, as both the literature review on CLV and expert opinion support the idea of using customer values for segmentation–targeting studies. Therefore, the customer pyramid approach, which was explained in the previous section, is used for segmentation. Using this approach, the states of customers for the year 2009 are determined.The marketing actions that are offered to the customers, as well as their periods, are derived from the data and, from this information, the transition probabilities between states are found. States are the segments determined in Step 5 and actions are “doing/not doing segment-specific promotion”. Transition probabilities are elements of Markov chains. A Markov chain model is characterized by an N×N transition matrix, say P, where Pik(i, k=1,2,…,N) is the transition probability that a customer will move to state k in the next period given that currently he/she is in state i (the retention probability of a customer in state i (i=1,…,N) is given by Pii) (Durango-Cohen, 2013).The transition probabilities across the states are calculated by the formula:Pik(j)=#of customers transiting from stateito statekunder actionj/#of customers in stateithat are offered actionjDetermination of discount factor. The discount factor is determined. The discount factor is the yearly rate appropriate for investment in marketing. Businesses need to consider the discount factor when deciding whether to spend some of their profits on investment or whether to give the profit back to their shareholders. It is the rate that is used by businesses to discount money with time to make financial decision that span several years. Therefore, companies can form their marketing action plans according to their forecast of the discount factor based on the conditions of the market, technology, competition and other environmental dimensions.(i)Formulation of the problem as stochastic dynamic programming.Maximization of CLV and the specification of the optimal promotion decision for each state.Comparison of the results with status quo.As stochastic dynamic programming is the most widely used technique for optimal promotion strategy determination problems (Ching et al., 2004; Ho et al., 2006; Jonker et al., 2004; Labbi & Berrospi, 2007; Piersma & Jonker, 2004), the problem in this study is also formulated as a stochastic dynamic programming model – the Markov decision process (MDP). This maximizes the value for each state in an infinite horizon. At this point, the annual customer (profit) values turn into CLVs.In a Markov decision process, the optimal values vi(maximum expected CLV of a customer in state i) satisfy the following relationship (Ching et al., 2004; Winston, 1994) for each state i and j=1,…,M:(3.1)Vi⩾maxj=1,…,Mci(j)+α∑k=0N-1pik(j)vkwhere viis the expected CLV of a customer in state i (i=1,…,N); M the total number of marketing actions (j=1,…,M);pik(j)the transition probability for the customer to move from state i to state k under the jth marketing action in each period;ci(j)the mean customer value of state i and α the discount factor.The solution to the problem gives the maximum expected lifetime values for customers (CLVs) in each state together with the optimal promotion plan. For the solution of this problem please refer to (Ching et al., 2004; Ross, 2000; Winston, 1994). The values obtained from this experiment are compared with the status quo.Section 5 provides the application of the proposed methodology in the banking sector.In order to investigate the potential for the practical application of the proposed methodology, the banking sector is selected as a case study. There are 49 banks operating in Turkey as of 31 December 2009, with 32 being in the commercial banks group, 13 in the merchant banks group, and 4 in the interest free banks group. Among commercial banks, there were 3 state-owned, 11 privately-owned and 17 foreign banks (TBA, 2009).Banks offer a wide range of services and products. Moreover, they have good customer databases due to the importance of managing ongoing relationships with their customers. Our dataset includes the monthly data of 10,000 customers of a bank. It also includes the annual profit values of 10,000 consumer banking customers for two years.The opinions of the experts about the decisions that should be made in respect of customer lifetime values are obtained from in-depth interviews. Experts were asked to evaluate the need to use the CLV for different decision areas found in the literature, which are listed in Table 1. They were also asked to add another aim other than those listed if they deem it to be necessary. Table 1 shows the number of the experts who think that CLV should be used to make the related decision.As shown in Table 1, nine of the experts believe that CLV should be used for selecting priority customers, as well as for segmentation and targeting. Eight of the experts think it should be used for determining when to scale down or discontinue attention towards customers and for developing strategies for the marketing mix. Seven believe it should be used for developing strategies to determine appropriate distribution channels and to derive the marketing budget allocation/optimal promotion while maximizing CLV. One additional decision, which is shown as bold in Table 1, was nominated by three of the experts. Selecting priority customers and segmentation–targeting via customer value topics are frequently found to receive the maximum number of votes in similar interviews referred to in the literature. Accordingly, in this study we also used CLV to select priority customers and to segment customers. Although it was not the case in most previous studies in the literature, determination of an optimal promotion campaign, with the objective of maximizing CLV, was selected as one of the most important decision areas by seven of the experts. Thus, this study aims to fill this gap in the literature by focusing on the role of CLV as a tool for optimal promotion determination.Experts from the 11 banks were also interviewed to get information about their opinion of the necessity of variables found from the literature review. Table 2shows the number of the experts who think that this variable should be included in a model for CLV measurement. Eight additional variables, which are shown in bold in Table 2, were added to this list by some of the experts. Some of these variables, such as operational risk, credit loan refinancing probability and product usage in other banks, were not examined in the CLV literature because of difficulties with availability of the data. The other variables were not taken into consideration because of the necessity for industry-specific model development and because of the absence in the literature of a model specific to the banking industry. However, they are seen as significant by the experts.Subsequently, after also taking into account the availability of the variables in the data warehouse, 29 variables are selected. Recency and frequency values are not analyzed because the large number of products and demographic variables cannot be used as the data concerning these values are not reliable. The selected variables are classified into five broad categories according to the experts’ opinions: profit values (profits gained from specific services e.g. loans, credit cards), activity levels of customers and monetary values (total values of specific products e.g. EFT, loans), monetary risks (e.g. credit cards), product-related variables (ownership of specific products/services) and total assets (which is not a category, but a single variable). The exact names of the variables cannot be given because of confidentiality restrictions.The average monthly values of the variables for the year 2008 are obtained and the annual profits are calculated for 2008 and 2009. The profit value of a customer in 2009 is the dependent variable for the regression models, and other variables are selected as independent variables.In order to build a linear regression model, dependent variable values are analyzed. It can be seen that the variance is very high while the skewness is far from 0.000 and the kurtosis is under 3.000 (Belsey, Kuh, & Welsch, 1980; Draper & Smith, 1998). Therefore, it is concluded that the data are not normally distributed. The dataset includes very small and very high values and there are outliers. Therefore, some values have been removed and the percentiles table is then derived (Table 3).As it is seen from descriptive statistics (Table 3), the distribution is extremely skewed. Despite using the total data, we trimmed by 10% on both of the sides. By this way, the outliers were removed and the regression models are developed for the customers that have a profit less than $500 and greater than $0. Three alternative models are developed:1.an LSE regression model built by taking the dependent variable as it is,an LSE regression model built by taking the logarithm of the dependent variable,an ANN regression model built by standardizing all of the variables.Eighty percent of the cases are selected as the training set and the R2 of the predicted model is found to be 0.472, which means that 47.2% of the variance in the dependent variable can be predicted from the independent variables. The R2 of the test set is 0.441, which is close to 0.472. Therefore, we can say that the developed model fits for the whole of the data. In addition, the logarithm of the dependent variable is taken and a rival model is also studied, but the R2 of the training set is found to be 0.110 and, hence, it is eliminated.The R2 values of the ANN regression model are 0.46 for the train set and 0.425 for the test set. The MATLAB Neural Network toolbox is used for the ANN based regression model. The training function is selected as “Train GDM” while the Mean Squared Error (MSE) is utilized as the performance function (Hassoun, 1995). Since log sigmoid function is chosen as activity function, the data should be normalized between 0 and 1. This has been done by dividing all of the variables by the greatest value of that variable (the predicted results are again unstandardized after taking the values from the model). One hidden layer and one output layer formed the network. The network is trained with different numbers of hidden neurons until a minimum MSE (8098.01-unstandardized value) is reached. During the training process, the software calculates the MSE for different structures by taking the average of squared errors, where errors are the differences between fitted and actual output (dependent variable) values. The structure that supplied the minimum MSE includes four hidden neurons.As the R2 value of the ANN model (0.46 for the train set and 0.425 for the test set) is lower than that of the first model (0.472 for the train set and 0.441 for the test set), the ANN model is also eliminated. The variance in the dependent variable is explained better in the selected model which has a higher R2. Furthermore, ANN has its black-box nature which makes it difficult to interpret the relation between the independent variables and dependent variables. ANNs cannot always explain why they arrived at a particular solution and they cannot always guarantee a completely certain solution, they cannot guarantee to arrive at the same solution again with the same input data. Therefore, the first regression formula is used to predict the profits of customers whose profits are higher than $500 in order to see if the model can be generalized for all customers. The correlation for the predicted and actual profits is found to be 0.674, which means that the formula can also be used for them. VIF scores and Condition Indices were also calculated in order to check the multicollinearity of the variables. The highest VIF score was 1.3 which means there is almost no multicollinearity. Additionally the highest Condition Index was found as 5.44 which is under the critical value. Therefore it can be stated that there is no evidence for multicollinearity problem in the model. The details of the model structure are provided in Table 4. As can be seen from Table 4 28 variables are significant at 5% significance level, and one variable is significant at 10% significance level. The F value of the model is 28.614 and it is significant at 1% significance level.Among the independent variables that are positively associated with the dependent variable, the monetary value 1 (the total value of the average period balances of deferred-payment credits) and the profit values 2 (profits gained from fund transactions) and 7 (profit value of cash loans) have the highest impacts, respectively, as can be seen from the standardized coefficients.On the other hand, among the independent variables that are negatively associated with the independent variable, monetary values 2, 5 and 8 have the highest impacts. This result shows that monetary values (the total values of the services/products used by the customer) and profit values (the profits obtained by the bank as a result of the usage of these services/products by the customer) are of crucial importance to prediction.Another result derived from the model is that, as a response to the criticism made by Jain and Singh (2002), the product usage variables are included. For instance, as the total value of some specific services/products for the year 2008 increases, the value of the customer in 2009 increases. On the other hand, when some of them (intuitively loans, debts) increase, the value of the customer decreases. Another significant contribution is the inclusion of monetary risk variables, which have been ignored by previous researchers, and their models (monetary risks were found to be significant by seven of the experts). However, it is interesting to note that one of the monetary risk variables is a positively affecting variable. This may be because of the extra interest charged to the customer when amounts due are not paid on time.The analysis also indicates that some of the variables in the same category have positive coefficients and others have negative coefficients. For instance, some product related variables have positive impacts while others have negative impacts on customer value. This might imply that some of the products owned by the customer cause customer values to decrease, such as the number of products where the bank mediates the payments. This is understandable because the bank does not gain any profit from the payments that it mediates. Product/service ownerships were supported for inclusion in the model by nine of the 11 experts, which is a high proportion, and the necessity for their inclusion is proved by the model.As can be seen from the model, profits obtained from transactions influence positively or negatively the next year’s customer values. The same comment also applies to monetary values.The performance of the model is measured via the hit ratio, based on correctly predicting the segment of the customer. The hit ratio is equal to the number of customers that is predicted by the model to be in the segment divided by the number of customers that are actually in the segment.The regression model developed based on the 2008 predictors is used to forecast the 2009 values of the customers and the predictive accuracy is measured by the hit ratio criterion (Donkers et al., 2007; Malthouse & Blattberg, 2005). The ratio of the top 2000 customers predicted by the model versus the actual top 2000 customers is calculated and can be seen in Table 5. This is similar to the classification table in the study by Malthouse and Blattberg (2005). The table shows that of the top 20% of the most profitable customers in 2009, 32% would not be identified by this model. Similarly, 8% of the least profitable (bottom 80%) customers are misclassified. In order to compare the results of this study, the 20–55 and 80–15 rules derived as a conclusion of the study of Malthouse and Blattberg (2005) can be used. They evaluated a firm’s ability to estimate the future value of customers using four data sets from different industries. As a result of their estimations, they found that; of the actual top 20%, approximately 55% will be misclassified (the 20–55 rule) and of the actual bottom 80%, 15% will be misclassified (the 80–15 rule). Compared to Malthouse and Blattberg’s study (2005), our results are highly competitive.In step 4, the performance of the study is measured by the hit ratios for the top 20% and bottom 80% profitability levels of customers, based on the study by Malthouse and Blattberg (2005). Because of the proposed segmentation approach for the previous step, namely that the customer pyramid divides the bottom 80% into three more segments, being 30%, 30% and 20%, the performance measures are also calculated for this difference in approach (Table 6).As can be seen from Table 6, the worst hit ratio is 54.86% for the third segment, which is a competitive result when compared to the 20–55 and 80–15 rules of Malthouse and Blattberg (2005). This 54.86% hit ratio means that the proposed model in step 3 correctly classified approximately 55 out of every 100 customers that are going to be in state 3 next year. This model forecasts the most profitable and the least profitable customers more accurately. In fact, these two groups are the ones who have more stable behaviors. Probably, they stayed in the same segment in 2008 and 2009 consecutive years. However, the remaining two groups, between these two extremes, might be influenced by different factors. They seem to be “potentially unstable” in terms of profitability and their profitabilities are harder to forecast.The values of the states are determined by taking the average of the profit values gained from the customers in the same state. Table 7shows the values of the states.As can be seen from Table 7, the average value of the first state is very high and keeping the customers in that segment has high importance.An experiment was designed to observe the effects of promotions on customers. Two representative samples, each containing 5000 customers, were derived from the customer database, and segment-special promotions were directed to one sample while no segment- specific promotions were directed to the other sample. The study covered a period of one year, but the segment-special promotion was applied for only six months. As a result, it was possible to evaluate the situation both before and after the experiment.Transition probabilities between states for segment-specific promotion/no segment-specific promotion periods are calculated. Table 8shows the transition probabilities between states under the no segment-special promotion condition. This transition matrix will also be used for the status quo case. For example, the cell “state 1-state 1” denotes the percentage of customers staying in the same segment (state 1) next year. In other words, 67.7% of the most profitable customers of the first year stayed in the same segment in the next year under the status quo condition, and 23.7% of them transitioned to the latter 30% segment in the next year.The transition probabilities between states under segment-special promotions are calculated according to the same formula. The transition probability matrix is given below (Table 9).A comparison of Tables 8 and 9 does not give us a quick guide to the success of the promotions. For instance, the probability of staying at the first state has increased from 0.677 to 0.720 but the probability of moving to the fourth state has also increased. In addition, the probability of staying at the fourth state has decreased from 0.516 to 0.410, but the probability of moving to the first state has also decreased. These results show that the promotions directed to the third state are unsuccessful since the retention probability and the transition probabilities to upper states have decreased, whereas the transition probability to the fourth state has increased.a.In order to see the robustness of the results, the model is solved using three different discount factors (namely 0.90, 0.95 and 0.99), as suggested by the experts during our in-depth interviews. Furthermore, these discount factors were suggested in a similar study of Ching et al. (2004).Using Markov decision processes, the optimal marketing decisions are calculated with the discount factors of 0.90, 0.95 and 0.99 for infinite horizons. Here we have four states and two marketing actions (j=do segment-specific promotion/no segment-specific promotion). The mean customer values of states (ck) and the transition probabilities for the customer to move from state i to state k under the jth marketing action in each period (pik(j)) were calculated in the previous steps. Lastly, the discount factors (α) are assumed as 0.90, 0.95 and 0.99. Accordingly, the inputs are prepared for the model and the linear programming problem is solved by using an Excel spreadsheet.Table 10shows the maximum expected CLVs of each state together with the optimal action decisions.The expected values for an infinite horizon in Table 10 decrease when the discount factor decreases but the optimal action decisions do not change generally. Therefore, the solution can be said to be robust for different discount factors, but the resulting values change. However, for state 2, when the discount factor decreases from 0.99, the optimal action decision changes from do segment-specific promotion to no segment-specific promotion. Additionally, for states 1, 3 and 4, the optimal decision does not change for different discount factors.The values of the states decrease from state 1 to 4. Moving from this information and the optimal marketing action decisions, we can comment further about the behaviors of the customers at each state. States 3 and 4 have the customers with the lowest customer value, and it seems that applying segment-specific promotion does not affect their transition to more valuable states, since the optimal marketing action is selected as no segment-specific promotion. Furthermore, the company may decrease its profit by directing segment-specific promotions to those customers since they are costly. State 1, for which the optimal action is do segment-specific promotion, includes profitable customers and they seem to stay there if segment-specific promotion is offered to them. Similarly, when the discount factor is 0.99, the same comment is valid for state 2, but when the discount factor decreases, it is profitable not to offer segment-specific promotion to these customers.Table 11shows the expected CLVs in each state under different discount factors with the status quo case. To demostrate the findings, some values in Tables 10 and 11 can be compared. The optimal marketing action for state 1 was found as do segment-specific promotion and, on this basis, the expected value was $33314.940 for the 0.99 discount factor. However, in the status quo, this value is $32149.400, which shows that the former basis is $1165.540 greater than the latter one. Similar findings are present for other states.The results show that, when the problem is solved for an infinite horizon using stochastic dynamic programming, the total value gained from the states under the optimal marketing decision is greater than the value gained under the status quo, but the difference is reduced for small discount factors. The total values in Table 10 for 0.99, 0.95 and 0.90 discount factors are, respectively, $123307.900, $24394.826, and $12391.694. However the equivalent values are $118995.650, $23735.549 and $12140.262 for the status quo. This difference shows us the importance of keeping previous data for customers, mining the data and using optimization techniques to decide on future marketing plans.The resulting optimal promotion plan is proposed as offering segment-specific promotion to the customers of states 1 and 2 and not offering it to those of states 3 and 4 if the discount factor is 0.99. For discount factors 0.95 and 0.90, the optimal decision for state 2 is changed to no segment-specific promotion. A significant point that should be considered here is the nature of the promotion plan offered to the states. These results may have occurred because of the irrelevant nature of the actions taken and the customer characteristics. If the customer characteristics and behavior are analyzed and appropriate marketing plans are prepared, customers may respond to them and move to more profitable states.Due to the growing importance of customer relationship management, CLV analysis has been one of the significant concerns of managers. By using the CLV paradigm, the companies can make consistent decisions about which customers have to be retained over time. They can also determine the allocation of the marketing and promotion budget for each market segment and plan the most appropriate marketing strategies. Taking into account this primary importance of CLV and hence, the related gaps in the literature concerning CLV modeling; the major purpose of this research is to develop an applicable and industry-specific model that proposes a guide for potential/future marketing decisions based on predicted potential customer values. This study tries to forecast potential customer value instead of current one in order to make future plans since current customer value may not be useful for making decisions for future. Due to the fact that the banks offer a wide range of products and the previous literature has been limited to industries that offer only one type of product, the banking industry is selected as a special case study for the application of the proposed methodology. Since the literature survey shows that the previous studies have concentrated on optimal marketing strategies for the companies offering only one type of product or service, those studies used recency–frequency–monetary values in order to define the states. In fact; while data on credit-card transactions includes all of the recency–frequency–monetary values, the frequency values do not exist for some investment products such as forward accounts. On the other hand, the banks offer a wide range of products and a customer may use many products or services, such as investment products, and routine services such as electronic fund transfers, cash withdrawal, credit cards, and loans in the case of banking services. Therefore, due to this fact, in this study, this narrow framework is extended to multiproduct or service offerings and the recency–frequency–monetary segmentation approach is not adopted.With the aim of developing an industry-specific model, an exploratory research was carried out through in-depth interviews with industry experts at the preliminary stage of the study. The potential customer value forecast model proposed in this study show that two different groups; namely service-specific revenue/cost indicators and product/service ownership related indicators are significant factors in measuring customer value in banking industry. These were also viewed as significant by the interviewed experts. In addition; although the importance of the product ownership and usage related indicators was emphasized by Ho et al. (2006) and Haenlein et al. (2007), these indicators have been generally neglected in the models developed by researchers. However, our proposed model points out that these factors significantly leverage the value obtained from the customers. Another significant contribution is the inclusion of monetary risk variables as they are also ignored in the literature. Due to the fact that product- related variables and monetary risks are among the industry-specific factors, the model presented in this paper gives possible responses to criticisms about the previous models made by Jain and Singh (2002) and Haenlein et al. (2007) by indicating that CLV has to be measured by considering industry and product-specific indicators. It is obvious that, in order to increase the potential value of their customers, organizations in the banking industry, have to give priority to facilitate the use of certain services as well as to persuade their customers to use those services more frequently.Based on the study by Malthouse and Blattberg (2005), the performance of forecasting is measured by the hit ratios for the top 20% and bottom 80% profitability levels of customers. It is found that the performance is highly competitive when compared to the 20–55 and 80–15 rules of Malthouse and Blattberg (2005).An important result derived from the empirical findings of the optimization model is that the valuable segments respond positively to the segment-specific promotions by moving to more valuable states. Additionally, the results show that the total value gained from the states under optimal marketing decisions is higher than that of the status quo when the problem is solved for an infinite horizon using stochastic dynamic programming. As expected, the difference is reduced for smaller discount factors. The other important finding of the model is about the nature of the promotion plans offered to the customers for the states for which no segment-specific promotion decision is found to be the optimal. The basic problem for these states may be the lack of success of the current promotion plans. This result shows us the importance of keeping previous data for customers, mining the data and using optimization techniques to decide on future marketing plans. Additionally, this study shows that customer value-based segmentation is effective for optimal promotion determination if the company concerned offers more than one type of product.A further research topic could be solving the problem for a finite as well as an infinite horizon and leaving the decision of which of the results (finite–infinite horizon) should be implemented in real life applications to the managers of companies. The inclusion of demographic variables and the scope of segment-specific promotions would also increase the value of the study. In fact, the results of our proposed framework may be different with different demographic characteristics and promotions. Therefore, the implementation of the model with different demographic clusters and different promotions would provide a more valuable guide to managers for developing strategies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
