@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Managing raw material in supply chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Manuscript focuses on the effect of raw material procurement.Three case studies of firms are detailed explaining their different raw material sourcing strategies.Analytic models of these three raw material scenarios encountered in the empirical work are presented.Overall, results show that active management of raw material sourcing can add value to supply chains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sourcing,Raw material,Supply chains,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we explore how firms can manage their raw material sourcing better by developing appropriate sourcing relationships with their raw material suppliers. We detail three empirical case studies of firms explaining their different raw material sourcing strategies: (a) firms can adopt a hands-off approach to raw material management, (b) firms can supply raw material directly to their suppliers, and this may be beneficial for some agents in the supply chain, and (c) firms can bring their component suppliers together, and the resulting cooperation between suppliers can be beneficial for supply chain. We then analytically model the three raw material scenarios encountered in our empirical work, examine the resulting profits along the supply chain, and extend the results to a competitive buyer scenario. Overall, our results show that active management of raw material sourcing can add value to supply chains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As businesses focus more and more on cost reduction and fast response, policies on supplier relationships and sourcing are fast becoming an effective tool for creating value for customers. Such policies include decisions on purchasing, quality, and process improvement that buyers may execute in the form of contracts between themselves and the suppliers. Our focus is on a critical component of sourcing – the raw material (RM). We believe that with increased focus on core business activities, and the outsourcing of non-core activities, firms have slowly distanced themselves from some of the sources of value in their sourcing–like managing upstream RM. For example, in some contexts, like that of an automotive firm, a large number of direct suppliers of the firm may be buying their RM from the same RM suppliers. In this scenario, building close relationships with these RM suppliers may be valuable for the automotive firm.In this paper, we explore how managers can create more value from better managing their upstream sourcing via (i) empirical studies, and (ii) analytical models. Our results show that a firm’s active management of RM sourcing can result in a more efficient supply chain.The paper is organized as follows: First, we review the extant literature and establish our motivation for this study. Second, we describe our empirical work comprising case studies of three firms in three countries. Third, we model three RM sourcing scenarios analytically, anchor them to empirical findings, and then analyze the interactions between a buyer, its suppliers, and its RM supplier. We then extend the models to the scenario of a competitive buyer. We conclude with a discussion of how firms can develop better RM sourcing, the generalizability of our results, and future research opportunities.Our work is related primarily to the literature in the area of sourcing and buyer–supplier relationships. Many empirical and modeling studies span this literature, and among these, we can discern two interesting thoughts of creating value. The first assertion is that firms must operate in a lean fashion, and move away from the complexity that surrounds them: such focus is beneficial since it helps in improving efficiency (Masten, 1984). The second assertion is that managing the complexity in itself could be valuable (Fiol & Lyles, 1985; Helper & Sako, 1995; Nishiguchi, 1994). Our paper is anchored in the latter stream of research – we focus on the complex RM sourcing of a buyer and how managing this sourcing can be valuable.Suppliers of a firm can provide valuable information to a firm (Gulati, 1999) and intangible relationship-specific investments in a firm’s supply network can result in productivity gains in the supply chain (Dyer, 1996). From a buyer perspective, investments in supply chain relationships drive long term costs down (Nishiguchi, 1994), and affect new product development routines (Clark & Fujimoto, 1991; Kim, 2000). Such investments are usually focused at reducing the future uncertainty of costs, technology and information (Bensaou & Venkatraman, 1995) and component complexity (Bensaou & Anderson, 1999).Managing upstream sourcing can help create value in three ways. First, better RM sourcing can help decrease the manufacturing complexity related to sourced components (Masten, 1984; Novak & Eppinger, 2001; Parimigiani, 2007; Walker & Weber, 1987). Second, focus on RM sourcing can help with new product development. When OEM designers have more information about the RM, they are able to better predict the problems in new product development cycle, and thereby develop more robust products (Clark & Fujimoto, 1991; Takeishi, 2002; Wynstra, Von Corswant, & Wetzels, 2010). Finally, better RM sourcing can help reduce costs of sourcing by cost control at the design stage of components (Ahmadjian & Lincoln, 2001; Monteverde, 1995).In the modeling studies on buyer–supplier relationships, game theoretic modeling is common, with a focus on buyer–supplier contracts. Most papers focus on the immediate suppliers of the firm, usually at the downstream end of the supply chain (Baiman, Fischer, & Rajan, 2000; Corbett, DeCroix, & Ha, 2005; Balachandran & Radhakrishnan, 2005; Lim, 2001) and for single or multiple periods (Tunca & Zenios, 2006). Xia and Gilbert (2007) focus on interaction between a manufacturer and a dealer for demand enhancing services, such as sales support. In this paper, in contrast, we model the upstream end of the supply chain and focus on the raw material sourcing. In this vein, our paper is closest in motivation to the work of Majumder and Srinivasan (2008), who focus on supply chain networks.Bernstein and Kök (2009) explore cost reduction via process improvement in an assembly setting similar to that in this paper. Whipple and Russell (2007) discuss how collaborative transactions, event management, and process management can create value between distributors and retailers. Wynstra, Van Weele, and Axelsson (1999) discuss how value can be created in new product development process between OEMs, their first tier suppliers and second tier suppliers. Ellram and Billington (2001) document how an automaker facilitates the raw material supply to its machine shop contractor. This paper extends this research and explores how developing relationships with raw material suppliers can create value.This work is motivated by our empirical investigation into the RM supply chain practices in the automotive industry. We worked with three OEMs in three different countries: DMV in Germany, TMV in India, and TDV in South Korea.1Firm names are altered since we had to enter into confidentiality agreements with these firms, as we were researching areas in the raw material supply chain, and the variables of study, such as component level prices, are considered extremely confidential by firms.1We spent many months onsite at each of these firms. In this paper, we first analyze these three case studies by exploring their RM sourcing strategies, and then analytically model the three RM sourcing scenarios to generate managerial insights.A simple quote from a manager at DMV Germany exemplifies our motivation further. We asked “How much aluminum does DMV buy?”. The response was “We do not know. We don’t need this information since this is not our core competence”. Our studies of the sourcing of DMV (over many months) showed that the firm is the biggest buyer of aluminum in Germany, but it does not have a direct relationship with its RM suppliers for its aluminum sourcing (Fig. 1).We found that the raw material information was not part of the decision making at OEM firms such as DMV. TMV and TDV had different approaches to raw material management: TMV had initiated direct RM buying for some of its suppliers, whereas TDV had gotten its component suppliers together and was taking a cooperative approach to managing its raw material supply chain. Can differential management of raw material supply chain be beneficial for firms? Our focus in this paper is to study this very real and interesting problem, via three case studies, and also by using parsimonious analytical models, to explore conditions under which raw material supply chain management can be beneficial.DMV is a European auto giant and is one of the world’s ten biggest car manufacturers. It has 14 plants worldwide, with six main plants in Germany. We studied DMV’s aluminum sourcing. DMV’s annual consumption of aluminum is close to 150,000tons. The firm has thirty aluminum component suppliers (including its inhouse foundry) who are supplied by Germany’s three main aluminum suppliers. The sourcing network for aluminum for DMV is shown in Fig. 1B.DMV’s aluminum suppliers, including the inhouse foundry, buy from all three of Germany’s major aluminum suppliers. DMV’s sourcing network of aluminum is dependent on the technology used by the suppliers for RM. In Germany, the aluminum component suppliers use molten aluminum as input, and a high volume of production is needed to ensure that the molten aluminum process is viable. More importantly, molten aluminum cannot be transported further than 200kilometer without undesirable temperature drop; therefore, it is imperative for component suppliers to be physically located close to the RM suppliers. For DMV, most component suppliers, including the inhouse foundry, are within a 200kilometer radius of the molten aluminum supplier plants. Production and all the associated processes of DMV aluminum supply are structured around this delivery model.The suppliers of DMV make a 15% profit on the raw material and value addition of components supplied to it. DMV is a significant purchaser of aluminum within Germany, yet it does not have any direct relationships with its raw material suppliers for its total raw material consumption.TMV is an Indian automotive firm. In the earlier years of its raw material supply chain management, TMV engaged in a hands-off RM management. However, it has now embarked on a policy of buying RM for many of its suppliers of steel and aluminum components. It now also purchases RM as a single buyer from the RM suppliers, and manages the logistics, physical supply, inventories of raw material and disposal or salvage of scrap/offcuts of steel generated in the manufacturing process at the component suppliers.The transition from a hands-off to direct RM purchasing was complex (the firm still does not buy RM for all its suppliers). The firm aligned the RM suppliers, drew up longer-term contracts and developed processes for physical supply and tracking of raw material at the component suppliers. The input RM, and all the scrap and offcuts generated during the production process, needed to be tracked. Many of these activities were one-time investments to start the direct purchasing processes; however, additional work was needed every time a new component was developed.There were implementation issues related to direct RM purchasing. In India, taxes are levied on direct transactions between any two parties. This creates some inefficiency in direct purchasing transactions. If TMV wants to directly buy RM, then the material transfer from the RM supplier to the component supplier needs to be executed in a way that is logistically inefficient – material has to be transferred to TMV’s ownership and then sent out for processing to the supplier. This logistical issue is local, and somewhat lowers the benefits that TMV can hope to accrue from direct RM supplies.In this direct RM supply strategy, the savings accrue from three modes. First, savings come from the reduction of margins for the component supplier. The supplier does not have to buy RM, and therefore, the double marginalization effect on RM purchasing is reduced. Second, direct purchasing may lead to volume based reductions from the RM suppliers. The third avenue of cost reduction comes from the differential cost of capital between TMV and its suppliers. TMV sources its debt internationally and its weighted average cost of capital (WACC) is lower than that of its suppliers (there is a difference of>3%between WACC of TMV and most of its suppliers). Therefore, if purchasing is made with TMV capital, it may result in a lower cost to TMV than purchasing made with the supplier’s capital. This effect is over and above the margin effect of direct purchasing. TMV estimated that they achieve reductions of>2%over the prevailing costs for their supplies where they institute direct RM supplies. For TMV, approximately 70% of the cost of goods sold are related to RM. Additionally, their margins on their finished products (automotives) are wafer-thin. Therefore such savings on RM are an important part of their cost management.In this scenario, the total landed cost of any component can be affected in three ways. First, when TMV buys RM, then the RM cost for TMV is lower than (or equal to) the RM cost for any component supplier. Second, for components where RM is supplied by TMV to the component supplier, double marginalization on the RM is avoided, and this lowers the cost. Finally, TMV has to invest in managing the RM transactions, and also use its own funds to buy RM, which increases the cost to TMV. Note that different RM suppliers have different contract setting with TMV. For example, the supplier of virgin aluminum has long-term (‘evergreen’) contracts while the contract with recycled aluminum suppliers is open for yearly bidding.The raw material supply process at TDV is different from that of DMV, Germany or TMV, India. The process is collaborative, and involves its RM supplier, as well as all its component suppliers. The collaborative relationships between suppliers help increase understanding of raw material sourcing.On an annual basis, TDV and its suppliers come together and develop the annual production plan, broken into half-yearly buckets. One of the outputs of this joint working with suppliers is a detailed raw material plan. The plan is discussed and agreed upon between TDV and the raw material suppliers. Quarterly and monthly plans are drawn and on a rolling basis, contracts are settled for the following month.On a monthly basis, the component suppliers work with each other to finesse the production of components, including components for new products and those needing a joint development. On a day-to-day operating level, a lot of information is shared between the firm, the component suppliers and the raw material supplier. TDV manages this information centrally at its purchasing or sourcing “hub”. The purchasing hub has sourcing individuals working full-time on sourcing transactions, including logistics and negotiations. The day-to-day transactions of sourcing run on a web based system. The specific information available on the system includes details of production plans for the coming months, new models, changes in drawings, production schedules, quantity of components required and the quantity and grades of raw material required from the raw material supplier. This web based information is used by component suppliers as well as raw material suppliers, and is continually updated.We have observed that there are two types of fixed costs in setting up RM sourcing for firms such as TMV and DMV–startup and ongoing. The startup cost relates to the detailing of raw material at component level and establishing a material database so that raw material supply is streamlined. The raw material level details at the component bill of material level are not a part of the day-to-day operations at other OEMs that we studied (such as DMV). In order to develop such a database, the OEM has to collate accurate raw material information – grades, weights and sources of material – for each component. This is not easy, but once in place, the database is an invaluable source for raw material-related knowledge.The ongoing cost consists of managing RM sourcing–developing periodic (frequently monthly) schedules, linking supply with the payment cycle to the raw material and component suppliers, and auditing the inventory. Our study of the TMV and TDV’s RM sourcing shows that the ongoing costs of managing RM sourcing are insignificant compared to its cost savings – for example, TMV manages its RM sourcing (for a single raw material, for a single country) with just three full-time employees, and part-time support from one person in the finance department.In this section, we analyze the strategies for RM sourcing deployed by the three firms we have studied. We have two assumptions in our models. Our first assumption comes from the observation that there are very few, and many times only a single raw material supplier to an OEM. Fig. 1 shows three OEM supply chain networks: the current steel supply network of TDV, and the aluminum supply networks of TMV and DMV. At TMV, over 10,000tons of aluminum is transacted in over 500 different components supplied by 4 component suppliers (including inhouse foundry); and almost all of the virgin aluminum requirement of these four suppliers is supplied by a single raw material supplier. TDV has a single steel supplier who supplies the raw material needs of all its component suppliers. DMV has only three primary aluminum suppliers supplying its aluminum needs. We abstract this empirical result in our models and consider only a single raw material supplier.The second assumption comes from the observation that at the supplier level, material flows are fungible by an OEM, and therefore study of raw material flows for a single OEM can provide insights which are similar to that of a network in which multiple OEMs are participating. Consider an OEM such as TDV, and its brakes supplier. For their new truck, TDV’s development engineers sit with the supplier’s manufacturing engineers to develop detailed specifications for the brake, which will go into the truck that TDV wants to produce (call it Z). As plans develop, the brake system for Z is broken into component level details that are used for detailed drawings. Usually, the supplier takes over at this point, and starts the process of developing the Z brake system. The component drawings, arising out of specifications for Z, are unique to Z. Next, the supplier generates new part numbers and a detailed bill of material for the Z brake system. The bill of material will have some small components that are common to other brake systems (for TDV or another OEM): however, the sizes and specifications of material, the forgings, castings, and machining tolerances, will be specific to Z. This pattern is repeated when TDV develops a variant (“New Z”). Different brakes will be needed for TDV’s different trucks, requiring fresh development by the supplier, and culminating in specific bills of materials for TDV’s specific truck models.Thus, at the level of component supplier, bills of material for customer-specific, model-specific products are available. Even when firms such as TDV and TMV have platform developments, blurring the model-level details at component level, there is little commonality in components used by different OEMs. The OEM level raw material supply chain is fungible. Therefore, we can study the raw material chain for a single OEM, and should be able to generate insights which are similar to that of a network in which multiple OEMs are participating. We therefore model the raw material supply network as a single raw material supplier, n component supplier, single OEM setup, exactly similar to TDV’s steel supply chain setup. We relax this second assumption in Section 6, where we explore the case of competitive buyers.We explore three facets of the raw material supply chain. We first study the hands-off strategy of DMV. This setup is similar to a three stage chain – the RM supplier supplies to a number of component suppliers, who then supply to the OEM. DMV’s strategy provides an interesting base-case scenario with which we can compare and contrast other strategies.We then study how OEMs and their suppliers can benefit from managing the RM supply chain. We explore TMV’s strategy – an OEM buys raw material for its suppliers – and analyze how relationships with raw material suppliers can bring in opportunities for value creation.Finally, we explore TDV’s strategy – how can an OEM benefit by initiating cooperation between suppliers? While cooperative game theory models in sourcing arena are well known (e.g. Kohli & Park, 1989; Reyniers & Tapiero, 1995), we explore a hitherto unexplored variation, where the component suppliers of a buyer cooperate between themselves to streamline the RM operations, while the OEM merely provides a platform for collaboration. Our analysis shows that such active management of RM sourcing by the OEM can be beneficial for the OEM, the component suppliers and the raw material supplier. Our model differs from those in the literature in that we explore how cooperation between suppliers, managed by an OEM, can create value for the supply chain. Moreover, we model the interaction with the raw material supplier, which is our key motivation in this paper.In what follows, we model the three RM sourcing scenarios – hands-off RM sourcing, direct RM supply, and cooperation between suppliers. Our focus is on exploring how profits of agents in the supply chain change depending on the situations of RM sourcing and cooperation between agents. We assume that the OEM operates in a market with linear demand, and gets components from nsuppliers. These n suppliers get their raw material from a single raw material supplier and supply unique (yet complementary) components that go into the buyer’s final product. Although our context is the automotive industry, the model is general enough to apply to any industry that has an assembly process for the final product, (e.g., digital equipment or apparel).To model DMV’s hands-off sourcing strategy, we assume that the buyer OEM faces the demand curveq=(a-Pmb)in the market, wherePmis the market price. The linear demand assumption is consistent with the literature (Bulow, 1982; Weng, 1995) and enables us to develop a parsimonious model of raw material supply chain decisions, but the generalizability of the results to nonlinear demand functions is a question of future research.The OEM’s own manufacturing and assembly costs arevm. The n component suppliers supply unique components,i=1,2,…,n, which go into the final product made by the buyer. We use the subscript i to denote the component suppliers as well as their components. Supplier i suppliesλicomponents per unit of final product produced. Thus for quantity q of final product sold in the market,∑i=1nλiqamount of input components are consumed. Each unit of component i consumesθiamount of raw material. Component supplier i supplies its components at pricePito the buyer. The component suppliers get the raw material from a single raw material supplier at ratesci, have variable costsviand fixed costsFi. Whileciis the price of raw material sourced by component supplieri,videnotes the value that component supplier i creates by working on the raw material. In doing so, component supplier i uses machines and processing equipment, andFidenotes all these costs that are fixed in nature. The raw material supplier has a costcrper unit of raw material produced. Under this scenario, the profit functions can be defined for the OEM asΠm=q(Pm-∑i=1nλiPi-vm), for the component supplier i asΠi=λiq(Pi-θici-vi)-Fi, and for the raw material supplier asΠraw=q∑i=1nλiθi(ci-cr). The buyer’s choice is consumer pricePmunder contracts with component suppliers. Fig. 2shows this scenario.We assume the following sequence of events: First, the raw material supplier announces a price scheduleci. Then component supplier i chooses pricePi. Finally the manufacturer chooses the consumer price (or quantity). The game is solved by backward induction. This setup is similar to that of DMV, and is aligned with our two assumptions – a single RM supplier supplies to many component suppliers, and these component suppliers supply to a single OEM. Since the OEM sees the demandq=(a-Pmb), his problem is(1)maxPma-PmbPm-∑i=1nλiPi-vm.Then, the answer to the OEM’s problem is(2)Pm∗=a+∑i=1nλiPi+vm2,q=a-∑i=1nλiPi-vm2b.Hence, the component supplier i’s problem becomes(3)maxPiλia-∑i=1nλiPi-vm2b(Pi-θici-vi)-Fi.Now for component supplier i, the first order condition is∂Πi∂Pi=λiPi-θici-vi∂q∂Pi+qλi=λiq-λi2b(Pi-θici-vi)=0,soa-vm-∑i=1nλiPi2b=λiPi-θici-vi2b.This algebraic manipulation gives us the best response of component supplier i, assuming that each supplier responds simultaneously given the action of the other suppliers, asPi∗=a-vm+(n+1)λi(θici+vi)-∑i=1nλi(θici+vi)(n+1)λi.SubstitutingPi∗into (2), we get the optimal quantity,q∗=12(n+1)ba-vm-∑i=1n(λi(θici+vi)).The raw material supplier’s problem ismaxci,i=1,…,nα2(n+1)ba-vm-∑i=1n(λi(θici+vi))∑i=1nλiθi(ci-cr).However, since the first order condition’s matrix of this system is not full rank, there exists a family of solutions to this problem, namely(4)ci=1λiθia-vm+∑i=1nλi(θicr-vi)2-∑j=1,j≠inλjθjcjcj,j≠i∗=cj.,and thereforeciwill satisfy the following relationship, in addition to the incentive compatibility constraint of component supplier i(5)∑i=1nλiθici=a-vm+∑i=1nλi(θicr-vi)2.Thereby, we get(6)q∗=a-vm-∑i=1nλi(θicr+vi)4(n+1)b.So thatΠraw=2(n+1)bq∗2,Πm=bq∗2andΠi=2bq∗2-Fi,i=1,2,…,n. For the total supply chain, the profits are(4n+3)bq∗2-∑i=1nFi.In this section we focus on the case where the buyer engages in raw material supply (Fig. 3). The buyer buys the raw material directly from the RM supplier and gives it to the component suppliers. We assume that c is a constant material cost from the RM supplier.In line with the observations in the case study, we model three additional conditions. First, the component suppliers’ fixed costs are reduced because the component suppliers are not purchasing RM any more, and fixed costs associated with RM procurement reduce. In addition, associated transaction costs of ordering and procurement decrease. We denote the changed fixed costs of the component suppliers asFirm<Fi,i=1,2,…,n.Second, the buyer incurs costs to set up and operate the RM supply, to develop relationships with the RM supplier, and to manage the associated transactions associated with buying the RM (such as delivery of RM to component suppliers, accounting, and scrap recovery transactions). Let this new fixed cost of the buyer be denoted asFrm. TheFirmandFrmterms mirror the concepts of information costs Kleindorfer and Sertel (1979) or transaction costs Williamson (1985) in economics literature.The game is akin to having(n+1)suppliers, with the last supplier being the raw material supplier, and the other n suppliers only having a value added component in their profit functions. We model the game as a two step game. In the first step, the n component suppliers as well as the raw material supplier move simultaneously to determine their price levels (of components and raw material respectively). In the second step, the buyer OEM determines the market price or quantity. We use the superscript rm for the variables related to this game.Proposition 1The RM Supply Game(a)The equilibrium quantityqrm∗=a-vm-∑i=1nλi(cr+vi)2(n+2)band the component suppliers pricesPirm∗=a-vm+(n+2)λivi-∑i=1nλiθicr+vi(n+2)λi,i=1,…,n.The supply chain profits are given as:Πrawrm∗=8(n+1n+2)2bq∗2,Πmrm∗=4(n+1n+2)2bq∗2-Frm,Πirm∗=8(n+1n+2)2bq∗2-Firm·2(n+1)bq∗2SinceFirm<Fi, the component suppliers have higher profits compared to the hands-off scenario. The buyer will have higher profits provided thatbq∗2((2n+2n+2)2-1)>Frm.□The value creation in this scenario results from a change in component level pricing. When the component supplier does not buy the raw material, the working capital used by the component supplier in its business with the buyer declines. Consequently, the buyer revises the purchase pricesPito take into account the changed working capital requirement of the component suppliers. We can understand this by writing the pricing contract of the buyer with its suppliers as follows:(7)Pi=kici+kiivi,i=1,…,n;ki,kii>1,wherekiandkiiare the mark-ups that the buyer provides on the raw material and value-adding costsviof supplier i. Therefore when raw material supply is initiated,Pidoes not change merely bycibut bykici– the component prices reduce by an amount greater than the input cost of the raw material.The counter intuitive result is that the component suppliers benefit from the policy of RM supply by the OEM. The reduction in input costs of the component suppliers reduces the marginalization problem of DMV’s hands-off chain to an extent, by moving towards optimal quantity, and thereby increases profits of some agents. This effect is similar to that discussed in Majumder and Srinivasan (2008) who show that if the leader is separated from the retailer and manufacturers by more than one degree, then more marginalization can occur. The fixed costs of setting up the raw material supply of the OEM(Frm)also affect the buyer’s profits. If these costs are less than the increased revenue coming from the reduction in mismatch of supply and demand, then RM supply is a viable option for the buyer.In this section we formulate the RM sourcing problem in a three step hybrid cooperative/non-cooperative game setting. First, the raw material supplier announces the price for the raw material. Then, the n component suppliers bargain cooperatively and determine their component price levels. Finally the manufacturer determines the market price or quantity.We model the non-cooperative nodes of the game at the raw material supplier and at the market frontier. At the component suppliers end, using the Nash bargaining solution, we model a cooperative game between n suppliers, who bargain over achievable joint profits. In this bargaining game between suppliers, we assume that the outside options of the component suppliers are equal to their non-cooperative profits (hands-off scenario), that is to say that the component suppliers revert to playing the base-case non-cooperative game if they fail to make the cooperation work.Why and how does cooperation happen? Cooperation between suppliers leads to a more efficient, lower cost supply chain, creating higher value. However, as we saw in the TDV case study, such cooperation does not “happen” between the component suppliers, but is actively managed by the OEM. Cooperation is not free – TDV incurs costs for managing the cooperation: to develop relationships between the component suppliers. In our model, we denote this new cost of the buyer asFcoop.Proposition 2Cooperation between suppliers(a)The expected cooperative quantity is(8)qcoop∗=a-vm-∑i=1nλiθicr+vi8b=(n+1)2q∗>q∗,and the intermediate prices for the component suppliers are given byPicoop∗=12nλia-vm-∑i=1nλivi-∑i=1nλiθici+2nλi(θici+vi).The expected buyer profit is(9)Πmcoop∗=b(qcoop∗)2-Fcoop,and the component suppliers’ expected profits are(10)Πicoop∗=b(qcoop∗)2-Fi.The expected profit of the raw material supplier is(11)Πrawcoop∗=4b(qcoop∗)2.Whenn>2,qcoop∗>qrm∗>q∗, and the game results in the following relations(12)Πrawcoop∗>Πrawrm∗>Πraw∗,Πicoop∗>Πirm∗>Πi∗,Πmcoop∗>Πm∗,i=1,…,n.Therefore,The component suppliers as well as the raw material supplier in the cooperative scenario have a higher profit compared to the hands-off RM supply or the direct RM supply scenarioThe buyer OEM has a higher profit in the cooperative scenario compared to the hands-off RM supply scenario, and can have a higher profit compared to the direct RM supply scenario ifFcoop<Frm□In our analysis above, we have ignored the possibility of cooperation among a subset of suppliers – what happens when some suppliers would like to break away? In other words, is the cooperation within suppliers a stable solution concept?Let us now suppose that a subset of suppliers withn-mmembers wants to break away from the central coalition, which is managed by the buyer. Let the original coalition be denoted by A and the breakaway coalition by B. Then, there are m members left in the coalition managed by the buyer. We note that irrespective of this breakup, the members of B need to produce the quantity being produced by A, since it is the quantity for the assembly process at the OEM. In this scenario, we get the following results.Proposition 3Breakaway groups(a)The quantity bargained by both the coalitions (A and B) isqnew∗=a-vm-∑i=1n(λiθici+λivi)6b<qcoop∗,and the intermediate prices for the component suppliers are given byPinew=13mλia-vm-∑i=1mλiθici-∑i=1mλivi+3mλi(θici+vi),i∈A13(n-m)λia-vm-∑i=1n-mλiθici-∑i=1n-mλivi+3(n-m)λi(θici+vi),i∈B.The profits made by the members of the two supplier groups areΠinew∗=qnew∗λi(Pinew-θici-vi)-Fi,i∈A,B.If the total profits made by the two groups of size m andn-mis denoted byΠA+B, thenΠA+B<nΠicoop∗∀m.For the two groupsΠinew<Πicoop∗,i∈A,Πjnew<Πjcoop∗,j∈B.Therefore,The total profit for all the component suppliers goes down whenever a group of suppliers breaks away,The breakaway group as well as the remaining group of suppliers have lower profits compared to their profits in a single cooperative group□We now analyze the results of the three RM sourcing setups. Table 1summarizes the profit values from the various scenarios that we have discussed. Note thatq∗=a-vm-∑i=1nλivi-∑i=1nλiθicr4(n+1)bis a decreasing function of the number of suppliers, n.Table 1 depicts the supply chain agents’ profits on a common scale of the quantity sold by the OEM in the hands-off chain(q∗). First, we note that the differences between various scenarios depend on the number of suppliers, n. Second,q∗is a decreasing function of the number of suppliers n, and can be extended to a convex domain.Proposition 4Number of suppliers and components per supplierq∗has strictly increasing differences in(n,λi). ForλiL,λiHsuch thatλiH>λiLand fornL∈q∗(λiL)andnH∈q∗(λiH), we havenH>nL□Proposition 4 says that when suppliers supply more number of items per unit of final product (λiis higher), then an increase in the number of suppliers has a greater effect on increasing the optimal quantity compared to a case when the component suppliers supply less items. Alternatively, as component suppliers supply more components per supplier, the value addition provided by RM supply setup or supplier cooperation setup increases with increasing number of suppliersProposition 5Number of suppliers and RM content in componentsq∗has strictly increasing differences in(n,θi). Therefore forθiL,θiHsuch thatθiH>θiLand fornL∈q∗(θiL)andnH∈q∗(θiH), we havenH>nL□Proposition 5 says that when the RM per unit of a component is more (θiis higher), then an increase in the number of suppliers has a greater effect on increasing the optimal quantity compared to a case when the components use less RM. Alternatively, as RM content in components increases, the value addition provided by RM supply setup or supplier cooperation setup increases with increasing number of suppliers.Proposition 6Number of suppliers and RM costsThe difference in profits for the OEM between the RM supply and the Hands-off scenario as well as the component supplier cooperation and the Hands-off scenario has increasing differences in(n,c). Therefore, forciL,ciHsuch thatciH>ciLand fornL∈q∗(ciL)andnH∈q∗(ciH), we havenH>nL□Proposition 6 says that when the RM costcis higher, then an increase in the number of suppliers has a greater effect on increasing the differential profits from implementing a RM supply scenario compared to a case when the RM costs are low. Alternatively, as the cost of RM increases, the value addition provided by RM supply setup or cooperation setup increases with increasing number of suppliers.Managing RM supply may not be relevant when there is competition at the RM end, or RM suppliers are changing across dynamic industries for the OEM. This is because on the one hand, the fixed costs (of developing the infrastructure and relationships required to make the hubs work) for the OEM’s will escalate, and on the other hand, the prices of RM will fall due to competition of RM supply, thus making cooperation an unattractive proposition for the RM supplier. As a firm’s sourcing base increases to more suppliers, the cooperation scenario or RM supply scenario provide additional value with increasing RM content in sourced components.In this section, we examine what happens when there are two buyers competing for the same inputs and who engage in Cournot competition at the market end. In a Cournot competition scenario, players make their quantity decisions independently of each other and at the same time. Cvsa and Gilbert (2002) model a similar Cournot duopoly game, while Majumder and Srinivasan (2008) model a Cournot game between supply chains. Such a formulation will help us examine how RM sourcing can be beneficial in a competitive scenario.We assume that there are two buyer OEMsj,j=1,2, andj∼=3-j. The buyers face the demand curveX=(a-Pmb)in the market, wherePmis the market price, andX=x1+x2, wherexjis the quantity sold by OEM j. The manufacturing and assembly costs of the OEMs arevmj. The n component suppliers supply unique components,i=1,2,…,n, which go into the final product made by both the buyers. Each unit of component i consumesθiamount of RM. Component supplier i supplies its components at pricePijto buyer j. The component suppliers get the RM from a single RM supplier at ratesci, have variable costsvijand fixed costsFij. The RM supplier has a costcrper unit of RM produced. The variableλiis defined as earlier, so that for quantityxjof final product sold in the market by OEMj,∑i=1nλixjamount of input components are consumed. We use the symbolΨto denote the profits of the supply chain agents in the two buyer scenario. Under this scenario, the profit functions for buyer j isΨjm=maxxjxja-bxj+xj∼-∑i=1nλiPi1-vmj,j=1,2,j∼=3-j,for component supplier i isΨi=maxPi1,Pi2λi∑j=12xj(Pij-θici-vij)-∑j=12Fij,fori=1,…,n,j=1,2,and for the RM supplier isΨraw=maxci(x1+x2)∑i=1nλiθi(ci-cr).The sequence of events is now different. First, the RM supplier announces a price scheduleci. Then component supplier i chooses pricePi. Finally the two buyers choose the consumer quantity by engaging in a Cournot competition at the market frontier.For the RM supply scenario with two buyers, the only change from the hands–off chain is that the two buyer OEMs get the RM from a single RM supplier at ratescjand give it to the component suppliers. We use the superscript RM for this setup for the variables. Under this scenario, the firm level profit function for buyer j is(13)Ψjmrm=maxxjrmxjrma-bx1rm+x2rm-cj∑i=1nλiθi-∑i=1nλiPij-vmj,for component supplier i is(14)Ψirm=maxPi1,Pi2λi∑j=12xjrm(Pij-vij)-∑j=12Fij,fori=1,…,n,j=1,2and for the RM supplier is(15)Ψrawrm=maxc1,c2∑j=12xjrm(cj-cr)∑i=1nλiθiSimilar to the RM supply scenario with a single buyer, we model this game as a two step game. In the first step, the n component suppliers as well as the RM supplier move simultaneously to determine their price levels (of components and RM respectively). In the second step, the buyer OEMs determine the market quantity in a Cournot competition.The cooperative scenario is also complex. We assume that both buyers are operating cooperative sourcing “hubs” with the same suppliers, and the same raw material supplier. The profit function for buyer j then is(16)Ψjmcoop=maxxjxja-bxjcoop+xj∼coop-∑i=1nλiPi1-vmj-Fcoop,j=1,2,j∼=3-j,for supplier i is(17)Ψicoop=maxPi1,Pi2λi∑j=12xjcoop(Pij-θici-vij)-∑j=12Fijcoop,fori=1,…,n,j=1,2,and for raw material supplier is(18)Ψrawcoop=maxci(x1coop+x2coop)∑i=1nλiθi(ci-cr).The sequence of events is again different from the deterministic case. First, the RM supplier announces the price for the RM. Then, the n component suppliers bargain cooperatively and determine their component price levels. Finally the two buyers compete on quantity.The proofs of the above two games are involved, and are presented in Appendix A. For notational convenience, defineϒ=∑i=1nλivij∼-∑i=1nλivij+vmj∼-vmj.If the two buyers have the same variable cost, and get inputs at the same total cost, thenϒ=0.Proposition 7Two buyer Scenario(a)The optimal quantities in the three setups are:xj∗=2a-2vmj-2∑i=1nλi(θicr+vij)+5ϒ12b(n+1),xjrm∗=a-vmj-∑i=1nλi(θicr+vij)+ϒ3b(n+2),xjcoop∗=2a-2vmj-2∑i=1nλi(θicr+vij)+5ϒ24b.The firm level profits for the supply chain agents in different game scenarios are as followsIf buyersj,j=1,2, have the same variable cost, and get inputs at the same total cost(ϒ=0), thenxj∗=23q∗,xjrm∗=23qrm∗,xjcoop∗=23qcoop∗. The introduction of the second buyer improves the total quantity sold in the market, but each buyer sells less than that in a monopoly situation. However, under these conditions(ϒ=0), forn>2, profit for buyer j in the cooperative scenario under competition is better than its profit under the hands-off chain(Ψjmcoop(ϒ=0)>Πm=bq∗2). So buyers can earn more profits under competition with a cooperative scenario, than if they were operating as a hands-off monopoly.For buyer j, the difference in buyer profits between the cooperative sourcing setup and the hands-off chain setupΨjmcoop-Ψjmhas strictly decreasing differences in(vij∼,θi). Therefore, forvij∼L,vij∼Hsuch thatvij∼H>vij∼Land forθiL∈Ψjmcoop(vij∼L)andθiH∈Ψjmcoop(vij∼H), we haveθiH<θiL. In words, when the competitor buyer can source components from suppliers at a lower cost per unit of final product, then an increase in the amount of RM used per component has an increasing effect on the difference in profits between the two setups. So, as sourcing becomes more RM dominant, the effect of competitive intensity reduces under cooperative sourcing operations (see Table 2).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
