@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Innovation diffusion of repeat purchase products in a competitive market: An agent-based simulation approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper introduces an agent-based simulation approach for innovation diffusion.We use repeat purchase products with differing attributes in a competitive market.Both the temporal and the spatial dimension of innovation diffusion are considered.The model accounts for consumers’ multiple information sources.Using a multitude of sources, the sample application is grounded in empirical data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Agent-based simulation,Diffusion of innovations,Second-generation biofuel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When introducing a new product into market, substantial amounts of resources are put at stake. Innovation managers therefore seek for reliable predictions of the respective innovation diffusion process. Making such predictions, however, is challenging, because the diffusion trajectory is affected by various factors such as the type of innovation, its perceived attributes, marketing activities and their impact, or consumers’ individual communication and adoption behaviors. Modeling the diffusion of innovations accordingly is of interest for both practitioners and management scholars.An agent-based model can overcome many limitations of traditional approaches. It accounts for heterogeneity in consumer preferences as well as in the social structure of their interactions and allows for modeling consumers as boundedly rational agents who make decisions under uncertainty and are influenced by micro-level drivers of adoption. We introduce an agent-based model that deals with repeat purchase decisions, addresses the competitive diffusion of multiple products, and takes into consideration both the temporal and the spatial dimension of innovation diffusion. The corresponding simulation tool can support decision makers in analyzing the prospective diffusion of an innovation in scenarios that differ in pricing strategy, distribution strategy, and/or communication strategy. Its applicability is illustrated by means of an empirically grounded example for a second-generation biofuel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In order to survive in a competitive market, firms have to develop new products on a regular basis. When introducing these innovations into market, managers need to select appropriate strategies for pricing, distribution, and communication. Such decisions require a thorough understanding of consumers’ preferences, consumption patterns, and word-of-mouth referral behavior, which together with the firm’s strategies leads to specific diffusion processes and eventually market acceptance of the innovation. Thus, models that can predict the impact of a chosen strategy on the diffusion of a new product are valuable tools for managing innovation.Traditional models based on differential equations (e.g., Bass, 1969) represent the diffusion process at the aggregate level of the entire population. However, such models do not explicitly account for the heterogeneity of consumers who differ in their preferences, are distributed across diverse geographical regions, and are connected to each other in various ways. An agent-based approach can overcome such limitations by modeling the diffusion of innovations at the micro level. For a comprehensive survey of agent-based diffusion models and a discussion of their advantages see Kiesling, Günther, Stummer, and Wakolbinger (2012).Although agent-based models (ABMs for short) allow to represent rich behavior at the micro level, and to derive conclusions at the aggregate level from this micro-level behavior, they are often criticized as ‘toy models’ that do not adequately capture actual behavior in a real market setting, mainly because many of them lack an empirical foundation. The aim of this paper is to present a model that on the one hand is based on empirical data in the context of an actual case study, and on the other hand extends previous models in several directions by (i) considering repeat purchase decisions, rather than only initial adoption of consumer durables, (ii) representing interactions between multiple products, rather than a fixed market potential for the innovation, and (iii) taking into account the spatial dimension of diffusion.The real-world context in which we apply this model is the potential diffusion of a novel second-generation biofuel on the Austrian market. Using empirical data from this case, we demonstrate how the simulation model can be used to evaluate product launch strategies in a competitive setting.The paper is organized as follows: First, we introduce the agent-based model and its core elements (Section 2). Then, we describe the sample application (Section 3) and present exemplary results (Section 4). Finally, the paper concludes with a summary of findings and an outlook to promising areas for further research (Section 5).Rogers’ (2003) well established conceptual model distinguishes five phases in the adoption or non-adoption of an innovation: (i) learning about the existence of an innovation and its basic functions (knowledge phase); (ii) forming a favorable or unfavorable attitude based on information (persuasion phase); (iii) decision to adopt or reject the innovation (decision phase); (iv) actual use of the innovation (implementation phase); (v) seeking information to reinforce the decision (confirmation phase). In each phase, the individual may revert to a preceding phase, based on new information. Our model covers the complete process, including the two latter phases that are not considered in most previous ABMs. Fig. 1 gives an overview of its main entities and the dynamics between them.Our model also differs from many other ABMs in its representation of time and space. Approaches using fixed time intervals force events to occur at the same (simulated) time and results thus may depend on the specific scheduling mechanism used in the simulation (Radax & Rengs, 2010). Our approach avoids such modeling artifacts by using a discrete event approach in which specific events (e.g., communication, need/purchase, and post-purchase evaluation) are scheduled by stochastic processes at arbitrary points on a continuous time scale. Accordingly, each event takes place at a unique point in time and triggers subsequent events after inter-event times drawn from suitable distributions.The relevance of space for innovation diffusion processes has long been recognized in literature (cf., e.g., Hägerstrand, 1967). Still, space has rarely been explicitly considered in ABMs. In some models, the existence of communication channels between agents can be interpreted to represent space. In others, agents are allocated on a uniform grid that is used to structure social interactions. Our model, in contrast, assigns geographical locations to agents based on actual population density, and takes them into account in interactions between agents.The model at hand allows for multiple products (Section 2.2.1), points of sale (Section 2.2.2), and heterogeneous consumer agents (Section 2.2.3), who are connected by a social network that structures their interactions (Section 2.2.4).We consider a set P of m products indexed by i = 1, …, m, which are characterized by n attributes indexed by j = 1, …, n. The true performance of product Piin attribute Ajdenoted byvi,jtrueis typically unknown to consumers, who rely on (potentially conflicting) information. In our model, each consumer agent maintains a distribution of information on attribute values received from various sources. Furthermore, consumers are not necessarily aware of all products or attributes, but learn about them over time.Information reduces, but does not eliminate uncertainty about attribute values. Even first-hand experience may not provide perfect information about all attributes (e.g., a fuel’s environmental impact). We therefore introduce an attribute-specific parameter ojthat determines the “observability” of an attribute. Likewise, information obtained via communication is not necessarily credible, and thus is weighted with similar factors.Points of sale (POS) are characterized by the (sub)set of products they carry and their current prices. Product prices may vary between points of sale and over time. They are defined exogenously, which allows us to study the effects of pricing strategies.The model accounts for a set C of heterogeneous consumer agents indexed by k. Each consumer agent Ck∈ C is characterized by a number of parameters. Heterogeneous preferences are represented by individual partial utility functions uk() that, for instance, may take the form of additive utility functions with piecewise marginal utilities as in our application case. Additional parameters describe application-specific agent characteristics (e.g., mobility behavior).Since consumer agents do not know the true attribute values, their decisions are based on estimatesvi,j,kestof product characteristics, which are updated whenever a consumer receives new information. Consumers may not even necessarily be aware of all products available on the market and/or their attributes which is why information about individual awareness is also stored for each agent. In markets typified by low involvement, consumers are less likely to consider a wide range of attributes compared to high involvement markets (Jager, 2007). When introducing low involvement products, it is hence necessary to “educate” the market about the relevance of new performance dimensions. Attribute awareness is therefore a key aspect in the diffusion of innovations that differ from existing products in “new” attributes (such as the environmental impact as soon as biofuel becomes available).The social network is represented by a weighted and directed graph G = (C, E) with C being the set of consumer agents and E the set of communication links. Various algorithms to generate such networks have been used in prior ABMs of innovation diffusion, but these algorithms usually do not account for the geographical location of agents, although spatial distance between members of a social system correlates strongly with the propensity to form bonds and exercise influence on each other (cf. Latane, Liu, Nowak, Bonevento, & Zheng, 1995).Therefore, we adapt the algorithm introduced by Barabási, Albert, and Jeong (1999) and construct an Euclidean network in which the attachment probability depends on the distance ℓ(a, b) between nodes. Our approach extends the method of Manna and Sen (2002) by creating nlink (rather than one) links for each incoming node. Network construction starts with a number of fully connected “seed” vertices. Vertices are added iteratively, connecting each incoming vertex a to nlink existing vertices b of degree deg(b) with a probability proportional to ℓ(a, b)α· deg(b)β. Parameters α and β thus represent the influence of geographic distance and clustering. The original model by Barabási et al. corresponds to the case of α = 0 and β = 1. For α < 0, the model will favor local links.For suitable parameter values, the algorithm generates graphs that exhibit the characteristic features of social networks, i.e., (i) small diameter and high clustering (i.e., the small-world property, cf. Watts & Strogatz, 1998), and (ii) scale-freeness (i.e., the probability P(k) that a node in the network is connected to k other nodes decays as a power law, following P(k) ∼ k−λ, cf. Barabási & Albert, 1999). A specification of the algorithm and illustrative plots with random agent distributions are provided in Online Supplement A.The spread of information through multiple channels in a social system is a key mechanism driving the diffusion of innovations (Rogers, 2003). In our model, consumer agents obtain information through interaction with other consumers, from advertising, and from direct experience. They use this information to learn about products and attributes and update their information about attribute values. All information obtained is weighted to represent the credibility of information sources, or observability in the case of direct experience.The impact of information is assumed to decay over time. This is reflected in the model by increasing the weight for new information by et · λ, where t is the current simulation time. The attribute value estimatevi,j,kestfor attribute Ajof product Piis obtained by averaging over all weighted values received so far.Communication events represent communication acts between consumers who are linked in the social network. These events are scheduled using exponentially distributed inter-arrival times. Each communication event consists of two steps: the selection of a list of topics (i.e., product-attribute pairs) to exchange information on, and the actual information exchange.With respect to communication topics, we made three key assumptions. First, “consumers tend to talk when they have obtained new information”. Second, “consumers will pass on information about a product attribute if it is important and not expected”, i.e., the larger the change in the estimated partial utility, the higher the probability of communication. Third, “bad news travel fast” (which is supported by marketing research; cf., e.g., Anderson, 1998), i.e., consumers are more likely to pass on information that has caused a negative change in estimated utility.After each agent involved in a communication event has individually selected topics, communication takes place for the union of both sets. If both consumer agents are aware of an attribute (e.g., quality) as well as a product (e.g., the biofuel), they provide each other with their current estimates of the attribute values. We store the sum of all weighted information on each product-attribute pair (i, j) obtained so far by an agent k in variable Vi, j, k. The sum of weights is stored in variable Wi, j, k. The attitude of a consumer agent therefore can be calculated asvi,j,kest=Vi,j,k/Wi,j,k. When agents a and b exchange information, the information pool of agent a is updated asVi,j,a:=Vi,j,a+vi,j,best·wa,b·et·λand Wi, j, a≔ Wi, j, a+ wa, b· et · λ. The same applies for agent b. If agent a is unaware of the attribute and/or the product and agent b is aware of both, information flows unidirectionally, i.e., agent a becomes aware of the product and/or the attribute and receives the other agent’s current estimate of the attribute value (Vi,j,a:=vi,j,best·wa,b·et·λand Wi, j, a≔ wa, b· et · λ). Note that at least one agent has to be aware of both the product and the attribute, otherwise this pair would not have been chosen as a communication topic (for more details on the underlying algorithms see the Online Supplement A).Consumers repeatedly purchase products at need events. The distribution of inter-purchase intervals can be parameterized individually for each consumer agent. In our biofuel application, we use Poisson streams parameterized according to the reported driving behavior.The purchasing process consists of five phases: (i) POS selection, (ii) evoked set construction, (iii) price information acquisition, (iv) utility estimation, and (v) final purchase decision. With respect to POS selection, three types of consumers are modeled, based on survey data: consumers always choosing the same point of sale, consumers who pick a different point of sale for each purchase, and consumers who mostly use a small set of points of sale, but occasionally choose another one. The evoked set of alternatives then consists of products that the consumer agent is aware of and that are available at the point of sale. Next, the consumer agent obtains price information, which we assume to be perfectly observable. Using the agent’s utility function and current estimates of attribute values, the utility of each product in the evoked set is calculated. To take into account possible mistakes, a random error term ε is added to the agent’s utility valuation. The purchase decision is made by choosing the alternative that maximizes (distorted) total utility. This utility value is recorded, as it may influence future POS selections.First-hand experience is triggered by product purchases and scheduled at a random point in time between the purchase and the next need event. In an experience event, the consumer receives information about the “true” attribute valuevi,jtruefor each attribute the agent is aware of, discounted by an observability factor, since some product characteristics (e.g., environmental impact) are less observable than others (e.g., fuel consumption).In contrast to word-of-mouth communication, advertising information flows in one direction only. Evidence from the marketing literature (e.g., Day, 1971) also suggests that its impact is typically smaller than that of inter-personal communication. The main effect of advertising may hence lie in increasing the awareness about a new product rather than in influencing the evaluation of a product (cf. Sheth, 1971).Each advertising event communicates a set of attribute values of a certain product. Advertising may either make a consumer aware of the product or affect the evaluations of consumers who are already aware of it. We distinguish between (i) POS advertising and (ii) mass advertising. Further types of advertising events could be added with little effort, but were not considered relevant for our application case.A POS advertising activity occurs in a particular time span at particular points of sale. Whenever an agent visits a point of sale, all associated communication activities are executed as outlined in Section 2.3.2. Consequently, the impact of POS advertising on a specific consumer agent varies with the number of times the agent visits a point of sale.Mass advertising events are characterized by the time at which they occur and the number of consumer agents exposed to them. They may be directed toward the entire population, a certain geographical region, or a specified customer segment (e.g., consumers whose preferences fall within a given pattern). When executed, the pre-specified number of consumer agents are randomly selected and subjected to a communication activity. As in all communication events, consumer agents weight the received information by an event-specific factor.We illustrate the applicability of our model via the case of introducing a second-generation biofuel in Austria. Concerns about declining reserves of fossil fuels, high energy prices, many countries’ critical dependence on oil imports, and the harmful environmental impact of fossil fuel use have led to a surge of interest in alternatives to petroleum-based fuels. Second-generation biofuels provide such an alternative. They can be produced on a sustainable basis from lignocellulosic resources such as dedicated biomass crops, or non-food parts of edible crops. These fuels are potentially carbon neutral or even carbon negative (Naik, Goud, Rout, & Dalai, 2010). Our application case is concerned with the diffusion of a second-generation biofuel based on gasification and subsequent Fischer–Tropsch synthesis that is under development at the Institute of Chemical Engineering at the Vienna University of Technology (for a thorough description of this approach cf. Fürnsinn, 2007). This biomass-to-liquid (BtL) fuel is already produced at a laboratory scale in a pilot plant in Güssing, Austria; industrial scale up and market introduction are expected within the next five to ten years. The fuel is fully compatible with the existing infrastructure, easily mixable with conventional fuels, and should offer superior combustion properties, enhanced engine performance, and lower emissions.For the simulations presented in the following we assume that the biofuel is directly marketed to individual consumers (rather than organizations). Furthermore, it is positioned as an environmentally-friendly “premium” product instead of being blended with conventional fuels. We also do not distinguish between diesel and gasoline. These assumptions are considered reasonable by experts in the fuel market.An overview of the data sources and collection methods for parameterizing the model is given in Table 1. Parameter values as well as an in-depth description of our approach to obtain these parameters are provided in Online Supplement C.Potentially relevant product attributes were identified through interviews with an expert on fuels from the Vienna University of Technology. Subsequently, we set up a focus group discussion with consumers (as suggested, e.g., by Chattoe, 2002).With respect to the product attributes identified as being particularly relevant by the members of the focus group and after a pre-study has confirmed their view, consumer preferences were obtained from an online survey of a representative sample of 1000 subjects from the Austrian population carried out by a professional market research firm. As suggested by Garcia, Rummel, and Hauser (2007) and Vag (2007) we included an adaptive conjoint analysis. The conjoint experiment involved ten paired comparisons of fuel products characterized by six attributes with two to five levels (see Table 2).Fig. 2shows the distribution of part worths in the sample. Results clearly indicate that there is considerable heterogeneity in preferences, and, not unexpectedly, that price is a particularly important attribute for the majority of consumers.The survey also inquires the mobility behavior (e.g., annual distance driven), vehicle characteristics (e.g., tank size, mileage), and POS selection behavior (e.g., number of gas stations used on a regular basis). Communication behavior (e.g., frequency of communication about cars and fuels, communication partners), finally, was discussed in the focus group, addressed in the online survey, and also investigated in the course of a non-representative sociological study that was performed by students from the University of Vienna as part of their class assignments in empirical social research.Consumer agents were geographically distributed according to the population density based on the latest available Austrian census data (as of 2001; raster size 2.5 kilometer). Geographical locations of the 1571 gas stations in Austria (as of July 2010) were obtained from OpenStreetMap. This data set also includes the operating companies of the gas stations, which allows for distinguishing between branded and non-branded gas stations.Drawing from these various sources, we initialized our model with 10,000 consumer agents, set up the spatial model, and constructed the social network.Consistent with the conjoint analysis model, we assume that consumers have additive multi-attribute utility functions with piecewise linear marginal value functions. All products in our simulation only have attribute values that correspond to the levels used in the conjoint analysis. However, since consumers form expectations about attribute values, they might need to evaluate intermediate attributes values.The distribution of time intervals between purchases is parameterized based on each respondent’s reported tank size, range per filling, and annual mileage. Given the relative inelasticity of short-term fuel demand and the limited simulation horizon, we assume that need events follow a stationary process. Extending the model to weekly or seasonal consumption patterns would be straightforward. Furthermore, we assume that consumers refuel as soon as they run low on fuel and always completely fill up their tanks. The quantity purchased thus corresponds to the tank capacity of the vehicle.Based on data from the consumer surveys, we parameterized POS selection behavior as follows: 26.7 percent of consumer agents always choose the same gas station; 61.2 percent of agents most often (i.e., in 80 percent of their purchases) choose one out of four favorite gas stations; and 11.9 percent of agents have no preferred points of sale at all, but choose randomly. Data from the survey also indicates that for the majority of consumers (approximately 73 percent) price of the fuels offered at the gas stations was the most important criterion for choosing a gas station. Since price has high weights in the utility functions, selecting points of sale according to utility values should provide a good representation of consumers’ behavior.Based on our data on the number of product-specific social contacts and communication frequency, we chose the following parameter values for the spatial social network generation algorithm: α = −5, β = 1, nlink = 3. The latter parameter value is based on the average number of product-specific social contacts. The exponents for the network generation algorithm reflect our assumptions that communication about fuels is highly localized (i.e., low α) and highly clustered, which can be achieved with a moderate value of β. A network instance created with these parameter settings is depicted in Fig. 3and corresponding summary statistics are provided in Table 3.As we create three edges per node, the average degree is six and the density of a network containing 10,000 nodes is3×10,000/(10,000×9999/2)≈0.0006. Clustering is measured by means of the clustering coefficient (Watts & Strogatz, 1998); note that the corresponding coefficient for a random network with the same numbers of edges and nodes is considerably lower (i.e., 0.00062). We are not aware of any empirical studies that investigate the topology of interactions for our particular application context to which we could compare the characteristics of our network model. However, the statistics substantiate that the networks generated exhibit typical characteristics consistently reported in more general empirical studies of real-world social networks (e.g., Dunn & Gallego, 2010), such as high clustering and low average shortest path length.The simulation allows for evaluating scenarios in which various strategic choices are implemented. In Section 4, we provide illustrative results for a sample scenario that includes the four types of fuel listed in Table 4.We set fixed prices for standard and premium fuels, but experiment with three price levels for the biofuel to represent different pricing strategies. The price levels are supposed to be provided by the managers for whom the simulation runs are performed and could be derived, for instance, from underlying cost models.At the beginning of the simulation, only the two standard fuels are available. After t = 750 days the premium fuel is introduced at 548 selected gas stations (at which premium fuels are currently available) and another 750 days later the biofuel is introduced at 189 gas stations of a major Austrian operator. Thus, we simulate not only the diffusion of the biofuel, but also that of premium fuel, which allows an ex-post validation of our model.The diffusion process is triggered by initial information about the new product, and our model allows for the analysis of different communication strategies. For the example scenario described here, we considered POS advertising campaigns launched once the new products are introduced. These campaigns are assumed to last for 30 days, and to reach 5 percent of agents who approach the gas station during the advertising period.The simulationwas implemented in Java SE6 using several additional libraries and tools described in Online Supplement D. For each scenario, we performed 50 replications and analyzed them with respect to the number of adopters (having purchased the new product at least once), market shares (including repeat purchases), and communication behavior. A single simulation run contains approximately eight million events and is completed in about 15 minutes on a system with a 3.0 gigahertz Xeon processor.In the following, we provide results concerning the pricing strategy (Sections 4.1 and 4.2) since pricing is a particularly relevant managerial decision variable in this sample application (for more analyses see Online Supplement E). Still, the agent-based simulation also allows for investigating further aspects such as imposing a delisting policy, or the effectiveness of various marketing campaigns, roll-out strategies, etc. To illustrate these possibilities, we analyze a delisting strategy in Section 4.3. Finally, we will elaborate on the sensitivity of simulation results (Section 4.4) and their validation (Section 4.5).The development of initial adoptions and repeat purchases of the biofuel for the three pricing scenarios (p = 1.2/1.3/1.4) is depicted in Fig. 4. The plots cover only the interval after the biofuel is launched att=1500(days). Results indicate that the price increase of 20 Cents decreases repeat-purchase rates in the long run by about 40 percent.For products with innovative characteristics, awareness of specific new attributes is particularly important. After premium fuels are introduced at t = 750, for example, it takes about 250 days until half of the consumers are aware of the attribute quality, the particular attribute that differentiates premium from (branded) regular fuels. Our model allows to analyze those micro-perspective aspects of communication that ultimately drive diffusion. Biofuel differs from conventional fuel in the attributes resource type (i.e., biomass-based vs. petroleum-based), environmental impact, and consumption. Fig. 5illustrates the diffusion of awareness about these attributes after biofuel is introduced att=1500. Awareness of the different resource type spreads fastest, followed by environment and consumption.From a management perspective, market share (including repeat purchases) is a key figure of interest when a new consumable product is introduced (see Fig. 6 for the respective plots).Until t = 750, only branded and non-branded conventional fuels are available at the market. Within the first simulated year, non-branded fuels gain market share even though the branded gas stations slightly outnumber the non-branded ones, because consumer agents increasingly prefer discount gas stations over branded ones. This is in line with our empirical data indicating that for the majority of respondents, price had the highest attribute weight, whereas brand was relatively unimportant to most consumers.At t = 750, premium fuel becomes available at approximately 36 percent of all points of sale. Its market introduction is supported by POS advertising, which leads to rapid initial takeoff. Fig. 6 also shows that premium fuel sales observably cannibalize sales of branded fuels, because premium fuel is available at branded points of sale only.The biofuel is introduced att=1500at 12 percent of the gas stations. Depending on the price level chosen, market share reaches up to 20 percent (in the low-price scenario) within roughly one and a half years. Even in the high-price scenario, the biofuel achieves a market share of approximately 8 percent. Approximately four years later (att=3000), it achieves an average market share between 18 percent and 27 percent.Customer retention and switching behavior is depicted in Fig. 7. The chart panel visualizes the flow of customers from non-adoption to individual product adoption and between products over time. It shows that demand for biofuel mostly comes from former customers of branded and non-branded regular fuels, while only few users of premium fuel switch to biofuel.Our simulation tool records all communication events at the attribute level, which allows us to analyze the dynamics of communication content over time. This information could help managers to fine-tune advertising campaigns by putting more emphasis on some attributes or raising them earlier. Such an analysis could also include regional differences. Fig. 8 illustrates the development of communication for a single simulation run.One interesting phenomenon here is that communication about new products initially focuses on attributes that are also relevant for the previous products, most notably price. After the introduction of premium fuel at t = 750, there is a peak in communication about the “old” attribute brand, while the new attribute quality becomes a major topic only after some delay. The same can be observed after the introduction of biofuel, for which communication about the major distinguishing attribute of raw material peaks only 500 days after the fuel has been introduced.As a second policy example, we compare two dynamic pricing strategies, namely penetration pricing and price skimming, that managers could consider when planning the market introduction of the biofuel. Table 5lists parameter values used for the two strategies.A penetration pricing strategy, which starts at a low initial price and gradually increases it over time may be used to attract new customers and increase word-of-mouth in the early stages of the diffusion process. It builds market share quickly at the expense of short-term profit. In the rather competitive fuel market, in which price has a strong influence, one may expect this strategy to offer significant advantages.Alternatively, we also simulate a price skimming strategy, in which the new product is introduced at a relatively high price which is then lowered over time. This strategy generates high initial profits by first attracting customers with a higher willingness to pay.Results are illustrated in Fig. 9. Discontinuities in initial adoption and repeat purchases are visible at all points of price changes. There is a strong negative effect of price increases on repeat purchases, which undermines the attractiveness of the penetration strategy. Price decreases in the skimming strategy each trigger a new peak in initial adoptions. However, the number of repeat purchases at the end of the simulation horizon is still lower than in the baseline scenario with permanently low prices.In order to illustrate the use of our model in evaluating other decisions than pricing, we study the effect of introducing a delisting policy for the biofuel. The policy requires that fuel obtains a market share of at least 5 percent at a point of sale, otherwise it will no longer be offered there. This policy is applied uniformly across all points of sale. The constraint is checked every 100 days, and a product is discontinued if sales are below the threshold at three consecutive observations. All the other parameters and decision variables remain unchanged from the sample scenario. Fig. 10 shows the corresponding development of market shares over time.In the low price scenario, the delisting rule does not impact the diffusion process, since market share exceeds the threshold at all gas stations. At higher price levels, however, there is a kink in sales growth as the product is delisted at several points of sale. This impact is moderate at a price of p = 1.3, but becomes dramatic for p = 1.4.As a means for evaluating the robustness of our results and to identify critical parameters, sensitivity analyses with respect to population size and social network parameters have been performed.Experiments with varying population sizes of 1000, 5000, 10,000, and 15,000 consumer agents showed that the paths of the biofuel market shares over time are very robust for population sizes of 5000 and above (see Fig. 11).We also investigated the influence of the network density parameter nlink = 2/3/4/5, the spatial parameter α = − 1/ − 2/ − 3/ − 4/ − 5, and the clustering parameter β = 1/2/3, and combinations thereof. These parameters indeed affect simulation results to some degree. As could be expected, higher network density increases the rate of adoption and market share (see Fig. 12).Parameters α and β affect the speed of sales growth. A lower value of α and, accordingly, a more localized interaction structure tends to slow down growth in sales. The clustering parameter β positively impacts sales growth (see Fig. 13). However, the simulation results for our specific application case also suggest that the effect of network structure is not as pronounced as might be expected. Information about the new product is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for agents to change their behavior. Thus, actual adoption proceeds slowly even when information spreads more rapidly.Validating ABMs is a challenging task because of the many parameters involved and other methodological issues (cf. Fagiolo, Windrum, & Moneta, 2007; Ormerod & Rosewell, 2009). In the context of innovation diffusion, difficulties arise from creating realistic networks, collecting individual-level data, and tracking diffusion at a disaggregate level (Peres, Muller, & Mahajan, 2010).Following Knepell and Arangno (1993), we performed extensivetests to check for conceptual validity, internal validity, micro-level external validity, macro-level external validity, and cross-model validity. Conceptual validity is reached when the underlying conceptual model adequately characterizes the real-world phenomenon under study; internal validity refers to the correct implementation of computer code; external validity concerns the relationship of model behavior to the actual system; and cross-model validation compares the results of different modeling approaches.Conceptual validity of our model is achieved through the solid grounding in well-established theory, in particular in the conceptual framework for innovation diffusion by Rogers (2003).In order to assure internal validity, the software was tested thoroughly during the implementation process to ensure conformance with the specified formal model. We performed extensive unit and integration tests and also conducted simulation experiments with “extreme” parameter settings to verify that they yielded the expected results (e.g., diffusion fails at very high price levels, if the product is not available, etc.).As a first step toward establishing micro-level validity, we carefully examined the survey data used for parametrization. Individual behavior of agents, as recorded in the system logfiles, was analyzed to verify that individual agent decisions (e.g., with respect to POS selection, communication behavior, and purchase decisions) are reasonable and correspond to results from the surveys.Macro-level validation of innovation diffusion models is difficult because real-world diffusion data is only available after the fact. For our application, we first resorted to face validation of macro-level results. An energy market expert asserted that diffusion rates and market shares obtained from our model are reasonable. Also, simulation results reproduce well-known stylized facts such as the typically S-shaped curve of innovation diffusion. Furthermore, market shares in steady state are consistent with those expected from the collected conjoint data. Finally, our simulation results for premium fuel diffusion, which already took place, are consistent with the limited real-world data available. Since detailed data for Austria is not publicly available, we compared premium market shares in the simulation against some market share projections for this segment from Germany, a country similar to Austria in these respects. This comparison also supports the conclusion that simulation results are plausible.Cross-model validation was performed by comparing our results to the widely used aggregate Bass model. We fitted the Bass model to the average diffusion curves for three price levels using nonlinear least squares. Overall, we find that the Bass model fits the simulation output reasonably well (Rp=1.22=0.68;Rp=1.32=0.68;Rp=1.42=0.61) and conclude that the simulation does indeed reproduce the stylized facts embodied in the Bass model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have introduced an agent-based model that can be used to simulate the diffusion of repeat purchase products in a competitive setting and have demonstrated its parametrization based on empirical data. Decision makers are thus provided with a quantitative projection of the impact of different strategies for new product market introduction. The diffusion of a second-generation biofuel on the Austrian market, as referred to in our case study, could not have been adequately captured by existing models, because it requires the consideration of repeat purchases. Further key innovations of our model include the continuous-time and continuous-space approach, the consideration of multiple products with different attributes, and the opportunity to model various marketing mix variables. The model accounts for consumers’ multiple information sources, including post-purchase evaluation and topic-oriented communication in a spatially explicit social network.In our view, these technical extensions of the ABM are not the only contributions of our work. A primary aim of our study was to demonstrate that it is possible to obtain sufficiently detailed real-world data to provide an empirical foundation for such a detailed and complex model. This required the use of a multitude of data collection techniques and sources to instantiate the model for this particular application case. Yet, we think that by this effort we were able to demonstrate that the need for detailed micro-level data can indeed be fulfilled, and that such a simulation can actually be grounded in empirical data. We consider this as an important step in taking ABMs from ‘toy models’ of a hypothetical world to useful tools in real-life applications.Still, there are some limitations and remaining challenges. Although we have grounded the model in well-established theory wherever possible, various aspects could be refined further. One salient area is the modeling of social networks and word-of-mouth interactions. While the spatial generative algorithm adopted in this paper yields promising results for our application case, finding appropriate generative algorithms and parameter settings for other applications remains a challenge. Due to the significant impact of social structure on diffusion patterns, future empirical research should address the impact of different types of markets and product characteristics on network structures and, accordingly, aim to identify appropriate network models for a variety of possible applications.Furthermore, we had to rely on available literature on general word-of-mouth referral behavior to ground our communication model, because there is currently no fully developed theoretical framework that explains what information consumers exchange and when they do so. This may be attributed to the considerable differences that exist between product categories and markets. The proposed model can be parameterized, extended, and modified in various ways to account for differences in communication behavior across products, but such extensions require more empirical research and theory development.In order to be used for a wider range of applications, the model also needs to incorporate additional aspects and alternative mechanisms dealing with, for instance, less regular purchase patterns or normative influences determining the social acceptance of a product (cf. Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004). Moreover, the agent-based simulation approach could be extended to address multi-generation diffusion (cf. Jiang & Jain, 2012).The simulation may also serve as a tool for teaching. Scenarios that enable students to test various strategic choices can be designed with little effort and the model could be expanded into an interactive business gaming simulation in which multiple participants compete in a simulated market, each controlling their own firm and launching their own products.Finally, our simulation tool so far “only” simulates the (market) outcomes for a given scenario (i.e., set of strategies for price, distribution, and communication). It will be a challenging, but rewarding, research endeavor to embed the agent-based model in a simulation-optimization framework supporting decision makers in identifying the optimal strategy.