@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The informational aspect of the group-buying mechanism

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the group-buying mechanism from a dynamic perspective in a rational expectations framework.We characterize the rational expectations equilibrium with customer choice of purchasing time.We show how information and demand dynamics affect the rational expectations equilibrium.We derive the condition for the optimal group size to maximize the seller’s profit.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-commerce,Group buying,Information update,Rational expectations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper studies the group-buying mechanism from a dynamic perspective. We consider a seller that offers a product in the form of group buying (priced low but uncertain) and spot purchasing (priced high but guaranteed). In the case of group buying, the information associated with the number of participating customers is updated in the middle of the sale. Customers are assumed to be strategic with a time-dependent utility. In addition to choosing between spot purchasing and group buying, customers could choose to delay their decisions until the information update. We characterize the customer behavior within a rational expectations framework. We then consider the effect of information and demand dynamics. Our results show that whereas an improvement in information quality has a positive effect on customer surplus and the group-buying success rate, the effect of inter-temporal demand correlation is mixed. We also discuss the seller’s profit maximization problem and derive the condition to be satisfied at the optimal group size.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Group buying has emerged as a popular sales strategy in the new millennium. Also known as collective buying, it “offers products and services at significantly reduced prices on the condition that a minimum number of buyers would make the purchase.”1Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_buying/.1Sellers usually offer group buying through third-party platform firms such as Groupon and LivingSocial.com. It is estimated that the total global group-buying market will reach nearly $4billion by 2015.The rationale behind the group-buying business model has attracted much interest (e.g., see Doukidis, Pramatari, & Lekakos, 2008, Dholakia, 2010, Edelman et al., 2012, Jing & Xie, 2011). One of the most distinctive features of the strategy is that group-buying customers receive products at a discount price only if the minimum number of the sales volume is reached. Due to this uncertainty, group buying could induce customer social interaction, which aligns the interests of participating customers with that of the seller (Jing & Xie, 2011). Group buying can therefore extract an effort from group-buying customers to help the seller boost its sales. Although it is debatable whether such an effort extraction is unique to group buying,2The dynamic pricing strategy, for instance, may incorporate a dynamic diffusion among customers (Bass, 1969), which induces the seller to adopt a lower price at an early stage. This is one example of penetration pricing.2there is no doubt that the mutual influence among customers plays a key role in shaping the demand. Jing and Xie (2011) demonstrate this observation in a static setting, and we aim to study it in a dynamic framework. The shift from static to dynamic introduces some interesting problems. For example, in a dynamic setting, group buying must deal with inter-temporal demand shift, a condition further contingent on the information updated during its course (more specifically, the information that reveals the number of existing group-buying customers). The practical implications of this study have been confirmed by empirical work (Kauffman & Wang, 2001, 2002; Kauffman, Lai, & Ho, 2010a, Kauffman, Lai, & Lin, 2010b; Zhou, Xu, & Liao, 2013). The empirical work shows that group-buying demand is indeed influenced by customers’ observation of the number of existing customers. In addition to discussing the effect of the information update, we also investigate the effectiveness of using group buying as a means for price discrimination. Due to the popularity of group-buying platforms such as Groupon and LivingSocial.com, sellers usually only pay attention to the advertising effect of group buying, and thus overlook that the strategy also serves the purpose of price discrimination. We study this overshadowed function of group buying and reveal the underlying tradeoff: On the one hand, sellers could make use of group buying to expand their customer bases; on the other hand, they do not want group buying to erode those high-margin customers who would otherwise purchase at a higher price in the spot sales.To investigate how the mutual influence among group-buying customers takes effect in a dynamic way, we incorporate three key elements into our analysis: strategic customer behavior, information dynamics and demand dynamics. Strategic customer behavior indicates that customers can shift their purchasing decisions inter-temporally. For instance, Kauffman and Wang (2001) observe that when the percentage of orders required to reach the next price drop is 25% or less, there is an average of 4.264 more orders per 3-hour time period (or 2.961 if limit orders are excluded). They refer to this as the before-price drop effect (BPDE) and provide a possible explanation: “When the numbers of orders needed are small enough to be within a potential buyer’s perceived price threshold, the person will be more likely to act upon the expectation that the price will drop in the near future.” Hence, to achieve information advantage, customers find it rational to delay their decisions. The informational concern brings out the second key element in our analysis: information dynamics. In this connection, we first consider a dichotomous-choice situation involving information revelation and then generalize our discussion to information quality. Our results show that information revelation or an improvement in information quality benefits customers and also increases the group-buying success rate. The third key element, i.e., demand dynamics, reveals how different inter-temporal realizations of demand affect customer behavior. Such dynamics are of interest because newly arrived customers choose whether to participate in the group buying based on the number of existing customers, thus offering a positive feedback. More specifically, in the case of group buying, the early influx of group-buying customers may induce more to follow, which accords with a positive-feedback pattern (see Shapiro & Varian, 1999). Nonetheless, we show that the effects of such positive feedback on customer surplus and group buying are both mixed. That is, positive feedback does not necessarily improve the customer surplus or the seller’s profit. Positive feedback can work in two ways. First, it attracts more customers when the early demand realization is good. Second, when the early demand realization is bad, it works in the opposite way to depress future demand.3A similar discussion regarding the chilling/warming effect of network externalities on product growth can be found in the marketing literature (Goldenberg, Libai, & Muller, 2010; Tellis, 2010).3Hence, the overall effect is mixed.We conduct our analysis using a two-period model. Two options, i.e., group buying and spot buying, are provided in each period at different prices. For the spot-buying option, delivery is made immediately, and for the group-buying option, delivery is scheduled at the end of the second period. There are two customer segments in each period, labelled as high-end and low-end. High-end customers can choose either option and shift their purchasing decisions inter-temporally. The number of low-end customers in each period is random, which makes delaying their decisions to wait for the information update at the beginning of the second period (i.e., the revelation of the number of existing group-buying customers) meaningful for the high-end customers, who arrive early. However, utility loss occurs due to the delay. All of the results obtained in the analysis are based on the assumption of rational expectations (RE), i.e., customers have a true belief in the group-buying success rate.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the related literature and identify our contributions. In Section 3, we present the model setup and derive the main results of the general model. We differentiate the general model in Section 4 according to the information and demand dynamics and provide a discussion of seller-side optimization. We carry out the numerical studies in Section 5. We conclude the paper with a discussion of future research topics in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
