@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Constant and variable returns to scale DEA models for socially responsible investment funds

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose constant and variable returns to scale DEA models to evaluate SRI fund performance.These models can be computed in all phases of the business cycle.An empirical investigation on European SRI funds indicates that the returns to scale are variable.We have analyzed the degree of social responsibility and the performance of the funds.An empirical study suggests that the ethical objective can be pursued without sacrificing financial reward.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Finance,Mutual fund performance evaluation,Socially responsible investing,Returns to scale,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to evaluate the performance of socially responsible investment (SRI) funds, we propose some models which use data envelopment analysis (DEA) and can be computed in all phases of the business cycle. These models focus on the most crucial elements of an investment in mutual funds.In the literature both constant and variable returns to scale DEA models have been used to evaluate the performance of mutual funds. We carry out an empirical investigation on European SRI equity funds to test the presence of returns to scale (RTS).Another aspect taken into account by the empirical investigation is the measurement of the degree of social responsibility of SRI equity funds in various European countries. In addition, we analyse the performance of the funds considered with the different DEA models proposed, which differ in the way the ethical objective is taken into account.Moreover, the paper focuses on another crucial issue regarding socially responsible investing: the comparison of the performances between SRI and non-SRI funds. The empirical study suggests that the ethical objective can be pursued without having to renounce financial rewards.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA) can be used to define mutual fund performance measures that let us take into consideration several input variables, such as different risk measures and the initial and exit fees of the investment, as well as several output variables, such as a return indicator but also indicators related to other objectives of the investors (see e.g. Murthi et al. (1997) and Basso and Funari (2001)).DEA models can also easily integrate non-financial objectives that drive the choices of investors who turn their attention to socially responsible investing (SRI). Actually, the market of socially responsible investment funds has seen a marked increase in the last decade both in the US and in Europe, while the traditional indicators used to evaluate the performance of mutual funds do not allow to take account of non-financial aspects, such as the ethical level of mutual funds. Along this line, Basso and Funari (2003) present some DEA models designed to evaluate the performance of SRI funds, which explicitly consider the ethical level of the mutual funds among the outputs.In order to evaluate the performance of both SRI and non-SRI funds, we apply some special models which use the DEA technique. Unlike much of the literature on mutual funds, in this contribution we propose to focus on what can be considered as the most crucial elements of an investment in mutual funds: the capital which is invested at the beginning of the holding period, the risk that has to be sustained, the final value which is withdrawn at the end of the holding period and a measure of the degree of social responsibility.In order to compute the net final value of the investment, first of all we have to choose the initial capital and the holding period of the investment. Then we have to take into account the charges entailed by the investment in the mutual fund (initial or exit fees), which lower the overall profitability of the financial investment. Let the capital invested in the mutual funds, net of the initial fees, be the same for all funds (say equal to 1); this means that the payout required by fund j (withj=1,2,…,n,nbeing the number of mutual funds considered) is equal to(1)Kj=11-cIjj=1,2,…,n,while the final value of the investment net of the exit fee can be computed as follows(2)Mj=(1+Rj)T(1-cEj)j=1,2,…,n,whereRjdenotes the mean rate of return of fund j in the holding period of length T considered, measured on an annual basis using the compound interest regime, andcIjandcEjdenote the initial and exit charges required by the fund.Note thatMj⩾0∀j; this means that, using the final value as a measure of profitability in place of the mean return, we overcome the computational difficulties encountered in slump periods, in which the mean return is negative for many mutual funds. This is especially important in periods of financial crises, when the historical mean returns of most mutual funds are negative and the models that rely on mean returns are forced to resort to one of the devices suggested to deal with the problem of the presence of negative data in DEA models, that often complicate the interpretation of the DEA scores. For example, among the models which can be used in order to tackle the problem of negative output data in the DEA analysis we may cite the additive models, which are translation invariant (see Cooper et al. (2000), Ali and Seiford (1990) and Lovell and Pastor (1995)), the input oriented BCC model (see Chen and Lin (2006)), the range directional model proposed in Silva Portela et al. (2004) and the semi-oriented radial measure recently proposed in Emrouznejad et al. (2010), Lamb and Tee (2012) also propose a way to deal with negative risk measures.As for the question of which DEA model is more suitable for the evaluation of the performance of SRI and non-SRI funds, we may wonder whether it is better to use a constant or a variable returns to scale model; for a discussion on the issue of returns to scale (RTS) in DEA we refer to Banker et al. (2011). In the literature both the CCR and the BCC models (see e.g. Cooper et al. (2000)) have been used to evaluate the performance of mutual funds, often without an explicit discussion of the motivations. On the one hand, the CCR model, which exhibits constant returns to scale (CRS), has the advantage of allowing for a generalization of well known financial performance indices such as the Sharpe ratio (see the pioneering contributions Murthi et al. (1997) and Basso and Funari (2001)). On the other hand, the BCC models are more flexible and allow to consider variable returns to scale (VRS) (see for example Glawischnig and Sommersguter-Reichmann (2010)); an empirical investigation of RTS in the mutual fund market is presented in Kerstens et al. (2011).As for the orientation of the models, the contributions that use a BCC model to evaluate the performance of mutual funds tend to adopt an input orientation, because the BCC model with this orientation is translation invariant with respect to output variables, thus allowing to overcome the problem posed by the presence of negative mean returns. However, with our choice of variables, the problem of negative data is bypassed by construction, so that we are no longer bound in the choice of the model orientation. In our opinion, the model orientation which is more suitable for evaluating the performance of mutual funds is the output one, since the usual objective of investors is to maximize the value of the output variables (in our case, the final value of the investment and the ethical level of the fund) without increasing the value of the input variables (in our case, the initial payout and one or more risk measures).The DEA models proposed are used to carry out an empirical investigation of European SRI equity funds in the period June 2006–June 2009. We test whether returns to scale are constant or variable and investigate both the degree of social responsibility of SRI funds in various European countries and their performance. To this end, we also present a method that evaluates the degree of social responsibility by taking the main ethical features into account.Finally, we focus the attention on another crucial issue regarding socially responsible investing, long debated in the literature: the comparison of the performances between SRI and non-SRI funds. In particular, the empirical study tries to ascertain if the ethical aim has to be reached at the expense of financial rewards.For more than two decades the literature have tried to compare the performance of socially responsible and non-socially responsible investments. Interestingly, most empirical studies find that the performance of socially responsible funds is not statistically different from the performance of conventional mutual funds. Indeed, the first studies carried out, but also more recent analyses, do not find significant differences comparing the performance of SRI and non-SRI US mutual funds (Bauer et al., 2005; Bello, 2005; Hamilton et al., 1993; Statman, 2000). The same conclusion is reached for the performance of European funds (Bauer et al., 2005; Cortez et al., 2009; Kreander et al., 2002, 2005) and for funds of other countries (Bauer et al., 2007; Bauer et al., 2006); an analogous result is reported also for sovereign bonds (Drut, 2010). On the other hand, some empirical analysis on the performance of socially responsible investments show evidence that SRI portfolios exhibit a better performance than unscreened conventional investments (see Derwall et al. (2005) and Kempf and Osthoff (2007) for US stock portfolios, Fernandez-Izquierdo and Matallin-Saez (2008) for Spanish mutual funds), while there are also some empirical results supporting the opposite conclusion that SRI funds exhibit an inferior reward-to-risk performance (Bilbao-Terol et al., 2012; Chang and Witte, 2010).The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present three CRS DEA models that differ in the way the ethical objective is taken into account and the three corresponding VRS models. In Section 3 we study the relations that exist among the performance measures obtained with the different models. Section 4 defines the ethical measure proposed and Section 5 summarises the specific analysis of the degree of social responsibility of European SRI funds. The empirical results on the performance of European SRI funds are synthesized in Section 6, while Section 7 compares the performance of SRI and non-SRI mutual funds. Finally, Section 8 presents some conclusions.In this section we present some DEA models with constant and variables RTS which can be adopted to analyse the performance of both SRI and non-SRI funds. We begin with the basic models without the ethical measure, which can be used to evaluate the performance of non-SRI funds. The VRS version will be used in Section 7 also to test if the SRI funds require a sacrifice in terms of financial returns.For the basic notions on DEA models we refer the reader to the huge literature on the subject (see for example Cooper et al. (2000), Cooper et al. (2011) and, applied to a financial context, Gregoriou and Zhu (2005)).Let us denote by:{1,2,…,n}the set of mutual funds consideredKjthe initial payout invested in fundj∈{1,2,…,n}βjtheβ-coefficient of fund j (the ratio of the covariance between the fund and the market returns to the variance of the market return)Mjthe final value for fund jv1the weight assigned to the initial payoutKjv2the weight assigned to theβ-coefficientuthe weight assigned to the final valueMjεa non-Archimedean constant that prevents the weights from vanishing (see for example Cooper et al. (2000))A CCR basic DEA model for the computation of the performance measure of mutual fundo∈{1,2,…,n}can be written as follows:(3)max{u,vi}uMov1Ko+v2βosubject to(4)uMjv1Kj+v2βj⩽1j=1,2,…,n(5)u⩾ε,(6)vi⩾εi=1,2and will be denoted by DEA-C. Here we assume thatMj>0∀j, i.e. we are excluding from the analysis defaulted funds.The DEA performance measure for fundo,Io,C, is the optimal value obtained for the objective function:(7)Io,C=u∗Mov1∗Ko+v2∗βo.Let us observe that in model (3)–(6) we include among the inputs theβ-coefficient as a risk measure of the investment in fund j. This choice is appropriate when investors’ portfolios are well diversified and the value of all betas is non-negative (as is usually the case with mutual funds). The beta coefficient has the advantage to be a linear combination of the betas of the portfolio components, but we could use one or more different risk measures as well, without changing the structure of the model. For different risk measures that can be used in DEA models see for example Basso and Funari (2001) and Chen and Lin (2006).As is well known, from a computational point of view the solution of problem (3)–(6) can be more conveniently computed by solving the following equivalent linear programming problem (see for example Cooper et al. (2000)):(8)min{u,vi}v1Ko+v2βosubject to(9)uMo=1(10)-uMj+v1Kj+v2βj⩾0j=1,2,…,n(11)u⩾ε(12)vi⩾εi=1,2HenceIo,C=1/(v1∗Ko+v2∗βo)∈(0,1]. Note that constraint (9) makes constraint (11) redundant.Model (3)–(6) can be applied to evaluate the performance of all mutual funds. With the addition of the constraint(13)∑j=1nλj=1in the dual of the linear program (8)–(12), it is also possible to define an analogous VRS model which will be denoted by DEA-V (see for instance the BCC models presented in Cooper et al. (2000)).Neither DEA-C nor DEA-V models take into consideration a socially responsible objective, but it is immediate to generalize these models so that we can take into account also the ethical objective of investors in SRI funds. For the CRS model, denoted by DEA-CE, we have:(14)max{ur,vi}u1Mo+u2eov1Ko+v2βosubject to(15)u1Mj+u2ejv1Kj+v2βj⩽1j=1,2,…,n(16)ur⩾εr=1,2(17)vi⩾εi=1,2,whereejdenotes the ethical measure used to rate SRI funds according to their ethical profile; a suitable ethical measure will be proposed in Section 4.Therefore, a DEA performance measure for fund o which gives social responsibility an additional premium is given by the optimal value of the objective function (14):(18)Io,CE=u1∗Mo+u2∗eov1∗Ko+v2∗βo.Again, problem (14)–(17) is equivalent to a linear programming problem which can be easily solved. Let us consider its dual program:(19)maxz0+εs1++εs2++εs1-+εs2-subject to(20)Moz0-∑j=1nMjλj+s1+=0(21)eoz0-∑j=1nejλj+s2+=0(22)∑j=1nKjλj+s1-=Ko(23)∑j=1nβjλj+s2-=βo(24)∑j=1nλj=1(25)λj⩾0j=1,2,…,n(26)sr+⩾0r=1,2(27)si-⩾0i=1,2,wherez0is the dual variable associated with the equality constraintu1Mo+u2eo=1,λjare the dual variables associated with the mutual funds constraints-u1Mj-u2ej+v1Kj+v2βj⩾0andsi-andsr+are the dual variables connected with the input and output weight constraintsvi⩾εandur⩾ε, respectively. For the DEA-CE model the constraint within brackets (24) has to be omitted, while its inclusion leads to the VRS version, called DEA-VE model.Both the DEA-CE and DEA-VE models are fairly straightforward and are effective in measuring the performance of SRI and non-SRI funds under the assumption that investors choose their investment in mutual funds by trying to maximize their satisfaction which depends, among other things, on both the return of the investment and its ethical level.On the other hand, when investing in a socially responsible manner, some investors fix the value of the ethical level they prefer in advance, and try to maximize their satisfaction by choosing among the funds with at least this value. In such a case, a constraint is imposed on the fund chosen. Indeed, investors that choose a given ethical level discard the funds with lower ethical levels and try to maximize their satisfaction among all the funds that satisfy the required ethical level.Formally, this entails that the ethical level has to be considered as an exogenously fixed output; on DEA models for exogenously fixed inputs or outputs see Banker and Morey (1986). By applying the suggestions of Banker and Morey (1986), it is straightforward to show that this constraint leads to the following model(28)maxz0+εs1++εs1-+εs2-subject to(29)Moz0-∑j=1nMjλj+s1+=0(30)∑j=1nejλj-s2+=eo(31)∑j=1nKjλj+s1-=Ko(32)∑j=1nβjλj+s2-=βo(33)∑j=1nλj=1(34)λj⩾0j=1,2,…,n(35)sr+⩾0r=1,2(36)si-⩾0i=1,2In order to prove it, let us first recall that the solution of a dual problem such as (19)–(27) enables to identify a virtual unit made up of a linear combination of efficient funds, with coefficients given by the optimal values of the dual variablesλj(j=1,2,…,n), that uses a level of inputs which is not greater than that employed by fund o and obtains a level of outputs that is not lower than that obtained by fund o.When the ethical level is considered as an exogenously fixed output, the virtual unit is required to have an ethical level not lower than that of fund o,(37)∑j=1nejλj∗⩾eoand constraint (21) of the dual problem has to be substituted by the following constraint(38)∑j=1nejλj-s2+=eo.Moreover, as proposed in Banker and Morey (1986), we relax the constraint on the weightu2in the primal problem to a pure non-negativity constraint. This entails that the coefficient of the slack variables2+in the objective function of the dual problem vanishes. With these modifications we obtain the dual program (28)–(36). We denote by DEA-CEef the CRS model that omits the constraint within brackets (33) and by DEA-VEef the VRS model that includes it.By construction, the performance indices obtained when the ethical level is exogenously fixed,Io,CEefandIo,VEef, are the reciprocal of the optimal value ofz0.We now prove that among the performance indices obtained with the CRS models DEA-C, DEA-CE and DEA-CEef there exist some useful relations, and that analogous relations hold for the performance indices obtained with the VRS models DEA-V, DEA-VE and DEA-VEef.Theorem 1LetIo,C,Io,CE,Io,CEef,Io,V,Io,VEandIo,VEefbe the DEA performance measures for fund o defined in Section 2. The following inequalities hold:(39)Io,C⩽Io,CEef⩽Io,CE(40)Io,V⩽Io,VEef⩽Io,VE.Let us first prove the inequalityIo,VEef⩽Io,VE. Since in both problems (19)–(27) and (28)–(36) the optimal value of the dual variablez0is not lower than 1, if we cut the feasible regions of both problems by introducing the additional constraintz0⩾1we do not cut out the optimal solution. In the remaining part of the feasible region, we have∑j=1nejλj⩾eoz0⩾eoand therefore constraint (21) is more restrictive than constraint (30). As all the other constraints of the feasible regions of problems (19)–(27) and (28)–(36) are equal, we conclude that the feasible region of problem (19)–(27) is a subset of that of problem (28)–(36).Since the difference between the objective functions of the two dual problems is given byεs2+which is lower than any positive real number, given the nature of non-Archimedean infinitesimalε, the optimal solution of problem (19)–(27) is no greater than the optimal solution of problem (28)–(36). Hence, for their reciprocal values, which give the DEA performance measuresIo,VEandIo,VEef, respectively, the reverse inequality holds.Let us now demonstrate the inequalityIo,V⩽Io,VEef. Let us compare the dual programs associated to the DEA-V and DEA-VEef models. We may observe that the dual program connected to the DEA-V model (the dual of problem (8)–(12) with the additional constraint (13)) can be obtained from the dual program (28)–(36) connected to the DEA-VEef model by omitting constraint (30) and the variables2+, the remaining constraints and the objective function being the same. The optimal solution of the second program, with the more restricted feasible region, cannot be higher than the optimal solution of the first one. Therefore, for their reciprocal values, which give the DEA performance measuresIo,VEefandIo,V, respectively, the reverse inequality holds.Inequalities (39) follow from the same reasoning, by simply omitting constraint (13).□Theorem 2 shows that for a mutual fund o with ethical measure equal to 0 (i.e. a non-SRI fund) the use of the models designed for SRI funds does not improve the fund efficiency score.Theorem 2Let o be a mutual fund with ethical measureeo=0and letIo,C,Io,CE,Io,CEef,Io,V,Io,VEandIo,VEefbe the DEA performance measures defined in Section 2. The following equalities hold:(41)Io,C=Io,CEef=Io,CE(42)Io,V=Io,VEef=Io,VE.Let us prove equalities (42) (the proof of equalities (41) is analogous). By Theorem 1 it is sufficient to prove thatIo,V=Io,VE. Let us observe that wheneo=0the dual problem (19)–(27) can be written by eliminatings2+from the equality constraint (21) and substituting its formula(43)s2+=∑j=1nejλjin the objective function. The non-negativity constraints2+⩾0is redundant in this case, since∑j=1nejλj⩾0as bothejandλjare non-negative. With this substitution we obtain an equivalent program with the same feasible region as the dual program of the DEA-V model (the dual of problem (8)–(12) with the additional constraint (13)), while the difference between the objective functions of the two dual problems is given by the termε∑j=1nejλj. This term is the product of a non-Archimedean infinitesimal and a limited quantity (note that the value of the dual variablesλjis limited by constraint (22)), so that the performance indicatorsIo,VandIo,VEcoincide.□In addition, we have:(44)Io,C⩽Io,V(45)Io,CE⩽Io,VE(46)Io,CEef⩽Io,VEefsince the VRS models differ from the CRS models only in constraint (13).The models for SRI funds presented in Section 2 use as an output variable an ethical measureej. In this section we define a suitable ethical measure that can be computed from data inferred from the ethical profile of mutual fund j.In particular, in order to assess the degree of the socially responsible behaviour of the funds stated as SRI funds, we focus our attention on a number of questions which define this behaviour and are related to either ethical, social or green issues. These questions can be grouped into issues used to exclude from the portfolios the assets of the companies with a profile that is bad for socially responsible criteria (negative screening), and issues used to include in the portfolio investments in companies which are selected on the ground of their SRI behaviour (positive screening).In more detail, the questions considered are taken from the ‘SRI Funds Service’2The ‘SRI Funds Service’ is a database of European SRI funds, offered since 1999 by the corporate social responsibility rating agency Vigeo Italia (formerly Avanzi SRI Research); financial data are added to the socially responsible database through a partnership with Morningstar. We thank Vigeo Italia for allowing us to use their database.2and can be summarized as follows:•Negative screening issues: 1. firearms; 2. weapons and military contracting; 3. nuclear energy; 4. tobacco; 5. gambling; 6. human rights violations; 7. labour right violations; 8. oppressive regimes; 9. pornography; 10. alcohol; 11. animal testing; 12. factory farming; 13. furs; 14. excessive environmental impact and natural resources consumption; 15. genetically modified organisms; 16. products dangerous to health/environment; and 17. other.Positive screening issues: 1. innovative and beneficial products and services for the environment; 2. innovative and beneficial products and services for the quality of life (e.g. health care, social housing); 3. responsible management of relations with customers; 4. environmental protection; 5. responsible management of employees; 6. human rights protection & supply chain; 7. promotion of economic and social development of local communities; 8. corporate governance; 9. fund investing according to the Islamic religion principles; 10. fund investing according to the Christian religion principles; and 11. other.Another important information on the behaviour of SRI funds is the (eventual) presence of an ethical or environmental committee which has the function of defining the guidelines of the socially responsible investments and controlling the actions of the fund management in this respect.We propose to measure the degree of the socially responsible behaviour as follows. LetnjNandnjPbe the number of negative and positive screening features presented by fund j, respectively, and let L be the maximum value assigned to the ethical measure, so that it will be defined in the real interval[0,L]. The ethical measure is defined as follows:(47)ej=ωNnjNnN+ωPnjPnP+ωCCjwherenNandnPare the total number of negative and positive screening issues taken into account,Cjis a variable which takes value 1 if fund j has an ethical or environmental committee and 0 otherwise,ωN,ωPandωCare positive weights andL=ωN+ωP+ωC.For example, in the empirical analysis carried out we choose for the weights the valuesωN=ωP=2andωC=1, so that(48)ej=2njN17+2njP11+Cjand0⩽ej⩽5. With such a choice we give the same importance to the negative and positive screening and less relevance to the presence of the ethical committee. Notice thatej>0denotes a socially responsible fund, while non-SRI funds haveej=0.The fraction of overall total asset under management referred to SRI funds domiciled in Europe may seem not very significant (1.11% of total UCITS3Publicly offered open-end funds investing in transferable securities and money market funds.3on June 2006, see Vigeo SRI Research (2009)); it is nevertheless a matter of more than 50 billion euros (53,276 million euros on 30/06/2009). Moreover, the SRI phenomenon is rapidly expanding; see Fig. 1for the growth of the total amount of asset under management since 1999. In the three-year period June 2006–June 2009 the total asset under management increased from 34,009 to 53,276 million euros, with a growth of +57% (+381% in ten years).On June 2006, at the beginning of the triennium considered in our analysis, the number of European SRI funds was equal to 388, spread over 15 countries (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Poland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Netherlands, United Kingdom; see Vigeo SRI Research (2009)). Three years later, on June 2009, this number had increased to 683 (+76%). We may observe that the percentage increase in the number of funds is higher than the percentage increase in the total amount of asset under management, meaning that the average amount of asset under management per fund has slightly decreased.All three types of funds (equity, balanced, fixed income) are represented. However, the breakdown varies in time: it changes from equity funds 61%, fixed income funds 22% and balanced funds 17% in June 2006 to 55%, 33% and 12%, respectively, in June 2009. In this paper we turn our attention to equity funds.For a more detailed presentation of the main features of socially responsible investing in Europe we refer to the European Sustainable and Responsible Investment Forum (Eurosif) (2010) report, which analyses their presence in each European country. The analysis presented in this contribution considers the European socially responsible funds which use ethical, social or environmental screening to select the assets in their portfolios. Moreover the funds considered are retail funds available to the public, advertised as socially responsible investments.In the analysis carried out we include all the SRI European equity funds for which the data in the ‘SRI Funds Service’ database are available for the period June 2006–June 2009. The number of SRI equity funds considered is equal to 189. Their distribution for the various European countries is reported in Table 1, where they are grouped by country of domicile. As we can see, in the period considered the SRI funds are mainly concentrated in few countries, namely France, Luxembourg, Sweden and United Kingdom.Table 1 shows the average value of the ethical measure (48) for each country. As it can be seen, the mean ethical level is not the same in all countries; for example, the ethical level of UK funds is on average almost twice the ethical level of Spanish, Swedish and French funds, while the mean level is even higher in Norway, Belgium, Switzerland and Austria.Fig. 2shows the frequency distribution of European SRI equity funds by ethical rating. As can be seen, the ethical level is not uniformly distributed and only few funds exhibit an ethical level lower than 0.5 or higher than 4.Table 1 reports also for all countries the average values of the relevant data which are used in the performance analysis, namely the annual mean return, standard deviation andβ-coefficient (the return data taken into account are the monthly returns achieved by the mutual funds in the three-year period June 2006–June 2009; source: Morningstar Europe), as well as the initial and exit charges, the initial payout and the final value.We note that the initial and exit charges differ substantially among the countries. On the other hand, while the average values of theβ-coefficient and the standard deviation are fairly similar for the different countries (with the exception of countries with only 1 or 2 funds), the same cannot be said for the mean return, which shows great differences among the countries. In particular mutual funds domiciled in some countries seem to have suffered the negative trend of the financial markets in the triennium considered more than others.Anyhow, due to the hardship of the financial crisis, most of the mutual funds considered exhibit a negative value of the mean return. Only about 14% of the funds have a positive mean return and only 4 out of 189 funds exhibit a positive excess return in the period analysed, with the consequence that the Sharpe ratio is negative for almost all the funds analysed.In our opinion, this is an exemplary case in which it is better to avoid using the Sharpe ratio to evaluate the performance of mutual funds. Indeed, the Sharpe ratio would cause us to choose funds with higher standard deviations. For example, between two mutual funds with the same (negative) value of the excess return, the fund with the highest value of the Sharpe ratio is the one with the highest value of the standard deviation. This problem is known in the literature (see McLeod and van Vuuren (2004)) and severely affects the ability of the Sharpe ratio to measure the performance of mutual funds in slump periods.In this section we present the results of the empirical analysis carried out to assess the performance of SRI equity funds in Europe.To this end, in order to compare the performance obtained by SRI and non-SRI equity funds, we also analyse a set of non-socially responsible funds. More precisely, we include in the set of funds considered some non-SRI equity funds with features analogous to those of the European SRI funds: for each SRI fund considered, a non-SRI fund with similar features and a similar investment style is selected among those offered by the same fund company, whenever one such fund is available in the Morningstar Europe database. In this way the number of non-SRI funds considered is lower than the number of SRI funds, but the comparison of the performance achievements takes place among SRI and non-SRI funds with a similar management.The main features of the non-SRI funds considered are summarized in Table 2, which exhibits the average values by country. The last row also reports the average value of SRI European funds, for comparison. On the whole, the average values for SRI and non-SRI funds are fairly close, although we may observe that the SRI funds exhibit a slightly higher mean return as well as a slightly higher standard deviation andβ-coefficient. The appropriate statistical test for equality of the means (Welch’s t test) and that for equality of the variances (F-test), however, indicate that the differences are not statistically significant, thus confirming the conclusions of many empirical studies.We compute the performance indices with the DEA models presented in Section 2, both with the basic model for all mutual funds and the DEA models devised for SRI funds. The analysis is carried out for the European mutual funds considered on the whole (279 mutual funds, 189 SRI funds and 90 non-SRI funds).A first objective of the empirical analysis is to determine if the mutual funds analysed exhibit constant or variable returns to scale. To this end, we apply a two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test to compare the distributions of the logarithms of the inefficiencies of CRS and VRS models, where the inefficiency is defined as the reciprocal of the DEA performance measure. We test the null hypothesis of CRS against the alternative hypothesis of VRS (for the details of the statistical test we refer to Banker (1996) and Banker and Natarajan (2011)). With regard to the comparison of the DEA-C and DEA-V models, the KS statistic is equal to 0.2222 and the asymptotic p-value is 7.6674×10−7, so that the null hypothesis is rejected for all usual significance levels. The comparison of the DEA-CE and DEA-VE models leads to accept the alternative hypothesis of VRS, too, with a value of the statistic equal to 0.1756 and an asymptotic p-value equal to 1.5146×10−4. The results are in line with those of Kerstens et al. (2011), who find different results for the constant and variable RTS versions of a basic non-parametric frontier model called MV-Loads, for a large sample of US and European mutual funds in the period January 2004 to February 2009, and with those found for hedge funds by Lamb and Tee (2012).The main results of the analysis carried out are summarized in Table 3, which reports the average value of the performance indices and the average ranking for each country, separately for SRI and non-SRI funds (from now on, we report only the results of the VRS models).Of course, as pointed out in the previous section, the values of the three performance indices computed coincide for the non-SRI funds, while for the socially responsible funds we haveIVE⩾IVEef⩾IV. Hence, the funds which are efficient with the DEA-V model (for whichIV=1) remain efficient also with the other two models. Moreover, despite the fact that the two DEA models devised for the socially responsible behaviour raise the value of the performance index of the SRI funds while keeping it constant for the non-SRI funds, the overall ranking does change, even for the non-SRI funds.We may compute the matrix of the correlation coefficients for the values of the indicesIV,IVEandIVEef, both for the whole set of funds (matrixΣ1) and for the SRI funds (matrixΣ2):(49)Σ1=1.000.660.830.661.000.930.830.931.00Σ2=1.000.600.790.601.000.920.790.921.00The empirical results indicate that the inclusion of the ethical level in the analysis does raise the results of the SRI funds considerably. This effect is stronger forIVE(less correlated withIV), while the value ofIVEeflies – as expected – between the values of the other two indices. Note that the value of the correlation coefficients for the SRI funds are slightly lower, since the value of the performance indices of non-SRI funds coincide for all the three models, and it indicates that the differences among the three performance indicators are significant.As regards theIVperformance index, at first glance the differences among SRI and non-SRI funds seem negligible for most countries. In the next section we test if these differences are statistically significant. However, the differences do seem sensible for theIVEefindex, and even more forIVE. As for the differences among the various countries, we may observe that the best SRI funds can be found on average in Sweden.From a financial point of view, investing in SRI funds raises the interesting question as to whether the social aim has to be pursued at the expense of the financial performance of the investment. As we have seen in Section 1, this question has been widely discussed in the literature, with sometimes opposite and surprising conclusions (for a review see also Renneboog et al. (2008) and Cortez et al. (2009)). Of course, at least in theory, we would generally expect that the non-SRI funds outperform SRI funds, since they may select their portfolio of assets without any restrictions. However, the empirical results presented in the literature do not always support the conclusion that non-SRI funds obtain better financial performances. Rather, most empirical studies suggest that the differences in the performance obtained by SRI and non-SRI funds are not statistically significant.In this section we investigate which indications come out from the analysis of European SRI funds using the DEA models proposed, by comparing the performances of SRI and non-SRI funds.Table 4reports some synthetic indicators which give some initial clues. As we can see, the number of efficient funds is small with the basic DEA-V model (about 2%, both for SRI and non-SRI funds), while it grows with the two models that reward social responsibility: it triples for SRI funds, while it remains unchanged for non-SRI funds. The proportion of SRI funds with a performance score higher than the overall median, too, is much higher with the DEA-VEef and DEA-VE models: with these models the proportion is near 60%, while it is around 50% with the DEA-V model. Analogously, if we compare the average value of the performance for SRI and non-SRI funds, we note that SRI funds exhibit a markedly higher value with DEA-VEef and DEA-VE. Interestingly, SRI mutual funds seem to perform slightly better than non-SRI ones even with the DEA-V model that does not give a reward for social responsibility.The situation is highlighted in more detail in Fig. 3, which compares the empirical cumulative distribution functions of the DEA efficiency measures of SRI and non-SRI funds obtained with the three models adopted. We can observe that SRI funds obtain a sensibly higher performance score when the ethical indicator is included in the set of outputs, while the behaviour is very close when the only output variable taken into consideration is the final value of the investment. It is also evident that the gain obtained by SRI funds using theIVEefindicator is on average around half the gain assigned by theIVEindicator.To verify if the differences in the DEA efficiency scores (more precisely, their reciprocal, i.e. the inefficiencies) between SRI and non-SRI funds are statistically significant or not, we carry out some statistical tests designed to compare the DEA inefficiencies between two groups of decision making units. For the description of the tests adopted we refer to Banker and Natarajan (2011) and Banker et al. (2010), that present a number of tests that can be used to this aim. Table 5shows the results of three of these tests, based on order statistics, that do not require specific assumptions on the probability distribution of the inefficiencies and can be used in the presence of a noise term independent of the inefficiencies: a median test and a Mann–Whitney test for equality of the medians of the inefficiencies of the two groups, and a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test for equality of their distributions.In agreement with most of the empirical studies – though the result is obtained using a different approach – all the tests carried out lead to accept the null hypothesis of no differences in the inefficiencies with the DEA-V model, for all usual significance levels (observe the high asymptotic p-values): hence, the differences in the performance scores are too light to be significant. On the contrary, the asymptotic p-values obtained with the DEA-VE model, which considers also the ethical level, are so close to zero that we reject the null hypothesis and accept the alternative hypothesis of different distributions for all usual significance levels: with this model, the SRI funds outperform their non-SRI counterparties, which accounts for the fact that investors in SRI funds do care for the ethical profile.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this contribution we present some models, in a DEA framework, to evaluate the performance of both socially responsible and traditional mutual funds. The input and output variables of these models are focused on the capital initially invested and its final value obtained at the end of the investment horizon, in addition to a measure of the investment risk and a measure of the ethical degree of the fund.A convenient property of the models proposed is that they do not suffer from the problem of the presence of negative data, not even in periods of heavy economic recession such as the one we are facing at present.After having determined that the returns to scale are variable, the VRS models are used to analyse the performance of European SRI funds in the period June 2006–June 2009.The empirical study carried out also focuses on the comparison of the performance scores between SRI and non-SRI funds, to see if the ethical objectives of the socially responsible investment funds require a sacrifice from a financial point of view. The answer to this issue is negative, in accordance with the results reported by most of the literature on the subject, though obtained with different methodologies. Therefore, it is possible to invest in a socially responsible manner without having to renounce financial reward.Another issue worth investigating, left for future research, is the influence of fund size on performance scores. In this respect, an analysis of the effects of the size of mutual funds on their performance is particularly relevant in the case of VRS models.