@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heuristic decision making in network linking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore individual linking decisions in a network context by an incentivized laboratory experiment with mixed logit analysis.The inherent complexity of this context results in two heuristic effects with substantial implications for OR models of network formation.Individuals’ choices are systematically less guided by payoff but more by simpler heuristic decision cues.This shift from payoff to heuristic cues is systematically stronger for social payoff than for own payoff.The specific between-subject complexity factors value transferability and social tradeoff aggravate the former effect.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Network formation,Individual decision making,Heuristic effects,Laboratory experiment,Mixed logit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Network formation among individuals constitutes an important part of many OR processes, but relatively little is known about how individuals make their linking decisions in networks. This article provides an investigation of heuristic effects in individual linking decisions for network formation in an incentivized lab-experimental setting. Our mixed logit analysis demonstrates that the inherent complexity of the network linking setting causes individuals’ choices to be systematically less guided by payoff but more guided by simpler heuristic decision cues, and that this shift is systematically stronger for social payoff than for own payoff. Furthermore, we show that the specific complexity factors value transferability and social tradeoff aggravate the former effect. These heuristic effects have important research and policy implications in areas that involve network formation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Network formation among individuals has important effects in many social, operational, and economic contexts, ranging from word-of-mouth communications among consumers (e.g., Iacobucci & Hopkins, 1992) and virtual communities (e.g., Wellman et al., 1996) to job opportunities (e.g., Granovetter, 1995) and mortality (e.g., Berkman & Syme, 1979). Therefore, the OR community has lately modeled such decentral network creation processes (e.g., Baron, Durieu, Haller, & Solal, 2006; Demaine, Hajiaghayi, Mahini, & Zadimoghaddam, 2012; Fabrikant, Luthra, Maneva, Papadimitriou, & Shenker, 2003; Harmsen - van Hout, Herings, & Dellaert, 2013; Hellmann & Staudigl, 2014; Janssen & Monsuur, 2012; Monsuur, 2007; Olaizola & Valenciano, 2014). The applications of these models vary from military and other communication networks to large-scale networking settings as the Internet and their approaches differ from non-cooperative and cooperative game theory to structural optimization mechanisms.In the current paper, we comply with the recent call by Hämäläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013) to explicitly consider behavioral phenomena within OR processes, as these processes are highly sensitive to behavioral effects. Accordingly, the abovementioned OR models on decentral network creation may result in opposite recommendations for optimal interventions. Although the approaches of these models vary in several respects, they all take optimizing individuals as a starting point, at most with some random deviation therefrom (e.g., Baron et al., 2006; Hellmann & Staudigl, 2014), whereas we investigate in how far real people systematically deviate from this assumption.There exists a recent and increasing experimental literature on network formation. One stream in this literature is involved with testing integral game-theoretic models of network formation. They include variants of Bala and Goyal’s (2000) noncooperative network formation model (e.g., Berninghaus, Ehrhart, & Ott, 2006; Callander & Plott, 2005), Jackson and Wolinsky’s (1996) pairwise cooperative network formation model (e.g., Deck & Johnson, 2004), and fully cooperative network formation models like Jackson and van den Nouweland's (2005) (e.g., Charness & Jackson, 2007). This research identifies several conditions under which theoretically stable network structures are reproduced in the laboratory and addresses their efficiency. Another stream of experimental studies examines the role of network formation as endogenously emerging in other relevant settings of cooperative decision making (e.g., Brown, Falk, & Fehr, 2004; Corbae & Duffy, 2008; Di Cagno & Sciubba, 2010; Hauk & Nagel, 2001; Kirchsteiger, Niederle, & Potters, 2005). This research shows that cooperation decisions are considerably influenced when individuals are allowed to choose their partners versus when a fixed interaction structure is imposed. Furthermore, Falk and Kosfeld (2012), Goeree, Riedl, and Ule (2008), and van Dolder and Buskens (2014) found social motives in network formation.From this experimental work it became clear that in extremely complex, dynamic and strategic situations, predictions of network formation models are not always accurate. An issue that has been largely ignored in this previous work though is that the complexity that individuals face in network formation may moderate their decisions already on a much more basic level. Also disregarding dynamics and strategic interaction, the network formation process is typically a complex decision setting, for individuals’ utilities are not only dependent on multiple characteristics of the choice options, like in most consumer choices (e.g., Swait & Adamowicz, 2001), and even not only additionally on the number of other individuals choosing the same option, like with global network externalities (e.g., Katz & Shapiro, 1985). They depend on all individuals in the entire pattern of network links, differently by their exact positions (e.g., Sundararajan, 2008). Furthermore, this network complexity varies depending on whether the type of value that is exchanged through the network only affects direct neighbors or is rather transferable via indirect links (Harmsen - van Hout et al., 2013) and depending on whether decision makers care about the effects of their choices on other individuals (Fehr & Schmidt, 2003).Such complexity may cause errors in their evaluation of different link formation options and hence in their choice process. Although previous research acknowledges the mere existence of errors (e.g., Charness & Jackson, 2007), these are simply modeled as random and the underlying process remains undisclosed. In fact, the complexity causing such errors is typically removed by providing experimental subjects with numerical payoff information in the network linking choice interfaces. The objective of the current paper is to investigate whether systematic heuristic shifts occur in individual decision making in network formation as a function of complexity in the network linking setting. Such complexity effects have been studied in several other choice contexts (e.g., Bonner, 1994; Dellaert, Donkers, & Soest, 2012; Sung, Johnson, & Dror, 2009; Timmermans, 1993).For this purpose, we focus on a static, non-strategic network setting in which the decision maker can choose to create or delete one link or to do nothing. Such a situation constitutes the simplest network linking decision context, which allows us to study the effects of complexity under highly controlled conditions. To prevent possible confounding effects that do not originate from complexity of the network setting but from strategic interaction among individuals, we thus analyze individual one-period decisions, so decisions of others in the network are deliberately excluded.A typical decision task as we study is as follows. The individual “you” in Fig. 1is connected with several other individuals in a network and is facing the one-shot choice problem to change at most one link: her choice options are to delete one of her existing links, so with “a” or “d”, to create a link with one individual that she is currently not directly connected to, so “b” or “c”, or not to change anything. This results in a new network structure that generates value for “you” as well as for “a” through “d”, whereas “a” through “d” do not make any changes to the network.In this individual decision-making experiment we vary three complexity factors that are relevant in the context of network linking. The first factor is baseline opacity of choice consequences. We induce this by providing participants in some treatments with a comprehensive payoff table, which is an effective way to systematically reduce complexity. The second factor is transferability of value over the network. We induce this by having participants in some treatments derive value from direct neighbors only, which reflects a situation where social value is derived from communication, and having participants in other treatments derive value from direct as well as indirectly connected individuals, which reflects a situation where informational value is derived from communication. The third factor is social tradeoff between own payoff and others’ payoff. We induce this by informing participants in some treatments that nobody else was affected by their choices, and informing participants in other treatments that the other participants in the room would be passively affected by their choices in a specific way.These factors complicate the choices that individuals make about creating and maintaining links in the network. We examine whether these choices therefore become systematically less payoff-motivated but more guided by simpler heuristic decision cues, and furthermore whether this shift to heuristic cues is systematically stronger for the extent that individuals’ choices are guided by social payoff, that is, the payoff generated for other individuals, than for the extent they are guided by own payoff.In order to test our hypotheses, we confront participants in the lab with multiple linking choice situations similar to the one in Fig. 1. Their choices have a direct impact on their monetary rewards in the experiment, which differ with respect to the three abovementioned complexity factors (baseline payoff opacity, value transferability, social tradeoff), leading to different treatments. We perform a comprehensive parametric test of the hypotheses by estimating a mixed (i.e., random parameters) logit model (Hensher, Rose, & Greene, 2005; McFadden, 2001) incorporating several payoff and decision cue variables as well as their interactions with the complexity factors. This allows us to investigate the impact of complex network properties on individuals’ decisions, while allowing for heterogeneity of the decision makers.Using this approach, we identify two cues that are merely qualitatively related to payoff but appear to have a significant additive impact on linking decisions: whether the choice option implies a deviation from the status quo or not, and the number of direct neighbors of the (potential) linking partner involved in the choice option. The effects of these heuristic cues are different under the various complexity factors. Furthermore, we demonstrate that social preferences throughout strongly rely on a numerical overview of choice consequences (which is usually provided in the laboratory but missing in real life), since apparent pro-social decision behavior in treatments with such an overview disappears in identical treatments without.In Section 2, we present our theoretical framework and hypotheses. Section 3 describes the experimental design and the approach used for the mixed logit estimation. The results of our experiment and hypotheses tests are reported in Section 4. At the end of this section, we perform several robustness checks, among which whether observed shifts in behavior may as well be captured by differences in randomness among complexity conditions. Section 5 concludes the paper with a discussion including implications for OR decentral network creation modeling.The objective of this section is to present our hypotheses about heuristic effects in individual decisions of network formation and compare them to predictions on individual choice behavior underlying the previous experimental network formation literature. The predictions based on prior theories are reviewed in Section 2.1 and our hypotheses are presented in Section 2.2.Economic theory (e.g., Varian, 1992, chap. 7) models experienced utility, that is, utility on which actual decisions are based, as follows. The experienced utility that individual i derives from choosing option j is given by:Uji=fi(Payoffj),where Payoffjis the payoff, that is, benefits minus costs, obtained by i when she chooses j and fiis a strictly increasing function. For empirical applications, a random factor can be added (e.g., Hensher et al., 2005, chap. 3):Uji=fi(Payoffj)+ɛji.We refer to this as the classical payoff-based model. For the example of Fig. 1, this model predicts that from the five choice options allowed, “you” chooses an option that provides her with the highest payoff.Social preferences theory (Fehr & Schmidt, 2003) augments this model by explicitly allowing for the fact that in addition to their own payoff, individuals may take the payoff for other individuals into account when making their decisions. In this case, the experienced utility that individual i derives from choosing option j is given by:Uji=fi(OwnPayoffj,(OthersPayoffjh)h≠i)+ɛji,where OwnPayoffjis the payoff personally obtained by i when she chooses j, OthersPayoffjhis the payoff obtained by another individual h when i chooses j, and fiis a function reflecting how i holds others-guided utility components in mind (e.g., inequity aversion, efficiency preferences, etc.). We refer to this as the classical payoff-based model extended with social preferences. For the example of Fig. 1, this model predicts that from the five choice options allowed, “you” chooses an option that causes her subjectively optimal combination of payoff for herself and payoff for the four other individuals.Our anticipation is that these prior utility models are not sufficient to explain link choice behavior due to the presence of a specific type of complexity. This complexity arises due to local network effects: an individual’s payoff from her own choice now is affected by all individuals in the entire pattern of network links, differently by their exact positions (e.g., Sundararajan, 2008). Therefore, she finds it an inherently complex task to determine the precise payoff of linking choice options.As humans are boundedly rational (Camerer, 1998), they cope with complexity in decision making by simplification, which commonly involves assessing a judgment object (e.g., linking choice option) using only the subset of properties of the object that are most accessible, that is, that come most readily to mind, rather than using all relevant properties (Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC research Group, 1999), as long as this leads them to a satisfying situation (Simon, 1956). This is clearly illustrated in the literature about the effects of task complexity in several other contexts, like job candidate selection (Timmermans, 1993), audit judgment (Bonner, 1994), consumer choice (Dellaert et al., 2012; Swait & Adamowicz, 2001), and betting markets (Sung et al., 2009), but no empirical research to date has addressed such effects in making complex network formation decisions.We propose two main types of heuristic shifts: (i) the complexity in the network linking setting makes individuals’ choices systematically less payoff-guided than predicted by the classical payoff-based model in that they are additionally motivated by other heuristic cues (Section 2.2.1) and (ii) it makes them deviate from the predictions of the classical payoff-based model extended with social preferences in being systematically less socially motivated (Section 2.2.2). Furthermore, we examine whether these effects are stronger under more complex linking decision making conditions, where we vary the presence of value transferability and social tradeoff (Section 2.2.3).In the network formation setting, the decision maker’s payoff depends on the network structure after completion of her choice, where having more connections is on the one hand beneficial, since they provide access to additional resources, and on the other hand costly, for it takes time and effort to maintain them. Because of network effects, it is typically a complex task for individuals to judge the exact payoff consequences of link choice options and we examine whether therefore individuals systematically deviate from payoff orientation.A psychological process of judgment simplification is encountered in the literature about conjunctive probability assessment, which shows that individuals make predictions based on a correlation they assume to exist between the assessment variable and some other variable (e.g., Broniarczyk & Alba, 1994). Accordingly, individuals could partly substitute the payoff value of a link choice option by descriptive attributes that can be determined more easily and that are qualitatively related to it. Consequently, they could shift their orientation from exact payoff to the most basic cues (i) whether a link choice option involves actively deleting or creating a link or rather doing nothing (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1991) describe how the status quo is a predisposed option for decision makers), and (ii) how many direct links the individual involved in the choice option has in the network (Freeman (1979) describes how the degree of a node is the most basic indicator of centrality, which in turn is the most basic social network measure). This is in line with qualitative process theory, which suggests that human reasoning is more likely to depend on qualitative rather than quantitative relations (Forbus, 1993). Therefore, in our model we allow for individuals’ use of the type of action or individual as simpler heuristic cues in addition to the precise expected payoff.We hypothesize:H1 (reduction of payoff orientation): Individuals’ network linking choices are affected less strongly by their payoff consequences than predicted by the classical payoff-based model (Section 2.1) in that they are also systematically based on heuristic cues.Pursuing the above line of reasoning, we formulate the experienced utility that individual i may derive from choosing option j with the following heuristic cues:(1)Uji=fi(Payoffj,Complexity×(Payoffj,Formationj,Degreej))+ɛji,where Complexity is the network choice complexity that i is facing, Formationjis a dummy variable indicating by zero that j involves remaining with the status quo and by one that it involves link deletion or creation, Degreejis the number of direct links of an individual with whom i deletes or creates a link in j, and fiis a function increasing in Payoffjand decreasing in the interaction of Complexity with Payoffj. For the example of Fig. 1, this model predicts that from the five choice options allowed, “you” chooses one that seems to provide her with the highest payoff, which she partly bases on the simple cues (i) whether the option implies a deviation from the status quo (which is the case for four options) and (ii) the degree of the node involved in the option (which varies between zero and three among options) rather than on the quantitative amount. Since several qualitative relations exist between the heuristic cues and payoff, we do not predict the signs of their net effects.The presence of social tradeoff is a further complicating factor in the network setting, implying that an individual’s choices not only affect her own value, but also the value for her neighbors, her neighbors’ neighbors, etc. (e.g., Bala & Goyal, 2000; Jackson & Wolinsky, 1996). This aspect of network formation choices makes it more complex for individuals with social preferences to judge the exact value of link choice options, because besides their own payoff they also have to consider the payoff of other individuals.We investigate whether individuals deal with the complexity of social tradeoff by focusing on the payoff aspect that can be determined most easily (Gigerenzer et al., 1999), that is, own payoff. Therefore, we examine whether individuals tend to pay systematically less attention to others’ payoff due to the greater complexity of evaluating this social payoff. In the past, behavioral economists have found empirical evidence for social preferences. Recently, Falk and Kosfeld (2012), Goeree et al. (2008), and van Dolder and Buskens (2014) found social motives in network formation, but this was in lab environments where choice complexity was largely mitigated by explicit payoff information, which directly presented participants with the numerical payoff consequences for themselves as well as for others of their choice options. We expect a smaller influence of payoff consequences for other individuals on choice when this is not the case. Obviously, since payoff for another individual is at least as opaque as own payoff, we anticipate a baseline shift from payoff to heuristic cues as predicted by H1 also for social payoff. However, we additionally expect a systematic heuristic shift from others’ to own payoff when complexity is not artificially removed. This shift may be both due to a concious shift of consideration from social to own payoff and due to an unintended stronger shift to the use of heuristic cues for social payoff. Thus, we propose the following hypothesis:H2 (reduction of social preferences): Individuals’ network linking choices are affected less strongly by their payoff consequences for other individuals than predicted by the classical payoff-based model extended with social preferences (Section 2.1) in that complexity systematically reduces the impact of social payoff on these choices more strongly than the impact of own payoff.We include this heuristic effect in the experienced utility that individual i derives from choosing option j as follows:(2)Uji=fi(OwnPayoffj,(OthersPayoffjh)h≠i,Complexity×(OwnPayoffj,(OthersPayoffjh)h≠i,Formationj,Degreej)),where f iis a function decreasing in the interaction ofComplexity with(OthersPayoffjh)h≠i. For the example of Fig. 1, this model predicts that from the five choice options allowed, “you” chooses one that seems to cause her subjectively optimal combination of payoff for herself and payoff for the other individuals, where we expect the latter payoff to get systematically less attention due to complexity.Finally, we hypothesize that in addition to the baseline opacity of choice consequences in this context due to the fact that network externalities have to be taken into account, two specific complexity aspects of networks may strengthen individuals’ tendencies to switch from payoff to heuristic cues orientation and to reduce their social preferences .The first network factor regarded here is value transferability, which refers to the fact that an individual derives value not only from her direct neighbors, but also indirectly from her neighbors’ neighbors, etc. This network property makes it even more complex for individuals to judge the exact payoff of link choice options, because it requires additional cognitive work to be forward-looking over indirect links. This leads to the following hypotheses:H3 (moderating effects of value transferability):H3a: The presence of value transferability in a network decreases the impact of payoff on an individual’s link formation choices in that it systematically increases the impact of heuristic cues.H3b: The presence of value transferability in a network decreases the impact of others’ payoff on an individual’s link formation choices systematically more strongly than the impact of own payoff.Another complexity property we consider is social tradeoff, implying that an individual’s choices not only affect her own value, but also the value for her neighbors, her neighbors’ neighbors, etc. (cf. Section 2.2.2). This network property makes it more complex for individuals with social preferences to judge the exact value of link choice options, because besides their own payoff they have to consider the payoff of (possibly many) other individuals, which requires extra cognitive effort. Therefore, the presence of social tradeoff will not only cause a shift of preferences from others’ to own payoff (H2), but we also expect it to have a strengthening effect on their shift from payoff to heuristic cues orientation. This can be formulated in the following hypothesis:H4 (moderating effect of social tradeoff): The presence of social tradeoff in a network decreases the impact of payoff on an individual’s link formation choices in that it systematically increases the impact of heuristic cues.We include these moderating effects of complexity factors in the experienced utility that individual i derives from choosing option j as follows:(3)Uji=fi(OwnPayoffj,(OthersPayoffjh)h≠i,ComplexityCondition×(OwnPayoffj,(OthersPayoffjh)h≠i,Formationj,Degreej)),where ComplexityCondition is the network choice complexity condition that i is facing – concerning both the baseline opacity of choice consequences due to network externalities and the reinforcing complexity of value transferability and social tradeoff – and fiis a function in which the hypothesized interaction effects with ComplexityCondition are included. For the example of Fig. 1, this model predicts that from the five choice options allowed, “you” chooses one that seems to cause her subjectively optimal combination of payoff for herself and payoff for the other individuals, which systematically varies with the complexity condition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A concise summary of our results is given in Table 9.The hypothesis that individuals’ network linking choices are affected less strongly by their payoff consequences than predicted by the classical payoff-based model (H1) is supported by the mixed logit estimation of Section 4.2.1, as it indicates that these choices are also based on heuristic cues. Already in the baseline treatment where payoffs are obscured due to network externalities, a lower degree of the node involved in the option significantly explains choice whereas the exact payoff was also included as an explanatory variable. In the treatments with value transferability, higher degrees become significantly more attractive and remaining with the status quo becomes an additional heuristic cue. In the treatments with social tradeoff, we even find a reverse status quo bias, which is quite unique in the literature (cf. Mengel, 2011), but this requires further research as it is not robust against order and learning effects. These results are also reflected in the descriptive Tables 6 and 7 in Section 4.1.The hypothesis that individuals’ network linking choices are affected less strongly by their payoff consequences for other individuals than predicted by the classical payoff-based model extended with social preferences due to a systematic shift of motivation from social to own payoff (H2) is strongly supported by the mixed logit estimation, as it indicates that these choices do not merely become more socially motivated when the complexity is largely removed by a comprehensive payoff overview (as reflected in descriptive Table 5 in Section 4.1), but they are even not socially motivated at all without such a numerical table. Indeed, the impact of own payoff on choices does not suffer to this extent from the same level of complexity. Note that some respondent answers in the debriefing part of the experiment suggest that this shift of the impact from social to own payoff as a consequence of social tradeoff is partly due to a concious shift of consideration away from social payoff (Appendix B, item 5). Our explanation of the reverse status quo bias in Section 4.2.1 suggests that it is also partly due to an unintended stronger shift to the use of heuristic cues for social payoff.The hypothesized moderating effects of the complexity factors value transferability and social tradeoff (H3, H4) are also supported by the mixed logit estimation, as their presence further decreases the impact of payoff on an individual’s link formation choices, which is also reflected in descriptive Table 4 in Section 4.1.Thus, this study shows that complexity in the network formation setting influences individual link choice behavior in a systematic way, since individuals’ choices are guided less by payoff, where the attention appears to be shifted to factors only qualitatively related to payoff, and moreover, this effect is stronger for social payoff than for own payoff. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the specific complexity factors value transferability and social tradeoff aggravate the former effect. In Section 4.2.2 (Random shift effects) it was confirmed that these changes in behavior cannot accurately be captured by a model only allowing for differences in choice precision (or randomness) among complexity treatments.The current study initiates empirical research into the issue of heuristic effects in individual decisions of network formation. Our results should raise interest in future research into this realm, for they have important implications for theoretical and experimental research as well as application areas of network formation.Our results show that behavioral effects play a crucial role in the process of decentral network formation. Therefore, theoretical OR models of network creation (e.g., Baron et al., 2006; Demaine et al., 2012; Fabrikant et al., 2003; Harmsen - van Hout et al., 2013; Hellmann & Staudigl, 2014; Janssen & Monsuur, 2012; Monsuur, 2007; Olaizola & Valenciano, 2014) should take such effects into consideration. In particular, the current experiment was based on payoff functions used in Harmsen - van Hout et al. to model communication network formation with high link specificity. This kind of models should not only allow for random error to become more realistic, but should explicitly include human tendencies as found by our analysis to base complex linking decisions on heuristic cues like status quo and node degree rather than exact payoff. As seen in Section 4.1 , the consequences for payoffs in the simplest setting may not be very high, but it may very well be expected that the structural and efficiency predictions and therefore recommendations for interventions resulting from these more complex models differ largely if their agents are no longer optimizing but consider much simpler decision cues instead (cf. Hämäläinen et al., 2013). For example, the model with high link specificity by Harmsen - van Hout et al. predicted a wide range of networks in situations without value transferability, including non-standard networks like highly connected and “small world” networks, and highly fragmented, efficient networks in situations with value transferability. Similarly, predictions were made for other levels of link specificity and several recommendations for network moderation were based hereupon. It should be investigated in how far these still hold with agents behaving heuristically rather than purely optimizing.On the other hand, our results suggest that the existent network formation models are already correct in not taking social preferences into account, for though previous laboratory research indicated that people do have them, we show that the complex decision environment keeps them from being revealed.Furthermore, experimental research practice is often disposed to make the payoff consequences of choices as transparent as possible for participants to prevent biased findings due to their wrong understanding of the instructions. However, we claim that this explicit information modifies participants’ behavior in a systematic way, since it eliminates complexity that they otherwise would handle by heuristic shifts.Finally, in many contexts of network formation among individuals such as job opportunities (e.g., Granovetter, 1995) and mortality (e.g., Berkman & Syme, 1979), it matters to be aware of heuristic effects as found in this study. For example, with word-of-mouth communications among consumers (e.g., Iacobucci & Hopkins, 1992), for the supplier of the respective product or service it is interesting to know when consumers have a tendency to talk with isolated or central peers and that they neglect benefits that peers derive from their communication decisions. Also, suppliers can exploit the finding that this behavior is dependent on the complexity of the network environment, for example, by facilitating information about social payoffs.Diverse linear transformations to convert points earned to euro payments – which we used over complexity conditions to equalize the average monetary rewards with which our participants leave the laboratory – might influence decisions (Maddox, Bohil, & Dodd, 2003). Although we think it unlikely that participants in our experiment were able to comprehend more than the fact that earning more points would increase their ultimate monetary payoff as well (see the Supplementary material, Appendix C), further work could account for this in another way.In order to prevent interference of complexity types that are not the focus of the current research, we studied a relatively simple network linking decision that is only one-shot and involves only one active participant changing at most one link. Also, the payoff information is complete and certain. Future research could study whether and in how far additional (and often previously studied) complexity types such as strategic interaction, dynamics, multi-link deviation, incomplete information, and uncertainty strengthen the heuristic effects shown by the current paper.Furthermore, in this pioneering study we could find significant shifts from exact payoff to the descriptive attributes qualitatively related to it that to the best of our knowledge can be determined most easily by a decision maker, namely remaining with versus deviating from the status quo and the degree centrality of a node. Issues like cognitive distinctions between deleting and creating a link or between connectedness and disconnectedness of the decision maker could be considered in future work, as well as decision cues based on more advanced centrality or other social network measures, e.g., the number of nodes reached at a distance of two. Similarly, follow-up experiments could investigate the effects of demographics and other background variables as collected in Appendix B if explicitly designed to do so.Another direction that future studies could take concerns the question in how far the complexity types and heuristic effects we considered are specific for the network context. For example, in how far does complexity systematically reduce social preferences in other choice settings? Moreover, further experiments could generate deeper insights in the linking choice process of individuals by concentrating on specific effects from the rich range of heuristic tendencies explored here.