@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ejection chain approach for the quadratic multiple knapsack problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents an ejection chain approach (ECA) to tackle the quadratic multiple knapsack problem (QMKP).To our knowledge, this is the first paper to employ the ejection chain to solve the QMKP.A powerful neighborhood construction phase based on greedy and random operators is embedded in our ECA procedure.ECA improves upper bounds for 34 instances and matches the best known results for the remaining ones except 6 cases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ejection chain,Quadratic multiple knapsack problem,Adaptive perturbation,Metaheuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In an algorithm for a problem whose candidate solutions are selections of objects, an ejection chain is a sequence of moves from one solution to another that begins by removing an object from the current solution. The quadratic multiple knapsack problem extends the familiar 0–1 knapsack problem both with several knapsacks and with values associated with pairs of objects. A hybrid algorithm for this problem extends a local search algorithm through an ejection chain mechanism to create more powerful moves. In addition, adaptive perturbations enhance the diversity of the search process. The resulting algorithm produces results that are competitive with the best heuristics currently published for this problem. In particular, it improves the best known results on 34 out of 60 test problem instances and matches the best known results on all but 6 of the remaining instances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The quadratic multiple knapsack problem (QMKP) (Hiley & Julstrom, 2006) extends the well-known 0–1 knapsack problem in two aspects. First, each knapsack possesses its own capacity, and each object can be assigned to at most one knapsack. Second, in addition to their individual values, objects have values in pairs that accrue to the total objective value when both objects in a pair are assigned to the same knapsack. The objective of QMKP is to fill the knapsacks with objects of maximum total value without exceeding the capacity of any knapsack. As a generalization and a combination of the multiple knapsack problem (Hung & Fisk, 1978) and the quadratic knapsack problem (Gallo, Hammer, & Simeone, 1980), QMKP is known to be NP-hard (Hiley & Julstrom, 2006).Meta-heuristic algorithms (García-Martínez, Glover, Rodriguez, Lozano, & R., 2013; García-Martínez, Rodriguez, & Lozano, 2014; Hiley & Julstrom, 2006; Sundar & Singh, 2010) are powerful tools for handling the QMKP problem. Among these algorithms, local search is one of the most well-known techniques. However, local searches based on simple neighborhood moves may easily fall into the local optima. To overcome this drawback, a variable depth method called ejection chain approach examines a large search space by generating a sequence of interrelated simple moves to create compound moves. In the past two decades, ejection chain methods have been widely used to tackle a variety of challenging optimization problems (see Section 2.2). The current work is motivated by these applications to employ ejection chain methods for the QMKP.Different from most local search heuristics that directly move from one solution to another, the ejection chain approach first moves to intermediate structures, called reference structures, before moving to another solution. During these procedures, a certain amount of infeasibility is imposed on the initial solution, which has to be ejected to obtain a new feasible solution. The ejection of infeasibility can be delayed to create a chain by moving to other reference structures. At each step of the chain, feasible solutions can be obtained by ejecting the infeasibility. Hence, the approach is termed ejection chain algorithm (ECA). The ejection chain approach can explore much larger search spaces in a compact manner than traditional local search heuristics based on simple neighborhood moves.The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:•To our knowledge, this work is the first to employ the ejection chain method to solve the QMKP. In addition, this technique has never been used to address other knapsack problems.Both greedy and random operators are embedded in the proposed ejection chain local search. This study also proposes an effective perturbation phase based on two specialized perturbation operators and an adaptive management mechanism.The performance of the ECA is tested on 60 benchmark instances that were extensively used in previous studies. The outcomes show the efficacy of this algorithm in terms of both solution quality and robustness. In particular, the ECA generates results competitive with those of state-of-the-art approaches presented in literature by improving the best known results on 34 instances and matching the best known results on all but 6 of the remaining instances.The effects of some important parameter settings and components of the proposed algorithm are analyzed.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the mathematical formulation of the QMKP and the related works. Section 3 describes the main components of the ECA. Section 4 presents the comprehensive computational results and comparisons between the ECA and some other best-performing algorithms in literature. The effects of several important components and the parameter settings of the proposed algorithm are analyzed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this study and gives suggestions for future research directions.The QMKP involves assigning a set of objects into knapsacks, such that the total profit of all objects in the knapsacks is maximized without violating the capacity constraint of any knapsack. It includes a setN={1,…,n}of n objects and a setM={1,…,m}of m knapsacks. Each object i ∈ N has a profit value viand a weight wi. Each pair of objects i ∈ N and j ∈ N (i ≠ j) has a profit value vij, while each knapsack k ∈ M possesses a capacity Ck. Each object should be assigned to at most one knapsack k such that the total weight of the objects in each knapsack k does not exceed its capacity Ck. The value of an assignment of objects N to knapsacks M is the sum of the linear values of the included objects and the quadratic values of the object pairs that fall into the same knapsack. In the QMKP, the objective is to maximize the total profit value Vsum. The decision variable xikis 1 if object i is assigned to knapsack k; otherwise, the value is 0. Thus, QMKP can be formulated as follows:(1)MaxVsum=∑i=1n∑k=1mxikvi+∑i=1n−1∑j=i+1n∑k=1mxikxjkvij,subject to(2)∑k=1mxjk≤1;j=1,…,n,(3)∑j=1nxjkwj≤Ck;k=1,…,m,(4)xjk∈{0,1};j=1,…,n;k=1,…,m.In the above formulation, objective function (1) aims to maximize the total profit value. Constraint (2) guarantees that each object can be assigned to at most one knapsack. Constraint (3) ensures that the total weight of any knapsack does not exceed its capacity. Constraint (4) imposes binary restrictions on decision variables.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
