@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bank branch sales evaluation using extended value efficiency analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Value efficiency analysis is extended.Finnish bank branch sales are analyzed in collaboration with the bank management.The bank has already used the study to support its decisions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Value efficiency analysis,Sales performance,Bank branches,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article results from our collaborative project with a Finnish bank aiming to evaluate the sales performance of bank branches. The management wishes to evaluate the branches’ ability to generate profit, which rules out the pure technical efficiency considerations. The branches operate in heterogeneous environments. We deal with the heterogeneity by subdividing the branches according to the bank specification into overlapping clusters and analyze each cluster separately. The prices of the branch outputs are hard to assess as the results from the sales efforts can only be observed with long delays. We employ benchmark units similarly as in value efficiency analysis (VEA). However, we extend VEA in two ways. First, in standard VEA the benchmark unit is assumed to yield the maximum profit among the set of feasible technologies; instead, our benchmark technology may or may not be in the feasible set. Second, we consider efficiency tests employing a benchmark with respect to both profit and return. We propose a solution strategy for these extensions. The bank uses the study to support decisions concerning new branches, changes in the operations of inefficient branches, and actions aiming to more flexible deployment of the staff.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The banks have traditionally been forerunners in adopting new approaches to improve operating efficiency. However, no standard system exists to benchmark the bank branches. The initiative for this paper was the need to compare the performance of the branch sales activities of Helsinki OP Bank, part of the OP-Pohjola Group which is a leading financial service group in Finland. The monitoring of branches of Helsinki OP Bank has so far been done on a relatively short-term basis. By carrying out the branch efficiency analysis with several years of perspective and combining the results with other information sources, the bank management seeks for a more profound understanding of the operational process in the branches to tackle three major challenges: what are the desirable characteristics of new branches in consideration, how to reorganize inefficient branches, and how to deploy the personnel in the branch network. To achieve valuable results, our analysis was carried out in close collaboration with the bank management.The surveys on efficiency studies in financial institutions by Berger and Humphrey (1997) and by Fethi and Pasiouras (2010) report more than 300 studies since the early 1980’s. Even though the majority of the literature has focused on the comparison of banks, there are a number of publications with the focus on bank branches that are discussed by a recent review of 80 DEA applications (Paradi & Zhu, 2013). According to the surveys almost all of the published branch level studies use the data envelopment analysis (DEA) with some chosen sets of inputs and outputs.The choice of inputs and outputs for DEA depends on the specific purpose of the analysis. For instance, Mahajan (1991) deals with branch sales performance, Nash and Sterna-Karwat (1996) consider cross-selling in the bank branches, and Cook, Hababou, and Tuenter (2000) distinguish between the sales and service function and their respective resources. Paradi, Yang, and Zhu (2011) distinguish three approaches of DEA to assess efficiency in bank branches: production, profitability and intermediation approaches; see also Berger, Hanweck, and Humphrey (1987). The production approach considers the branch using inputs (such as labor, capital, and space) to generate output services such as loans, deposits and insurances. The profitability model examines how efficiently a branch uses its cost factors of inputs to create revenues from outputs. The intermediation approach considers the bank as an intermediary collecting funds for loans and other revenue earning activities. Thanassoulis (1999) distinguishes two forms of the intermediation approach: liquidity efficiency reflecting the solvency risk measured on the bank level, and market efficiency reflecting the ability to convert the inputs as well as the market potential (as an additional input) into sales. Athanassopoulos (1998) is a pioneer in utilizing the market efficiency model for clusters of branches. Thanassoulis (1999) lists example branch studies that have adopted the production approach or the market efficiency form of the intermediation approach.For the banking outputs and/or inputs the unit prices may not be easily available. The results of sales efforts in banks are often observed with a long delay. The exact specification of prices for the outputs is not realistic, for instance, because it is uncertain when a customer will withdraw from an investment fund or how long the actual period of lending is. Even though the monetary value of earnings in a period could be used, it cannot be matched with the sales activity of the same period (see also Smith, 1990) but with the activity of several periods. Moreover, the bank offers a wide range of services the price of which for a customer may depend on the assortment of services that she/he uses: e.g., a customer with a long-lasting and stable relationship with the bank often gets a loan with a lower margin than other customers. The revenues from the sales of services are based on both interests and commissions and fees. This further challenges the explicit definition of prices especially if the outputs are on an aggregate level.Also Thanassoulis (1999) recognizes the need of improvement in the price measurement in branch studies. As a consequence of the price measurement problem, the bank branch studies often measure branch operations’ technical efficiency. However, there are also studies on the cost efficiency (Hartman, Storbeck, & Byrnes, 2001), output-mix efficiency (Camanho & Dyson, 2005) or profit efficiency (Portela & Thanassoulis, 2005; Portela & Thanassoulis, 2007) that employ some price information.The branches of Helsinki OP Bank have both the roles of a service provider and selling. Our interest lies in such previous work that includes sales type outputs. Furthermore, it was in the interest of the management of Helsinki OP Bank to evaluate each branch – the decision making unit (DMU) – in terms of monetary value. Therefore, we excluded from consideration pure technical efficiency. In principle, the market efficiency approach may be adopted in the analysis of branches. However, due to the lack of data on the market potential of the branches, we rejected that type of approach. We utilize transactional sales volumes of financial services as output and workforce effort as input. Commonly in DEA, input and output weights are interpreted as scaled prices. However, the scaling can be different for inputs and outputs in which case the monetary units are different as well. Instead, our input and output weights of the analysis have monetary interpretations, which enable us the assessment of revenues, costs, profit and return. Furthermore, in place of standard DEA approaches (CCR by Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978, and BCC by Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984) we extend and employ value efficiency analysis VEA by Halme, Joro, Korhonen, Salo, and Wallenius, 1999 to make efficient use of managerial judgment in the analysis.Few studies have included clear managerial value judgments in the analysis. Among others, Schaffnit, Rosen, and Paradi, 1997 and Cook and Zhu (2005) and Paradi and Schaffnit (2004) employ weight restrictions. Yang, Wong, Liu, and Steuer (2010) made the managers and directors search for the most preferred solution on the efficient frontier. We employ management preference information in several ways: (i) we carry out performance evaluation separately in several overlapping branch clusters which are relatively homogenous and subjectively defined by the management based on environmental factors such as existing customer base of the branch, for instance; (ii) for efficiency tests we employ benchmark units also defined by the management; (iii) we employ managerial judgment in the form of pair-wise comparison of branches belonging to the same cluster; and (iv) we use judgmental lower limits on the profitability of individual services of a benchmark branch. All such judgmental information has an impact in prices used for efficiency evaluation.We employ the benchmark units in the analysis in two different ways: using value efficiency analysis (VEA) by Halme et al. (1999) that compares the profits of the units, or using return efficiency analysis (REA) by Kallio and Kallio (2002) that compares the return of the units. In the context of sales evaluation we define the profit as the margin between revenue generated from the sales and cost of sales activity. The return is correspondingly the ratio of revenues to costs.Originally VEA assumes that the benchmark is the most preferred unit (MPU) of the cluster and it is efficient among the set of production possibilities. We extend VEA in a way that a benchmark, a desired technology (DT), is not necessarily in the current set of feasible technologies defined using existing DMUs.1In this article, a technology refers to a pair of input and output vectors. For instance, each point in the production possibility set refers to one particular existing technology.1However, DT is a conceivable technology to be adopted in the future. After all, it is up to the management to choose such a technology of interest. This amendment to the VEA is well justified from the point of view of the bank branch application, for instance. The bank management found it natural and straightforward to think of an ideal unit consisting of the best salespeople forming a “dream team”. The superior competencies of such a team have a significant effect on the branch performance.Also Sowlati and Paradi (2004) suggest the use of targets for efficient units not in the current production possibility set. They point out that based on a DEA analysis no further improvement can be indicated for efficient units (Sowlati & Paradi, 2004, p. 261): “Nevertheless, it is important for management to indicate targets for their efficient units if the organization is to improve as a whole. Based on possible variations in the input and output levels of efficient DMUs, new units which are more efficient than DEA efficient units can be created”. Such variations are based on management’s judgment.Our approach thus deviates from standard DEA in several ways: we use clusters of units that are partially overlapping, within homogeneous clusters we compare profits in addition to return, and we use preference information in terms of benchmarks supplemented possibly by other types of preference information. The use of the clusters tends to increase efficiency scores of the units compared with those of the standard DEA. The impact of preference information restricting the set of admissible prices is opposite: accounting for the preference information introduces additional restrictions into an LP problem – thus it never results in more optimistic scores and tends to decrease efficiency scores.The performance of the bank branches is considered specifically from the point of view of their long-term sales performance in order to mitigate the short-term random effects in the outputs. We use data of four years and carry out the efficiency analysis employing benchmarks in a number of homogeneous clusters.We consider efficiency tests employing benchmarks with respect to both profit (VEA) and return (REA). The VEA, including its extension, is carried out using linear programming. While the efficiency tests for REA involve nonconvex optimization problems which may have multiple local optima, we propose a solution strategy for global optimization.As far as our terminology is concerned, VEA refers to value efficiency analysis2Value enters the name of the method because the starting point in VEA by Halme et al. (1999) in comparing alternative technologies is based on a pseudo-concave value function; however, linear approximation of the value function at the optimum technology can be interpreted as using profit in place of value.2or its extension and REA to return efficiency analysis or its variation. The respective efficiency measures are profit efficiency and return efficiency. Scores for each efficiency measure are introduced in Sections 3 and 4. Subsequently, return always refers to total return which is revenues divided by costs.In Sections 2–4 we introduce value efficiency analysis (VEA) of Halme et al. (1999) with an extension and the return efficiency analysis (REA) of Kallio and Kallio (2002) with some modifications. The methods are discussed in a general framework for which the subsequent bank branch efficiency analysis in Section 5 is a special case.For the discussion of efficiency analysis, we begin by introducing the set of feasible technologies and the set of admissible prices to be employed in the efficiency tests. Here we introduce the methodology in more general terms than is necessary for the subsequent bank branch analysis.Consider n decision making units (DMUj) j, j=1, 2, …, n, to be evaluated against each other. There are m input and k output products which are consumed or produced by the DMUs. An intermediate product may appear twice: as an output for some DMUs and as an input for others.Letxij⩾0be the input of product i by DMUjandyij⩾0the output in a given period of analysis. The input vector of DMUjisxj=xij∈Rmand the output vector isyj=yij∈Rk. LetX=xijbe the m×n-matrix with columns xjandY=yijthe k×n-matrix with columns yj.Let an index r refer to a DMUrto be evaluated. We judge DMUrin terms of the input xrand output yrwith respect to a set T of feasible technologies and a set P of admissible price vectors. Feasible technologies are defined by pairs of input and output vectors (x,y)∈T. For all j, we assume that (xj,yj)∈T; i.e., technology employed by DMUjis a feasible technology.The set T can be defined in alternative ways. We consider feasible technologies, which are linear combinations of the input and output pairs (xj,yj); i.e., for a set Λ⊂Rn, we defineT={(x,y)|x=Xλ∈Rm,y=Yλ∈Rk,λ∈Λ}.We assume that the inputs and outputs are freely disposable. Hence, if (x,y) is feasible, then output y with input x′⩾x is also feasible, and similarly output y′⩽y with input x is feasible.Note that this definition of the set T is not restrictive. Because fictitious DMUs related to feasible technologies (input and output vectors) may be included among the n alternatives, all technologies which are feasible in the real world can be included in T. For example, a technology representing a ray in the production possibility set may be included among the DMUs. Similarly, technologies of abandoning inputs or outputs (for free disposability) may be included.The choice of Λ results in alternative sets T, of which one is adopted for evaluation. If Λ consists of all unit vectors in Rn, then T consists of the observed n input and output pairs (xj,yj). Additionally, for Λ={λ∈Rn∣λ⩾0}, T is the minimal convex cone containing individual technologies j, and forΛ={λ∈Rn|∑jλj=1,λ⩾0}, T is the convex combination of individual technologies.For convex T, with A∈Rh×nand b∈Rh, we define Λ={λ∈Rn∣Aλ⩽b,λ⩾0} and(1)T={(x,y)|x=Xλ,y=Yλ,Aλ⩽b,λ⩾0}.For example, if A=(1,…,1) and b=1, then (1) defines T as convex combinations of the origin and the n individual technologies (xj,yj). On the other hand (1) can be used to approximate any convex set T arbitrarily closely.The efficiency concept that we employ uses preference information provided by the DM. This information leads to dealing with constrained input and output row vectors of prices q∈Rmand v∈Rk. Note that the price vectors are expressed in money/unit which means their values normally are not equal to the values of the DEA multipliers. We require (v,q)>0. If an output is undesirable (e.g., pollution), then we treat such a product as an input with positive input price. Prices may be restricted by other means as well. For instance, some prices may be fixed or restricted to some interval. We define a set P of admissible row vectors of prices (q,v)∈R(m+k), which are used to evaluate costs and revenues of the DMUs. We define a convex set of admissible prices P(2)P={(v,q)∈Rm+k|vB1+qB2⩽c}.with B1∈Rk×s, B2∈Rm×sand row vector c∈Rs. There are s inequalities in (2) which refer to relative or absolute price constraints depending on the component of c being zero or nonzero, respectively. For example, we may require that price of a certain product is at least as high as the price of another product. Such requirement represents a relative price constraint. Additionally, if (x,y) is preferred to (x′,y′) in a pair-wise comparison between two technologies in T, then we may include such preference information in the analysis. In this case, we require vy−qx⩾vy′−qx′; i.e., v(y−y′)−q(x−x′)⩾0 which represents a relative price constraint.Given a choice for feasible technologies T and for a set P of admissible prices, the evaluation of DMUrmay be based on alternative concepts. We consider profit efficiency and return efficiency which are defined in the next two sections.In this section we introduce value efficiency analysis with an extension for profit efficiency measurement. The starting point is the set of feasible technologies T and the set of admissible prices P. The latter accounts for managerial preference information, such as pair-wise comparisons. For profit efficiency evaluation of DMUr, as usual in DEA, we search for prices in P which are most favorable for the profit of DMUrin comparison with the best profit achievable by feasible technologies in T. The methodology is generally applicable whenever feasible technologies in T and admissible prices are specified. The advantage of using preference information in price restrictions is an improved discrimination power; for instance, without price restrictions a large share of DMUs may turn out to be efficient while such result appears inconsistent from management’s point of view.We proceeds as follows. First, we define profit efficiency in a way which includes alternative cases of profit efficiency by Kuosmanen, Kortelainen, Sipiläinen, and Cherchye (2010, pp. 585–586) as special cases. Second, with the additional requirement that the most preferred unit (MPU) yields the largest profit we end up with the value efficiency analysis (VEA) of Halme et al. (1999). Third, while an MPU in VEA needs to be an efficient technology of T, we employ a desired technology DT in place of an MPU to achieve an extension of VEA. DT need not be in T but it is a conceivable technology to be adopted (or a long term target achievable) in the future.Given a price vector (v,q)∈P, the profit of a technology (x,y)∈T is vy−qx. Technology (xr,yr) is profit efficient with respect to P and T if there is a price vector (v,q)∈P such that vyr−qxr⩾vy−qx, for all (x,y)∈T. Because (v,q)>0, for all (v,q)∈P, profit efficiency implies Pareto optimality.We adopt the test for profit efficiency from Kallio and Kallio (2002) as follows. Given the set P of admissible prices and the set T of feasible technologies, we solve the following problem to test for profit efficiency(3)min(v,q)∈P,θ,x,y{θ-(vyr-qxr)|θ⩾vy-qx,forall(x,y)∈T}.At the optimal solution of (3), θ is the maximum profit over T and θ−(vyr−qxr)⩾0 because (xr,yr)∈T. If θ−(vyr−qxr)=0, then (xr,yr) maximizes vyr−qxrover T and (xr,yr) is profit efficient. Following the definitions of Nerlove (1965), the optimal objective function value θ−(vyr−qxr) in (3) is the difference measure of profit efficiency3For suitable definitions of the admissible prices P and feasible technologies T our definition of profit efficiency is consistent with the definitions of four alternative cases by Kuosmanen et al. (2010).3while (vyr−qxr)/θ is the ratio measure.Next, consider technologies T given in (1) and prices P given in (2). In general, the number of technologies (x,y)∈T is infinite and the problem stated in (3) is not a linear programming problem4A linear programming model involves only linear functions of endogenous variables. In (3), however, vectors v, q, x and y are endogenous and vy−qx is a nonlinear function.4. Therefore, we reformulate (3) as follows. For (x,y)∈T, x=Xλ and y=Yλ for some λ⩾0 such that Aλ⩽b. Thus, (3) is equivalent with the problem(4)min(v,q)∈P{maxλ⩾0{(vY-qX)λ|Aλ⩽b}-(vyr-qxr)}.Given any constant price vector (v,q)∈P, the inner maximization in (4) is a linear program. Hence, by standard duality theory of linear programming, it can be replaced by its dual problem: minη⩾0{ηb∣(vY−qX)−ηA⩽0}. Hence, (4) is restated as a linear programming problem(5)min(v,q)∈P,η{ηb-(vyr-qxr)|vY-qX-ηA⩽0,η⩾0}.In conclusion, if (v,q) and η denote an optimal solution for (5), then (v,q) and θ=ηb solve (3) with admissible prices given by (2) and technologies given by (1).Value judgment schemes have been proposed for the originally value-free DEA for several reasons, initially in the form of weight restrictions (e.g., Charnes, Cooper, Wei, & Huang, 1989; Thompson, Singleton, Thrall, & Smith, 1986; Wong & Beasley, 1990). Another way is to provide the information in the form of target outputs given the inputs or vice versa (Golany, 1988; Thanassoulis & Dyson, 1992). Value efficiency analysis (VEA) by Halme et al. (1999) suggests that the DM’s preferences are incorporated in the analysis by locating the DM’s most preferred unit (MPU), which is a (possibly virtual) unit on the efficient frontier and which is preferred by the DM to the rest of the units. At this point the DM’s pseudo-concave value function is assumed to attain its maximum in the set of efficient technologies. In VEA, this means that there exist prices of the inputs and outputs defining a linear value function for which the MPU is an optimum. Therefore, when the profit efficiency of a unit is diagnosed, the prices are further constrained such that the MPU yields optimal profits over the set of feasible technologies.We supplement the information of the MPU à la VEA. Suppose the DM chooses (x∗,y∗)∈T as an MPU. Then x∗=Xλ∗,y∗=Yλ∗, for some λ∗⩾0 and Aλ∗⩽b. When this information is taken into account while judging the efficiency of (xr,yr), then (v,q) and η in (5) are further restricted so that (x∗,y∗) is an optimal technology given prices (v,q); i.e., λ∗ is optimal for the profit maximization problem maxλ⩾0{(vY−qX)λ∣Aλ⩽b}. Such optimality is guaranteed if we append to the constraints of (5) the following complementarity conditions(vY-qX-ηA)λ∗=0andη(Aλ∗-b)=0.Hence, an MPU (x∗,y∗) in VEA introduces two additional linear constraints to (5) and such modified problem is a linear programming problem as well.In VEA above, the MPU is assumed to be on the efficient frontier. Next we deal with a desired technology DT in place of an MPU. Here as well, DT represents technology which is in DM’s preferences at least as good as any technology in T. However, DT need not necessarily be in T. We propose an approach to account for a DT, and thereby extend the result of Halme et al. (1999).Let (x∗,y∗) be a DT, which is required to be at least as profitable as any technology (x,y)∈T. Hence, we impose an additional restriction θ=vy∗−qx∗ in (3), and the problem is rewritten as the following linear programming problem:(6)minv,q,η⩾0[(vy∗-qx∗)-(vyr-qxr)]s.t.(7)vB1+qB2⩽c(8)vY-qX-ηA⩽0(9)-vy∗+qx∗+ηb⩽0The weak duality theorem of linear programming implies that ηb is an upper bound for the maximum profit of all technologies in T given prices (v,q). Therefore, (9) implies that DT is at least as profitable as any technology in T. The following result, whose proof is in Electronic Appendix, concerns properties of the problem (6)–(9).Theorem 1Assume that the set P of admissible prices in(2)and the set T of feasible technologies in(1)are nonempty.(a)If the problem(6)–(9)is feasible then the optimal objective function value is non-negative and vy−qx⩽vy∗−qx∗for all (x,y)∈T.Consider an optimal solution for(6)–(9)with optimal prices (v,q). If the optimal dual variable for(9)is strictly negative, then there exists a profit maximizing technology (xo,yo)∈T such that vyo−qxo=vy∗−qx∗.If the problem(6)–(9)is infeasible and the set P is bounded, then there exists (xo,yo)∈T such that (vyo−qxo)>(vy∗−qx∗) for all (v,q)∈P; i.e., (xo,yo) is superior to (x∗,y∗) with respect to the set P of admissible prices.In case (a) of Theorem 1, if the optimal objective function value is zero then DMUris profit efficient. As above, (vy∗−qx∗)−(vyr−qxr) at the optimum is the difference measure of profit efficiency and (vyr−qxr)/(vy∗−qx∗) is the ratio measure. In case (b) there exists an efficient technology in T that produces the same profit as the DT. In case (c), if P is unbounded there may or may not be (xo,yo)∈T which is superior to (x∗,y∗); for examples, see the Electronic Appendix.The linear programming problem (5) was shown to be equivalent to the original profit efficiency problem (3). An alternative way of solving (3) proceeds as follows. Given extreme points (xe,ye) and extreme rays (xs,ys) of the set T in (1), the condition θ⩾vy−qx for all (x,y)∈T in (3) holds if and only if θ⩾vye−qxefor all extreme points, and 0⩾vys−qxsfor all extreme rays. Hence problem (3) can be rewritten as a linear programming problemmin(v,q)∈P,θ{θ-(vyr-qxr)|θ⩾vye-qxeforalle,0⩾vys-qxsforalls}.Furthermore, if in the evaluator’s preferences (x∗,y∗) is a DT or an MPU, we append this linear programming problem with an additional constraint θ=vy∗−qx∗. Such approach is particularly attractive if the set T is simple in the sense that its extreme points and rays are easily available.We may evaluate the units also on the basis of an alternative model using return efficiency analysis (REA). Starting with a model in the spirit of the REA model of Kallio and Kallio (2002), we incorporate DT (or MPU) in REA.Given a price vector (v,q)∈P in (2), the revenue of output for technology (x,y)∈T in (1) is vy, the cost of input is qx and the return is vy/qx. For efficiency test, we solve the following problem(10)minv,q,θθ-(vyr/qxr)s.t.(11)vy∗/qx∗=θ(12)vy/qx⩽θ,forall(x,y)∈T(13)vB1+qB2⩽c.Note that the problem differs from a DEA problem with weight restrictions in such a way that (1) the return efficiency of the best performing unit is a variable in the optimization and (2) we maximize the deviation of the return of the unit under consideration and the best unit instead of their ratio (3) the prices (v,q) are expressed in money/unit.To solve (10)–(13), observe first that because (xj,yj)∈T, for all j=1,2,…,n, and (x,y)∈T means that x=Xλ and y=Yλ, for some λ⩾0, it follows that requirement (12) can be replaced by vyj−θqxj⩽0 for all j, or equivalently, vY−θqX⩽0. Second, define α=qxr, μ=v/α and ω=q/α. Then (10)–(13) is restated as(14)minα⩾0,θ,μ,ωθ-μyrs.t.(15)ωxr=1,(16)μy∗-θωx∗=0(17)μY-θωX⩽0(18)αμB1+αωB2⩽c.In (18), α⩾0,αμ=v>0, αω=q>0 imply that α>0, μ>0 and ω>0. Consequently, (16) implies that θ>0. The optimal objective function value θ−(vyr/qxr)=θ−μyris the difference measure of return efficiency and (vyr/qxr)/θ=μyr/θ is the ratio measure. The difference measure is equal to 0 if (xr,yr) is return efficient.In general, the problem (14)–(18) is a non-convex optimization problem which may have multiple local optima. However, for any fixed positive α and θ, the problem reduces to a linear programming problem. Therefore, the global optimum can be found by solving a sequence of such linear programs with varying α and θ. If there are no absolute price constraints in (18) beyond some small lower bounds ∊>0 for all prices, then α>0 falls out from (18) and the search for a global optimum involves variations in θ only.Next we discuss the efficiency analysis of bank branches in the Helsinki OP Bank. The bank management was looking for tools to evaluate the economic performance of the branches and welcomed the analyses we offered. Subsequently, the evaluation was conducted as a joint effort of the researchers and the bank. At the time of our study, the bank hired a consultant to make a site location study to measure the potential customer flows of the branches. Both that and our study were aimed to identify improvement opportunities in the network of the branches.The analysis concerns the years 2007–2010 in the 25 branches operating in the Helsinki metropolitan area. These branches serve private customers and small businesses offering financing, investment, daily personal finance services and insurance services. For the bank, the branches are crucial sales channels along with the internet and call centers. The financing and investment advisors are organized in teams and their performance is monitored against semi-annual sales targets. This monitoring, however, emphasizes short term sales with a rather large variation. The management wished to view the performance with a longer perspective and asked to carry out a cross sectional analysis of the four years as the annual data was including a significant amount of random elements. Note that some years included in the data were turbulent on the financial market.We use the transactional volumes as the basis of the sales activity evaluation. The management preferred dealing with them to using monetary amounts of sales which was considered unfair because the branches function in different types of areas. They found the use of market efficiency unrealistic as the market potential is hard to assess owing to the complexity of customer flows in their living, working and shopping environments. As mentioned earlier the liquidity form of intermediation approach is functioning on the bank level and was not considered suitable for the branch level sales efficiency analysis.As the title of our article refers to bank branch sales evaluation, the outputs in our analysis are the banking services to the customers provided by sales people, while inputs consist of resources needed for sales activity. Such banking services of a branch can be divided in four categories: financing, investment, daily banking services and insurance services.Financing services consist of loans and additional services to borrowers (housing loans, consumer loans and payment protection insurance) and the investment services include all saving services (mutual funds, insurance savings and critical illness cover; new saving accounts were excluded because of ambiguity between renewed and truly new fixed term accounts, and because the importance of other types of saving accounts were considered minor). The bank considers these two categories as the primary ones and they are used as outputs in the model. The daily services including the cashier services are considered rather as consequences of the sales activity of financing and investment services and thus they are excluded in the analysis. As for the insurance services, part of them have been included in the investment services and part in the financial services. However, non-life insurances intermediated by the bank were excluded.Both the financial and investment services consist thus of several components. The analysis aims at evaluating the sales performance and the two services categories were considered adequate for that purpose by the management. However special attention was paid to how the individual services within the categories of financial and investment services were aggregated. The bank provided the weights that were employed in the aggregation. Such weights reflect the ability of the service to create return and were based on the data available in the accounting system. The output quantities for the aggregate financing services and investment services by bank branch are shown in Table 3 of the electronic appendix. These quantities are weighted sums of the number of services in various categories during the four year period.In our analysis we employed one input, the total cost of sales force. Many bank branch studies include additionally other operational costs. We omitted them to view the sales directly as a result of the work of sales teams. The sales force is also the most significant cost in the branches and unlike many other operational costs, like rents, it is locally controllable. The input quantity used is the overall work time in full-time years. Such figures are weighted sums over sales force categories where the weight for each category is proportional to the average wage in that category. The sales force was divided to direct sales force working mainly with financing services and investment services, and indirect sales force consisting of managers, team leaders and service advisors. The work years of indirect sales force are allocated to the two service groups in proportion to the work years of the direct sales force. The total input quantities for the aggregate financing and investment services by bank branch are shown in Table 3 of the electronic appendix.5Note that we use the data of the two inputs (instead of their sum) only when defining price restrictions for the MPUs (see Section 5.5).5The 25 branches are different in size, internal organization, location and customer base and stage of life-cycle. Some bank efficiency studies have applied cluster analysis to the branches (see e.g., Athanassopoulos, 1998; Chaffai & Dietsch, 2009). The number of branches being relatively small we instead categorize the units according to the DM’s subjective judgment into five partly overlapping clusters: C1, C2,…, C5 as indicated in Table 1.Dyson et al. (2001) defined homogeneity in DEA as follows: first the units are undertaking similar activities and producing comparable products or services so that common set of outputs can be defined, second similar range of resources is available to all the units, and third that units are operating in similar environments. The management constructed the clusters to fulfill these requirements. Cluster C1 units are located in shopping centers that are today important retail locations. Cluster C2 involves large branches having a big customer base and they are typically located favorably close to significant customer flows. Unlike other clusters they have separate teams for the customer financing and investment services. Their input–output combinations are not attainable for the established small branch cluster C3 that functions in less favorable locations. Cluster C4 represents new branches. Thus, the basis of categories C1–C4 is in the size, retail location, and life-cycle stage. The three categories C2, C3 and C4 are mutually exclusive. C5 is an exception among the clusters as the geographic location of the branches is its basis and it includes branches in two suburban towns A and B. All its units belong also to some other cluster.It is customary in management accounting to rely on several measures in judging performance. Also in the case of Helsinki OP Bank, both VEA and REA are carried out separately within each cluster. For branch i, let xidenote the sales force input during the four-year period and yithe vector of financing and investment services. For each cluster Ck, k=1,…, 5, the set of feasible technologies is defined as the non-negative combinations of the technologies of its branches; i.e., suppressing k,T={(x,y)|(x,y)=∑iλi(xi,yi),λi⩾0}where summation is taken over the branches of the particular cluster Ck. In this case, the matrix A and the vector b in (1) are void. When defining the clusters the size of a unit was one factor taken into account, which to a large extent removes the need to assess the scale efficiencies. We also expect that the main sources of inefficiency lie in differences in local management and competencies of individuals.The management identified the MPU as well as a DT for each cluster. As in Halme and Korhonen (2012), the MPU is an existing DMU that the management considered to have a superior performance among its peers. The management found it convenient to use existing branches as MPUs though virtual MPUs could have been used. The choices for the MPUs were made in a meeting where both numerical data and supporting graphs were available. Table 1 indicates the most preferred unit for each cluster as well. The input/output data for the MPUs are given in Table 4 of the electronic appendix, where the benchmark technology is denoted by (x∗,y∗), the output vector y∗ with two componentsy1∗andy2∗, and the input x∗ assigned to the two services byx1∗andx2∗.As for the cluster DTs in Table 4 of the electronic appendix, their outputs were based upon the actual sales of the top performing advisors in the three advisor roles in 2010. The sales statistics of each individual advisor was aggregated to financial and investment services using the weights employed in the aggregation of the outputs. The ideal performance per work year for a service was defined as the average of two best individuals in each advisor role. For each cluster and each service, the output quantity for the DT of the cluster is computed as the product of the ideal performance and the sales force input of the cluster MPU in that service category. Thus the DT of a cluster was defined to have the input level of the cluster MPU and the ideal output in case the DMU had the best performing individuals according to year 2010 sales.It was the management’s initiative to employ also a Super DT (Table 4 of the electronic appendix) to be shared by all clusters excluding clusters C2 and C5 which both include large branches. Super DT is made up of a self-steering team consisting of two best performing advisors of the bank in the two advisor types.6The bank used statistics on the individual salespeople performance.6In total four advisors made up the ideal branch team.When applying the value and return efficiency analysis we account for additional price restrictions as well. First, for the definition of the set of admissible prices P, we scale prices so that the input price q is one monetary unit (cost of one unit of labor). Thereby, we set q=1 and we measure profit in monetary terms, but the unit of money is the cost of one unit of labor7Note that such a cost can be interpreted to account for overhead costs as well, in addition to direct cost of labor. In fact, such an interpretation was used by the bank management.7. Second, in each cluster Ck,k=1,…, 5, it is required that in an MPU, a DT or the Super DT, whose technology is denoted by (x∗,y∗), neither of the outputs is at a loss; i.e., both outputs must at least break even. Thus, for the admissible prices the bank requires that the return for each individual output u, u=1, 2, is at least ρ=1; i.e.,vuyu∗/qxu∗⩾ρ, whereyu∗is the output of service u andxu∗is the total sales force allocated to u. This rules out zero prices of outputs. Third, in return efficiency analysis in each cluster Ck, the prices are constrained employing pair-wise comparisons among pairs (i,j) of DMUs, where both i and j belong to the same cluster Ck. The pairs of units in comparisons were defined by the management and are listed in Table 5 of the electronic appendix. Let Qkdenote the set of such pairs (i,j) where ordering is such that branch i is found superior to branch j in cluster Ck. Hence, for (i,j)∈Qk, the resulting price restriction is vyi/qxi⩾vyj/qxj. In summary, the set of admissible prices for cluster Ck, suppressing k, is given byP={(v,q)|q=1,vuyu∗/qxu∗⩾ρ,u=1,2,vyi/qxi⩾vyj/qxjfor(i,j)∈Qk}.We consider both profit and return based efficiency scores across the five clusters with (i) existing units as MPUs, (ii) desired technologies DT as benchmarks and (iii) the Super DT as benchmark. In each case and for each cluster we use the set T of technologies defined in Section 5.4 and the set P of prices defined in Section 5.5. With an MPU, a DT or the Super DT as benchmark, profit efficiency is obtained by solving (6)–(9) and return efficiency by solving (10)–(13) with requirement (11) replaced by vy∗−θqx∗=0 and (12) replaced by vY−θqX⩽0.The efficiency scores are presented in Table 2(at the end) both for VEA and REA. The number of branches in each cluster is small. However, due to the incorporation of subjective preference information, very few branches are efficient. Note that profit efficiency scores depend on size of the unit unlike in return efficiency. We may expect that these measures give different but correlated ranking results as demonstrated for clusters C2 and C5 below. With the MPU as benchmark the Spearman correlation of rankings based on VEA and REA among the five clusters is in range 0.81–0.96.Recall that the DT in each cluster uses the input (work time) of the MPU with the additional assumption that the unit employs the “dream team” as its sales force. Therefore, return efficiency scores with DT are more pessimistic than the scores with MPU, but the ranking of the units remains the same. However, for VEA the rankings with DT and MPU are not perfectly correlated. The small branches in clusters C1, C3 and C4 were also benchmarked against the Super DT. In each cluster the MPU has ca. 50% inefficiency in REA. Thus, a super team could significantly improve the performance of established branches. Again, for REA the rankings with Super DT and MPU are perfectly correlated but for VEA they are not.For the sake of brevity, we limit a more detailed discussion to clusters C2 and C5 only. Cluster C2 includes big units which – in the case of poor performance – can have a large unfavorable impact on the bank profitability. Similarly as Boussofiane, Dyson, and Thanassoulis (1991) present their results in an efficiency/profitability matrix, we illustrate the profit and return efficiencies in Fig. 1for the branches of cluster C2 with B12 as an MPU. In this case the efficiency measures are highly correlated which is due to the homogeneous sizes of the units – a property which is not valid for cluster C5 to be discussed below. One unit in profit inefficiency represents one standard work year lost during the four year period. Fig. 1 shows that – apart from benchmark B12 – two other branches, B19 and B23, outperform the others. The remaining four branches are, however, much inferior to the MPU with respect to both profit and return. Because the branches are large, the profit lost is remarkable, for instance, for branch B21, the loss is 25 times the cost of one work year. The management put a high priority to investigate sources of inefficiency.Cluster C5 includes the branches in two suburban towns, A and B, in the Helsinki metropolitan area. Fig. 2shows the return vs. profit efficiency for cluster C5 with B12 as an MPU. Unlike Fig. 1, Fig. 2 illustrates that profit and return efficiency are different concepts. The objectives of the models are different and neither profit efficiency implies return efficiency nor vice versa. In Fig. 2 profit and return based rankings are not strongly correlated. B16 and B17 are units with high volumes while B24 and B25 are smaller branches. The former pair is superior to the latter in terms of return efficiency. However, for big units the difference measure of profit efficiency is large compared to the small ones, wherefore the ranking with VEA is reversed compared with REA. Thus, different sizes of the units explain why profit and return based analyses lead to imperfectly correlated rankings.The analysis indicates that the branches in region B outperform the branches in region A. The difference was so alerting that we prepared for the management additional monthly data for discussion. The results indicated that the difference in sales performance in the two towns had increased during the four-year period. Both towns are located in the metropolitan areas where the bank image is the same. The bank management concluded that one of the likely sources of performance differences was the flexible practices in resource sharing across the branches in town B. Thereby, there were learning opportunities not only on the branch level but also on the regional level. Fig. 3is a graphical illustration of the computation of prices used to determine return efficiency of branch B14 in cluster C5.Simultaneously with this study the newly appointed CEO of Helsinki OP Bank introduced major changes in the bank. Therefore, it is somewhat difficult to judge the importance of distinct factors – such as our research findings – affecting the revisions in the bank policies. Nevertheless, from the management’s perspective the time was right for the study as the bank was reshaping its operations. The information provided by the study improved and focused the largely intuitive perceptions of the management on the bank branch performance. According to bank management, this study undoubtedly provided useful insights or helped in policy choices in the following topics of management.New branch establishment. The bank ranks the growth very high in its strategy and new branch establishment is an essential means to achieve it. The performance measures of the existing branches provide crucial benchmark information concerning e.g., how targets should be set for the new ones. In the analysis additionally an important insight was related to the desired minimum staff of the new branches. The results reinforced to the management that the smallest branches (5–7 people) tend to be outperformed by the midsize branches (8–10 people) in return efficiency. The exceptions seem to relate to some outstanding individuals who can have a considerable effect on the efficiency of a small branch. This size effect on efficiency can be seen especially in the cluster of established branches. The network management recognized that the work practices require the advisors to substitute each other often in the smallest branches. For example financing and investment advisors have to lend their hand to the daily services which deteriorates their sales performance and further harms the return efficiency of their branch. Based upon this insight the bank management has redefined the minimum staff requirement for new branches to be established.Reorganizing inefficient branches. The insight of the critical size led to reorganizations in the existing branches. In some small branches the demand may not be sufficient to justify the critical size. In such a case the branch can be merged operationally with a larger branch and the service assortment is revised. Branches B1 and B6 are already merged and they share the sales force. The advisors are working in location of B1 when taking care of booked customer appointments only. The management considers similar measures for other inefficient branched as well.Staff deployment. The bank has enhanced the collaboration among the branches by reorganizing them – instead of the previous five regional groups there are currently three and the personnel is deployed within each group in quite a flexible way.Opening hours. Many branches have avoided evening opening hours due to staff working arrangement problems caused by collective labor agreements. However, the evening hours are preferred by customers and – as the study indicated – they seem to pay off as the branches with longer opening hours tend to have higher return efficiency than those operating only daytime. The management decided to encourage the extended service hours. As the opening hours data was not available for the researchers at the time of the study, this insight was provided by the management.Leadership. The bank has been assessing systematically the work environment and leadership in the branches. The study results confirmed to the management that superiors that create atmosphere favorable for improved practices and boost novel ideas – own or adopted – to the stage of implementation were also successful in increasing their branch efficiency. The role of the leaders is seen increasingly important.As for the DTs they may not be realistic in the long term but they indicate sales potential. Such teams could be used in special situations, for example when launching a new branch. They, however, would probably require special planning. The management was especially concerned of the risk of putting high performing individuals in the same team – owing to team dynamics high performing individuals may not make a high performing team.The measures taken should enable a strong start of the new branches to be established, decrease the efficiency gaps between the existing branches, and as the result, increase sales of the entire network. The analysis will be repeated to see the development of the sales efficiency.According to the branch network management the main benefit of the analysis was that it assessed and gave a quantitative measure of the long term efficiency of the branches as the bank’s own measures were based on semiannual and even shorter term data. A key challenge which the bank faces is the assessment and restructuring of the branch network to increase the market share. For that aim our study is one piece in the larger picture including a retail site location study, for instance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We analyze the long term sales efficiency of bank branches to complement previous sales efficiency measures which exclusively concerned semiannual and shorter term sales performance. Two basic approaches are employed to measure the efficiency of the branches: one based on comparisons of profits and another based on returns. In the profit based approach the starting point is value efficiency analysis (Halme et al., 1999), where the most preferred unit – an efficient unit chosen by bank management among feasible technologies – restricts the prices of inputs and outputs. We also generalize the use of value efficiency analysis to employ desired technologies – such units need not be in the set of feasible technologies. For the return based analysis a method is proposed to account for benchmark technologies as above.Our methodology is generally applicable whenever the feasible technologies (the production possibility set) and admissible prices (accounting for managerial preferences) are specified. What is new in our approach is the use of a desired technology (DT) as a benchmark, and such a DT may or may not be in the production possibility set. But the approach does not require any other type of preference information to restrict the set of admissible prices. Neither does our approach require any type of clusters to be used – they were employed in our case example owing to the wishes of the bank management.The evaluation of the branches took place in collaboration with the management of the branch network which provided the necessary preference information for the assessment. Such information included – besides the most preferred units and desired technologies – pair-wise comparisons of branches to be used for further price restriction in the efficiency analysis. The use of preference information improved the discrimination ability in comparison with standard DEA models. To deal with the heterogeneity we analyzed the bank branches in homogeneous clusters defined by the management.The use of the efficiency analysis with preference information provided the management a new platform for learning. In the interactive process with the analyst the management was imposed to define their value judgments for the analysis. While shaping the benchmarks (desired technologies) outside the production possibility sets the management assessed the sales potential of “dream teams” – a concept which they found easy to adopt. Even if such ambitious benchmarks are not feasible targets for all the branches they inspire new initiatives to deal with important business challenges such as how to initiate a new branch. From the bank management’s point of view, the research methodology was relatively easy to understand and valid for the problems studied. In the future, the management plans to use the methodology while more data accumulate over time.This study provided the bank management with information about the profit and return efficiency of the current branch sales. Together with other sources of information – such as customer flow studies in the neighborhood the branches – our results help develop the bank branch network and the operating models of the branches.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.08.005.