@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Last time buy and repair decisions for spare parts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Alternative sources, even expensive, worth considering due to postponement effect.Reducing lead times and increasing yields are important to reduce the LTB order.Accurate life cycle demand forecasts reduce the LTB quantity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Stochastic processes,Spare parts,Last time buy,Repair,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM's) of advanced capital goods often offer service contracts for system support to their customers, for which spare parts are needed. Due to technological changes, suppliers of spare parts may stop production at some point in time. As a reaction to that decision, an OEM may place a so-called Last Time Buy (LTB) order to cover demand for spare parts during the remaining service period, which may last for many years. The fact that there might be other alternative sources of supply in the next periods complicates the decision on the LTB. In this paper, we develop a heuristic method to find the near-optimal LTB quantity in presence of an imperfect repair option of the failed parts that can be returned from the field. Comparison of our method to simulation shows high approximation accuracy. Numerical experiments reveal that repair is an excellent option as alternative sourcing, even if it is more expensive than buying a new part, because of the option to postpone the repair until the parts are needed. In addition, we show the impact of other key parameters on costs and LTB quantity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper, we consider the spare parts supply for advanced capital goods. Examples of these goods are mainframe computer systems, aircrafts, chemical plants, and medical systems. These systems are very expensive and can be in use for a long period (5–30 years). Often, these systems are highly downtime critical, that is, downtime has serious consequences in terms of costs, quality of service, and safety risks.The customers of these systems are often not just interested in acquiring such systems at an affordable price, but far more in a good balance between the resulting Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) and the system availability throughout its lifetime. Often, the support costs for system upkeep during its lifetime constitute a large part of the TCO. For customers however, system use is their core business, and not the system upkeep. Therefore, customers often prefer to outsource major parts of system upkeep, either to an OEM or to a specialized service provider, if they can provide a good balance between system uptime and costs of system upkeep. A service contract specifies the services provided and the corresponding service level agreements, such as a maximum problem resolution time, or a minimum system uptime per year. To achieve a high uptime, capital goods are often repaired by replacing failed parts by ready-to-use parts from inventory. Therefore, service providers should offer high spare parts availability.Due to technological developments and the introduction of new systems, the demand for specific spare parts may significantly drop after some time, causing the manufacturer of these parts to decide that it is not profitable anymore to produce them. This point in time may be many years before the time that service obligations end. As a result, the service provider has to decide how to cover future demand until the end of the service period. This decision is inevitably hard, due to the long remaining period and the high level of uncertainty in demand, arising from uncertainty in the size of the installed base and the parts failure rate.Placing a large final order, a so-called Last Time Buy (LTB) order, is common in industry. Often, the LTB order quantity is very large to attain a high service level, which also yields high obsolescence levels at the end of the service period. Therefore, companies try to mitigate these risks and the costs involved by considering alternative sourcing options. Examples are (i) repair of failed parts that are returned from the field, (ii) strip phased-out systems for reusable spare parts, (iii) buy second-hand parts on the open market, (iv) substitute by a compatible part, and (v) system redesign avoiding the need of the specific spare part.A key advantage of using such alternative supply options is that either the decision to supply parts from alternative options can be postponed, thereby reducing the level of uncertainty to deal with ((i), (ii), (iii)), or that an LTB order is not needed at all ((iv) and (v)). Even though companies use these alternative supply options, they lack decision support tools to make rational trade-offs between the various supply options.In this paper, we construct a model to determine the LTB quantity by making trade-offs between one alternative supply option, namely repair of the failed parts that are returned from the field. In this research, we collaborated with two industrial partners (computer machinery and printing machines). We noticed that typically only a certain fraction of the failed parts will be returned and diagnosed to be suitable for repair, the so-called return yield. As we observed in practice, the return yield may depend on the willingness of the users to send the broken parts back. In those cases, incentives such as a payment for a returned part will increase the return yield. In several real applications in our industrial partners, we observed an average return yield between 60 percent and 80 percent showing that the return flow is potentially a significant source of supply. In addition, we observed high repair yields (80 percent–90 percent) in practice. Not all returned parts can be repaired from a technical point of view.We assume a pull policy for the repair of failed parts (i.e., repair on demand), as this is known to be effective (Krikke & Van der Laan, 2011). We aim to minimize the sum of LTB procurement costs, holding costs of ready-to-use parts, repair costs, and shortage costs minus the salvage value. In addition, we aim to evaluate service levels in terms of fill rate and probability of not running out of stock. We develop accurate approximations for performance evaluation and efficient heuristics to optimize the key decisions: the LTB quantity and the repair policy (time-dependent inventory levels).In the next section, we discuss the related literature and specify our contribution. Next, we present our model in Section 3. Section 4 shows the performance analysis and the optimization heuristic when repairs are assumed perfect. Section 5 extends the model to the case with imperfect repairs. We validate the accuracy of our approximations as well as our optimization heuristic in Section 6. There, we also show the impact of the key input parameters in a numerical experiment. Finally, we summarize our main conclusions and give promising directions for future research in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
