@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
New product introduction and capacity investment by incumbents: Effects of size on strategy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Incumbents on established market may add capacities for a new product.Capacity constrained oligopolistic price competition on interrelated markets.Non-monotone effects of established capacities on equilibrium profits.Smaller firm on the established market might outperform larger competitor.Symmetry breaking of identical firms depends on firm size on established market.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Game theory,Innovation incentives,Capacity choice,Multi-product oligopoly,Subgame-perfect-equilibrium,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We analyze a duopoly where capacity-constrained firms offer an established product and have the option to offer an additional new and differentiated product. We show that the firm with the smaller capacity on the established market has a higher incentive to innovate and reaches a larger market share on the market for the new product. An increase in capacity of the larger firm can prevent its competitor from innovating, whereas an increase in capacity of the smaller firm cannot prevent innovation of its larger competitor. In equilibrium the firm with smaller capacity on the established market might outperform the larger firm with respect to total payoffs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we study the impact of the size of an oligopolistic firm’s production capacity for an established product on its incentive to open up a new connected market segment. Two real-world examples serve as an illustration of our focus.In 2007 PC maker Asus introduced the EEE PC, a low-priced mini-notebook (so-called netbook) with reduced weight and performance. At this point Asus had a market share of only about 4% on the notebook market. Other PC makers followed suit, and in 2008 almost all major players in the notebook market were offering netbooks. However, Asus still had a market share of about 30% on the netbook market, whereas the leaders on the notebook markets were rather minor players in this innovative market segment.1For example, in 2008 HP had 20% on the notebook market and 6% on the netbook market. For Dell these figures are 15% and 3% respectively. The mentioned market share numbers can be found at http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/blog/2008/dec/10/acer-asus-netbooks (netbooks) and http://community.winsupersite.com/blogs/paul/archive/2008/06/14/notebook-computer-market-share-q1-2008.aspx (notebooks).1In the TV industry major producers of standard CRT television sets have started the production of flatscreens around the year 2000. Although the production processes for these two variants are based on very different technologies, for many years firms offered both products simultaneously. For example Philips produced “standard” CRT television sets for decades, when in 1999 it started to produce LCD (flatscreen) television sets. A decade later it still produced both products.The common features of these examples are that (i) new product variants are added to an established oligopolistic market, (ii) the new product is offered by incumbents, and (iii) the new product is not replacing the old product, but is offered in addition. In many cases market leaders on the new market have minor market shares on the established market, as illustrated with the notebook/netbook example. The observation that on many occasions new products are introduced by incumbents is reinforced by empirical studies like Chandy and Tellis (2000). Their article also highlights the negative relationship between firm size and the propensity to introduce (radically) new products. Similar to other influential contributions (see e.g. Christensen, 1997) the authors explain this by the bureaucratic inertia and organizational structure in large firms. Although these aspects are certainly valid, this article points out that in markets characterized by the three features described above, pure strategic considerations induce a similar relationship between firm size, innovativeness and new capacity investments. In that respect we address the following research questions:1.What is the effect of the size of a firm’s production capacity on the established market on its incentive to enter the new market?What is the effect of the size of the competitors’ production capacity on the established market on the firm’s incentive to enter the new market?If a firm enters the new market, how is the optimal production capacity on the new market influenced by capacity levels of the firm and its competitors on the established market?Does a higher capacity on the established market always lead to relative advantages with respect to profit?In order to address these questions we consider a stylized duopolistic setup. Both firms are operating on an established homogenous product market on which an ‘old’ product is sold. For this market, firms have given production capacities, which are assumed to differ between firms. Therefore, we can distinguish between a small and a large firm. Our approach to take existing capacities on the established market as proxies for firm size, allows us to explicitly focus on the role of differences in firm size rather than on related issues, like incumbent-entrant interactions or differences in production technology, that have been addressed in most of the related literature. We implictly assume that differences in old market capacities have been caused by path-depencies or past interactions that are outside the scope of our analysis.Both firms have the opportunity to introduce a differentiated ’new’ product, which competes with the old product. A firm that enters the new market does not only provide extra competition for the rival but also cannibalizes its own sales of the old product.The considered sequence of actions is that first, both firms have to decide whether or not to launch the new product, which would require incurring sunk costs. In case either one of them has decided to introduce the new product, a heterogenous product market arises. The firms that enter the new market then have to determine the production capacity of the new product. Finally, firms have to fix the prices of all products they are offering. They maximize the sum of profits on both markets net of possible sunk costs.It turns out that the interplay of four mechanisms drives the effects of old capacities on the behavior of rational firms in such a setting: the cannibalization effect, the size effect, the strategic effect and the indirect effect. The cannibalization effect results from the observation that a firm with a larger capacity on the old market is more reluctant to reduce the price of the old product. This lowers the incentive to introduce the new product and to increase capacity on the new market. Furthermore, the size effect refers to the fact that if the capacity of a firm on the established market becomes larger, the price level for the new product becomes smaller. Therefore, the marginal returns of building capacity on the new market decreases which makes the new market less attractive for the firm. The strategic effect captures the following link: if a firm’s capacity for the old product increases and this firm does not enter the new market, then this induces the competitor to select a smaller capacity level for the new product. This negative effect on the competitor’s capacity on the new market does not arise if the firm actually enters the new market. In such a case the increase in old market capacity is counterbalanced by the induced reduction of the new market capacity of the same firm in such a way that the capacity investment incentives of the competitor stay unchanged. Finally, the impact of an increase of the competitor’s old market capacity on the incentives of a firm to enter the new market is also influenced by the indirect effect. If the old market capacity of the competitor goes up, this reduces its investment in capacity on the new market, which positively affects the incentives of the focal firm to innovate.Considering the interplay of these effects we demonstrate that incumbents with a high capacity on the established market have lower incentives to introduce a new product. And, if they decide to enter the new market, they invest less in corresponding production capacities compared to smaller competitors. Consequently, profits from producing the new product will be higher for the smaller firm, and this could even result in higher overall profits. Furthermore, if the capacity of the smaller firm on the established market changes, this has a qualitatively different impact on payoffs and innovation incentives than a change of the capacity of the larger firm. Overall, total payoffs depend non-monotonously on the capacities on the established market.From our results we can derive that for the larger firm on the old market it might be optimal not to serve all new markets into which the smaller competitors (and new competitors) enter. According to our analysis, equilibrium constellations where only the small firm innovates occur in many scenarios. In such cases the lack of innovativeness of the large firm is a consequence of strategic considerations rather than an implication of the organizational structure. Our analysis also shows that in industries where frequently new product designs are added to the existing range of designs, having a relatively small capacity for production of the existing designs might be a good starting point to attain profit leadership. The advantage of the small firm results from the fact that even if it is optimal for the large firm to refrain from innovating, the small firm can still gain substantial additional profits with the new design. Thus, our analysis also provides a new explanation for the phenomenon of leapfrogging in markets as illustrated by our real-world examples. Finally, we obtain that an increase of capacity of the larger firm can prevent its competitor from innovating, whereas an increase in capacity of the smaller firm never prevents innovation of its larger competitor. Preventing the competitor from innovating can be seen as a strategy closely related to entry deterrence. Straightforward intuition derived from the entry deterrence literature suggests that expanding capacity can be used as an instrument to keep the competitor out of the new market. A new insight gained in this article is that relative firm size determines whether such a strategy can be successfully applied.The article is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the related literature, Section 3 presents the model, while the results of our analysis are presented in Section 4. Section 5 provides an extensive economic analysis, and Section 6 concludes. Some additional model details are given in Appendix A and all proofs in the Online Appendix B.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The set-up considered in this paper, where firms innovate in a situation where they are active producers of some standard product, is highly relevant in today’s economy, as the examples listed in the Introduction exemplify. Nevertheless, the model of this article leaves room for various extensions. First, whereas in the current set-up the capacity for the original product is exogenous, we could also think of making it endogenous. Then the problem is to determine the capacity level of the original product while taking into account competition as well as future product innovations that require a different kind of capital stock.Second, the current framework focuses on strategic uncertainty, but leaves out other types of uncertainties like market or technical uncertainty. The effect of such types of uncertainties on investment is studied in real option theory (see, e.g., Dixit and Pindyck, 1994). Employing this theory may generate results concerning the effect of uncertainty on the options to innovate of the two competing firms.Third, building up capacity is a dynamic process. Therefore, an interesting but mathematically complex project is to develop and analyze a dynamic model with the aim to determine the strategic effects within a framework of two firms being active in building up capacity for both the standard and the innovative product. In Caulkins et al. (2011) capital accumulation for both a standard and an innovative product is considered, but in that article this is done in a non-strategic framework, i.e. there is only one firm being a monopolist in both the standard and the innovative product market. A first step towards a dynamic strategic analysis of this issue has been made in Dawid et al. (2010b), where capacity dynamics in a duopoly is analyzed under the assumption that one of the two competiors is offering the innovative product in addition to the standard product.The market model is in the spirit of the Stackelberg-Spence-Dixit model, as it has been denoted in Tirole (1988). Before the eventual innovation phase a homogenous product market exists on which the established product is traded. Consumers are identical and as long as the innovative product does not exist, they all have the utility function(22)Uo(Qo)=Qo-12Qo2+M1,in which Qois the quantity of the standard product and M1=y−Qopo(pobeing the unit market price of the standard product whereas y stands for consumer income) denotes the expenditure on outside goods. We assume that each consumer spends only a small part of her income on the industry’s product. This implies that income effects on the industry under consideration can be ignored and partial equilibrium analysis can be applied (Symeonidis, 2003).If at least one of the firms has innovated, existence of the new innovative product changes the consumer utility function in the following way (see, e.g., Vives, 1999, p. 145):(23)Un(Qo,Qn)=Qo+Qn-12Qo2-12γQn2-ηQoQn+M2,where all the parameters are positive, M2=y−poQo−pnQndenote the expenditure on outside goods and pn, Qnare the unit price and the quantity of the innovative product respectively. Again it is assumed that each consumer only spends a small part of her income on the industry’s products implying that income effects can be ignored and partial equilibrium analysis can be applied. Maximization of utility with respect to both quantities yield the inverse demand system given in the text and the following direct demand system:(24)Q∼n(po,pn)=1-ηγ-η2-1γ-η2pn+ηγ-η2po,(25)Q∼o(po,pn)=γ-ηγ-η2+ηγ-η2pn-γγ-η2po,Concavity of the consumer utility function is ensured by our assumption η<γ (see, e.g., Dixit, 1979).If both producers set identical prices for a good, obviously we haveph=p1h=p2h,h∈{o,n}. If no capacity constraints bind, actual quantities are given by the demands (24) and (25). In case prices differ, then if the capacity constraint(s) become(s) binding for the cheaper firm we haveph=maxp1h,p2h,h∈{o,n}. Otherwise, the cheaper firm can serve the entire market andph=minp1h,p2h. Furthermore, if the unconstrained demand for one product at phexceeds the capacities there and consumers take these constraints into account, the demand for the other product changes in structure and capacity size rather than prices of the substitute good becomes relevant. In particular, ifQ∼n(po,pn)>K1n+K2nthe demand for the old product reads(26)Q∼∼opo,K1n,K2n=1-ηK1n+K2n-po.In caseQ∼∼opo,K1n,K2n>K1o+K2o, then all quantities on both markets are given by the corresponding capacities. Analogously, for the new product we obtain the demand function(27)Q∼∼npn,K1o,K2o=1-ηK1o+K2o-pnγ,ifQ∼o(po,pn)>K1o+K2o. Again, all quantities are given by capacities ifQ∼∼npn,K1o,K2o>K1n+K2n. In the cases where no capacities on a market are binding it is assumed that firms sell identical quantities if they charge identical prices. It is straightforward but cumbersome to list the entire demand system, while taking into account unequal prices and all possible capacity constraint constellations. Therefore, we refrain from presenting the complete demand system. It will turn out that in the equilibria considered here prices are always identical and capacity constraints for a given product bind either for none or both firms.Here we first review existence and properties of equilibria in the pricing and capacity choice stage if the capacities of the firms in the old market are large.We first consider the case where each of the two firms has sufficient capacity to serve the entire old market demand at a price of zero, i.e.K1o>K2o⩾Qo(0)=1,i=1,2.In this case there exists an equilibrium with po=0 regardless of capacities chosen on the new market. To see this note that under the assumption that the opponent charges a price of zero on the old market and has a capacity large enough to serve that entire market, a firm can neither sell on the old market nor influence the price on the new market by setting a positive price. In addition, it follows from Proposition 1 (iii) that there can be no equilibrium with non-binding capacities and a positive price on the old market. Therefore, for the new market we are left with a standard model of capacity choice and price competition (Kreps and Scheinkman, 1983). Equilibrium capacities correspond to Cournot quantities based on the residual demand (see (24) with po=0)Q∼n(0,pn)=1-ηγ-η2-1γ-η2pn.This gives equilibrium capacities ofKin∗=max0,1-η-c3(γ-η2),which are fully exploited at the equilibrium pricepn∗=13(1-η+2c),wheneverKin∗is positive. Production on the old market is given byQo∗=1-2ηKi∗n=min1,13+23γ-η(1-c)γ-η2.In cases where the sum of the capacities on the old market is sufficiently large to drive the price to zero, but at least firm 2 does not have sufficient capacity to serve the whole demand on the old market at a price of zero by itself, there exists no pure strategy equilibrium at the pricing stage. To argue why, we exploit a result of Proposition 1 (see Section 4) that states that in a pure strategy equilibrium both firms set an identical price for each separate product. Assume that a pure strategy equilibrium exists. Then the equilibrium price on the old market must either be zero or positive. However, a price of zero is not an equilibrium for the following reason. As firm 2’s capacity falls short of serving the whole market, firm 1 can profitably deviate by marginally increasing its price. But also a positive price is not an equilibrium, because the firm that is not capacity-constrained can gain by undercutting.8In a symmetric product differentiation market in which each firm offers one different product, Vives (1999, pp.165-166) shows that a symmetric pure strategy equilibrum need not exist in a similar situation, i.e. where at equilibrium excess aggregate capacity of the competitors of any firm is smaller than individual firm production.8Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.04.002.Online appendix