@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pricing and sales-effort investment under bi-criteria in a supply chain of virtual products involving risk

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A single margin maximizes any utility function of the retailer.A procedure to find the equilibrium under perfect information is suggested.A procedure to find the equilibrium under imperfect information is suggested.Specific results are provided for the expectation and the target criteria.Constructing an efficient set under bi-criteria preferences and game approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain,Game theory,Risk,Multiple criteria,Imperfect information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work develops a stochastic model of a two-echelon supply chain of virtual products in which the decision makers—a manufacturer and a retailer—may be risk-sensitive. Virtual products allow the retailer to avoid holding costs and ensure timely fulfillment of demand with no risk of shortage. We expand on the work of Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), who investigated the pricing of virtual products under uncertain and price-dependent demand, by including sales-effort as a decision variable that affects demand. Whereas in the previous work equilibrium was obtained exactly as in a deterministic case for any utility function, herein it is not. Consequently, we focus on the strategies of both the manufacturer and the retailer under different profit criteria, including the use of bi-criteria. By formulating the problem as a Stackelberg game, we show that the problem can be analytically solved by assuming certain common structures of the demand function and of the preferences of both the manufacturer and the retailer with regard to risk. We extend the solution to the case of imperfect information regarding the preferences and offer guidelines for the formation of efficient sets of decisions under bi-criteria. Finally, we provide numerical results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The last decade has seen a rapid increase in the market share and variety of virtual products. This increase is largely a result of the proliferation of digital platforms for content consumption, as well as the development of the internet as a direct channel for delivering goods and transferring payments (Waelbroeck, 2013). Foros, Kind, and Shaffer (2013), who investigate business formats of digital platforms, refer to the wholesale price contract as a common type of contract between manufacturers (e.g., content providers such as book publishers and developers of mobile applications) and retailers (e.g., Apple Store, Google Play, Amazon). Jeong, Khouja, and Zhao (2012) and Li and Liu (2013) analyze this type of contract for digital products. Examples of companies that have adopted this contract in practice include Amazon, which used it for many years to sell eBooks. Additional companies that apply the wholesale price contract for sales of virtual products include retailers who offer hotel bookings online. For example, according to Lytle (2014), some online travel companies, e.g., Expedia, sign contracts with hotels in which the hotel agrees to receive a fixed payment per night, and the online travel company charges a commission.Our study focuses on pricing and sales-effort decisions in a supply chain of virtual products under uncertain demand and risk consideration. While pricing decisions have been thoroughly analyzed in the literature, the sales-effort investment decision is less explored. According to Xiao, Yu, and Sheng (2005), sales effort is important in stimulating demand and may constitute a significant portion of a firm's operating expenses. For comprehensive discussions of this issue see Taylor (2002) and Cachon and Lariviere (2005). The importance of joint decisions on pricing and sales effort is reflected in the recent literature. For example, He, Zhao, Zhao, and He (2009) investigate channel coordination for a supply chain facing stochastic demand that is sensitive to both sales effort and retail price, using a standard newsvendor setting with a supplier and retailer who are both risk-neutral. Both Xie and Wei (2009) and Aust and Buscher (2012) study vertical cooperative advertizing and pricing decisions in a manufacturer–retailer supply chain with deterministic demand. Wang, Wang, and Shou (2013) investigate a dominant retailer's optimal joint strategy of pricing and timing of effort investment and analyze how it influences the decision of the manufacturer, the total supply chain profit, and the consumers’ payoff. Jin, Wang, and Hu (2015) investigate the issue of sales-effort decision rights under a wholesale price contract. They found that it is better for both the manufacturer and the retailer if one firm fully controls the market demand (e.g., through pricing and sales effort) and the other firm moves first. In contrast to our study, the papers above do not consider the risk sensitivity of supply chain members.Recently, Chernonog and Avinadav (2014) investigated the pricing of virtual products under a wholesale price contract. Their work was based on the premise that the stochastic nature of demand exposes the supply chain members to financial risk, and that each party adopts profit criteria that reflect his or her attitude towards this risk. The authors showed that, when stochastic demand follows a multiplicative form, the pricing decisions that maximize the expected profit also maximize all the investigated profit criteria—and, in fact, any utility function of the profit. We expand the two-echelon supply chain model of Chernonog and Avinadav (2014) in two directions. First, we consider the effect of the retailer's sales-effort investment on the model. Introducing the sales-effort investment as a decision variable of the retailer results in an equilibrium that is sensitive to the retailer's utility function. This result differs from that of Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), in which equilibrium was obtained exactly as in a deterministic case for any utility function. Second, we consider bi-criteria decision making in a two-echelon supply chain. In Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), in contrast, bi-criteria analysis is carried out for only one decision maker without a game approach.The main contribution of this paper is in analyzing the decisions of the supply chain members in a framework of a game under bi-criteria. We find that bi-criteria preferences of the retailer introduce a new source of uncertainty in addition to the demand uncertainty. To further explore this case, we analyze it from two perspectives: perfect and imperfect information regarding the retailer's choice mechanism. Under the assumption of perfect information, the probabilistic choice theory (Swait & Marley, 2013) is used, whereas under imperfect information, normative (Fishburn, 1981) and behavioral (Maskin, 1979) approaches are used. In order to simplify the solution under the imperfect information assumption, we propose an innovative technique for finding the efficient set of wholesale prices for any utility function of the manufacturer.Similarly to Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), we develop a model of a manufacturer who distributes a virtual product to customers via a retailer. The sales volume of such products matches the demand, as virtual products can be produced with ample capacity and no need for inventory. The manufacturer (he) determines the wholesale price per unit, w. The retailer (she) determines her margin, m, so that the retail price to the customer isp=m+w. In contrast to Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), the retailer also determines her sales-effort investment, e. We assume that the demand function for the virtual product isD˜(p,e)≡D(p,e)ɛ, where D(p, e) is the expected demand as a function of the retail price and the sales-effort investment (e.g., Aust & Buscher, 2012; Lau, Su, Wang, & Hua, 2012; SeyedEsfahani, Biazaran, & Gharakhani, 2011; Wang et al., 2013) and ε is a non-negative random variable (E(ɛ)=1), which is independent of p and e.Let Fɛ( · ) be the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of ε. As is common in economics, D(p, e) is decreasing in p for any given e. We also assume that D(p, e) is increasing in e for a given p.Since demand is random, the profit of the manufacturer is also random and follows(1)π˜M(w)≡πM(w)ɛ,where(2)πM(w)=wD(m+w,e)is the expected profit. The objective of the manufacturer is to maximize the expected utility of his profit by controlling w.Similarly, the retailer's profit is also random and follows(3)π˜R(m,e)≡mD(m+w,e)ɛ−e.Consequently, the retailer's expected profit is(4)πR(m,e)=mD(m+w,e)−e.The retailer's objective is to maximize the expected utility of her profit by setting m and e.Similarly to Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), we state:Theorem 1(i)The wholesale price per unit w that maximizes πM(w) maximizes the expected value of any utility function of the manufacturer's profit.The margin m that maximizes πR(m, e), for a given e, maximizes the expected value of any utility function of the retailer's profit.ProofSee Appendix.The insight provided by Theorem 1 is that the manufacturer should determine his wholesale price exactly as in a deterministic demand model (i.e., select the value of w that maximizes πM(w)), regardless of his attitude toward risk or the distribution of ε. It implies that the retailer's strategy is independent of the manufacturer's utility function.The following lemma implies that stochastic dominance of the retailer's profit does not exist with respect to e for given values of w and m.Lemma 1Given e1, e2and m, the corresponding CDFsFπ˜R(m,e1)andFπ˜R(m,e2)cross each other so that neither profit stochastically dominates the other.ProofSee Appendix.Lemma 1 shows that, in contrast to Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), it is essential to consider the utility function of the retailer. Denoting the retailer's utility function by u, the problem of the retailer is(5)maxe{maxm{E[u(π˜R(m,e))]}}.Furthermore, the retailer, for a given e, should determine her margin exactly as in a deterministic demand model (i.e., select the value of m that maximizes πR(m, e)), regardless of the distribution of ε. Thus the problem can be solved in two stages:(6)maxe{E[u(π˜R(me,e))]},where(7)me=argmaxm{mD(m+w,e)}.The decisions of the two parties are interrelated as in a non-cooperative game, where the manufacturer is the leader of the supply chain. We assume, a priori, a game with perfect information, in which both players are aware of the demand function and of the supply chain members' risk preferences (see, for example, Chernonog & Kogan, 2014; Xie, Yue, Wang, & Lai, 2011). This type of game is also known as a Manufacturer Stackelberg (MS) game.In the MS game, the manufacturer knows that if he determines a certain value of w then the retailer will respond by choosing the values [m(w), e(w)] that maximizeE[u(π˜R(m,e))]. Hence, the manufacturer's strategy is to select the value of w that maximizes πM(w), subject tom=m(w)ande=e(w). This strategy is denoted by wMS. The sequence of decisions in the MS game implies that the manufacturer has to know the retailer's attitude toward risk and the distribution of ε.In what follows, to obtain analytical results, we assume certain common structures of the decision makers' preferences toward risk and of the demand function. We consider two cases: the first is the Expectation criterion (Expected Profit Maximizing), which reflects a risk-neutral retailer. Under this criterion, u is a linear function, so that πR(me, e) is to be maximized. The second is the Target criterion, which is also known as Profit Satisficing (Shi & Chen, 2008). Under this criterion, the retailer wishes to maximize the probability that the profit will be no less than a predefined target level, T, i.e., she seeks to maximize{1−Fπ˜R(me,e)(T)}. This criterion can be considered as a surrogate utility function, as it is a non-decreasing (step) function of the profit: a value of 0 is assigned to profits that are less than T, and a value of 1 is assigned to those greater than T, so that the results obtained for general utility functions hold for this criterion as well.As for the demand function, we assume that the expected-demand function takes a multiplicative form, which is commonly used in the literature (Huang, Leng, & Parlar, 2013). Accordingly, let(8)D(p,e)=g(p)h(e),where g(p) is the price effect and h(e) is the sales-effort investment effect. We assume that g(p) is strictly decreasing and that h(e) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, as is common in the literature (see, e.g., Aust & Buscher, 2012; SeyedEsfahani et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2013). For simplicity, it is assumed that g(p) is differentiable and that h(e) is twice differentiable. Accordingly, the manufacturer's payoff is the expected profitwg(m+w)h(e), and the retailer's payoff is the expected utility of profit,E{u(mg(m+w)h(e)ɛ−e)}.Similarly to Chernonog and Avinadav (2014) we start with single-criterion decision making analysis. Herein, however, in contrast to Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), when stochastic demand follows a multiplicative form, the retailer's utility function does affect the equilibrium. Thus, we provide analysis for the Target criterion in addition to the Expectation criterion. According to Theorem 1 and Eq. (8), the optimization process is carried out according to the following steps:Procedure 1Step 1. Find the best retailer response m(w) that maximizesmg(m+w).Step 2. Find the best retailer response e(w) that maximizesE{u(mg(m(w)+w)h(e(w))ɛ−e(w))}.Step 3. Find wMSthat maximizeswg(m(w)+w)h(e(w)).By this optimization procedure, we state:Theorem 2In the MS game, wMS,mMS=m(wMS)andeMS=e(wMS)is the Nash equilibrium.By Procedure 1, the retailer's utility function directly affects Step 2 only. Under the Expectation criterion, Step 2 of Procedure 1 is: find the best retailer response e(w) that maximizesm(w)g(m(w)+w)h(e)−e; the solution is denoted eE(w). Under the Target criterion this step is: find the best retailer response e(w) that maximizesP(π˜R(m(w),e)≥T)=1−Fɛ(T+em(w)g(m(w)+w)h(e)). Note that e(w) is obtained byargmine{(T+e)/h(e)}, so that the solution is independent of w and denoted eT.Lemma 2For a given w, (i) the retailer's expected profit is concave in e; (ii) the retailer's probability to obtain a certain target level is strictly pseudo-concave in e.ProofSee Appendix.Lemma 2 is used in the following sub-section to obtain the efficient set of sales-effort investment values in the analysis of a bi-criteria decision.When the retailer makes her decisions under two profit criteria, she chooses her sales-effort investment from the efficient set of values that yield a non-dominated set of criteria values. By Lemma 2, this efficient set is an interval that starts at e1(w) ≡ min (eE(w), eT) and ends at e2(w) ≡ max (eE(w), eT). Note that Chernonog and Avinadav (2014) did not analyze bi-criteria decision-making, since, in their model, one price optimized all utility functions because of the stochastic dominance property.Two choice-models, deterministic and probabilistic, are commonly used in the literature. Under the deterministic model, the retailer will choose a point e(w) for a given w on the basis of a value function that reflects her preferences. An example for such a case is a retailer who assigns weights (β,γ) to the Expectation and the Target criteria, thereby obtaining a value functionv(π˜R)=βπR+γP(π˜R≥T). Equilibrium is obtained by applying Procedure 1, where, in Step 2, the value function of the retailer is maximized.The probabilistic choice model is supported by Swait and Marley (2013), who claim that there is variability in choices because of unavailable information, limited cognitive ability, lack of attention, and/or changing tastes. According to Kamakura and Srivastava (1984), probabilistic choice models can capture individual choice behavior. Accordingly, we assume that the retailer draws her sales-effort investment,e˜w, randomly from a certain distribution over the efficient set. By Lemma 2,e˜wis a random variable over the support [e1(w), e2(w)], andFe˜w(·)denotes the CDF ofe˜w.According to the perfect information assumption, the manufacturer knowsFe˜w(·). The introduction of this new source of randomness requires the model to take into account the manufacturer's utility function, denoted uM( · ), and the optimization process is modified according to the following steps:Procedure 2Step 1. Find the best retailer response m(w) that maximizesmg(m+w).Step 2. Calculate the distribution function of random variableξw=h(e˜w)ɛ.Step 3. Find wMS that maximizes the expected utility of the manufacturer's profitEξw[uM(wg(m(w)+w)ξw].In Step 3 of Procedure 2, ξwdepends on w, so that the stochastic dominance obtained in Theorem 1(i) is lost. Consequently, we state:Theorem 3Under the probabilistic choice model, the decision of the manufacturer is affected by his utility function.In what follows we assume that the manufacturer does not know how the retailer selects the preferred point from the efficient set of sales-effort investment. According to the normative approach (e.g., Fishburn, 1981), the manufacturer assesses a distribution function on [e1(w), e2(w)]. This function reflects his belief regarding the selection of the retailer—and, as in the probabilistic choice model, he uses Procedure 2 in order to make a decision about the wholesale price.We propose an innovative two-stage approach, which the manufacturer can use in order to choose his wholesale price. In the first stage, the set of wholesale prices from which the manufacturer selects the optimal value w can actually be reduced to an efficient set. In the second stage, the manufacturer chooses his preferred wholesale price from the efficient set. Below we mention several methods that the manufacturer might use for this purpose and elaborate on one such method.First stage: The minimal and maximal expected profits that the manufacturer obtains after choosing w areπM1(w)=wg(m(w)+w)h(e1(w)), andπM2(w)=wg(m(w)+w)h(e2(w)), respectively. Thus, for a given w, the interval[πM1(w),πM2(w)]is the feasible range for the manufacturer's expected profit. Clearly, a price w for whichπM2(w)<πM1(w0)for some price w0 is not efficient. Letψ≡maxwπM1(w)andΛ≡{w|πM2(w)≥ψ}. ThenTheorem 4Λ is the efficient set of wholesale prices for any utility function of the manufacturer.ProofSee Appendix.The merit of Theorem 4 is in limiting the domain of potential wholesale prices that the manufacturer may select. This is achieved by excluding inefficient wholesale prices, which provide worse results in both profit criteria in comparison to certain other prices.Second stage: The manufacturer can adopt a behavioral approach (e.g., Maskin, 1979) to choose his preferred point from the set of efficient wholesale prices, Λ. For example, the manufacturer may maximize his expected profit under the worst case (Maxi–Min) or under the best case (Maxi–Max). More generally, he can adopt the Hurwicz criterion, which balances the latter two criteria by using weights α and 1−α. Note that when α = 1, the manufacturer uses the Maxi–Min criterion, and when α = 0, he uses the Maxi–Max criterion. The manufacturer uses the following procedure in order to obtain the wholesale price under the Hurwicz criterion.Procedure 3Step 1. Find the best retailer response m(w) that maximizesmg(m+w).Step 2. Calculate e1(w) and e2(w).Step 3. Find w that satisfiesargmaxw∈Λ{wg(m(w)+w)h(αe1(w)+(1−α)e2(w))}.Numerical exampleWe demonstrate how to implement Theorem 4 (constructing the efficient set Λ) and Procedure 3 (obtaining the specific values of w under the Maxi–Min and Maxi–Max behavioral approaches). We assume a commonly used demand function (Aust & Buscher, 2012; Avinadav, Chernonog, & Perlman, 2014a; 2014b),D˜(p,e)=(a−bp)eɛ,p≤a/b.By applying Step 1 of Procedure 3, we obtain the best retailer response:m(w)=(a−bw)/(2b); and by Subsection 3.1,eE(w)=(a−bw)4(8b)2andeT=T. Substituting these results into ψ, we obtainψ≡max0<w≤a/b{0.5w(a−bw)·min{(a−bw)28b,T}}.For illustrative purposes, we use a = 10, b = 0.1 and T = 20, so thatψ=53.75. Then, according to Theorem 4, we solve0.5w(10−w)max{(10−w)2/8,20}≥53.75and obtainΛ=(1.31,5.98). The manufacturer's expected profit over Λ, shown in Fig. 1, is between 24.82 (for w = 5.98) and 65.92 (for w = 4.02). Implementing the behavioral approaches proposed in Procedure 3, a manufacturer who wishes to maximize his expected utility of the profit under the worst case (α = 1) should choosew=4.02as a wholesale price. On the other hand, if he wishes to maximize his expected utility of the profit under the best case (α = 0) then, as illustrated in Fig. 1, he should choosew=2.5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The model introduced in this paper utilizes the attributes of virtual products to create a stochastic model of a two-echelon supply chain in which the decision makers are risk-sensitive. As in Chernonog and Avinadav (2014), under a single profit criterion of the retailer, the manufacturer's risk attitude does not affect the strategies of the two parties. However, in contrast to their findings, herein the retailer's attitude toward risk does influence these strategies. Moreover, when the retailer makes her decision under bi-criteria, both the retailer's and the manufacturer's attitudes toward risk are crucial. Specifically, the retailer's efficient set of sales-effort investment values depends on the wholesale price determined by the manufacturer. Therefore, in this case it is more difficult to obtain Nash equilibria than in the single-criterion case. Above we have shown how the manufacturer can construct an efficient set of wholesale prices.