@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transmission and generation investment in electricity markets: The effects of market splitting and network fee regimes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Equilibrium model for transmission line and generation capacity investment.Problem tailored solution for techniques multilevel optimization problems.Analysis of investment incentives for different market designs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electricity market modeling,Mixed-integer nonlinear optimization,Multilevel programming,Network expansion,Transmission management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose an equilibrium model that allows to analyze the long-run impact of the electricity market design on transmission line expansion by the regulator and investment in generation capacity by private firms in liberalized electricity markets. The model incorporates investment decisions of the transmission system operator and private firms in expectation of an energy-only market and cost-based redispatch. In different specifications we consider the cases of one vs. multiple price zones (market splitting) and analyze different approaches to recover network cost—in particular lump sum, generation capacity based, and energy based fees. In order to compare the outcomes of our multilevel market model with a first best benchmark, we also solve the corresponding integrated planner problem. Using two test networks we illustrate that energy-only markets can lead to suboptimal locational decisions for generation capacity and thus imply excessive network expansion. Market splitting heals these problems only partially. These results are valid for all considered types of network tariffs, although investment slightly differs across those regimes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Following the British privatization in the 1980s, various countries around the world liberalized their electricity sectors. Today, in most industrialized countries only the transmission network remains regulated while private firms decide on investment in generation capacities and trade electricity on markets. This structure challenges the planning of transmission and generation capacity expansion. While an entirely regulated electricity sector allows for simultaneous transmission and generation expansion planning, in a liberalized market, investment decisions in transmission and generation capacities are taken by different agents. Investment in generation capacities is typically made by firms and private investors based on their expectations concerning the future regulatory environment. Network expansion, however, is decided on by regulated firms (or even the regulator), in anticipation of capacity investments by private firms. Traditional optimization approaches, which only consider integrated transmission and generation expansion planning, reveal the optimal expansion plan for transmission and generation but do not offer valuable information on how to achieve those goals in a mixed market/non-market environment. In a liberalized market, incentives induced by the interplay of the market environment and regulation determine whether firms make the appropriate investment choices. As our results clearly reveal, the proper design of market rules providing adequate incentives in those markets crucially matters. Liberalized electricity markets thus call for new tools to inform the various agents involved: regulators, electricity firms, investors, and other stakeholders.In this paper we propose a model that allows to analyze investment decisions by the regulator and private firms in liberalized electricity markets. We model energy-only markets and a regulated transmission system operator (TSO) who uses cost-based redispatch to deal with transmission constraints. In a multilevel analysis we study transmission expansion decisions by the regulated TSO in anticipation of capacity expansion by private firms. In different instantiations of our model we analyze the effects of market splitting (one vs. multiple price zones) as well as different approaches to recover network cost—in particular a lump sum, a generation capacity based, and an energy based fee. In order to compare the outcomes to a first best benchmark we also solve the integrated planner problem. For the computational studies we restrict ourselves to solving stylized test cases to illustrate the applicability of our framework. The results demonstrate that investment choices in a market environment substantially differ from the first best solution. In our numerical examples the absence of proper locational investment incentives for firms clearly affects investment choices of generators, which, in turn, leads to excessive line investment. This shows that our model allows to compare different network management regimes and to quantify their effects on long-run investment decisions. Our approach is thus an important extension of various studies that have mainly considered the short-run properties of different transmission management regimes; see the literature review below. As we show, transmission management has also important implications in the long-run when generation and transmission expansion are taken into account.Let us emphasize that our approach allows to assess the long-run impact of different transmission management regimes adopted in liberalized electricity markets around the world. Especially in Europe spot market trading does not fully account for transmission constraints. In contrast, capacities are shut down and called by the TSO in case that the spot market solution is technically infeasible. Under cost-based redispatch (as it is used in Austria, Switzerland, or Germany) firms called into operation are just compensated for their variable production cost. Consequently, redispatch operations cannot contribute to the recovery of investment cost.11In contrast, market-based redispatch (used, e.g., in Belgium, Finland, France, or Sweden) may yield rents for firms that are called at the redispatch and thus induces incentives to build plants at locations with systematic underprovision, see Grimm, Martin, Sölch, Weibelzahl, and Zöttl (2016). However, market-based redispatch is plagued by severe gaming problems, which obtain even for perfectly competitive markets. In the literature this is often referred to as the inc-dec game. For a discussion of these issues see, e.g., Neuhoff, Hobbs, and Newbery (2011).Other liberalized electricity markets adopted a system of nodal prices (see, e.g., Joskow, 2008), where spot market prices directly reflect transmission constraints (e.g., the United States, Canada, Australia, or New Zealand), which induces more adequate incentives for generation capacities by private firms. To at least partially overcome the lack of locational signals provided by spot market prices, several countries that rely on a system of redispatch have introduced price zones (e.g., Sweden and Italy). Since the first best solution coincides with the outcome obtained under nodal pricing in our framework, our approach also allows to assess the long-run benefits of a change to this transmission management system.Apart from the consideration of nodal prices and price zones as compared to a uniform price spot market, we also analyze the impact of different network fee regimes. We consider a lump sum fee as a theoretical benchmark that does not directly affect investment decisions for generation capacity. In practice, however, network fee regimes typically combine energy based and capacity based components. For instance, the current practice in the UK uses “Transmission Network Use of System” fees that are collected based on power plant capacity connected to the grid, whereas “Balancing Services Use of System Charges” fees are charged based on energy fed into the network (cf. National Grid, 2015). In order to provide some insights on the desirability of different network fee regimes, we consider the extreme cases of an energy based and a purely capacity based network fee. The insights of Ruderer and Zöttl (2012) that a lump sum fee yields the highest generation investment incentives and a capacity based fee the lowest (with the energy based fee in between) are reflected in our computational results. In the discussion of our case studies we provide an intuition and moreover demonstrate that the clear ranking of the network fee regimes in terms of investment incentives does not translate into a clear ranking in terms of welfare. The desirability of a network fee regime rather depends on whether distortions induced by the market design itself are alleviated or worsened by higher investment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
