@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A bi-objective weighted model for improving the discrimination power in MCDEA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine GPDEA models in relation to the MCDEA framework.GPDEA models perform poorly in weight dispersion and discrimination power.The proposed BiO-MCDEA model outperforms GPDEA models in all datasets tested.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-criteria data envelopment analysis,Goal programming,Discrimination power,Weight dispersion,Multi-objective programming,Energy policy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lack of discrimination power and poor weight dispersion remain major issues in Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Since the initial multiple criteria DEA (MCDEA) model developed in the late 1990s, only goal programming approaches; that is, the GPDEA-CCR and GPDEA-BCC were introduced for solving the said problems in a multi-objective framework. We found GPDEA models to be invalid and demonstrate that our proposed bi-objective multiple criteria DEA (BiO-MCDEA) outperforms the GPDEA models in the aspects of discrimination power and weight dispersion, as well as requiring less computational codes. An application of energy dependency among 25 European Union member countries is further used to describe the efficacy of our approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA) was first proposed by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978) and remained the leading technique for measuring the relative efficiency of decision-making units (DMUs) based on their respective multiple inputs and outputs. DEA has been the fastest growing discipline in the past three decades covering easily over a thousand papers in the Operations Research and Management Science discipline (Emrouznejad, Parker, & Tavares, 2008; Hatami-Marbini, Emrouznejad, & Tavana, 2011). The efficiency of a DMU is defined as a weighted sum of its outputs divided by the weighted sum of its inputs on a bounded ratio scale.One of the drawbacks of DEA is the lack of discrimination among efficient decision making units (DMUs), hence yielding many DMUs to be efficient. The problem is highlighted when the number of DMUs evaluated is significantly lesser than the number of inputs and outputs used in the evaluation. The weights derived from a DEA analysis may reveal that some inputs or outputs have zero values. This is counter-intuitive especially in a decision making exercise, where one expects to use all the inputs and output values that are rated for the DMUs. Hence, it further implies that some of the variables were not used in the evaluation judgment in achieving the final ranking. On the contrary, the unrealistic weight distribution for DEA also occurs when some DMUs are rated as efficient due to extremely large weights in a single output and/or extremely small weights in a single input.Thompson, Singleton, Thrall, and Smith (1986) are among the first authors to propose the use of weight restriction to increase the discrimination power of DMUs. The issue was immediately picked up by many authors, including Dyson and Thanassoulis (1988), Charnes, Cooper, Huang, and Sun (1990), Thanassoulis and Allen (1998). Hence, several methods such as assurance region (AR) procedure (Khalili, Camanho, Portela, & Alirezaee, 2010; Mecit & Alp, 2013; Sarrico & Dyson, 2004; Thompson, Langemeier, Lee, & Thrall, 1990) and cone ratio envelopment (Cao & Kong, 2010; Charnes et al., 1990) were addressed in the literature as strategies to solve problems arising from unrealistic weight distribution. However, there are some drawbacks to the methods – AR and cone ratio techniques are highly dependent on the measurement of the inputs-outputs units, which may lead to infeasible solutions. In other words, both the methods incorporate extra constraints to the model; thus, making it harder to solve the problem.Subsequently, other DEA models were introduced in the literature to overcome the discriminant power problems, such as the super-efficiency model (Andersen & Petersen, 1993; Chen, 2005; Chen, Du, & Huo, 2013; Lee, Chu, & Zhu, 2011) and cross-efficiency evaluation technique (Anderson, Hollingsworth, & Inman, 2002; Doyle & Green, 1995; Green, Doyle, & Cook, 1996; Sexton, Silkman, & Hogan, 1986; Wang & Chin, 2010, 2011). The super-efficiency DEA model may obtain infeasible solutions for efficient DMUs; particularly, under variable returns to scale (VRS) model. However, attempts had been made to solve the infeasibility problem in super efficiency methods. Chen (2005) proposed an approach in which both input-oriented and output-oriented super-efficiency models are used to fully characterize the super-efficiency model, thus claiming that the approach kept infeasibility to a rare occasion. However, Soleimani-damaneh, Jahanshahloo, and Foroughi (2006) presented some counter examples to negate Chen’s (2005) claims without any proposed alternative. Drawing from two main sources (i.e. Chen, 2005; Cook, Liang, Zha, & Zhu, 2009), Lee et al. (2011) later provided a solution by a two-stage process catering to adjustments in input saving and output surpluses. Chen and Liang (2011) subsequently formulated a one-model solution to the two-stage process. Lee and Zhu (2012) found that the solution can still be infeasible should some of the input variables have zero values.With regards to cross-efficiency evaluation technique, the non-uniqueness of the DEA weights could provide a large number of multiple optimal solutions for DEA models. Although recent improvements of cross-efficiency evaluation techniques were proposed (Angiz & Sajedi, 2012), the solution is computationally expensive with the need to solve a series of linear programming problems. The suggestion of imposing secondary goals to improve variability of cross efficiency scores still leaves the non-uniqueness problem looming (see Cook & Zhu, 2013).Drawing from a multiple objective decision making framework, the multiple criteria (or multi-objective) DEA model (Chen, Larbani, & Chang, 2009; Foroughi, 2011; Li & Reeves, 1999) was suggested as a means to overcome discriminant power and weight dispersion problems. However, the original formulation of Li and Reeves (1999) does not promise complete ranking but merely presupposes the decision maker to use its model’s 3 objectives interactively. Thus, in the MCDEA model, the three objectives are analyzed separately; one at a time, and no preference order was set for those objectives. Bal, Örkcü, and Çelebioglu (2010) recently proposed the goal programming approach for solving all 3 objectives of the MCDEA model simultaneously. Their GPDEA models (i.e. constant returns to scale and variable returns to scale) were claimed to improve the dispersion of weights and discriminatory power in a MCDEA framework. This paper highlights that those claims were unfounded, and goes onto show a new bi-objective multiple criteria DEA (BiO-MCDEA) model that could solve those drawbacks.The focus of this paper is to introduce a weighted model for improving the discrimination power and weight dispersion in the domain of Multiple Criteria Data Envelopment Analysis (MCDEA). The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief description of the multiple criteria data envelopment analysis (MCDEA) and the more recent goal programming data envelopment analysis (GPDEA) as a procedure for MCDEA. Section 3 highlights the drawbacks of using GPDEA to represent MCDEA analysis. We therefore introduce an alternative bi-objective multiple criteria model (BiO-MCDEA) to improve the discrimination power of MCDEA in Section 4. An application of energy dependency among 25 EU member countries demonstrates the efficacy of the model in Section 5. Concluding remarks are given in Section 6.Li and Reeves (1999) first proposed the MCDEA model as a means to improve the discrimination power of the classical DEA model. In their solution procedure, Li and Reeves (1999) suggested an interaction approach for solving three objectives. The first objective or criterion considers the classical definition of relative efficiency, thus capturing the classical DEA solution within the set of MCDEA solutions. The other two objectives, Minimax and Minsum objectives provide a more restrictive or lax efficiency solutions, respectively. This implies that a wider solution is possible with MCDEA, so as to gain more reasonable input and output weights.In MCDEA, the three objectives are analyzed separately; one at a time, with no preference order set for those objectives. The solutions derived from each run are considered non-dominated in the multi-objective linear programming (MOLP) sense. Li and Reeves (1999) note that generally the Minimax criterion is more restrictive than the Minsum criterion, while the first criterion (i.e. Classical DEA objective) is considered to be the least restrictive of the three. Since the Minimax and Minsum criteria tend to provide less number of efficient DMUs as compared to the first criterion, it is said to provide better discrimination power than a classical DEA model. As such, the Minimax and Minsum criteria are helpful when the number of DMUs is not sufficiently larger than the number of inputs and outputs used for evaluation.Consider the relative efficiency of n DMUs which use m inputs (xij, i=1,…,m, j=1,…,n) to produce s outputs (yrj, j=1,…,s, j=1,…,n). The MCDEA model proposed by Li and Reeves (1999) which considers three objective functions: (i) minimizing do(or maximizing θo), (ii) minimizing the maximum deviation, and (iii) minimizing the sum of deviations, is defined as follows in Model 1:(1)mindoormaxθo=∑r=1suryrominM,min∑j=1ndj∑i=1mvixio=1,∑r=1suryrj-∑i=1mvixij+dj=0,j=1,…,n,M-dj⩾0,j=1,…,n,ur⩾0,r=1,…,s,vi⩾0,i=1,…,m,dj⩾0,j=1,…,n.The quantity d0 in the first objective function is bounded on an interval [0,1) and is regarded as a measure of inefficiency. Thus, DMU0 is efficient at h0=1−d0 where h0 is the efficiency measure in a classical DEA. In short, the first objective functioni.e.mind0ormax∑r=1suryrois equivalent to the objective function of the classical DEA. The M in the second objective function (Minmax criterion) represents the maximum quantity of all deviation variables dj(j=1,…,n). The third objective function is a Minsum of all deviation variables. Another noteworthy point is the introduction of the M−dj⩾0, (j=1,…,n) constraint in MCDEA, which does not alter the feasible region of the solution but merely ensure that max dj⩾0.Li and Reeves (1999) did not suggest a solution for their proposed MCDEA model that optimizes all objectives simultaneously. The aim of their proposed MCDEA model solution process is not to extract an optimal solution; but instead, to find a series of non-dominated solutions that is left to the analyst in selecting the most preferred one, if need be. Therefore, goal programming can be seen as a natural progression in converting the multi-objective programming of the MCDEA model into a single objective problem.Goal programming is a type of multi-objective optimization, which can provide a way of striving towards several such objectives simultaneously. The basic approach of goal programming is to establish a specific numeric goal for each of the objectives, formulate an objective function for each objective, and then seek a solution that minimizes the (weighted) sum of unwanted deviations of these objective functions from their respective goals.Bal et al. (2010) recently proposed the following goal programming to solve the formulation proposed by Li and Reeves (1999). The former adopted the non-weighted approach in their solution design and claimed to be an equivalent single objective form to the latter’s three objectives.(2)mina=d1-+d1++d2++∑jd3j-+∑jdj∑i=1mvixio+d1--d1+=1,∑r=1suryro+d2--d2+=1,∑r=1suryrj-∑i=1mvixij+dj=0,j=1,…,n,M-dj+d3j--d3j+=0,j=1,…,n,ur⩾0,r=1,…,s,vi⩾0,i=1,…,m,dj⩾0,j=1,…,n,d1-,d1+,d2-,d2+⩾0,d3j-,d3j+⩾0,j=1,…,n.The above model is with the assumption of constant returns to scale (CRS) (Bal et al., 2010), whered1-andd1+are the unwanted deviations for the goal which the weighted sum of inputs equal to unity,d2-andd2+are the wanted and unwanted deviation variables which make the weighted sum of outputs less than or equal to one, whereasd3j-andd3j+(j=1,…,n)are the unwanted and wanted deviation variables for the goal M−dj⩾0, (j=1,…,n). remains as the maximum deviation, for DMUj(j=1,…,n), which is also an unwanted deviation. A similar model under the VRS assumption is placed in Appendix A.The achievement objective functiond1-+d1++d2++∑jd3j-+∑jdjstates that all deviations have been given equal weights. In the GPDEA’s case, minimizing the unwanted deviations from the goal values are to be desired (Ignizio, 1976; Lee, 1972). However, there are fundamental flaws associated with the GPDEA models, ranging from the interpretation of a goal programming method to the reported results. We highlight some of these issues separately in the next section.The purpose of this section is to highlight the drawbacks of the GPDEA models, which will help us to further develop the new bi-objective multiple criteria DEA (BiO-MCDEA) model in Section 4.We were initially intrigued by the use of goal programming as a means to achieve greater weight dispersion and discrimination power among criteria in DEA. When attempting to reproduce the analysis in Bal et al. (2010), we have noted some methodological and formulation problems. We found some of these problems to be consistent for all datasets in Bal et al. (2010). However, for the purpose of illustrating the inappropriateness of the GPDEA models, we only explain the solutions of ‘dataset 1’ and ‘university dataset’ in Bal et al. (2010).Let us first start with the hypothetical dataset consisting of 10 DMUs with four inputs and four outputs (see Table 1which is reproduced from Bal et al. (2010) for ease of reference).We used Model 1 formulation for both CRS and VRS assumptions to reproduce the results as depicted in Tables 2 and 3. It is easy to observe that the true efficiency values differ significantly from the ones reported in Bal et al. (2010). More importantly, we examined the weights and noticed contrary to what had been claimed in Bal et al. (2010), the input–output weights and efficiency values for some DMUs could attain zero values for all variables. For example in this case, zero weights were discovered for all variables for DMU1 (under CRS) and DMU5 (under CRS and VRS). This just disproves the “…improvement of the dispersion of input–output weights and the improvement of discrimination power…” as claimed in Bal et al. (2010). This is problematic when some of the efficiency values can be ‘1’ at the same instance, thus confirming the inability for the input and output weights to translate into technical efficiency effectively (see Appendix B for proof).It is rather quite simple to reason where the problem lies. As one can easily observe in the next section, we impose some restrictions on the weights to avoid this issue. In an input-oriented model, it is necessary to set the constraint∑i=1mvixio=1, and seek to achieve an output that is as high as possible. This is a fundamental aspect of scaling and benchmarking, where one has to fix either the sum of input or the sum of the output to be 1, before proceeding to determine the other. In Bal et al.’s case (Bal et al., 2010), they chose to set both∑i=1mvixio+d1--d1+=1and∑r=1suryro+d2--d2+=1. It stands to reason that proper scaling cannot be achieved in this manner as the model is neither input nor output oriented. Even if we eliminate∑r=1suryro+d2--d2+=1, there is a possibility for0⩽∑i=1mvixio⩽1due to the minimization ofd1--d1+in the objective function.To explore the results of MCDEA models we further compared the results of GPDEA with MCDEA. We discovered that the GPDEA models do not conduct nor achieve the same purposes as the MCDEA model. MCDEA model uses non-dominated solutions and each objective is handled one at a time. Unlike GPDEA models, MCDEA does not attempt to get a global optimal value but more towards generating a series of non-dominated solutions interactively. In other words, MCDEA can be used to achieve either a stricter or more lenient solution set, depending on whether a more or less number of efficient DMUs are sought by the analyst in the decision making process.We recomputed the results of the MCDEA model of Li and Reeves (1999) using only the Minsum objective function of∑jdjand reproduce them in Table 4(CRS) and Table 5(VRS). If one were to compare the MCDEA-Minsum analysis with the results gathered from analyzing the GPDEA models (see Tables 2 and 3), the efficiency values were found to be similar. It has to be emphasized that the comparison has to be made on the corrected values denoted as ‘true values’ in Tables 2 and 3 and not the ‘values reported in Bal et al. (2010). Given that the GPDEA models only capture the solution set of a single objective in MCDEA (i.e. Minsum), it is trivial to note that the GPDEA models’ objective functiond1-+d1++d2++∑jd3j-+∑jdjcannot handle all of the three criteria in the MCDEA model.In classical VRS model (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984), cois a free variable placed in both the objective function and the inequality constraint. We ran the analysis based on a wrongly formulated VRS model on purpose, by considering only coin the constraint∑r=1suryrj-∑i=1mvixij+dj=0but not in the Minsum objective function of∑jdj(see Appendix C). With the exception of DMU5, we achieved the same efficiency results as Bal et al. (2010) with the incorrect formulation! This can be observed by comparing the true values in Table 3 against the efficiency values in Table 5. It can therefore be concluded that the GPDEA-BCC model proposed by Bal et al. (2010) is not an acceptable extension of VRS model (Banker et al., 1984) for MCDEA.Table 6can be found in Bal et al. (2010), which is reproduced here for ease of reference. The data consist of 7 departments (DMUs) of a university with the following input and output variables: number of academic staff (x1), academic staff salaries in thousands of pounds (x2), support staff salaries in thousands of pounds (x3), the number of undergraduate students (y1), number of postgraduate students (y2), number of research papers (y3).When applying the GPDEA models, we first noticed the results reported in Bal et al. (2010) were incorrect. We therefore reported the corrected results in Tables 7–10. It is easy to observe that the input–output weights do not discriminate well and the GPDEA model cannot be representative of the MCDEA model. Based on the corrected weights reported in Tables 7–10 derived from the analysis, it can be noted that the third input is completely ignored by almost all DMUs in Tables 7 and 9. Also, the first and third outputs are completely ignored by all DMUs in Tables 8 and 10 (i.e. all weights are set to zero). This suggests that the variables have no effect in the efficiency values of the evaluation! We will see that in the proposed model of Section 4; we would impose some restrictions on the weights to avoid this issue.The aim of this section is to introduce an alternative MCDEA model which is able to provide better weight dispersion and discrimination power while allowing multiple criteria to be optimised simultaneously. We seek to avoid the earlier issues raised in the GPDEA models through our proposed BiO-MCDEA model.Although there are a variety of solution procedures for multi-objective or multiple criteria linear programming (MOLP or MCLP), only goal programming had been suggested for optimizing all objectives simultaneously. The difficulty of a multi-objective problem is not just in finding an optimal solution for each objective function but to find an optimal solution that simultaneously optimizes all objectives. In most cases, no single optimal solution would satisfy all the conditions simultaneously, thus requiring a set of efficient or non-dominated solutions. Further details on MOLP problem can be found in (Cohon, 1987; Dimitris, 2003).In Li and Reeves (1999) proposed MCDEA model, they used the ‘non-dominated’ solution approach. Bal et al. (2010) proposed goal programming as an alternative for achieving all objectives simultaneously in the MCDEA model. It has been pointed out in the previous section that the proposed GPDEA models suffer from serious drawbacks. We are compelled therefore to consider an alternative approach to optimize all objectives simultaneously in a MCDEA model, i.e. a bi-objective weighted formulation.Recalling Li and Reeves (1999) approach, the MCDEA model’s objective functions consist of three parts: min d0, min M, and min∑jdjas defined in model 1. In a weighted method, the MCDEA’s tri-objective function can be restated as follows,w1do+w2M+w3∑jdjfor the single weighted objective equivalent. The weights wi(i=1,2,3) can be varied to obtain different efficient solutions.However, given that the first objective w1 is in fact the equivalent to a conventional CCR model, it can be eliminated from the MCDEA in the weighted objective sense. Besides, Li and Reeves had demonstrated that the first objective yields lower discrimination power as compared to the other two objectives. Hence, for our proposed BiO-MCDEA model, we solved the bi-objective weighted problem using both the second and third objectives. The value of w1 is set equal to zero because whenever∑jdjis minimized, dowill be minimized as well. Thus, we proposed the following model:(3)minh=w2M+w3∑jdj∑i=1mvixio=1,∑r=1suryrj-∑i=1mvixij+dj=0,j=1,…,n,M-dj⩾0,j=1,…,n,ur⩾ε,r=1,…,s,vi⩾ε,i=1,…,m,dj⩾0,j=1,…,n,where d0 and dj(j=1,…,n) are the deviation variables for DMU0 and the jth DMU respectively. DMU0 is efficient if and only if d0=0, otherwise the efficiency value of DMU0 is ho=1−do. The effect of constraints M−dj⩾0(j=1,…,n) does not change the feasible region of the solution but merely to make M the maximum deviation. The values of urand viare set to be greater than or equal to, thus ensuring this lower bound specification prevents inputs or outputs from being ignored by the DMUs.We analyzed the dataset of ‘Example 1’ and the ‘university dataset’ with our proposed BiO-MCDEA approach. The efficiency values in Tables 11 and 12perform better when compared against the actual efficiency values of the GPDEA-CCR models (Tables 2 and 7, respectively).We further illustrate our proposed model with a 3-input and 2-output dataset of 25 European Union (EU) member countries (except Malta and Estonia) as presented in Appendix D. Data were based on the EU Emissions Trading Scheme of more than 10,000 installations that generate an excess of 20MWeach within the country. This is believed to capture about half of the CO2 emissions within EU. We termed the model as energy dependency as the choice of inputs are based on a set of resources that generate carbon emissions and the output will be the extent of those resources in limiting the carbon effects. The operational definition of the 3 inputs and 2 outputs are as follows (see Table 13):Although the weights of our proposed BiO-MCDEA can be varied to obtain a set of efficiency scores according to the decision analyst’s preference, we have set equal objectives such that w2=w3=0.5 for the purpose of this study. The results are presented in Table 14along with Bal et al.’s GPDEA-CCR solution. The results show that the BiO-MCDEA outperforms the GPDEA model; both, in terms of discrimination power and weight dispersion.Comparing the two (where an infinitesimal value is chosen), it can be easily observed from Table 14 that the efficiency scores from our BiO-MCDEA model could provide ease of ranking without any ties (other than the efficient units). Such is not the case for the GPDEA efficiency scores. All of the efficiency scores and weights for GPDEA appear to be close to zero. Fig. 1illustrates that BiO-MCDEA outperforms GPDEA. The Nonparametric Levene test confirms that there is a significantly greater weight dispersion for the Bio-MCDEA model (see Appendix E).In the case of setting ε=0, the GPDEA model cannot even generate a value to be above zero; that is, all the efficiency values, input and output weights are zeroes (see Table 15). However, the BiO-MCDEA model did not suffer a similar fate and appeared to be robust.With the exception of this study; to date, only GPDEA models were proposed as a solution method to the MCDEA model. We have demonstrated that the GPDEA models are not alternatives to the MCDEA model. It has major drawbacks in both discrimination power and weight dispersion, aside from the misreported efficiency values of all the tests. Hence, the fair basis of comparison would be between our proposed BiO-MCDEA model and the GPDEA models, given that the MCDEA model merely provided a mathematical formulation with an interactive solution procedure without any emphasis placed on the issues of discrimination power and weight dispersion. In short, we have illustrated that the BiO-MCDEA model outperforms the GPDEA models in terms of both weight dispersion and discrimination power.Although we have proposed a bi-objective weighted method for solving the MCDEA model, we stress that there may be other solution procedures that can be used to extract solutions under multiobjective LP environment. We merely showed a procedure that performs better than the GPDEA in terms of ease of formulation and mathematical programming (i.e. less computational codes). We hope that future researchers in DEA will explore other methods such as metaheuristic solution procedures for the MCDEA model.In terms of the application, we have used an energy dependency context for the performance comparison between BiO-MCDEA and GPDEA. Given that environmental context has larger policy implications, future researches should look into the structural differences between the two disposability conditions of natural and managerial disposability when comparing DEA models (see Sueyoshi & Goto, 2012). Natural disposability refers to decreases in input vectors that correspond to decreases in undesirable output vectors (such as CO2emissions). On the other hand, managerial disposability refers to increases in input vectors that can simultaneously increase desirable output vectors and decrease undesirable output vectors.In our case, we have only considered natural disposability. By further exploring the aspects of managerial disposability, technological innovation can be uncovered, especially in the context of environmental modeling. For example, a country’s growth or productivity (i.e. desirable output) is closely tied to its level of industrialization, which is positively correlated to the by-product of CO2 emissions (i.e. undesirable output). The implication is such that environmental strategies that are focused on curbing CO2 emissions should not end up decreasing productivity due to the high correlation between desirable and undesirable outputs. On the methodological forefront, treating such problems may involve negative data, and interested readers may refer to the following papers (see Emrouznejad, Amin, Thanassoulis, & Anouze, 2010; Emrouznejad, Anouze, & Thanassoulis, 2010) for a solution.Future researchers may also explore our BiO-MCDEA model in a new light by applying the COOPER-framework (see Emrouznejad & De Witte, 2010) which gives much thought to the structuring of data. All of our variables are scaled by the population sizes of the respective countries in order to eliminate the potential bias, given that larger countries would naturally produce more emissions. Nonetheless, it would be interesting to observe a different method such as the clustering approach (see Amin, Emrouznejad, & Rezaei, 2011) for handling data from non-homogenous sets. This would help in generating unbiased results while formulating energy policies that strike a balance between controlling CO2 emissions and ensuring that the control measures do not impede on the productivity level, owing to a more comparable within-group effects. Therefore, it is more feasible to investigate operational elements that improve the output-input ratio for desirable outputs while controlling for the output-input ratio for undesirable outputs. This can only be achieved through innovative means in the process that augment the production frontier.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
