@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of gift cards on optimal order and discount of seasonal products

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the effect of selling gift cards on holiday products’ stocking level.Gift cards’ profitability depends on treatment of unredeemed balances by the state.Gift cards’ profitability increases with demand variability.Gift cards’ profitability depends on type of products consumers purchase with them.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Pricing,Gift cards,Newsvendor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gift cards are replacing cash and holiday products as gifts for many consumers. We analyze the effect of gift card sales on a retailer’s optimal stocking level of holiday products and his expected profit within the newsvendor model framework. We derive the sufficient condition for the optimal stocking level of holiday products. We find that increased gift card sales decrease the retailer’s optimal stocking level. The effect of gift card sales on the expected profits depends on treatment of unredeemed gift card balances by the state and the type of non-holiday products gift card redeemers buy with gift cards. When these balances remain with the retailer, even small non-redemptions of gift cards will cause gift card sales to increase most retailers’ expected profit. When balances are treated as abandoned property which must be turned to the state after a specified period of time, gift cards sales may increase or decrease the retailer’s expected profit. If gift card redeemers buy products with gift cards they would not have bought from the retailer in cash, then the optimal expected profit is likely to increase. Gift card profitability increases with demand variability and the post-holiday markdown required to sell holiday products to bargain hunters. The performance of gift cards also depends on consumers’ reservation prices for non-holiday products. If unredeemed gift card balances are collected by the state, then profitability of gift cards increases with increased consumer reservation prices for non-holiday products.Gift card sales in the USA grew to 91 billion dollars in 2010 (Mui, 2010), a 3 billion dollars increase over their previous peak of 88 billion dollars in 2007 (Horne, 2007a). More than half of these gift cards are typically redeemed in the month after Christmas (Mui, 2010). Gift cards redemption in the post-holiday11We use holiday instead of Christmas, which is the major gift-giving time in the USA and western Europe, to include other cultures and countries with a different major gift-giving holiday.period can make a substantial positive impact on sales (Anonymous, 2006) and may give retailers healthy store traffic (Anonymous, 2008). Some retailers express preference for gift card redeemers since they are more likely to buy regular-priced items (Goldeen, 2003). The existence of a large amount of gift card balances and their eminent redemption in the post-holiday period may enable retailers to avoid deep discounts on holiday products.In this paper, we investigate the implications of gift card sales on the optimal stocking level of holiday products in the pre-holiday period and the pricing of these products in the post-holiday period from a retailer’s perspective. We analyze the problem for a retailer who sells holiday products in the pre-holiday period and discounts any remaining inventory of these products in the post-holiday period. The retailer also sells non-holiday products and gift cards throughout the year. While gift cards are sold and redeemed throughout the year, the holiday season accounts for about half of their sales (Horne, 2013). We, therefore, focus on gift cards sold as holiday gifts, which make up most of the gift cards redeemed in the post-holiday period. Gift card holders can redeem their gift cards any time on any product in inventory. Some gift cards are never redeemed and unredeemed gift card balances may be taken by the state or may remain with the retailer.An important distinction of holiday products is that these products are used as gifts and therefore consumption choices are made by the gift-giver and not the final consumer (she), i.e. the gift-recipient (Waldfogel, 1993). This raises the potential of mismatch between gifts and the recipients’ preferences. The gifts, therefore, may leave the recipient worse off than if she had made her own consumption choices. The amount of cash spent on a gift above the value the recipient places on it is known as deadweight loss (Waldfogel, 1993). Waldfogel (1993) estimated that compared to cash, gifts in-kind lose between 10 percent and 33 percent of their value by the time they reach the recipient. This deadweight loss has led many gift-givers to give cash and checks instead of physical gifts (Principe & Eisenhauer, 2009). In a sample of 455 students from three universities, Waldfogel (2002) found that 13.5 percent of all gifts were cash or gift certificates. Waldfogel (2002) also found that the appeal of cash increases as the personal familiarity between the gift-giver and the gift-recipient decreases.While giving cash avoids deadweight loss, cash is viewed by many consumers to be inappropriate as a holiday gift (Offenberg, 2007; Waldfogel, 2002). Gift cards are viewed as a more appropriate alternative to cash. Gift cards are becoming the choice of many consumers as holiday gifts. From a consumer’s view point, gift cards reduce the risk of poor gift selection (Horne & Kelly, 1995), allow the recipients to select their own gifts from a set of alternatives which increases their utilities (Horne, Craddock, & Norberg, 2005), and reduces the deadweight loss of gifts that do not fulfill the needs and desires of recipients (Waldfogel, 1993). Gift card sales have been increasing since 1997 with the exceptions of 2008 and 2009 due to the recession (Mui, 2010). About 30 percent of gift cards are purchased for gifts at the end-of-year holiday season. The low cost of producing plastic cards with magnetic strips to keep track of card balances instead of the old paper gift certificates, and the rapid growth of chain stores have significantly contributed to this growth (Offenberg, 2007).Gift cards account on average for about 5 percent of retail holiday sales and for some retailers can account for as high as 15 percent of sales (National Retail Federation, 2006). Gift cards are not counted as sales until they are redeemed. Keeping this drawback in mind, the reason for the popularity of gift cards among retailers is not clear. One argument is that many consumers may only redeem part of the cards’ full value and others may not use the card at all (Thomas & Dillenbeck, 2004), thus leaving the retailers with the cash. Reasons for partial or no redemption include loss of cards, expiration of cards, and consumers’ forgetting. We refer to this partial redemption as slippage.22Estimates of unredeemed cards nine month after issuance is 19 percent (Horne, 2007b). Efforts to eliminate expiration dates on gift cards (Horne, 2007b) were anticipated to improve redemption rates. However, research indicates that gift cards with longer expiration dates are less likely to be redeemed (Shu & Gneezy, 2010).However, an examination of regulations on gift cards shows that the above argument may not be very convincing. Several states treat unredeemed gift card balances as abandoned property which must be turned in full or in part to the state after a specified period of time. Other states exclude gift certificates and cards from abandoned property definitions (Horne, 2007b). As of 2008, at least 39 states have laws addressing issues relating to unredeemed gift card balances and more state legislatures are enacting laws affecting gift card non-redemptions (Feinson, 2008). New York State for example collected 9.6 million dollars in unredeemed gift cards in 2008 and these collections are on the rise as states face declining tax revenue (Alini, 2009). Therefore, the advantage of gift cards leaving retailers with a large amount of unredeemed gift cards balances may not be as important as one would expect, particularly because many retailers are domiciled in Delaware where unredeemed cards are treated as abandoned property (Horne, 2007b).Gift cards have other advantages for the retailer (he) besides slippage. Whether the cash from unredeemed cards is kept by the retailer or turned over to the state, the retailer has the use of that cash until cards are redeemed or the money is taken by the state. Gift cards may also bring new consumers to the store who would not have visited the store without receiving gift cards. Consumers redeeming gift cards may also spend more than the value of the gift card which creates additional sales. In a survey of more than 500 U.S. consumers conducted by Accenture, 48 percent of respondents said they spend more than the value of the gift card (Accenture, 2006). One estimate of the average spending of consumers beyond the card value is about 20 percent of card value (Thomas & Dillenbeck, 2004).One hidden advantage of gift cards may be in increasing the retailer’s ability to deal with demand uncertainty. The retailer may be able to change the order quantity and the pricing strategy in such a way that the expected profit is increased even if all gift cards are redeemed. At the holiday time of the season, the retailer has better information about the demand in the post-holiday period, knows the exact amount of gift cards that has been sold, and can use this information to make a holiday products discounting decision which maximizes his expected profit in the post-holiday period. In addition, this ability to make better discounting decisions in the post-holiday period may decrease the penalty from overstocking or understocking in the pre-holiday period.Consumers may use gift cards to buy holiday products (most likely discounted) or non-holiday products (regularly-priced) in the post-holiday period. An important determining factor of the profitability of gift cards is the type of non-holiday products consumers purchase with gift cards. When consumers use gift cards for purchases they would have made with cash in the future at the retailer, future cash sales decrease, which causes future profit to decline. We refer to the reduction of future cash sales due to gift cards redemption as the future cash sales offset. In the survey conducted by Accenture, 67 percent of respondents stated that when redeeming gift cards, they buy themselves something they would not normally buy (Accenture, 2006). We anticipate that gift cards are most effective for a retailer when consumers use them to buy products they would not buy without gift cards or to buy products they would buy with cash at another retailer.Previous analytical models on the use of gift cards are few and are focused on the use of “free” gift cards. Khouja, Pan, Ratchford, and Zhou (2011) analyze the decision of a retailer giving consumers a “free” gift card if their purchase amount of all products in a single visit exceeds a threshold amount. Khouja, Park, and Zhou (2013) analyze the retailer’s decision to use “free” gift cards to sell a particular product within the newsvendor model framework. Khouja, Rajagopalan, and Zhou (2013) address a similar problem in which the consumer gets a “free” retailer gift card for buying particular manufacturer’s product in a single-retailer single-manufacturer supply chain where the manufacturer bears the cost of the card. Khouja and Zhou (2015) analyzed the decision of a service provider to sell gift cards for his services through an independent retailer.Gift cards are a form of advance selling which may provide a powerful tool to improve profits (Shugan & Xie, 2000; 2005). Fay and Xie (2010) define “advance selling” as a marketing practice in which the seller offers buyers opportunities to make purchases before the time of consumption. Gift cards create another twist on advance selling in the sense that in addition to the temporal separation (Shugan & Xie, 2000) between purchase of the card and the selection of goods, the selection is made by persons other than the card buyers.We analyze the optimal stocking level of holiday products of a retailer who also sells gift cards, and his optimal pricing decision for the leftover holiday products after the holiday. We use the newsvendor problem framework because it is most suitable for products carried for one season. Previous research on extensions of the newsvendor model is extensive and reviews of this research can be found in Khouja (1999) and Petruzzi and Dada (1999).We investigate the following questions: (1) How does the use of gift cards change the retailer’s optimal stocking level and pricing decisions for holiday products? (2) Does the use of gift cards benefit the retailer? (3) How does the treatment of unredeemed gift card balances by the state affect gift card profitability? (4) Are gift cards more suitable for some type of retailers than others?The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we analyze consumer choice and demand when the retailer sells gift cards. We also provide a benchmark where no gift cards are sold. In Section 3, we solve the retailer’s problem: finding the optimal pricing of holiday products in the post-holiday period and the sufficient condition for the optimal stocking level in the pre-holiday period. In Section 4, we extend the model and allow the gift card holders’ reservation prices for non-holiday products to be a random variable. A numerical analysis is presented in Section 5. The paper is concluded in Section 6.In many parts of the world, including the U.S.A. and Canada, the annual festive period that surrounds Christmas, which is referred to as the holiday season, is celebrated with the exchanges of gifts. Christmas holiday sales account for about 20 percent of total annual retail sales in the USA (National Retail Federation, 2012) and is the only holiday found to have a significant effect on demand (Soysal & Krishnamurthi, 2012). We study a retailer who stocks two categories of products during the pre-holiday period, holiday products and non-holiday products. Holiday products exhibit strong seasonality in demand with a peak before the holiday and lose value to the consumers after the holiday. Examples of holiday products include holiday decorations, gift baskets, and winter clothing. According to Deloitte’s 2012 Annual Holiday Survey (Deloitte, 2012), clothing is the top gift consumers expect to purchase and the third gift they want to receive. Consumers value seasonal products such as winter clothing less and less as the end of the selling season gets nearer since consumers will enjoy the products for a shorter period of time (Bitran & Mondschein, 1997). On the other hand, non-holiday products exhibit weak or no seasonality in demand and do not lose much value to the consumers after the holiday. After the holiday, holiday products are cleared off while non-holiday products continue to be stocked.We treat holiday shoppers as basket shopping consumers (Cachon & Kök, 2007a) who desire to purchase different products within the holiday product category. Since we are dealing with a basket of goods, we express the retailer’s retail price and consumers’ reservation price in a relative form, i.e. the amount per 1 dollar worth of product inventory to the retailer, rather than as a product-specific price or reservation price. Clearly, there is one-to-one correspondence between these two forms. The retailer uses the commonly practiced cost-plus pricing within each product category, i.e. setting a mark-up rate which when multiplied by the retailer’s buying price results in the retail price (Hansen & Solgaard, 2004). This pricing serves as an approximation of the typical markups within a given specialty retail segment (van Ryzin & Mahajan, 1999). There may be some differences in the markup of products within a category. Therefore, because of our aggregation of products, our model can be used to provide a higher level understanding of the aggregate stocking level of holiday products and pricing decisions. Like other aggregate planning models, the disaggregation problem to find the individual products’ stocking levels can be solved by using the results of our model as parameters. The constrained multi-product newsvendor disaggregation problem has been addressed in the literature (Niederhoff, 2007; Zhang, 2010).Let M1 dollar be the revenue the retailer gets from selling 1 dollar worth of inventory of products. Thus,(M1−1)dollar is the profit per M1 dollar of sales. The profit per 1 dollar of sales is thus given byM1−1M1dollar=(1−1M1)dollar and the cost of goods per 1 dollar of sales is1M1dollar. For example, if the retailer marks-up inventory by 200 percent, thenM1dollar=3,her profit per 1 dollar of sales is(1−13)dollar=0.67dollar and her cost of goods per 1 dollar of sales is13dollar=0.33dollar. The assumption that the retailer applies the same markup to holiday and non-holiday product categories does not qualitatively change the results while simplifying the analysis. We also assume that the retailer is a price-taker in a competitive market. There is considerable literature on the news vendor with price-dependent demand (Petruzzi & Dada, 1999). However, many researchers have assumed exogenous prices to focus their analysis on particular settings of the newsvendor model (Babich, Li, Ritchken, & Wang, 2012; Densing, 2013).Total holiday spending at the retailer planned by all consumers (gift givers) is D1, a non-negative random variable. If the retailer does not offer gift cards, then a consumer has a probability θ of not finding a satisfactory gift and the sale is lost to competing retailers or cash giving. Therefore,D=(1−θ)D1is used to purchase holiday products at the retailer and θD1 of the demand is lost. Therefore, gift cards provide a benefit by increasing total sales. Since the effect of the parameter θ is positive and to simplify the analysis, we follow a conservative approach and assumeθ=0. Thus, total holiday spending at the retailer planned by all consumers (gift givers) is D, a non-negative random variable. If the retailer does not offer gift cards, then D is used to purchase holiday products at the retailer exclusively. Let f(·) be the probability density function of demand, F(·) be the cumulative distribution function (cdf), andF¯(·)=1−F(·)be the complementary cdf. A summary of notation is given in Table 1. We assume that D satisfies the following property defined in Cachon and Swinney (2009) and is shown to be satisfied for many commonly used nonnegative distributions, including the gamma, Weibull, uniform, exponential, power, beta, chi, and chi-squared. We use this property in the proof of Proposition 2.Definition 1A continuous, nonnegative random variable X with density f satisfies the monotone scaled likelihood ratio (MSLR) property if, for all γ ≤ 1 and x in the support of X, f(γx)/f(x) is monotonic in x.In the pre-holiday period, consumers have the same reservation price for both holiday and non-holiday products. In the post-holiday period, if there are no gift cards, any remaining holiday products inventory is discounted and sold to bargain-hunters who only buy discounted products. We assume that this segment is very large and requires a steep discount to buy holiday products in the post-holiday period, which is the usual salvage in the newsvendor model (Cachon & Swinney, 2009). Let q be the stocking level of holiday products in dollars, and MBbe the reservation price of bargain-hunters, 0 ≤ MB< 1. This implies that1−MBis the markdown from cost needed to have bargain hunters buy holiday products in the post-holiday period. Define the notationA+=max{0,A}. The retailer’s expected profit from sales of holiday products when he does not offer gift cards is(1)πNG(q)=E[min{D,M1q}−q+MB(q−DM1)+],where min {D, M1q} is the sales of holiday products in the pre-holiday period, q is the cost of holiday products (i.e. stocking level) andMB(q−DM1)+is the sales of holiday products in the post-holiday period. Similar to the standard newsvendor problem, we have the following lemma about the retailer’s optimal stocking level.Lemma 1Without selling gift cards, the retailer’s optimal stocking level of holiday products satisfies the fractile formula:(2)F(M1q)=M1−1M1−MB.Therefore, the optimal stocking level isqNG=1M1F−1(M1−1M1−MB). The solution of the no-gift-card problem will be used as a benchmark to evaluate the effectiveness of gift cards.If the retailer sells gift cards, then gift givers who would buy holiday products as gifts without a gift card option have a choice between buying holiday products or switching to gift cards in the pre-holiday period. A gift giver may choose to buy gift cards because she has a high search cost, wants to avoid deadweight loss, or expects the retailer to lower prices after the holiday which may increase the utility of the gift card recipient. Deloitte’s 2012 Annual Holiday Survey reports that gift cards/certificates are the most requested holiday gift and the second gift consumers expect to purchase. We assume that a gift giver buys gift cards with a probability of β (0 ≤ β ≤ 1) and buys holiday products with a probability of1−β. Therefore, consumer demand for holiday products in the pre-holiday period if the retailer offers gift cards is(1−β)Dand demand for gift cards is βD. The sequence of events is shown in Fig. 1.Redemptions of gift cards occur in the post-holiday period because gift cards are bought as holiday gifts which are given at holiday and are redeemed after it. Let α (0 < α ≤ 1) be the average redemption rate of gift cards, which may be well below 100 percent due to slippage33We assume the retailer can obtain industry estimate of the average gift card redemption rate as well as other gift-card related parameters via market intelligence.. Thus, the total amount of gift cards which will be redeemed in the post-holiday period is αβD. We assume that a portion ζ, of gift card redeemers are interested in holiday products and the rest,(1−ζ),are not. Consumers making up ζ prefer to redeem their gift cards on holiday products such as winter clothing and winter sports equipments since the season for using them has some time left. We refer to these consumers as holiday-product-redeemers even though some of them may not find holiday products available or find the price higher than they expected when they arrive to redeem their gift cards. Consumers making up1−ζ(non-holiday-product-redeemers) may have received enough of these products to satisfy their needs and wants for the season. Gift card recipients’ choices in the post-holiday period are shown in Fig. 2.A gift card recipient may or may not be a bargain hunter and, therefore, gift card holders’ reservation price for holiday products in the post-holiday period is not necessarily the same as the reservation price of the bargain hunters MB. In addition, gift card holders are expected to have higher reservation price than bargain hunters because they take into consideration that a gift card is redeemable only at the retailer and, therefore, do not view gift cards as equal to the same amount of cash. In an experimental study, Gneezy, List, and Wu (2006) found that when asked to bid for 50 dollars Barnes and Noble gift certificates, people on average were willing to pay 26.10 dollars for it. Evidence from the resale of gift cards on a website shows that consumers value 1 dollar of gift card in the range of 0.75–0.90 dollar cash equivalence (Offenberg, 2007). Given that holiday products’ price in the pre-holiday period is M1 which is observable to everyone, and consumers who buy these products in the post-holiday period enjoy the products for a shorter period of time, it is reasonable to assume that the upper limit on the holiday-product-redeemers’ reservation price for holiday products in the post-holiday period is M1. Also, since some holiday-product-redeemers are bargain-hunters, their reservation price for holiday products is MB, at which demand is infinite based on the assumption of the size of the bargain-hunter segment. This implies that the lower limit on the holiday-product-redeemers’ reservation price for holiday products in the post-holiday period is MB. We assume the reservation price of holiday-product-redeemers for holiday products in the post-holiday period is a uniformly distributed random variable M with support on [MB, M1], density h(·), distribution H(·), and complementary cdfH¯(·)=1−H(·). If the price of holiday products in the post-holiday period M2 is low enough (i.e. M2 ≤ MB), then both bargain hunters and holiday-product-redeemers compete for holiday products. We assume that demand for holiday products forms a queue of both types of consumers. The parameter δ ∈ [0, 1] represents the proportion of holiday-product-redeemers in the queue. Holiday-product-redeemers represent every 1/δth customer in the queue, which is served using first-come-first-served order until inventory (I) is depleted or until there are no more holiday-product-redeemers and only bargain hunters remain. This queue is similar to the queue formed by strategic and bargain hunting consumers in prior research (Cachon & Swinney, 2009). Aδ=1indicates that holiday-product-redeemers are served first, i.e. are at the front of the queue. Aδ=0indicates that holiday-product-redeemers are never served since they are behind an infinite number of bargain hunters. The specification of the queue is motivated by the need to know how many gift card redeemers will not be able to redeem their cards on holiday products and may then redeem their gift cards on regularly priced non-holiday products.The reservation price of all gift card redeemers for non-holiday products V is assumed to be at M1. This assumption is relaxed in Section 4. The retailer’s price of non-holiday products remains at M1 in the post-holiday period. This implies that all non-holiday-product-redeemers will redeem their gift cards on non-holiday products. We assume that the aggregate stocking level of non-holiday products is large enough so that there is no stockout of most non-holiday products44It is possible for certain non-holiday products to be out of stock. Since a typical retailer carries thousands of non-holiday products, these stockouts have negligible effect on the model.. A holiday-product-redeemer will choose one of the following alternatives depending on the retailer’s price of holiday products M2 and the availability of holiday products in the post-holiday period: (1) redeem the gift card on discounted holiday products if she gets a non-negative utility from holiday products, i.e. M ≥ M2, and inventory is available for her to redeem55Although some holiday-product-redeemers may be indifferent between holiday products and non-holiday products, their behavior is inconsequential to the retailer since they have a measure of zero.; (2) redeem the gift card on non-holiday regularly priced products if M ≥ M2 and holiday-products inventory is not available for her to redeem, or she gets a negative utility from holiday products, i.e. M < M2.We assume that any leftover holiday products after the post-holiday period will be discarded with zero salvage value (Cachon & Swinney, 2009). While it is possible for consumers to hold on to the gift cards until the next holiday season, we assume that this probability is zero since most gift cards are redeemed within one month of purchase (Tkacik, 2002).In this section, we derive the retailer’s optimal pricing in the post-holiday period, show that the retailer’s expected profit function is quasi-concave in the stocking level of holiday products q, and identify the sufficient condition for the stocking level to be optimal.The retailer’s sales of holiday products in the pre-holiday period ismin{M1q,(1−β)D}. Therefore, at the start of post-holiday period, the retailer hasI=(q−(1−β)DM1)+worth of holiday products inventory and there are βD dollar in gift card balances outstanding, of which αβD dollar will be redeemed. The retailer must determine the price M2 for the holiday products. The retailer’s total expected profit from holiday products and gift cards for a given q is(3)π(q)=E[min{M1q,(1−β)D}−q+maxM2π2(M2,D)].The first term in Eq. (3) is the revenue from holiday products in the pre-holiday period and the second term is the cost of holiday products. The third term is the revenue from gift card redemption in the post-holiday period on all products (holiday and non-holiday) minus the cost of non-holiday products purchased with gift cards, and the revenue from bargain hunters, if the discount is large enough to attract them.If gift cards are used to purchase non-holiday products, then the retailer obtains a profit of(1−1M1)dollar per 1 dollar of gift card redemption. Furthermore, if a gift card redeemer uses on average 100 × τ percent of her gift card to pay for purchases she would have made with cash in the future at the retailer, then the retailer’s future profit will decline by(1−1M1)τdollar per 1 dollar of gift card redemption66We assume that gift card recipients do not switch retailers to the card-issuing retailer after card redemption. Gift givers are likely to give gift cards of stores the recipients like. This does not change any of the factors which influence store switching behavior (Popkowski Leszczyc & Timmermans, 1997).. Therefore, the retailer’s net profit from gift card redemptions is obtained by subtracting the future cash sales offset resulting in a net profit of[1−1M1−(1−1M1)τ]dollar per 1 dollar of gift card redemption on non-holiday products77Selling gift cards also gives the retailer the use of unredeemed gift card money balances. However, since most gift cards are redeemed within one month of purchase (Tkacik, 2002), we take a conservative approach and do not consider the time value of money from unredeemed gift card balances in the model.. Letχ≡1M1+(1−1M1)τdenote the cost rate of redeemed gift cards on non-holiday products. Aτ=0implies consumers redeem gift cards to purchase products they would not have purchased without gift cards. In this case,χ=1/M1which is the cost of non-holiday products sold fraction. The profit per 1 dollar of gift card redemption is(1−1M1)dollar. Aτ=1implies that consumers redeem gift cards to purchase products they would have purchased with cash. In this case, for each 1 dollar of redeemed gift cards the retailer makes(1−1M1)dollar which is the amount he will make anyway if there is no gift card redemption. In other words, the profit from gift card redemption is canceled by the loss of profit from reduced future cash sales of the same amount. Thus, there is no incremental net benefit to the retailer and the resulting cost rate per 1 dollar of redeemed gift cards on non-holiday products isχ=1.If holiday products inventory at the start of post-holiday periodI=(q−(1−β)DM1)+=0,i.e.D≥M11−βq,then all gift card redeemers purchase non-holiday products. Thus, the retailer’s profit from gift cards is(1−χ)αβD. Note that gift cards are not treated as sales until they are redeemed. This is because for accounting purposes, gift cards are not recognized as sales until redemption (Horne, 2007b). If I > 0, i.e.D<M11−βq,then there are two cases.(a) Pricing of holiday products to serve only gift card redeemers, i.e. M2 > MB. For a given M2, if there are enough holiday products for holiday-product-redeemers to purchase, i.e.M2I≥H¯(M2)ζαβD,then the retailer’s expected profit from gift cards is(4)π2(M2,D)=H¯(M2)ζαβD+(1−χ)[αβD−H¯(M2)ζαβD].If there are not enough holiday products to satisfy all gift card redemptions, i.e.M2I<H¯(M2)ζαβD,then(5)π2(M2,D)=M2I+(1−χ)(αβD−M2I).(b) Pricing of holiday products to serve bargain hunters, i.e. M2 ≤ MB. Holiday-product-redeemers and bargain hunters compete for holiday products. Effective inventory available for holiday-product-redeemers is δI and the remaining is for bargain hunters. If there are enough holiday products for holiday-product-redeemers, i.e. δM2I ≥ ζαβD, then(6)π2(M2,D)=M2I+(1−χ)(αβD−ζαβD).If there are not enough holiday products to satisfy all gift card redemptions, i.e. δM2I < ζαβD, then(7)π2(M2,D)=M2I+(1−χ)(αβD−δM2I).The first part in Eqs. (4–7) is the revenue from holiday product sales whereas the second part is the net profit from gift card redemption on non-holiday products. The following proposition identifies the retailer’s optimal pricing strategy for holiday products in the post-holiday period.Proposition 1Define two critical demand levelsDl=M1MB(M1−MB)(1−(1−χ)δ)qM12ζαβχ+[M1(1−β−ζαβ)−MB(1−β)]MB(1−δ(1−χ))andDh=M1q1−βwhere l and h stand for low and high, respectively. Then, given a demand level D, there is a unique optimal pricing level for holiday products in the post-holiday period, which is determined by(8)M2*(D)={Ml,ifD≤DlMh(D),ifDl<D≤Dh,whereMl=MBis the low pricing level andMh(D)=M12ζαβDM1ζαβD+(M1−MB)(M1q−(1−β)D)is the high pricing level.When consumer demand is low, i.e. D ≤ Dl, the leftover holiday products inventory is so high that the retailer has to sell to bargain hunters to clear all of it. When consumer demand is between Dland Dh, the retailer sets the price of holiday productsM2=Mh(D),whereMh(D)I=H¯(Mh(D))ζαβD. This means that the amount of gift card redemption from holiday-product-redeemers will clear all holiday products exactly. It can be shown that Mh(D) is increasing in D. SinceMh(Dl)=1−(1−χ)δχMB≥MBandMh(Dh)=M1,gift card sales may enable the retailer to avoid a deep discount of holiday products, and the degree of the discount depends on the amount of leftover holiday products (which is determined by the stocking level and the demand realization in the pre-holiday period), and the amount of gift card redemption on holiday products. When consumer demand is very high, i.e. D > Dh, there is no holiday products left in the post-holiday period.We substitute the retailer’s optimal post-holiday pricing level of holiday products into the expected profit function in Eq. (3) to obtain the following expected profit.(9)π(q)=−q+∫0Dh(1−β)xf(x)dx+∫Dh∞M1qf(x)dx+∫0Ds[MB(q−1−βM1x)+(1−χ)(1−ζ)αβx]f(x)dx+∫DsDl[(1−(1−χ)δ)MB(q−1−βM1x)+(1−χ)αβx]f(x)dx+∫DlDh[1−χ+χζH¯(Mh)]αβxf(x)dx+∫Dh∞(1−χ)αβxf(x)dx,whereDs=M1MBδqM1ζαβ+(1−β)MBδ. The first row of Eq. (9) is the expected profit in the pre-holiday period. The remaining is the expected profit in the post-holiday period. From Proposition 1, it is optimal for the retailer to sell to bargain-hunters, i.e.M2*=MB,when D ≤ Dl. In this case, holiday-product-redeemers compete with bargain-hunters for holiday products inventory. Therefore, when the demand is very low, i.e. D ≤ Ds, holiday products inventory is enough for holiday-product-redeemers; when the demand is low, i.e. Ds< D ≤ Dl, the holiday products inventory is not enough for the holiday-product-redeemers and some of them will buy non-holiday products instead. In Proposition 2 we derive the sufficient optimality condition of the retailer’s stocking level of holiday products given the MSLR property holds for the demand distribution.Proposition 2The retailer’s expected profit function π(q) is quasiconcave in q, and the optimal stocking level is determined by the unique solution to the first-order condition,(10)dπ(q)dq=M1−1−M1F(Dh)+(1−(1−χ)δ)MBF(Dl)+(1−χ)δMBF(Ds)+∫DlDhχM1(ζαβx)2[ζαβx+(M1−MB)(q−1−βM1x)]2f(x)dx.Closed-form expressions for the optimal stocking level for some demand distributions such as the uniform and exponential can be obtained, however they are quite lengthy. Next, we investigate the problem when salvage value is zero, i.e.MB=0. From Proposition 1 and Eq. (9), the retailer’s expected profit whenMB=0,denoted by π0(q), is(11)π0(q)=−q+∫0Dh(1−β)xf(x)dx+∫Dh∞M1qf(x)dx+∫0DhχMh(x)(q−1−βM1x)f(x)dx+∫0∞(1−χ)αβxf(x)dx,whereDh=M1q1−βandMh(x)=M1ζαβxM1q+(ζαβ−1+β)x.We can show that π0(q) in Eq. (11) is concave in the following Corollary.Corollary 1IfMB=0,then the retailer’s expected profit function π0(q) is concave in q, and the optimal stocking level is determined by the unique solution to the following equation,(12)M1−1−M1F(Dh)+∫0DhχM1(ζαβx)2[M1q+(ζαβ+β−1)x]2f(x)dx=0.We can show the monotonicity property of the optimal stocking level whenMB=0.Proposition 3IfMB=0,then the optimal stocking level is increasing in the average redemption rate α, the proportion of gift card redeemers who are interested in holiday products ζ, and the cost rate of redeemed gift cards on non-holiday products χ.Since the total amount of gift cards that consumers intend to redeem on holiday products in the post-holiday period is ζαβD, which is increasing in α and ζ, the optimal stocking level of holiday products in the pre-holiday period is increasing in α and ζ. When the cost of redeeming gift cards on non-holiday products χ is high, the retailer has an incentive to reduce the amount of gift cards redeemed on non-holiday products. Increasing the stocking level of holiday products so that more holiday products are available for gift card redeemers in the post-holiday period will help the retailer achieve this reduction.Some states already have laws in which part or all unredeemed gift card balances become the state’s property (Alini, 2009; Feinson, 2008). When unredeemed gift card balances stay with the retailer, the retailer’s expected profit is(13)πRP(q)=π(q)+∫0∞(1−α)βxf(x)dx=π(q)+(1−α)βμ.It can be easily seen that the retailer does not change his optimal stocking level whether the unredeemed gift card balances are his property or the state’s property. This is because the redemption rate is constant and gift card holders who do not find holiday products available in the post-holiday period redeem their cards on non-holiday products. The retailer’s profit will increase as long as some gift card holders do not redeem the cards.In this subsection, we examine some properties when the holiday spending demand at the retailer is uniformly distributed on [0, R] andMB=0. From Eqs. (11) and (12), the optimal stocking level and the optimal expected profit are(14)qU*=(M1−1)RΓ(Γ−Ω)3M12[(Γ−Ω)3−χΩ(Γ2−Ω2)−2χΓΩ2ln(ΩΓ)]and(15)πU*(qU*)=(M1−1)qU*2+αβR(1−χ)2=(M1−1)2RΓ(Γ−Ω)32M12[(Γ−Ω)3−χΩ(Γ2−Ω2)−2χΓΩ2ln(ΩΓ)]+αβR(1−χ)2,whereΓ=1−βis the proportion of each 1 dollar in demand spent on holiday products in the pre-holiday period andΩ=ζαβis the proportion of each 1 dollar in demand consumers intend to spend on holiday products in the post-holiday period. We can prove Proposition 4.Proposition 4For uniformly distributed pre-holiday demand andMB=0,(i)The optimal stocking level is non-increasing in the proportion of each dollar in demand spent on gift cards in the pre-holiday period β;The optimal expected profit is increasing in the average redemption rate α and the proportion of gift card redeemers who are interested in holiday products ζ; and is decreasing in the cost rate of redeemed gift cards on non-holiday products χ.Note thatχ=1M1+(1−1M1)τ,which increases with the future cash sales offset τ. Thus, the optimal expected profit is decreasing in τ.In addition, when holiday demand is uniformly distributed on [0, R] andMB=0,the retailer’s optimal stocking level and optimal expected profit without gift cards areqUNG=(M1−1)RM12andπUNG=M1−12qUNG=(M1−1)2R2M12. ComparingqUNGtoqU*,andπUNGtoπU*,we can obtain the following Corollary.Corollary 2For uniformly distributed pre-holiday demand and MB=0,(i)the retailer will always reduce the stocking level of holiday products when offering gift cards for all values of α, β (β > 0), ζ and χ;if there is full future cash sales offset (τ=1orχ=1), then the expected profit with gift cards is smaller than without gift cards for all values of α, β (β > 0), and ζ.With uniformly distributed holiday spending demand andMB=0,the retailer always reduces his stocking level of holiday products with gift cards as long as some gift-givers will purchase gift cards instead of holiday products before the holiday. Part (ii) of Corollary 2 is counter-intuitive. However, it is explained by the fact that offering gift cards allows some consumers to buy gift cards instead of holiday products as gifts. If some gift card holders redeem the cards on non-holiday products which they would have purchased in the future with cash anyway, then the net effect is a reduction in sales compared to the no-gift card case. This in turn will decrease profit. This outcome is less likely to occur if one considers the lost sales effect, given by θ in Section 2, the retailer may have if he does not offer gift cards.To illustrate the effect of χ on gift cards’ profitability, defineΥ(β,χ)≡πU*−πNG,which is the change in the optimal expected profit due to gift cards. ϒ(β, χ) can be written as(16)Υ(β,χ)=R2M12[M12αβ(1−χ)+(1−M1)2(1−ΩΓ)3Γ(1−ΩΓ)3−ΩΓ(1−(ΩΓ)2)χ−2(ΩΓ)2χlog(ΩΓ)−(1−M1)2].If ϒ(β, χ) > 0 then the expected profit will increase when offering gift cards. Define χcas the critical value of χ for whichΥ(β,χ)=0. From Proposition 4(ii), the optimal expected profit with gift cards decreases with χ. Therefore, when χ < χc, the retailer is better off with offering gift cards, whereas when χ > χc, the retailer is worse off with offering gift cards. Fig. 3ashows that when χcis 1.00 (i.e.τ=1.00), gift cards can’t provide more profits than the no-gift card case, which illustrates Corollary 2(ii). Fig. 3a also shows that χcis smaller at lower values of α and ζ, i.e. gift cards are less likely to be more profitable than no gift cards, which illustrates Proposition 4 (ii). Fig. 3b shows that forα=ζ=0.70,χcis smaller at a larger value of M1, i.e. gift cards are less likely to be more profitable than no gift cards. This can be partially explained by rewriting χ asχ=1M1(1−τ)+τ,which implies that the increase in M1 will cause the values of the critical χ to decrease.As Corollary 3 shows, the retailer will be better off with gift cards if the unredeemed gift card balances become the retailer’s property and the redemption rate is sufficiently low.Corollary 3For uniformly distributed pre-holiday demand and MB=0, if unredeemed gift card balances become the retailer’s property and the redemption rate satisfiesα<α0≡2M1−1M12,then the retailer’s optimal expected profit is larger with gift cards than without them for any values of χ, ζ and β (β > 0).Since1−αis the slippage rate, Corollary 3 implies that a slippage of1−α0will guarantee gift cards profitability. Fig. 4 illustrates Corollary 3. As can be seen, even with all gift card redeemers buying non-holiday products (i.e.ζ=0) and fully offsetting their future purchases by the gift card redemption amounts (i.e.χ=1), small slippage is sufficient to make gift cards profitable. Also, the slippage rate required to make gift cards profitable is smaller when markup is small. If the markup M1 is small, then the cost of goods sold per 1 dollar of gift cards redeemed1M1is large and, therefore, slippage results in larger savings. On the other hand, if the markup is large, then slippage results only in saving the small cost of goods sold. Considering that high-end retailers such as department stores have an average gross margin of 0.427 (Retail Owners Institute, 2010), which is a markup of 0.745, Fig. 4 shows that a redemption rate of no more than 82 percent (at least 18 percent slippage) will guarantee gift cards profitability. If some gift cards redeemers buy holiday products in the post-holiday period (i.e. ζ > 0) or do not fully offset their future cash purchases of non-holiday products (i.e. χ < 1), then the required slippage can be much lower. For an average gross margin of 0.25 (i.e. 0.33 markup), which includes many retailers, a slippage rate of 6 percent or more will guarantee gift cards profitability for parameter values of Fig. 4.In the previous section, we assumed that gift card redeemers’ reservation price of non-holiday products V is a constant of M1. In this section, we relax this assumption and allow V to be a uniformly distributed random variable. We assume that V has a support on[V̲,V¯]withV̲<M1<V¯andV¯<2M1−MB88Since M1 is the price of the non-holiday product, it is reasonable to assume that consumers’ reservation price does not deviate far from it. In the extreme case whereV¯≥2M1−MB,the problem can be treated as a special case ofV¯<2M1−MB. We only include the case ofV¯<2M1−MBto simplify the presentation..The retail price of non-holiday products is constant (M1) in the pre-holiday and post-holiday periods. Since gift card redeemers (with total gift card dollars of αβD dollar) can now decide between redeeming their gift cards on holiday or non-holiday products or hold on to the cards based on their reservation price for holiday products of M ∈ [MB, M1] and for non-holiday products ofV∈[V̲,V¯],the parameter ζ is no longer needed. We also assume that gift card redeemers’ reservation price for holiday and non-holiday products are independent of each other. Next, we explore the gift card redeemers’ purchase decision given the price of holiday products M2 in the post-holiday period.LetS=2M1−V¯,then S > MB. In post-holiday period, the retailer sets the price of holiday product M2 under the three cases shown in Fig. 5. Gift card redeemers can be divided into four types in all three cases of Fig. 5, based on their reservation prices for holiday and non-holiday products, i.e. the values of M and V. Type I gift card redeemers do not purchase holiday or non-holiday products, i.e. they do not redeem their gift cards99These consumers who attempt but choose not to redeem the cards are different from those (with gift cards value of(1−α)βDdollar) who do not redeem because of forgetting, losing or misplacing the cards. Thus, the gift card redeemers in Section 4 are those who attempt to redeem.. Type II gift card redeemers purchase only holiday products. Type III gift card redeemers purchase holiday products if they are available; otherwise, they purchase non-holiday products. Type IV gift card redeemers purchase only non-holiday products. Lemma 2 identifies the probabilities of different types of gift card redeemers in the three cases of Fig. 5.Lemma 2Given a price of holiday products of M2in the post-holiday period, the probabilities of different types of gift card redeemers in the three cases ofFig. 5are shown in the following table.Hereafter, the superscript E denotes the extended model. Proposition 5 gives the optimal pricing strategy for holiday products in post-holiday period.Proposition 5Define the critical demand levelsDlEas the minimum root of function(1−χ)(PIIIa(MmE)αβD−PIIIcδMBIPIIc+PIIIc)−(MmE−MB)I=0,DmE=SM1q[PIIa(S)+PIIIa(S)]M1αβ+S(1−β),andDh=M1q1−β,where l, m, and h stand for low, medium, and high, respectively. Then, given a demand level D, the optimal price of holiday products in the post-holiday period is(17)M2E*(D)={MlE,ifD≤DlEMmE(D),ifDlE<D≤DmEMhE(D),ifDmE<D≤Dh,whereMlE=MBis the low price,MmE(D)=M1[2M1(2V¯−V̲)−M12−V¯2]αβD2(V¯−V̲)[(M1−MB)(M1q−(1−β)D)+M1αβD]is the medium price, andMhE(D)=(2M1−V̲)αβD+I(V¯−V̲)(M1−MB)−[(2M1−V̲)αβD+I(V¯−V̲)(M1−MB)]2−M1(3M1−2V̲)(αβD)2αβDis the high price.The retailer’s total expected profit for a given q is(18)πE(q)=−q+∫0Dh(1−β)xf(x)dx+∫Dh∞M1qf(x)dx+∫0DsE[MBI+(1−χ)PIVcαβx]f(x)dx+∫DsEDlE[MBI+(1−χ)(V¯−M1V¯−V̲αβx−PIIIcPIIc+PIIIcδMBI)]f(x)dx+∫DlEDmE[MmEI+(1−χ)PIVa(MmE)αβx]f(x)dx+∫DmEDh[MhEI+(1−χ)PIVb(MhE)αβx]f(x)dx+∫Dh∞(1−χ)V¯−M1V¯−V̲αβxf(x)dx.whereDsE=δMBM1q(PIIc+PIIIc)M1αβ+δMB(1−β). The first three terms of Eq. (18) make up the expected profit in the pre-holiday period. The remaining terms are the expected profit in the post-holiday period. We are unable to obtain analytical results because of the complexity of the expected profit in Eq. (18). We therefore perform the following numerical analysis.In this section, we conduct a numerical analysis to develop insights from the models using gamma distributed pre-holiday demand. We first analyze the base model in which consumers’ reservation price for non-holiday products is fixed at M1. We examine the effect of future cash sales offset by setting it at two levels,τ=0.1and0.7. Also, we examine two cases for the treatment of unredeemed gift card balances, state property (SP) vs. retailer property (RP), resulting in the four problem types shown in Table 2. For each of these problem types we solved 2916 problems with the parameter combinations shown in Table 3. The percent changes in the optimal expected profit and optimal stocking level of holiday products from the no-gift card case are shown in Table 4. Similar to the results of Corollary 2, which was proved for uniformly distributed demand andMB=0,the numerical results show that the optimal stocking level tends to decrease from the no-gift card case when gift cards are offered. The optimal expected profit with gift cards will most likely decrease from the no-gift card case if the future cash sales offset is large (τ=0.7) and unredeemed gift card balances are the state’s property, i.e. problem type SP7 shown in Table 4. This under-performance of the gift card case exceeded a 5 percent decrease in expected profit from the no-gift card case for 17 out of the 22 problem groupings of the SP7 problems. While the gift card case mostly out-performs the no-gift card case when cash sales offset is small (τ=0.1) even when unredeemed gift cards are the state’s property, the SP1 column shows that there are still some problem groupings for which the gift card case under-performs the no-gift card case. For problems where the gift card case under-performs the no-gift cards case (SP problems), the worst performance occurs when the redemption rate is low (low α), demand has low variability (low σ/μ), the pre-holiday markup is high (large M1), and the post-holiday salvage value is high (large MB). When unredeemed gift cards are the retailer’s property, the gift card case out-performs the no-gift card case unless the redemption rate is close to 100 percent. A more detailed analysis of the results by parameter group follows.The effects of the parameter β, which represents the proportion of each 1 dollar in pre-holiday demand spent on gift cards, is illustrated in Fig. 6. As Fig. 6a shows, when the unredeemed gift card balances are the retailer’s property, larger gift card sales can lead to a substantial increase in the optimal expected profit. In addition, low future cash sales offset results in gift card sales being more profitable for both treatments of unredeemed gift card balances. When future cash sales offset is large and unredeemed gift card balances are the state’s property, large gift card sales decrease the expected profit and this decrease can be large enough to make the optimal expected profit of the gift card case substantially below the no-gift card case as shown by line SP7 in Fig. 6a. As indicated in Section 3.2, the optimal stocking level is independent of the treatment of unredeemed gift card balances by the state. This is illustrated in Fig. 6b. As more consumers buy gift cards instead of holiday products in the pre-holiday period, i.e. β increases, the retailer reduces the optimal holiday products stocking level to avoid deep discounts on them in the post-holiday period. Another benefit of reducing holiday products stocking level is that some gift card redeemers will buy non-holiday products, which can be profitable. When future cash sales offset is large, the retailer obtains less profit from gift cards redemption on non-holiday products. Therefore, the retailer stocks more holiday products when the future cash offset is large (the line ofτ=0.7is higher than the line ofτ=0.1in Fig. 6b).Fig. 6 c and d show that the profitability of the gift cards as a function of the proportion of gift card sales depends strongly on demand variability if unredeemed gift card balances are the state’s property. For small demand variability in Fig. 6c, increases in the proportion of gift card sales causes a decrease in expected profit, whereas Fig. 6d shows that for large demand variability, increases in the proportion of gift card sales causes an increase in expected profit. When demand variability is large, the potential for incurring large overstocking cost is large. In this case, having many consumers buy gift cards allows the retailer to reduce holiday products stocking level and if demand turns out to be low, then the overstocking cost is reduced. If demand turns out to be high, more gift cards are sold and non-holiday products can be used to satisfy gift card redeemers in the post-holiday period, which reduces under-stocking cost. Thus, the retailer’s decision of whether to promote gift cards or not depends on demand variability.The effects of the three parameters which determine gift cards redemption, and the desirability and availability of holiday products for gift card redeemers, α, ζ, and δ, respectively, are illustrated in Fig. 7. As Fig. 7a shows, the effect of the redemption rate on the profitability of gift cards depends on the treatment of unredeemed gift card balances by the state. The retailer has a total of(1−α)βDof unredeemed gift card balances at the end of the post-holiday period. When these unredeemed gift card balances are to be turned to the state, the profit increases with the redemption rate whereas when unredeemed gift card balances are the retailer’s property, the optimal expected profit decreases with the redemption rate. This implies that the retailer has an incentive to encourage gift card redemption, which we assumed to be exogenous, when unredeemed gift card balances are the state’s property, and to discourage it if these balances are the retailer’s property. Fig. 7b shows that, because the retailer makes0.9(1−1M1)dollar per redeemed 1 dollar on non-holiday products when the future cash sales offset isτ=0.1,he may only slightly change the stocking level of holiday products as the redemption rate increases. On the other hand, when the future cash sales offset isτ=0.7,the retailer makes only0.3(1−1M1)dollar per redeemed 1 dollar on non-holiday products, and thus the retailer responds to increases in the redemption rate by increasing the stocking level of holiday products. Fig. 7c and e show that ζ and δ have a small impact on the optimal expected profit. In Fig. 7d, as more gift card redeemers desire to redeem on holiday products than non-holiday products, i.e. ζ increases, the retailer increases the stocking level of holiday products when the future cash sales offset is large to satisfy more holiday-products-redeemers. When the future cash sales offset is small, the retailer prefers redemptions on non-holiday products and thus responds to increases in ζ by only slightly changing the stocking level of holiday products. In Fig. 7f, as δ increases, more holiday-products-redeemers are in the front of the queue and the retailer can satisfy more of them with the same stocking level of holiday products and therefore the stocking level of holiday products decreases with δ for all future cash sales offset.The effects of the pre-holiday price M1, the lower bound of the post-holiday price MB(hereafter, post-holiday salvage price), and demand’s coefficient of variation σ/μ are shown in Fig. 8. Unlike other problem parameters, M1, MB, and σ/μ also affect the optimal expected profit and the optimal stocking level of holiday products of the no-gift card case and Fig. 8 shows the relative values of the gift card case to the no-gift card case. As Fig. 8a and c show, gift cards have the largest effect on the optimal expected profit when the pre-holiday price is low (i.e. markup is small) and/or the post-holiday salvage price is low (i.e. the salvage markdown is large). When the pre-holiday price is low, the retailer orders larger q (since q is stated in cost dollars and total holiday spending D does not change). In this case, the amount of remaining holiday products inventory in the post-holiday period can be large and holiday-product-redeemers play a significant role in clearing this inventory without requiring the retailer to give a deep discount on it. When the pre-holiday price is large, the retailer orders a small q, which can meet more demand because of the high pre-holiday price, and it is more likely for the retailer to have little or no holiday product inventory left in the post-holiday period. In this case, holiday-product-redeemers have a smaller effect on the optimal expected profit. Therefore, the percent change in the optimal expected profit in Fig. 8a is decreasing in M1.With a low post-holiday salvage price (small MB) the retailer’s optimal stocking level without gift cards is low because of the large overstocking cost. Therefore, even when some of the pre-holiday demand for holiday products shifts to gift cards, the retailer does not need to reduce the stocking level of holiday products significantly since the stocking level is already low (Fig. 8d). With low holiday products stocking level, the retailer is likely to have little or no holiday products inventory left in the post-holiday period. More gift card redeemers are forced to redeem on non-holiday products. The retailer can increase the expected profit because of more non-holiday products redemptions, especially when future cash sales offset is small. This is shown in Fig. 8c where the percent change in the optimal expected profit is decreasing in MBand the curves representingτ=0.1are above the curves representingτ=0.7for both RP and SP. Fig. 8a, c, and e show that with large future cash sales offset (τ=0.7),and unredeemed card balances becoming the state’s property (SP7 curves), selling gift cards will decrease the retailer’s profit for a wide range of M1, MB, and σ/μ.Fig. 8 e shows that gift cards performance relative to no gift cards improves as demand variability increases. For low demand variability, offering gift cards may result in a lower expected profit compared with the no gift card case. This is because under low demand variability, the cost of mismatch between demand and supply in the no gift card case is small. Offering gift cards in this case does not substantially reduce the overstocking cost. In addition, offering gift cards allows some gift card redeemers to redeem their cards on non-holiday products, which may increase the retailer’s cost with the future cash sales offset, especially when it is large. Fig. 8f also shows that the optimal stocking level is significantly lower with gift cards when demand variability is high. When demand is highly variable, there is a large potential for mismatch between demand and supply. Reducing the stocking level of holiday products will substantially decrease the overstocking cost while the under-stocking cost is made low by the ability of gift card redeemers to purchase non-holiday products. Fig. 8b, d, and f show that even when the parameters of the sensitivity analysis (M1, MB, or σ/μ) lead to changes in the optimal stocking level of both the gift-card and no-gift card cases, the optimal stocking level is still lower with gift cards.Our analysis shows that the relationships between the optimal expected profit as well as the optimal stocking level to problem parameters in the case of uniform reservation prices for non-holiday products are similar to the case of constant reservation price. The lower bound on consumers’ reservation price for non-holiday productsV(similarly,V¯) has a significant impact on the retailer’s optimal expected profit and stocking level. Fig. 9a shows that the optimal expected profit decreases asVdecreases. A lowVimplies that there are more gift card redeemers whose reservation price for non-holiday products are not met after holiday products are sold out and those consumers will hold on to their cards causing the balances to become the state’s property. The proportions of gift card intended redeemers not redeeming their gift cards (PI), buying holiday products (PII), buying holiday products if available and non-holiday products if not (PIII), or buying non-holiday products (PIV) are shown in Fig. 9c. For a smallV, fewer consumers buy non-holiday products in the post-holiday period when holiday products inventory is sold out and more consumers buy holiday products or end up not redeeming their gift cards. AsVincreases, more consumers get high utility from buying non-holiday products and PIVincreases. When future cash sales offset is small (e.g.τ=0.1in Fig. 9), gift card redemptions on non-holiday products is profitable and thus the optimal expected profit is sensitive toV. This can be seen in Fig. 9a. Fig. 9b shows that the optimal stocking level of holiday products increases asVdecreases. A smallerVimplies that more gift card redeemers will not redeem their gift cards on non-holiday products and thus, the smaller theVthe larger the optimal stocking level of holiday products.Fig. 10b shows that the retailer responds to increases in future cash sales offset by increasing the stocking level of holiday products to avoid gift card redemptions on non-holiday products and Fig. 10a shows that the expected profit decreases. However, the optimal expected profit and stocking level are less sensitive to changes in future cash sales offset when consumers’ reservation price for non-holiday products is low (V̲=0.5andV¯=1.5) compared to when it is high (V̲=1.0andV¯=2.0). The reason is that when consumers’ reservation price for non-holiday products is low, fewer gift card redeemers are willing to buy non-holiday products and, therefore, the future cash sales offset, which affects the profitability of gift card redemptions on non-holiday products, is not as important.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
