@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Behavioral technology credit scoring model with time-dependent covariates for stress test

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We suggested a technology credit scoring model with time-varying covariates.SMEs with higher management score than average have the high loan survival probability.We analyze effect of economic condition on default probability using stress test.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Technology credit scoring,Stress test,Time-varying covariate,Survival analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Technology based loan default is related not only to technology-oriented attributes (management, technology, profitability and marketability), and firm-specific characteristics but also to the economic situation after the loan. However, the default phenomenon for technology based loan has not reflected the change of economic situation. We propose a framework of utilizing a time varying Cox hazard proportional model in the context of technology based credit scoring. The proposed model is used for stress test with various scenarios of lending portfolio and economic situations. The results indicate that the firms with higher management score than average have the lower loan default rates than the firms with higher profitability or marketability score than average due to the effect of manager's knowledge and experience and fund supply ability when they are exposed under the same economic condition. In scenario test, we found the highest default rate under stable exchange rate with high consumer price index. Moreover, firms with a high level of marketability factors turn out to be significantly affected by economic conditions in terms of technology credit risk. We expect the result of this study can provide valuable feedback for the management of technology credit fund for SMEs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) that have a new technology play vital roles in various industries, and their performance is an essential part of the national economy (Moon & Sohn, 2010). However, many SMEs experience financial difficulties. To survive in a fast-paced business environment, SMEs with a new technology need to raise funds for the commercialization of their technology (Jeon & Sohn, 2008; Ju & Sohn, 2014a). In order to support SMEs with high growth potential, various technology credit guarantee programs have been made available to those firms that attain high technology scores. However, high loan default rates have been reported with critical losses of technology credit fund. Inadequate and inaccurate evaluations were claimed to be associated with these serious problems (Moon & Sohn, 2010).To improve technology-based credit evaluations, many efforts have been made to develop more advanced technology credit scoring models. Previous investigations that focused on the development of advanced credit scoring models are outlined below.Using logistic regression, Sohn, Moon, and Kim (2005) suggested an improved technology credit scoring model based on the factors of individual evaluation attributes. Moon and Sohn (2010) extended it by not only considering technology-related attributes but also environmental conditions such as firm-specific characteristics and the economic environment at the time of the application. Also, Moon and Sohn (2011) proposed a survival model for loan default that considers the total perception scoring phenomenon. Ju and Sohn (2014b) proposed a survival model that can predict the probability of loan default by a start-up SME based on technology-oriented attributes, firm characteristics, and the economic environment at the time of lending. The expected loss for a given time was obtained based on the loan default probability, exposure at default, and the loss in the event of default.These previous studies are associated with a technology credit scoring model that predicts loan default by SMEs at a given time, considering the evaluation attributes at the time of the application for funding. However, after the loan is made, attributes can change over time (Ammann & Suss, 2009; Bellotti & Crook, 2009). Therefore, time-varying covariates need to be accounted for when developing a behavioral technology credit scoring model. Moreover, potential interaction effects between a firm and the economy need to be reflected in the model. Some related papers that considered time-varying covariates are as follows. However, none of the time-varying covariate studies were done in the context of a technology credit scoring model. An examination of the interaction effects among time-varying economic indicators, firm characteristics, and technology attributes evaluated at the time of the application would have significant implications for improving technology credit funds.In this paper, we suggest a behavioral technology credit scoring model that reflects the time-varying characteristics that are associated with the loan recipient firms for general manufacturing industry. In order to adopt time-varying variables, we employ the Cox proportional hazard model. The Cox proportional hazard (PH) model (Cox, 1972) is commonly utilized to predict loan default over time (Bellotti & Crook, 2009; Brown & Larson, 2007; Van den Poel & Lariviere, 2004).Additionally, we apply the proposed model to stress tests in an effort to analyze the impact of economic changes on a technology credit fund. A stress test is a popular tool in the area of risk management to assess the potential impact of dynamic situations that might impact the financial sector (Bellini 2013; Coffinet, Pop, & Tiesset, 2012; Huang, Zhou, & Zhu 2009). We expect that the proposed model will provide guidelines for the effective management of a technology credit fund under a changing economic environment.This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review previous studies related to the Cox proportional hazard (PH) model with time-varying covariates. In Section 3, we propose a behavioral technology credit scoring model. In Section 4, we conduct a stress test based on historical scenarios. In Section 5, we discuss our study results and suggest further research.The Cox hazard regression model proposed by Cox (1972) has been widely used in survival analyses involving time-to-event data with censoring, and it has been extended to accommodate time-varying covariates (Mata & Portugal, 1994). In this paper, we apply the Cox proportional hazard model to represent changing economic conditions after a loan to technology-based firms. We define the event as a default by a SME on a technology credit loan. In this section, we briefly introduce the Cox proportional hazard model with time-varying covariates applied to our data.The time-varying proportional hazard model estimates the relationship between the hazard rate (the likelihood of SME default), λ(t) and a number of explanatory variables (three groups of input variables: the technology-oriented attributes, the firm-specific characteristics, and the economic indicators), z(t) which are permitted to vary over time. The proportional hazard function is specified so that the explanatory variables shift an underlying baseline hazard function, λ0(t), up or down. The time-varying proportional hazard function is expressed as follows:(1)λ(t;z(t))=λ0(t)eβz(t).In this equation, β is the set of coefficients to be estimated.Cox (1972) describes how β can be estimated by maximizing the partial likelihood function of the probability of default observed in the sample. β is estimated from inferences on the conditional probability of defaulting in a given time period (Boyson, 2003).It is assumed that there is a sample of n SMEs, k of which default on their loans during the observed period with default times of t1 < t2 < ⋅⋅⋅ < tk. The assumption of this model is that each default occurs in a different time period, with the defaults ordered from 1 to k chronologically. The remaining n–k SMEs are censored and have no loan default times during the sample period. However, these SMEs could default on their loan at some time after the sample period ends.Let zi(t) be z(t) for the SME with default time tiand let zj(t) be z(t) for each SME at risk at time ti. Assign ciequal to 1 if SME i defaults in observed period, otherwise zero. Riis the set of SMEs at risk of loan default in period i. The partial likelihood function to be maximized is(2)L(β)=∏i=1n(eβzi(ti)∑j∈Rieβzj(ti))ci.This allows the use of the maximum likelihood method to estimate β without needing to know the baseline hazard. However, in order to estimate survival probabilities, the baseline hazard is needed. This can be estimated based on the parameter estimates β given by the maximum likelihood estimation and using an estimate for the integrated baseline hazard given by Andersen (1992), as follows:(3)λ0(t)=∑ti≤tCi∑j∈Rieβzj(tj).With this information, the survival probability at time t can be given in terms of the hazard function:(4)S(t)=P(T≥t)=exp(−∫0tλ(u)du).There are several studies related to time-varying proportional models. Using the Cox regression model with time-dependent covariates, Bellotti and Crook (2009) tested whether the probability of default of an individual is affected by macroeconomic conditions such as bank interest rates, the unemployment index, and earnings after the loan. Malik and Thomas (2010) proposed a hazard rate model to predict the probability of default by a consumer. They used Cox proportional hazard rate models, and their study results showed that the rates of default by consumers are significantly affected by macroeconomic variables such as interest rates, the GDP (Gross Domestic Product), and the CPI (Consumer Price Index). Their model can be used to predict consumer credit risk in loan portfolios. Thomas (2000) has also described the important impact that dynamic economic conditions can have on credit risk. In that study, four general macroeconomic variables were analyzed. Three macroeconomic variables that were shown to be significant on the default behavior of consumers were the CPI (specifically the rate of inflation), interest rates, and GDP growth. In this paper, we use the Cox PH model with time-varying economic covariates to predict defaults by SMEs on technology credit loans. Malik and Thomas (2010) suggested that consumer-specific ratings (behavioral scores) incorporate macroeconomic variables to construct a consumer default probability model. Their model showed that consumer default is significantly associated with macroeconomic factors. Carling, Jacobson, Linde, and Roszbach (2007) used the Cox proportional hazard model to explain the survival time to default for borrowers of a major Swedish bank. The authors estimated the expected survival time of firms using macroeconomic explanatory variables.In order to develop a behavioral technology credit scoring model with time-varying covariates, we apply the Cox proportional hazard (PH) model to our empirical data set based on three groups of input variables: technology-oriented attributes, firm-specific characteristics, and economic indicators. The technology-oriented attributes employed in the evaluations of these firms were divided into four sub-groups: management, technology, marketability, and profitability, which contain a total of 16 individual attributes, as displayed in Table 1(Moon & Sohn 2010; Sohn et al., 2005) and Appendix A. These attributes are observed at the time of the application for the loan.The data set consists of 4566 cases that obtained a credit guarantee by a technology scoring system implemented in Korea between 1999 and 2004. Obtained cases were evaluated by an expert committee sent by Technology Credit Guarantee Fund that screens SMEs. A total of 1327 firms experienced loan default during this period, and the remaining firms were censored cases. Censored cases represented not only SMEs successfully repaid their loan but also they are under technology credit guarantee. According to the scorecard in Table 1, an applicant firm was assessed in terms of the 16 attributes, all of which had a pre-assigned relative weight of 5 or 10. Those evaluated on a ten-point Likert scale are regarded to be worth two times more than those evaluated on a five-point scale. The final score is the simple sum of the score of each attribute, and a score of 100 points denotes the highest score (Moon, Kim, & Sohn, 2011). Many attributes may cause problems due to the potential for multi-collinearity. Accordingly, we used an explanatory factor analysis (EFA) to eliminate the multi-collinearity among them (Coldrick, Longhurst, & Hannis, 2005; Farrukh, Phaal, Probert, Gregory, & Wright, 2000; Hernriksen & Traynor, 1999; Moon & Sohn, 2010). Before the EFA, we rescale technology superiority, technology commercialization potential, product competitiveness, and the sales schedule on a five-point scale in order to eliminate weighted values. All attributes are measured on a five-point scale, with larger being better. As a result of the EFA of the technology-oriented attributes, we obtain 12 factors as shown in Table 2that can explain 87.65 percent of the variation of the original 16 technology-oriented variables and detailed information is shown in Appendix B.In addition, we used characteristic variables of the SMEs; these variables are binary variables with 0 (non-conformance) or 1 (conformance) for each characteristic, as represented in Table 3.Next, as shown in Table 4, we considered seven economic environment variables that are potentially associated with the credit risk of firms. They are used as time-varying covariates that are observed monthly.To propose a behavioral technology scoring model, we use the Cox proportional hazard model and analyze the hazard rate in accordance with the time-varying economic environment over time. We expect that the inclusion of time-varying covariates will improve the prediction performance. The significance level used was 5 percent, and the selected results are displayed in Table 5. The estimated coefficients of the explanatory variables represent the associated effect on the hazard rate.When the variable is assigned with the parameter of a positive sign, it is associated with an increased hazard rate in terms of loan default of a firm. F8 (market potential), ECO3 (consumer price index), and stock market listing turn out to have positive associations with the loan default.This result indicates that the default rate of SMEs is increased when market potential is high because they would be faced with disadvantageous condition due to intensive participation of large enterprises in the area of the high market potential (Moon & Sohn, 2010). The effect of ECO3 can be interpreted that SMEs can suffer from reduced consumption activities due to an increased consumer price index.In addition, the SMEs listed in a stock market were positively associated with loan default. In 1999, the Korean government attempted to boost venture capital businesses in their efforts to mitigate the effects of the Asian financial crisis that occurred in 1997. Many SMEs were listed on stock market such as KOSDAQ (Korean Securities Dealer Automated Quotation). However, the economic boom did not last for long. At the end of 2000, this attempt caused major losses. The large positive association between a stock market listing and the hazard rate of loan default reflects such a phenomenon (Ju & Sohn, 2014b; Moon & Sohn, 2010).On the other hand, the F1 (manager's knowledge and experience), F4 (sales schedule and return on investment), F5 (business progress), ECO5 (the won-to-dollar exchange rate), F12 (fund supply), External audit, Venture registration, and INNO-Biz registration have negative association with loan default rate of SMEs.Credit risk analysis is an important issue related to loan portfolio management, because it plays a crucial role in financial institutions (Jakubik, 2007). Stress tests based on the estimation of a technology credit risk in various scenarios have been used as an important tool in the area of financial risk management. These tests seek to measure the sensitivity of a group of institutions, or even an entire financial system, to economic shocks (Hilbers & Jones, 2004; Virolainen, 2004).In this paper, we apply the behavioral technology credit scoring model developed in Section 3 to predict the loan default rate for use in a stress test. To measure the stress test results over time, the time-varying values of variables in Table 5 need to be explored under various scenarios. For unknown economic indicators (ECO3 and ECO5), we apply historical scenarios by adopting previous economic situations to which technology credit loans were exposed. Historical scenarios are used here because it is difficult to set up long-term monthly economic indicators reflecting economic conditions that can interact with each other in the future.First, we set up a scenario which represents the unstable economic situation of the global financial crisis which started in the middle of 2008. In order to include this crisis in this economic scenario, we consider the period from October 2007 to September 2009. During this period, all economic indicators including the consumer price index (ECO3) and exchange rates (ECO5) reflect a climate of global financial crisis. Second, we consider the period from December 2009 to November 2011. As in the previous scenario, we consider two years before and after December 2010. This situation represents a stable economic situation. During this period, foreigners purchased blue-chip stocks on a large scale because various Korean economic indicators showed an increase in economic growth. In accordance with this situation, the KOSPI (Korean Composite Stock Price Index) increased significantly and the overall economic environment improved. According to Kim, Seo, and Sohn (2011), the default rate of SMEs is closely related to macroeconomic conditions. Figs. 1and 2 show the changes of economic variables ECO3 and ECO5 that turn out to be significant, as displayed in Table 4.In the case of ECO3 (consumer price index) as displayed in Fig. 1, the period from October 2007 to September 2009 reflected a low consumer price index. On the other hand, the period from December 2009 to September 2011 reflected a relatively high consumer price index. A high consumer price index can depress consumption activities (Cunado & Pérez de Gracia, 2005). Fig. 2 shows two phases of activity related to the won-to-dollar exchange rate. During the period from October 2007 to September 2009, the won-to-dollar exchange rate fluctuates significantly. Initially during this period, the won-to-dollar exchange rate increased steadily for 12 months. However, after this 12 month period, a dramatic increase occurred that lasted for the next six months, but then the rate decreased after that. In contrast, the period from December 2009 to September 2011, which represents the second phase does not have significant fluctuations in the exchange rate in comparison to the period from October 2007 to September 2009. The average exchange rate of the period from October 2007 to September 2009 is 1158.637, and the won-to-dollar exchange rate for the period from October 2007 to September 2009 is in the range of 914.81–1453.35. The average won-to-dollar exchange rate for the period from December 2009 to September 2011 is 1132.02 and the won-to-dollar exchange rate for the period from October 2007 to September 2009 ranges from 1058.49 to 1214.02. That is, the average won-to-dollar exchange rate of the two situations during 24 months is similar; however, the fluctuation ranges of the exchange rates differ. Based on the this information, we set up four economic situations using macroeconomic indicators: 1) an unstable economic situation (exchange rate) with a low consumer price index, 2) a stable economic situation (exchange rate) with a high consumer price index, 3) an unstable economic situation with a high consumer price index, and 4) a stable economic situation with a low consumer price index.According to the results of the behavioral technology credit scoring model in Section 3, F1 (manager's knowledge and experience), F4 (sales schedule and return on investment), F5 (business progress), F8 (market potential), F12 (fund supply), ECO3 (consumer price index), ECO5 (the won-to-dollar exchange rate), stock market listing, External audit, Venture registration, and INNO-Biz registration have significant associated with the rate of loan default. F1 and F12 represent the management of the technology and Factor 8 represents the marketability of the technology; F4 and F5 show the profitability of the technology. Thus, we cluster the entire sample into three groups according to the values of F1, 4, 5, 8, and 12, and then we consider the twelve situations that reflect changes in the four economic situations, as displayed in Table 6. Scenarios from 1-1 to 1-4 consist of SMEs that were evaluated as having higher management scores than average under the four economic conditions. Scenarios from 2-1 to 2-4 consist of SMEs that were evaluated as having higher marketability scores than average under the four economic conditions. Scenarios from 3-1 to 3-4 consist of SMEs that were evaluated as having higher profitability scores than average under the four economic conditions. In all scenarios, the scores of the remaining technology-oriented attributes and levels of firm-specific characteristics retained the original values for each firm.Next, we estimate the technology credit risk based on the time-varying behavioral technology credit scoring model. In general, credit risk is obtained as a product of the risk probability of default (PD), the loss given default (LGD), and the exposure at default (EAD) (Altman & Sabato, 2005; Altman & Saunders, 2001; Claseens, Krahnen, & Lang, 2005; Jeon & Sohn, 2008; Kolbe & Zagst, 2010; Pirotte & Vaessen, 2008). PD is obtained from a stress test based on the result of the behavioral technology credit scoring model. EAD represents the loss that depends on the bank's exposure to the borrower at the time of default; we used the loan amount as the EAD value. LGD was not considered because SMEs are assigned the same LGD value in general. To compare the technology credit risk in terms of the portfolios described by our twelve scenarios, we adjust the amount provided in each scenario by the total credit guarantee fund, as follows. In the first step, we calculate the proportion of loans assigned to SMEs by the total credit guarantee funds assigned to all recipient SMEs (4566 firms) in each scenario. In the second step, the actual guaranteed funds assigned to each SME are divided by this ratio to represent the EAD for each SME. EAD multiplied by the loan default probability at time t of each scenario is defined as the technology credit risk at time t. The total technology credit risk during 24 months under four economic scenarios in terms of technology characteristics such as management, profitability or marketability factor is summarized in Table 7.The stress test results based on the twelve proposed scenarios are displayed in Figs. 3–5in terms of the loan default probability for two years. The results show the changes in the loan default probability according to the scenario. The x-axis represents the elapsed month as t while the y-axis shows the probability of loan default at each t.In the case of SMEs with technology associated with a high level of management factors, the loan default probability of both scenario 1-2 and scenario 1-4 tended to increase during the elapsed 24 month period. The average loan default probabilities of the four scenarios in Fig. 3 are 8.7 percent, 13.4 percent, 12.1 percent, and 9.7 percent. In the case of SMEs with technology associated with a high level of profitability factors, the average loan default probabilities of scenarios 5-8 in Fig. 4 are 12.4 percent, 18.5 percent, 16.8 percent, and 13.7 percent. In the case of SMEs with technology associated with a high level of marketability factors, the average loan default probabilities of the four scenarios in Fig. 3 are 15.9 percent, 23.0 percent, 21.2 percent, and 17.5 percent. The results of the stress test are represented in Table 7.In terms of technology-oriented attributes, firms that are evaluated as having a high score on marketability factors showed higher loan default rates than the other firms that were evaluated as having a high score on management or profitability in all economic scenarios. The loan default rate of scenario 3-2, in particular, is the highest. This result reflected the ECO3 (consumer price index), ECO5 (the won-to-dollar exchange rate), and F8 (market potential) that have a positive sign on the loan default. It can be interpreted that the firms having high market potential would have high loan default rates when economy is depressed due to high consumer price index and stable exchange rate.According to the result of estimated total technology credit risk in Table 7 the SMEs with technology associated with a high level of marketability factors have the highest technology credit risk under scenario 3-2, because it provided the highest average loan default probabilities. On the other hand, scenario 2-1 resulted in the lowest technology credit risk compared to other economic situations. These results imply that firms with good profitability capabilities respond well to fluctuating economic environments, such as an exchange rate fluctuation. However, although firms have good profitability capabilities, these firms have difficulty dealing with a high technology credit risk when economic consumption activity slows down.The SMEs with technology associated with a high level of marketability have higher loan default probabilities under a stable situation with a high consumer price index (Scenario 3-2) than more dynamic economic situations; they also showed the highest total technology credit risk. In addition, compared with other SMEs, firms with technology associated with a high level of marketability factors turn out to be significantly affected by economic conditions in terms of technology credit risk. Overall, our stress test indicated that profitability of technology plays an important role in decreasing default under various economic circumstances.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
