@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measurement issues in the evaluation of projects in a project portfolio

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Portfolio selection requires the evaluation of individual project benefit scores.Assessing project benefits on interval scales can lead to rank reversals.This is because the class of consistent transformations excludes translation.The correct solution is to fix a do-nothing baseline for measurement.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision analysis,Portfolio Decision Analysis,Multicriteria decision analysis (MCDA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A common problem arising in many domains is how value the benefits of projects in a project portfolio. Recently, there has been some attention given to a decision analysis practice whereby analysts define a value function on some criterion by setting 0 as the value of the worst project. In particular, Clemen and Smith have argued this practice is not sound as it gives different results from the case where projects are “priced out”, and makes a strong implicit assumption about the value of not doing a project. In this paper we underscore the criticism of this way of using value functions by showing it can lead to a rank reversal. We provide a measurement theoretic account of the phenomenon, showing that the problem arises from using evaluating projects on an interval scale (such as a value scale) whereas to guard against such rank reversals, benefits must be measured on at least a ratio scale. Seen from this perspective, we discuss how the solution proposed by Clemen and Smith, of reformulating the underlying optimisation problem to allow for explicitly non-zero values, addresses the issue, and explore in what sense it may be open to similar problems. In closing we discuss what lessons from practice may be drawn from this analysis, focussing on settings where the Clemen and Smith proposal may not be the most natural way of modelling.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
All organisations have to decide which activities (out of a set of possible activities) they will initiate, which they will continue, and which they will stop. Supporting such decisions by evaluating projects and assessing the benefits of possible portfolios as a function of the component projects represents a significant part of the professional work of many analysts. The application of decision analysis in such settings is often referred to as “Portfolio Decision Analysis”: Portfolio Decision Analysis seeks to provide frameworks for performing portfolio analysis in a way which allows a rigorous treatment of issues of value and uncertainty. Kleinmuntz (2007) and Phillips and Bana e Costa (2007) have provided overviews of past work, and personal statements of what good practice looks like. The edited volume by Salo, Keisler, and Morton (2011) provides a range of perspectives on theory and practice in this area.A common practice in Portfolio Decision Analysis in a multicriteria setting is to define criterion-specific value functions by setting 0, the baseline for measurement, as the value of the worst item, as recommended by Phillips and Bana e Costa (2007, p. 57) and implicitly recommended by Kirkwood (1996); see for example Kirkwood’s example of Section 8.1 and the discussion in footnote 3 of Clemen and Smith (2009). These scores are then summed up across criteria to give an overall project score, and summed across the constituent projects to give an overall portfolio score. Clemen and Smith (2009) (henceforth, “CS”) argue that it is not a sound approach to analysis as it gives different results from the case where projects are “priced out”, and makes a strong implicit assumption about the value of not doing a project. As a solution, they advocate explicitly assigning project-specific value scores for not doing particular projects.A number of scholars have sought to build on the work of CS. In particular, Liesiö and Punkka (2014) have explored how to elicit a suitable baseline value and also provide techniques for exploring sensitivity of the solutions recommended by a particular decision model to uncertainty about the appropriate baseline values. de Almeida, Vetschera, and Almeida (2014) explore three consequences of rescaling the valuations of projects in a portfolio setting, which they dub the portfolio size effect, the baseline effect, and the issue of consistency across different aggregation sequences; and de Almeida and Vetschera (2012) explore a similar issue in the context of the PROMTETHEE multicriteria method.CS demonstrate by citing and describing in some detail numerous published examples that this practice is widespread. Notably, they cite an application to capital budgeting in healthcare (Kleinmuntz & Kleinmuntz, 1999); an application to project selection in a telecommunications company (Lindstedt, Liesiö, & Salo, 2008); and a military portfolio optimisation (Parnell, Bennett, Engelbrecht, & Szafranski, 2002). They comment that this list is not exhaustive and they “have found similar issues in many studies” (p. 262). This author has had the same experience. For example, in the context of R&D prioritisation, Morcos (2008) recommends expressing scores “along a value scale with intervals from 0 (least desirable) to 100 (most desirable)” (p. 77). (Examination of the figures in this paper suggests that he departs from this rule in the case of one criterion, “profitability” but adheres to it for the “risk” and “reliability” criteria.) Similarly Baltussen and Niessen (2006) present an illustrative example of multicriteria techniques to priority setting in healthcare (in which the task is to rank order projects with a view to deciding what subset of them to undertake) in which the zero has been set at the level of the least preferred project on three of four criteria (for the fourth criterion, “severity of disease”, the projects are given between one and four stars, and the zero is set at one star). The reason for the pervasiveness of this practice seems to be that setting the zero at the level of the least preferred alternative is standard, unproblematic and uncontested advice in the context where one is choosing a single item from a set. Many authors generalise this advice to the setting where the task is to choose multiple objects from a set.In this paper we will study the setting of baselines from a measurement theoretic point of view. Seen from this perspective, the issue is one which has surfaced in different forms in the literature over the years. In particular, Rao and Weiss (1986) provide a numerical exploration (in the context of a particular application) of the number of possible ways of ranking items in benefit cost order when the benefit scores of individual items are translated by a constant. Roberts (1990) provides an introduction to the theory of measurement and explores how it may be relevant in the context of combinatorial optimization problems: he observes that one can only be sure that the solution to a combinatorial optimization problem will be invariant with respect to monotonically increasing transformations of its objective function coefficients when the optimizing algorithm uses only ordinal information about these coefficients (for example, a greedy algorithm).The contribution of this paper will be to study the practice discussed by CS and answer the following questions.1.Can we get a clear view of what goes wrong when we use value functions to value projects multicriteria Portfolio Decision Analysis?What are the specific characteristics of value functions which give rise to this problem? Might this problem apply more generally when project benefits are assessed in some other way? In what way is this a specifically portfolio problem?Why does the solution proposed by CS “work” to resolve this problem? Is the solution proposed by CS vulnerable to other similar and related problems?How important is the separability of the rule for combining project benefit values as overall portfolio benefits in this analysis? Do the results we obtain for this rule give insights into what should happen in a more general setting?What, practically speaking, can we learn from this analysis about how to perform better and more robust analysis?The structure of the paper will be as follows. Section 2 will answer question 1. Section 3 will provide the analytic framework to answer the second and third groups of questions, which will be dealt with in Sections 4 and 5 respectively. Section 6 answers the fourth group of questions and Section 7 returns to the example of Section 2 to answer the question 5. Finally, Section 8 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
