@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Compromise programming: Non-interactive calibration of utility-based metrics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We calibrate a generic utility based metric for compromise programming.The proposed method guarantees exact calibration to observed decisions.The obtained parameters represent preferences and aversion to extreme solutions.Our method is non-interactive i.e. does not require involvement of the decision maker.We demonstrate the method graphically with a small scale numerical example.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Utility optimization,Goal programming,Compromise programming,Preferential weights,Model calibration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Utility functions have been used widely to support multi-objective decision-making. Expansion of a general additive utility function around the ideal results in a composite linear-quadratic metric of a compromise programming problem. Determining the unknown parameters of the composite linear-quadratic metric requires substantial interaction with the decision maker who might not always be available or capable to participate in such a process. We propose a non-interactive method that uses information on observed attribute levels to obtain the unknown parameters of the composite linear-quadratic metric and enables forecasting and scenario analysis. The method is illustrated with a small scale numerical example.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Utility optimization has been used widely in economic literature to support managerial decisions when multiple conflicting objectives are involved (André and Riesgo, 2007; Wallenius et al., 2008). The utility function can be used to articulate the preferences of the Decision Maker (DM) and provide insights in scenario studies and forecasting. In practice, it is difficult if not impossible to obtain the utility’s functional form that represents the actual decision-making process adequately (Ballestero and Romero, 1991). Substantial interaction with the DM is required and often arbitrary assumptions on the utility’s structure are imposed.Compromise Programming (CP) is a Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) method that focuses on finding the efficient alternative that is closest to an infeasible, ideal solution (Yu, 1973; Zeleny, 1974). Ballestero (2007) showed that Taylor expansion of a general additive utility function around the ideal results in a composite linear-quadratic metric of a CP problem. The proposed composite linear-quadratic metric is independent of the utility’s functional form and equals the weighted sum of linear and quadratic distances to the ideal. The linear component represents the preferences of the DM and is biased towards extreme solutions while the quadratic component represents aversion to imbalance. By adjusting the coefficients of the linear and quadratic components of the composite linear-quadratic metric, the preferential structure (utility) of the DM is articulated. The resulting CP model can be a valuable tool for simulating the behaviour of the DM and for analysing future scenarios.However, determining the unknown parameters of the composite linear-quadratic metric might be a challenging process that involves substantial interaction with the DM. The DM might not always be available or capable of participating in such interactive processes (Amador, Sumpsi, and Romero, 1998). To facilitate the interaction with the DM, MCDM methods, which are based on pairwise comparisons, penalty structures and techniques of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA), have been used. However, in applications of these interactive methods the exact involvement of the DM is not adequately reported, which makes them (to a certain degree), random and ad-hoc (Jones, 2011). Moreover, in many cases, for simplification, these interactive methods focus only on obtaining the unknown coefficients of the metric h = 1, which corresponds to a linear additive utility structure (André and Riesgo, 2007). This can be a strong assumption far from the actual decision making process because it imposes a constant marginal utility independent of the level of achievement and the distance from the ideal (Romero, 2004). A poor representation or oversimplification of the utility function might result in poor forecasting performance and a CP model incapable of assessing future scenarios.The objective of this article is to propose a method that uses information on observed attribute levels to determine the unknown parameters of the composite linear-quadratic metric proposed by Ballestero (2007). The proposed method does not require any interaction with the DM and guarantees exact calibration to the observed attribute levels. The resulting calibrated CP model can be used for forecasting future decisions and scenario analysis.In Section 2, we summarize how Ballestero (2007) derived a composite linear-quadratic metric from a general utility function and we describe the proposed non-interactive calibration method. In Section 3, the method is illustrated with a small scale example. Section 4 is the discussion and conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
