@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pulsation in a competitive model of advertising-firm's cost interaction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Contradiction in the literature on how to allocate advertising budgets over time.Article offers a reconciliation mechanism for monopolistic and competitive markets.Concave advertising-firm cost functions interaction is studied.Derivation of rules promoting the superiority of advertising pulsation.Empirical assessment of the shape of the firm's cost function is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Marketing,Advertising pulsation,Game theory,Regression,Shape of firm's cost function,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The literature reveals contradiction between theoretical results (superiority of uniform policy under a concave advertising response function) and empirical results (concavity of the advertising response function and the superiority of a pulsation policy). To reconcile the above difference, this paper offers a resolution based on (1) the concavity of the advertising response function; (2) the convexity of the firm's cost function; and (3) over-advertising. The resolution is reached upon maximizing the net profit per unit time over the infinite planning horizon subject to an exogenous advertising budget constraint. Theoretical results for monopolistic markets are found mostly generalized to competitive markets. A numerical example is introduced to gain more insight into the theoretical findings and an approach is introduced and implemented to empirically assess the shape of a firm's cost function and the advertising policy to be employed.A firm's marketing effort that considerably relies on advertising often requires a commitment of significant amount of resources. Therefore, the issue of whether it is best to adopt a pulsation policy (alternating advertising between high and low levels) or one uniform policy (even-spending of advertising) that costs the same over time continues to be of significant interest.Sasieni (1971) in his pioneering article shows that with decreasing marginal returns to advertising spending (concave advertising response function), a uniform advertising policy is superior to cyclic policies of the same cost in the long run. However, empirical evidence (Ackoff & Emshoff, 1975; Eastlack & Rao, 1986) suggests that a pulsation advertising policy could be superior to uniform spending over time. Due to the contradiction between theoretical and empirical findings, few models have been published with the purpose of substantiating advertising pulsation. Notable studies in this respect in monopolistic markets are summarized in Table 1. In this regard, Simon and Arndt (1980) and Mantrala (2002) indicate that there is a limited empirical support for a convex advertising response function or an S-shaped one. Sasieni (1989, p.360) mentions that he has not observed the phenomenon of asymmetric response (hysteresis) described in Simon (1982).Unlike the thoughtful studies reviewed in Table 1 that attempted at reconciling the difference between the theoretical and the empirical findings in the literature through reliance upon certain mechanisms solely within the marketing function, this research offers a novel reconciliation mechanism within the marketing-firm's cost interface. Through analytical proofs, numerical illustrations and empirical analyses, the results indicate the potential superiority of a pulsation policy for monopolistic markets in the presence of concavity in the advertising response function if the firm's total cost function is convex and the firm over-advertises. Consistent with Tull et al. (1986), over-advertising is defined as setting the advertising budget at a level above the unconstrained optimal expenditure that maximizes firm's profit.Is over-advertising a departure from rationality? The answer to this question is perhaps not. Tull et al. (1986) suggest that advertising managers can afford to over-spend to gain share without much loss in terms of foregone profit (the flat maximum principle). Chintagunta (1993) finds that the flat maximum principle is robust for both static and dynamic duopolies and concluded that over-advertising is justified in good times and under-spending in bad times. Other reasons for over-advertising have been mentioned in the literature. Excess budgets may be simply due to the rote application of percentage-of-sales rules-of-thumb, with the driving ad-sales ratio set too high (Tellis & Weiss, 1995). Aykac, Corstjens, Gautschi, and Horowitz (1989) mention that what appears to be over-spending relative to the optimum budget in a deterministic analysis may, in fact, be a risk-averse management's response to estimation uncertainty. Chemmanur and Yan (2009) and Lou (2014) provide evidence that managers adjust firm advertising, in part, to attract investor attention. The above observations are interesting because the bulk of empirical studies of firms’ advertising budgets suggest that most firms over-advertise (Aaker & Carman, 1982; Abraham & Lodish, 1990; Prasad & Sen, 1999).A few articles have addressed the issue of advertising pulsation in competitive markets. On the theoretical side, Park and Hahn (1991) develop a model of advertising competition in a duopoly that uses discrete-time dynamics and show that pulsing can be superior even when the change in market share is a concave function of advertising. Villas-Boas (1993) and later Freimer and Horsky (2012) show the optimality of pulsing under the assumption that response is governed by certain discrete Markov processes. While Villas-Boas (1993) find that alternating (out-of-phase) pulsing is more profitable than matching (in-phase) pulsing, Freimer and Horsky (2012) show just the opposite. In a series of articles, Mesak and Callaway (1995a,1995b) and Mesak (1999), examine advertising scheduling schemes using a game theoretic approach. These articles find that whether firms involve in a uniform advertising policy or a pulsation counterpart depends on the shape of the advertising response function. On the empirical side while Dube, Hitsch, and Manchanda (2005) and Doganoglu and Klapper (2006) provide support that in many consumer goods competitive markets firms tend to employ advertising pulsation in practice, data provided in Bronnenberg, Kruger, and Mela (2008) and examined by Freimer and Horsky (2012) suggest that competing brands advertise and seize to advertise mostly in-phase.The firm's total cost represents the sum of the cost of goods sold and selling, general and administrative expenses. The above costs are routinely reported in the financial statements of the business enterprise (details of such costs are found in Section 5). The convexity of total cost is typically found in a firm which uses its production facility intensively, which decreases operating efficiency, thereby resulting in an increase in marginal cost. Also, it arises when multiple production sources are available to the firm and thus it chooses the sources from the cheapest to the most expensive (Kim & Lee, 1988). Eliashberg and Steinberg (1987) cite production and economics literature that employ a convex linear-quadratic cost function. Kim and Lee (1988), however, offer that concave costs become an issue in situations involving economies of scale in the production process, or for a firm operating at a below capacity level.The closest studies to this research are Mesak and Darrat (1992) for monopolistic markets and Mesak (1999) for oligopolistic markets. Mesak and Darrat's (1992) study as well as the monopolistic version of our model employ a modified version of the Vidale and Wolfe (1957) dynamic advertising response model attributed to Little (1979). Mesak and Darrat (1992), however, do not consider in detail firm's cost in their modeling effort as we do. While Mesak and Darrat (1992) show that a pulsation policy is superior to its uniform counterpart in the presence of convexity in the advertising response function and linearity in the production cost function, the present study demonstrates the potential superiority of a pulsation policy in the presence of concavity in the advertising response function, convexity in the firm's cost function and over-advertising. Whereas Mesak (1999) who only considers linear production cost employs a conventional Lanchester model of combat introduced by Little (1979) that does not include a sales decay constant, the competitive version of our model employs a revised version of the Lanchester model that allows for the presence of a sales decay constant. In particular, our competitive version of the model extends a duopoly model of market share articulated by Wang and Wu (2001) to an oligopolistic setting that deals with sales. While Mesak (1999) shows analytically the superiority of the uniform policy of advertising spending by all rivals, when they have concave advertising response functions, our study demonstrates analytically the potential superiority of advertising pulsation policies of firms when their advertising response functions are concave, but some of the firms have cost functions that are convex and they are over-advertising. In addition, presence and prevalence of convex cost functions are empirically examined for several industries using data related to the 500 Fortune companies.The present article is concerned with long-term, steady-state response and employs demand functions of rival firms that are deterministic.Huang, Leng, and Parlar (2013) provide a recent review of demand functions in decision models. Hauser and Wernerfelt (1989, p. 393) argue that such a focus is appropriate for long-term strategic decisions involving competition. De Giovanni (2009, p. 556) believes that such orientation is desirable in games that involve multiple players. The study is seen applicable to products in the maturity stage of their product life cycles.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The second section outlines the theoretical model in a monopoly. In the third section, a comparison between the uniform advertising policy and alternative pulsation policies is presented and illustrated through a numerical example. The fourth section extends the modeling effort to deal with competitive markets. The fifth section discusses how to empirically assess the shape of the firm's cost function together with the prevalence of its different shapes. The sixth section concludes the paper. To improve exposition, derivation of key formulas, mathematical proofs of eleven theoretical results and issues related to the empirical work are reported in a supplementary companion (Appendices A–E).The model described in this section can be applied to a business that sells a single consumer item in a monopolistic market, where the firm's marketing efforts are mostly limited to advertising. A monopolistic environment can be approximated in a condition where a firm dominates the market while facing competition from many firms who are too small to influence the market in a noticeable manner. To illustrate our methods and the qualitative nature of the solution, we have preferred a concrete problem parameterization rather than a perhaps less intuitive treatment of the problem in its full generality. The proposed model is constructed using an extended version of the Vidale and Wolfe (1957) model as indicated in Mesak and Darrat (1992) and, therefore, is introduced next.The Vidale and Wolfe (1957) model is one of the earliest and most intensively analyzed mathematical models of dynamic advertising response (Mahajan & Muller, 1986; Sasieni, 1971). According to a modified version of this model, the instantaneous change in the sales rate is given by the following first-order linear differential equation:(1)dSdt=f(x)(m−S)−aS,where S is the sales rate (units/unit time) at time t; x is the advertising rate ($/unit time); f(x) is a concave advertising response function (f''(x) < 0); m is the market potential or saturation sales assumed to be constant; and a is the decay constant. The steady state sales rate S(x) is derived through setting dS/dt = 0, and solving for S to obtain(2)S(x)=mf(x)a+f(x).For a concave f(x), it can be shown that S(x) is also concave. S(x) is a monotonic increasing function in x and approaches m as x becomes very large.Mesak and Darrat (1992), among others, provide empirical evidence showing that the modified version of the Vidale–Wolfe model (1) predicts well the sales rate as a function of the advertising rate. It can be easily shown after rearrangement of terms that (1) takes on the following form:(3)dSdt=α(x)[S(x)−S],where(4)α(x)=a+f(x).Fig. 1provides a schematic illustration of three practical advertising policies the firm would choose from: (a) Uniform Advertising Policy (UAP), in which the firm advertises at a constant level throughout (x1 = x2), where x1 and x2 indicate two different levels of advertising intensity, (b) Advertising Pulsing and Maintenance Policy (APMP), in which the firm alternates between a high level of advertising x1 that lasts for a time period t1, followed by a lower level x2, usually a maintenance level lasting for a duration of (T – t1), where T is the length of each cycle, and (c) Advertising Pulsing Policy (APP), in which the firm alternates between high and zero levels of advertising. The relationship between x1 and x2 and between t1 and T pertaining to each policy is shown at the top of each configuration. Through field experiments reported in Ackoff and Emshoff (1975) and Eastlack and Rao (1986) as well as others, it has been shown that an advertising pulsation policy can be superior to the uniform advertising policy. These studies justify that the relatively narrow pulsation policy set considered above is not only of theoretical interest but also of practical relevance. Although the three studied pulsation policies are not by any means exhaustive, the inferiority of the uniform strategy implies the superiority of pulsation in general.It is advantageous at this point to mention that the minimum value for t1 is dictated by the rigidity of media implying that the advertising rate should apply for a certain period of time and may be constrained by category-specific interpurchase times (Bronnenberg, 1998). The cycle time T is bounded from below by t1 and from above by management practice. For example, according to Bronnenberg (1998), the decision maker might have a budget for some planning period (say a year) without the possibility of borrowing from future years.Similar to many of the reviewed studies in Table 1, the average undiscounted profit per unit time is chosen as a performance measure when comparing alternative policies of advertising pulsation [see Mesak & Darrat, 1992for a comparison to other performance measures].Considering a general advertising policy for which 0 ≤ x2 ≤ x1 (see Fig. 2), the time axis is divided into equal similar cycles of duration T, in which advertising is at a high level x1, over a duration of time t1, and at a low level x2 over a duration of time (T-t1). The first cycle starts at t = 0 at which the initial sales is S0, the sales rate grows to M at t1 following the sales growth curve g1(t) while advertising is kept at its higher level. Afterwards, as the advertising level is decreased, the sales rate decays along the curve g2(t) until T and the cycle repeats with new initial conditions. It can be shown [following Mesak & Darrat, 1992] that the system eventually reaches a quasi-steady state for which the steady state cycle starts and ends with the same level of sales rate as shown in Fig. 2. These levels are unique and independent of the initial sales rate. Also it can be shown [following Mesak & Darrat, 1992] that for an infinite planning horizon, the long run average sales rate of a firm is equal to the average sales rate over the steady state cycle. As mentioned earlier, the average profit per unit time at the steady state, PRO, in response to a general pulsation policy is chosen here to represent the performance measure of the firm.Referring to Fig. 2 and apart from a fixed cost term for a zero production level, the following quadratic cost function is considered in the analysis:(5)qi(t)=vgi(t)+1Kgi2(t);i=1,2.The above cost function, envisioned as a Taylor expansion of order two, is composed of two terms. The first term is linear in the sales rate, measured in dollars per unit time, whereas the second term is quadratic in the same. The quantity v is a positive constant seen to represent the linear cost component per unit sold and K is another constant. The quadratic cost function (5) is as follows:(6)ConvexforK>0,ConcaveforK<0andLinearforK→∞.Considering the steady state cycle, the expressions for average sales in units per unit time (R), and the average total cost per unit time (PC) are given by expressions (7) and (8), respectively.(7)R=1T(∫0t1g1(t)dt+∫0T−t1g2(t)dt).(8)PC=vR+1KT(∫0t1g12(t)dt+∫0T−t1g22(t)dt).[It is noted in (7) and (8) that time t pertaining to the second integral is counted from time t1]. The first term in (8) is designated by PC1 and its second term is designated by PC2. Both cost terms account for fluctuation in the sales rates. Considering Eqs. (7) and (8) and introducing γ = P–v , and P is the price per unit sold, with a given average rate of advertising spending x assumed to have been determined exogenously, net profit per unit time, PRO, is given by(9)PRO=1T{γ(∫0t1g1(t)dt+∫0T−t1g2(t)dt)−1K(∫0t1g12(t)dt+∫0T−t1g22(t)dt)}−x.[It is noted in (9) that t of the second integral in the first two terms is counted from time t1 as in (7) and (8)]. It can be shown [following Mesak & Darrat, 1992and Appendix A] that expression (7) takes the following form:(10)R=1T[12S(x1)t1+S(x2)(T−t1)+{S(x1)−S(x2)}(1α2−1α1)(1−e−α1t1)(1−e−α2(T−t1))(1−e−(α1t1+α2(T−t1))].The second term in expression (8) derived in Appendix A, PC2, takes the following form:(11)PC2=1KT[S2(x1)t1+S2(x2)(T−t1)+2{S(x1)−S(x2)}(S(x2)α2−S(x1)α1)(1−e−α1t1)(1−e−α2(T−t1))(1−e−(α1t1+α2(T−t1))+{S(x1)−S(x2)}22(1−e−(α1t1+α2(T−t1))2{(1−e−2α1t1)(1−e−α2(T−t1))2α1+(1−e−α1t1)2(1−e−2α2(T−t1))α2}],whereS(x1)=mf(x1)/(a+f(x1));S(x2)=mf(x2)/(a+f(x2));a1=a+f(x1);a2=a+f(x2).Therefore, the net profit per unit time given in (9) takes on the from(12)PRO=γR−PC2−x.In this section, the notion of dominance among different classes within the advertising group of policies is introduced. As in Mahajan and Muller (1986) and Mesak and Darrat (1992), an advertising policy cidominates another cjthat costs the same if when the firm employs policy ci, the average profit per unit of time is larger than that under policy cj. A class of policiesCidominates a class of policiesCjif for any policy inCj, there exists a dominating policy inCi.Considering a given average advertising budget rate x per unit time in a cycle of duration T for all the three advertising policies (namely, UAP, APMP, and APP), then we must have for each policy(13)x1t1+x2(T−t1)=xT,These policies can be compared by conceiving them as policy sets, each characterized by a certain value of a policy parameter λ.The policy parameter λ (0 ≤ λ ≤ 1) is defined as x2 = λx, such that different advertising policies can be characterized in terms of λ in the following manner: UAP is characterized by λ = 1 (Fig. 1a), APMP is characterized by 0 < λ < 1 (Fig. 1b), and APP is characterized by λ = 0 (Fig. 1c). Thus for any given value of λ, the high advertising level x1 can be uniquely determined from (13) upon replacing x2 by λx. Hence, the UAP set contains only one policy element for which x1 = x2 = x. On the other hand, the APMP set contains a number of policy elements given by the Cartesian product (t1 × T × λ), while the APP set contains a number of policy elements given by the Cartesian product (t1 × T). Based on expressions (10)–(12), we are in a position to introduce seven analytical results related to concave advertising response functions for which the proofs are provided in Appendix B. The results are derived based on a mathematical program that maximizes the objective function (12) subject to the exogenous advertising budget constraint (13). We follow the introduction of the analytical results in this section with an illustrative numerical example.Lemma 1For a concave advertising response function and considering the performance measure R given by (10), advertising pulsing/maintenance policy (APMP) dominates advertising pulsing policy (APP) but is dominated by the uniform advertising policy (UAP).Lemma 2For a concave advertising response function, the absolute value of the quadratic term of the production cost function (PC2) given by (11) reaches its maximum at a value of the policy parameter λ = 1 (or UAP).Based on Lemmas 1 and 2, one more result is introduced.Lemma 3For an Advertising Pulsing Policy (APP) related to a firm of a convex quadratic cost function(14)Signofd(PRO)dt1|t1→Tisgivenby:Signof(γ−2S(x)K)XSignof{f(x)−xf′(x)}.From Lemma 3, the following observations are made:(i)The sign of [f(x)-xf'(x)] is positive for a concave advertising response function,It is observed from (2) that the maximum value that S(x) could take, for a finite value of x, is less than m. Therefore, if a solution to the equation γ = 2 S(x)/K does not exist (γK/2 ≥ m), the sign of [γ-2 S(x)/K] is always positive, andIf a solution to the equation γ = 2 S(x)/K does exist (γK/2 < m), the solution would be unique at a value xs > 0. In this case, the sign of [γ-2 S(x)/K] is positive for advertising budgets x < xsand the sign of [γ - 2 S(x)/K] is negative for x > xs(see Fig. 3for a schematic illustration).Lemma 3 implies that if the sign of expression (14) is negative, then APP dominates UAP as there will be at least one APP policy for which t1 is smaller but close enough to T for which PRO is larger than the only unique UAP counterpart that costs the same. Based on Lemmas 1 through 3, Propositions 1 and 2 are introduced.Proposition 1For a concave advertising response function and for a firm of a concave quadratic cost function or a linear cost function, APMP dominates APP but is dominated by UAP.Proposition 2In the presence of a concave advertising response function and for a firm of a convex quadratic cost function, if a solution to the equation γ = 2 S(x)/K exists at xs > 0, APP and APMP dominate UAP for all advertising budgets x > xs.Propositions 1 and 2 taken together attribute the potential superiority of a pulsation policy in the presence of concavity in the advertising response function to the convexity of the firm's cost function for sufficiently large budgets. While Proposition 2 indicates that there exists a pulsation policy that is superior to its UAP counterpart in the presence of a concave advertising response function when x > xs, it does not identify such policy. In addition, when x ≤ xs, or when a solution to the equationγ=2S(x)/Kdoes not exist, the optimal advertising policies are not disclosed. Proposition 3 sheds light on such issues.Proposition 3In the presence of a concave advertising response function and for a firm of a convex quadratic cost function(i)If a solution to the equation γ = 2 S(x)/K does not exist, or exists at xs > 0 then for advertising budgets x ≤ xs , the optimal advertising policy is UAP of a policy parameter λ*= 1.If a solution to the equation γ = 2 S(x)/K exists at xs > 0 then for x > xs , the optimal policy parameter is given by Max {0, λ*}and λ*< 1, approximately satisfying the equation (2m–γK)[f(x1)t1 + f(x2)(T-t1)] = γKaT, where x1 = (x/t1)(T-λ(T-t1)) and x2 = λx .It is advantageous to relate the advertising budget xsto the endogenous unconstrained optimum advertising expenditure x* that maximizes the firm's profit. Proposition 4 addresses such a situation.Proposition 4In the presence of a concave advertising response function and for a firm of a convex quadratic cost function, the unconstrained optimum advertising expenditure x*that maximizes the firm's profit is smaller than xs provided that γK/2 < m.The condition γK/2 < m implies that xsexists by observation (iii) of Lemma 3 (see also Fig. 3). A monopolistic firm usually sets its advertising budget x at a level significantly higher than x* for a variety of reasons (e.g., Aykac et al., 1989; Tellis & Weiss, 1995; Tull et al., 1986). Proposition 4 implies the potential superiority of an advertising pulsation policy if and only if the firm is over-advertising. Note the “only if” part in the previous sentence. It can be shown using optimal control theory that the optimal unconstrained advertising trajectory is monotonic and approaches the steady state quantity x* in the long-run (see Appendix C of the Supplementary Material for details). Therefore, if one starts advertising at the beginning of the planning horizon at an advertising rate equals x*, the unconstrained optimal advertising policy would be an UAP. Hence, only over-advertising would substantiate the potential superiority of an advertising pulsation policy.For a given advertising budget, Fig. 4provides a structure summarizing the relationship between the mentioned propositions and the appropriate advertising policy to be implemented by the decision maker as rules of thumb. Appendix D operationalizes the decision-making process depicted in Fig. 4 in a real-life empirical setting.The numerical example depicted below aims at illustrating the analytical results that have been introduced earlier, and summarized in Fig. 4. The employed values of model parameters have been influenced a great deal by the results of the empirical calibration of modified versions of the Vidale–Wolfe model found in the literature (e.g., Mesak & Darrat, 1992).For T = 0.50, t1 = 0.25, γ = 0.4, K = 40,000, f(0) = 0 and the modified Vidale–Wolfe model (3) of a concave advertising response function,f(x)=0.01x, takes the formdS/dt=(0.20+0.01x)[S(x)−S],andS(x)=(16,000)0.01x0.2+0.01x.It can be shown that the solution of the equation γ = 2 S(x)/K is given by xs= 400. Table 2reports the quantities R, PC2, PRO1 and PRO2 as a function of the policy parameter λ for two values of the advertising budgets x = 300 < xsand x = 500 > xs. Consistent with Proposition 1, the maximum value of PRO2 for which the quadratic cost function is concave, is attained at an UAP (λ* = 1.00) for both advertising budgets. Consistent with Propositions 2 and 3, the maximum value of PRO1 for which the quadratic cost function is convex, the optimal advertising policy is UAP (λ* = 1) for an advertising budget x = 300 ≤ xs= 400 whereas it is an APMP (λ* = 0.20) for an advertising budget x = 500 > xs= 400. For x = 500, it can be easily shown that the predicted value of λ* from Proposition 3(ii) is also 0.20. Furthermore, in conformity with Lemmas 1 and 2, optimal R and PC2 occur at λ* = 1. Furthermore, consistent with Proposition 3, an advertising budget of x = 500 in the presence of a convex cost function a pulsation policy would result in an increase in PRO1 from 1095.031 for UAP to 1099.917 (or an 0.45 percentincrease in profit).It is shown in the next section that, for all practical considerations, the theoretical results obtained for a monopoly in Section 3 are generalized to an oligopoly of N competitors.Consider that there are N firms competing in a single market of a constant potential m related to an established consumer item in the maturity stage of its product life cycle, where advertising is considered as the major element in the marketing mix of each firm.Let Sibe the sales rate of firm i (physical units/unit time), xithe real advertising spending rate of firm i ($/unit time) and fi(xi) the advertising response function of firm i with the propertiesfi(xi)≥0,fi′(xi)≥0andfi′′(xi)<0forxi≥0.A competitive version of Vidale and Wolfe (1957) model that will be considered in this section takes on the following form:(15)dSjt/dt=fj(xj)(m−Sjt)−(∑i=1i≠jNfi(xi))Sjt−djSjt,j=1,2,…,N.Expression (15) asserts that a rival j gains sales proportional to its advertising response function and its market potential (m–Sjt). Moreover, the rival is losing sales proportional to its sales and the combined advertising response functions of its competitors. The last term–djSjtindicates that, if all competitors do not advertise, sales of a rival would decrease. The incorporation of such term captures the effects of product quality and advertising by other small competitors. Expression (15) also implies that(16)∑i=1NSit≤m.A duopolistic version of (15) that deals with market shares instead of sales was first introduced by Wang and Wu (2001). It can be shown that for a vectorxof competing constant advertising spending and after arrangement of terms that (15) takes on the form shown below.(17)dSjt/dt=(∑i=1Nfi(xi)+dj)(Sj(x)−Sjt),j=1,2,…,N,where Sj(x) is the long-term sales of firm j related to the vectorx= (x1, x2, …,xN) of competing constant advertising spending when applied indefinitely and is given by(18)Sj(x)=mfj(xj)/(∑i=1Nfi(xi)+dj),j=1,2,…,N.Expression (18) is obtained from Eq. (15) upon solving for Sjafter putting dSjt/dt = 0, j = 1, 2…, N. A comparison of (17) and (18) with their monopolistic counterparts (3) and (4) reveals similar structures upon substituting for firm j,aj=∑i=1i≠jNfi(xi)+dj.Consider an advertising pulsation policy in-phase by all rivals (Bronnenberg, Kruger, & Mela, 2008; Freimer & Horsky, 2012) for which the time axis is divided into similar cycles of duration T in which firm j advertises at level xj1 over a duration of time t1, and at a level xj2 over a duration of time (T–t1) such thatxj1t1+xj2(T−t1)=xjT,j=1,2,…,N; where xjis a given mean advertising rate for firm j. In this regard, Mesak (1999, p. 435) analyzes a conventional Lanchester model and shows that(a)When an advertising pulsation policy is employed by each firm, the system eventually reaches a quasi-steady state in which, for each firm j, the limit cycle starts and ends with the same level of sales rate. These levels are unique and independent of the initial sales rates.For an infinite planning horizon, the long-run mean sales rate of a firm in an oligopoly is equal to the mean sales rate over the steady state cycle.The conventional Lanchester model analyzed by Mesak (1999) is a special case of model (15) upon putting dj= 0 for j = 1, 2… N so that∑i=1NSi=m. It can be easily shown that findings (a) and (b) are also generalized to model (15) as well. An empirical comparison between the performances of Mesak's (1999) model and its revised counterpart (15) reported in Appendix C of the Supplementary Material argues in favor of model (15) for at least the considered data set.Referring to Fig. 2 together with expression (6) and considering a quadratic production cost function for a firm j given byqji(t)=νjgji(t)+1Kjgjt2(t);i=1,2,and based on the above observations (a) and (b), it can be shown that the counterparts of expressions (10), (11) and (12) for firm j in a competitive market takes on the following forms:(19)Rj=1/T[Sj(x1)t1+Sj(x2)(T−t1)+{Sj(x1)−Sj(x2)}x(1αj2−1αj1)(1−e−αj1t1)(1−e−αj2(T−t1))(1−e−(αj1t1+αj2(T−t1)))],(20)PC2j=1KjT[Sj2(x1)+Sj2(x2)(T−t1)+2{Sj(x1)−Sj(x2)}(Sj(x2)αj2−Sj(x1)αj2)x(1−e−αj1t1)(1−e−αj2(T−t1))(1−e−(αj1t1+αj2(T−t1)))+{Sj(x1)−Sj(x2)}22(1−e−(αj1t1+αj2(T−t1)))2x{(1−e−2αj1t1)(1−e−αj2(T−t1))2αj1+(1−e−αj1t1)2(1−e−2αj2(T−t1))αj2}],and(21)PROj=γjRj−PC2j−xj,j=1,2,…,N;whereSj(x1)=mfj(xj1)/αj1;Sj(x2)=mfj(xj2)/αj2; γjis defined as in (9);αj1=fj(xj1)+∑i=1i≠jNfi(xi1)+dj;αj2=fj(xj2)+∑i=1i≠jNfi(xi2)+dj;x1 is a vector of constant advertising spending (x11, x21, … , xN1) in period [0, t1]; andx2 is a vector of constant advertising spending (x12, x22, … , xN2) in period [t1, T].Considering (21), the best course of action of firm j in response to a uniform advertising (UAP) employed by all of its rivals is governed by the statements of Lemma 4 shown below.Lemma 4The best advertising pulsation policy response for firm j in reaction to UAP of its rivals when all the advertising response functions are concave would be(i)Uniform Advertising Policy (UAP) if its cost function is linear or concave,Uniform Advertising Policy (UAP) if its cost function is convex, but a solution to the equation γj = 2Sj(x)/Kj does not exist, and Sj(x) is given by (18),Uniform Advertising Policy (UAP) if its cost function is convex and a solution to the equation γj = 2Sj(x)/Kj exists at xjs > 0, but xj < xjs, orPulsation Policy (APMP or APP) if its cost function is convex and a solution to the equation γj=2Sj(x)/Kj exists at xjs >0, and xj > xjs. The related policy parameter λj is given by Max {0,λj*}, andλj*< 1 satisfies the equation(2m−γjKj)[fj(xj1)t1+fj(xj2)(T−t1))−γjKj(∑i=1i≠jNfi(xi))T]−γjKjdjT=0,wherexj1=(xj/t1)(T−λj(T−t1))andxj2=λjxj.The findings reported in Lemma 4 are obtained directly from Propositions 2 and 3 of Section 3.1 for a monopoly upon substituting∑i=1i≠jNfi(xi)+dj=constant=aj. For a convex cost function of the firm, the feasibility of part (iv) of Lemma 4 appears likely because of the tendency of excessive advertising in competitive markets as each firm attempts to defend its market share (Armstrong & Collapy, 1996; Metwally, 1978).Lemma 4 appears also applicable for markets of monopolistic competition. In addition to product differentiation, an industry can qualify as a case of monopolistic competition if (among others) (1) each firm's product is a fairly close substitute for the products of the other firms in the market and (2) each firm expects its actions to go unheeded by its rivals and is unimpeded by possible retaliatory moves on their part (Mansfield, 1993, p. 402). In this context, the role of advertising is seen to reinforce loyalty to the product advertised and/or persuade the consumer to buy more of the product (Stewart & Kamins, 2002, p.288). Therefore, one may conjecture that for such markets∑i=1i≠jNfi=0so thatdj=ajfor each firm j.Lemma 4 assumes that the competitors of firm j are passive and stick to their initial advertising policy decisions (UAP) indefinitely. When all rivals in the market are rational optimizers and each aims at maximizing the respective payoff (21), the optimum pulsation policy choice within the advertising pulsation classP*=(P1*,P2*,…,Pj*,…,PN*)would satisfy the following N inequalities:(22)PROj(P1*,P2*,…,Pj*,…,PN*)≥PROj(P1*,P2*,…,Pj,…,PN*),j=1,2,…,N.Conditions (22) imply that it would not be advantageous for any single firm j to unilaterally change its advertising policyPj*given the other firms’ optimal advertising policies. This is the well-known Nash Equilibrium solution concept.To gain additional insight, the main result of this section (Proposition 5) characterizes a solution for which firms are allowed to choose a policy within the studied advertising classes based on an approximate expression for Eq. (21) in reference to (B.2), (B.9), and Proposition 3 given by(23)PROjA=γjmfj(xj1)t1+fj(xj2)(T−t1)fj(xj1)t1+fj(xj2)(T−t1)+∑i=1i≠jN[fi(xi1)t1+fi(xi2)(T−t1)]+djT±(m2/Kj)(fj(xj1)t1+fj(xj2)(T−t1)fj(xj1)t1+fj(xj2)(T−t1)+∑i=1i≠jN[fi(xi1)t1+fi(xi2)(T−t1)]+djT)2−xj;j=1,2,…,NIn expression (23), the positive sign of the second term is applicable for a concave quadratic cost function whereas a negative sign of the second term is applicable for a convex quadratic cost function. The game (23) is seen as a continuous, non-zero sum game on the unit cube as each of the decision variablesλj=xj2/xjlies within the interval [0, 1]. Existence of a solution in mixed strategies was first discussed in Owen (1976). A recent review of such games is found in Başar (2010). Because of their managerial appeal, this study is only interested in deriving solutions that involve pure strategies. In this regard, we introduce first a theorem attributed to Debreu (1952), followed by Lemma 5.Theorem (Debreu, 1952) Suppose that for each player the strategy space is compact and convex and the payoff function is continuous and quasi-concave with respect to each player's own strategy. Then there exists at least one Nash equilibrium in pure strategy in the game.Based on the above theorem, Lemma 5 is introduced.Lemma 5The continuous variable – sum game presented by (23) has at least one Nash Equilibrium in pure strategies.From the perspective of generating qualitative insights, it is quite useful to have a game with a unique Nash Equilibrium. If there is one equilibrium, then one can characterize equilibrium actions without much ambiguity. Unfortunately, demonstrating uniqueness is generally much harder than demonstrating existence of equilibrium (Cachon & Netessine, 2004). In this regard, we assert for the moment that the game (23) has a unique Nash Equilibrium. Uniqueness of the Nash equilibrium solution for symmetric competition is proven in Appendix A upon showing the negative semi-definiteness of the square matrix H of second order partial derivatives of profits. Based on the above discussion, a solution of game (23) in pure strategies is introduced in Proposition 5.Proposition 5For the non-cooperative, continuous and variable sum game (23) where all firms have concave advertising response func-tions.(i)For the n1firms of linear or concave quadratic cost functions, the optimal advertising policy for each of such firms is UAP.For the n2firms of convex quadratic cost functions such that γj–2m/Kj≥ 0, the optimal advertising policy for each of these firms is UAP.For the remaining n3firms (n3 = N-n1-n2) of convex quadratic cost functions such that γj–2m/Kj< 0, the optimal pure strategy of such firms is the solution of the system of simultaneous equations given below.(2m−γjKj)(fj(xj1)t1+fj(xj2)(T−t1))−γjKj∑i=1i≠jn3(fi(xi1)t1+fi(xi2)(T−t1))−γjKjT(∑i=1n1+n2fi(xi)+dj)=0;j=1,2,…,n3,wherexj1=(xj/t1)(T−λj(T−t1)),xj2=λjxjand 0 ≤ λJ≤ 1.The findings of Proposition 5 (i and ii) represent competitive generalizations of monopoly counterparts. The findings of Proposition 5 (iii), on the other hand, may not constitute competitive generalizations of monopoly results because of the interdependence of the related optimal pulsation policies. Empirical analyses related to the assessment of the different shapes of the cost functions are reported in Section 5.It has been demonstrated analytically in Sections 3 and 4 that convexity of the firm's cost function is a necessary condition for motivating advertising pulsation. This section discusses how to assess empirically the shape of the firm's cost function together with the prevalence of its different shapes.The empirical analysis reported herein is confined to two companies in the U.S.: Dell and Mattel. Dell has grown rapidly over the years to become one of the top three vendors in the PC industry whereas Mattel is the world's largest toymaker.The income statement of a company as reported in Standard and Poor's COMPUSTAT annual database includes two major costs. They are the Cost of Goods Sold (Cogs) and Selling, General & Administration Expense (Sga).Cogs includes the cost of the materials used in creating the good along with the direct labor costs used to produce the good but excludes indirect expenses such as distribution costs and sales force costs.Sga is the sum of all direct and indirect selling expense and all general and administrative expenses of a company. Direct selling expenses are expenses that can be directly linked to the sale of a specific unit such as credit, warranty and advertising expenses. Indirect selling expenses are expenses which cannot be directly linked to the sale of a specific unit, but which are proportionally allocated to all units sold during a certain period, such as telephone, interest and postal charges. General and administrative expenses include salaries of non-sales personnel, rent, heat and lights.In this regard, we define company cost in year t (in millions of dollars), Ct, as(24)Ct=Cogst+Sgat−xt(advertisingexpense).We note that excluding advertising expenses from Ctis consistent with model formulation (9). Given expressions (6), (B.2) and (B.9), Ctis expressed as follows:(25)Ct=A0+A1St+A2St2+A3Ct−1+ɛt.The lagged dependent variable Ct-1 is incorporated in (25) to allow for company dynamic effects (Bayus, Erickson, & Jacobson, 2003). The method of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) was first used to estimate model (25). The analyzed annual data cover the period 1989–2009. Considerable auto-correlation was detected from the related values of the Durbin–Watson's statistic. We assume afterwards that errors follow a first-order auto-regressive model. In this model the error term εtdepends on its lagged value εt-1 plus another random component utthat is uncorrelated over time and has zero mean and constant variance. That is,ɛt=ρɛt−1+utwhere ρ is a parameter that determines the correlation properties of εt. To remove auto-correlation, we applied the Cochrane–Orcutt procedure in Stata software package. The auto-correlation was largely removed as gleaned from the related Durbin-Watson's statistics.Whenever one or more parameters turned out not being significantly different from zero, the model was re-estimated to end with a model for which all parameters are significantly different from zero. Table 3reports the estimated parameters for Dell and Mattel.Table 3 indicates that a quadratic cost function is of considerable empirical appeal. The table also shows that the cost functions for the two firms are convex. It is noted that the estimated coefficients of A2appear relatively small. These estimates, however, are in conformity with previous empirical research findings associated with estimating quadratic cost functions (e.g., Bower, 1964; Dewan & Min, 1997).The analysis reported herein is confined to the Fortune 500 companies in the U.S. because of the availability and reliability of related cost data.The analysis is limited to eligible 500 Fortune companies included in COMPUSTAT during the period 1989–2009. A company was considered eligible for inclusion into the analysis if its relevant data were available for at least 10 consecutive years during the above period to estimate the cost expression (25). There were 109 companies that met the stated requirement. The shape of the cost function was successfully estimated and classified as linear, concave, or convex for 108 companies (only one company was discarded from further analysis as its reduced model was given by Ct= Ct-1, and this is not informative in identifying its shape).Using Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system, each company in the final sample was classified as Manufacturing, Retailing or Other. Table 4summarizes the obtained cross-classification results. A χ2- test of independence results in χ2- test statistic of 3.65 < χ2(0.05,4) = 9.488. It is thus concluded that the type of industry for which a 500 Fortune company is in has no significant impact on the shape of its cost function. More importantly, the percentage of companies of convex cost in our 500 Fortune sample is in excess of 25 percent. This implies that the research work reported herein is not only of theoretical appeal, but also of practical relevance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In short, this paper concludes that an advertising pulsation policy has the potential of being superior to its uniform advertising policy counterpart for a firm of a concave advertising response function and a quadratic convex cost function in the presence of over-advertising (Propositions 2, 3 and 4 for monopolistic markets and Proposition 5 for competitive markets). The presence and prevalence of convexity in the cost function is found to be of empirical appeal for firms in manufacturing, retailing and other sectors of the economy (Section 5). The above propositions provide management with simple rules to assess the potential superiority of an advertising pulsation policy (Fig. 4).The theoretical results of this paper are not confined to the specific monopoly model (3) and the competitive model (17) considered herein. The results should be reproducible for other monopoly models that can be cast in (3) [such as Nerlove and Arrow (1962) and Little (1975)] and other oligopoly models that can be cast in (17) [such as the Lanchester model of combat modified by Little (1979) and the model articulated by Erickson (1995)]. Huang, Leng, and Liang (2012) provide a recent literature review of several dynamic advertising models in continuous time that can be cast in the contexts of models (3) and (17).The modeling effort developed in this paper is exploratory, revealing many possibilities for future research. This study assumes price to be exogenous. A challenging task would be to devise the optimal pricing and advertising policies in a unified framework. In this research work we have made aggregation of advertising over all media. An interesting area for future research would be to consider different advertising media of different effectiveness and examine synergy effects among them. This research assumes that the sales rate responds instantly to changes in the advertising level. Future research would consider changes in a delayed response due to memory for advertisements (Aravindakshan & Naik, 2015). A plausible direction for future research would be to consider the trade-offs among firm's profitability, market share and uncertainty in parameter estimation in determining the optimal advertising budget for both monopolistic and competitive markets. Furthermore, while the present study provides an implementable approach to the empirical assessment of the shape of the firm's cost function, future research would investigate the determinants of such shapes.