@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Three-level warranty service contract among manufacturer, agent and customer: A game-theoretical approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presenting a three-level service contract: a manufacturer, an agent and a customer.Considering different strategies among three levels based on game theory approach.Obtaining the optimal policy for each strategy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,Warranty,Three-level service contract,Non-cooperative and semi-cooperative games,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A warranty is a service contract between a manufacturer and a customer which plays a vital role in many businesses and legal transactions. In this paper, various three-level service contracts will be presented among the following three participants; a manufacturer, an agent, and a customer. In order to obtain a better result, the interaction between the aforementioned participants will be modeled using the game theory approach. Under non-cooperative and semi-cooperative games, the optimal sale price, warranty period and warranty price for the manufacturer and the optimal maintenance cost or repair cost for the agent are obtained by maximizing their profits. The satisfaction of the customer is also maximized by being able to choose one of the suggested options from the manufacturer and the agent, based on the risk parameter. Several numerical examples and managerial insights are presented and used to illustrate the models presented in this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A warranty is a service contract attached to a product guaranteeing that the product fulfills certain, key commitments to the customer, examples of which include product reliability and failure-free operations for a specified period of time. The majority of customers prefer to purchase a product from a manufacturer with a warranty ensuring the replacement or repairing of the product during the warranty period, with little or no charge. A warranty is therefore an effective incentive for customers to purchase a product from a manufacturer with similar product quality and reliability to that of other manufacturers. Thus it does not come as a surprise that service providers usually offer a wide variety of service contracts to customers, ensuring an increase of sales leading to more profit. Customers, in turn, when faced with these choices of contract, can reap the benefits of selecting the one which best suits their needs.In literature, warranties are categorized into several broad types (Murthy & Djamaludin, 2002). Free replacement as a kind of warranty policy is presented in many papers. In such a policy, the manufacturer replaces the failed item with a new one free of charge the first time, and repairs it at a low cost during the remainder of the warranty period (e.g. Rinsaka & Sandoh (2006), Zhou, Li, & Tang (2009) and Wu, Lin, & Chou (2006)). In some cases the manufacturer has to compensate the customer by refunding the price paid (money back warranty) in addition to free replacement (e.g. Boom (1998)).Outsourcing services are considered as another type of warranty polices whereby when a product fails, an external agent to the supplier rectifies the failure using different options (e.g. Asgharizadeh & Murthy (2000), Murthy & Asgharizadeh (1996), Murthy & Yeung (1995), Jackson & Pascual (2008)).Maintenance options in a service contract present the third type of warranty policy. For instance, some papers proposed models where customers could negotiate different maintenance options such as availability, reliability, and selecting time intervals between maintenance controls (e.g. Wang (2010), Maronick (2007)). Maintenance in lifetime warranty policies and corresponding models for predicting failures and estimating costs for such policies have been presented in some recent researches (e.g. Chattopadhyay & Rahman (2008)). In addition to the aforementioned research, Hartman and Laksana (2008) discussed some warranty contracts including restrictions on repairs and renewals. discussed some warranty contracts including restrictions on repairs and renewals. Recently, Shamsi et al. presented a three-partite service contract model regarding risk parameters and quantity discount policies (Shamsi, Esmaeili, & Monfared, 2013). They considered a penalty cost for the agent due to repair waiting times.A significant shortcoming of all the formerly detailed papers is that they have ignored the three-level interaction between the manufacturer, agent and customer. In other words, they have considered a two-partite interaction or a tri-partite Service Contract which lacked interaction between the three parties. This omission appeared anomalous considering that most products these days, particularly high-tech products, are supported by a third party (agent) warranty in addition to the manufacturer’s warranty. For instance, huge companies like BMW,1https://www.bmw-warranty.co.uk/.1Apple, etc. offer a third-party warranty instead of a dealership warranty or insured warranty. An additional common example is the iPad2 which is insured both by Apple Company2http://www.apple.com/support/products/.2as the manufacturer and by Squaretrade3http://www.apple.com/support/products/.3as the third-party (agent).In this paper, several scenarios will be proposed between the manufacturer, agent and customer under different warranty options. The manufacturer offers two choices to the customer: (1) free replacement per failure during the warranty period, or (2) no warranty is offered. On the other hand, the agent offers three options to the customer: (1) repairing any failure of the product after the expiration of warranty for a fixed cost per failure, (2) repairing all failures which have occurred during the lifetime of the product for a fixed maintenance price, or (3) repairing the failed product at a fixed cost per failure during its lifetime. The last two options offered by the agent are contingent on the manufacturer offering no warranty. Therefore, the customer essentially faces three options; the first option of the manufacturer and the agent, the second option of the manufacturer and the agent and the second option of the manufacturer and the third option of the agent. Since the price of each service or product influences its sales volume, the sales volume of each suggested option based on its price will be addressed (Glickman & Berger, 1976). Thus, the customer investigates the manufacturer and agent’s options based on the price of each option so as to maximize their own satisfaction. To enrich the model in question, regarding the relation between the satisfaction and the utility function of the customer, the risk parameter on the customer’s side is also considered. Moreover, for each option, the optimal sale price, warranty price and warranty period for the manufacturer, and the optimal maintenance cost or repair cost for the agent will be determined by maximizing their profits. The interaction between the manufacturer, agent and customer is modeled using a game theory approach and this covers both non-cooperative and semi-cooperative games. In the non-cooperative game, two types of scenarios are considered. In the first scenario, Nash equilibrium is obtained while the manufacturer, agent and customer choose their strategies separately and simultaneously. In the second scenario, the manufacturer has more power than the agent (Manufacturer Stackelberg game) and the agent has more power than the customer (Agent Stackelberg game). Sub-game perfect equilibrium (SPE) is obtained by the backward induction method. In the semi-cooperative game, the manufacturer and the agent cooperate together and act as an integrated service-provider against the customer, thereby dominating the latter in a Manufacturer–Agent Stackelberg game.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The notation and assumptions underlying the model will be given in Section 2. In Section 3, this problem will be formulated; including models for the manufacturer, agent and customer, and their optimal solutions under different warranty options will be discussed. Section 4 will present non-cooperative games (static and Stackelberg models) and a semi-cooperative game. Computational results including numerical examples and managerial insights illustrating the different models will be detailed in Section 5. Finally, the paper will be concluded in Section 6 with several suggestions for further research in this topic.This section introduces the notation of the models. In addition, all decision variables, input parameters and assumptions which will be used to formulate the models will be stated.Pipsale price received per unit item by the manufacturer under optioni,i=1,2Twwarranty period offered by the manufacturerPwwarranty price per unit item paid by the customer to the manufacturerPamaintenance price announced by the agent to the customerCirrepair cost charged by the agent to the customer per unit item under option iLlifetime of productCpproduction cost per unit itemPssalvage value of a failed product(Ps<Cp)Cr′repair cost per unit item incurred by the agentN1number of failures during the lifetime of productN2number of failures during the warranty periodN3number of failures after warranty has expiredXioperational time of product after the ith repair and before the (i+1)th failureX∼operational time of product after the last repair and before termination of its lifetimeλ(t)failure raterrate of ageing of productSisales volume under option iK0an amplitude constant factor(K0>0)αjiprice elasticity of manufacturer and agent(j=M,A)under optioni;(αji>1)γirisk parameter of the customer under optioni;i=1,2,3Rquantitative satisfaction of customer under each optionΠMiprofit of manufacturer under optioni;i=1,2ΠAiprofit of agent under optioni;i=1,2,3ΠSPprofit of service providerΠCitotal satisfaction of customer under optioni;i=1,2,3Ui(C)utility function of customer under optioni,i=1,2,3The proposed models are based on the following assumptions:1.There is one customer, one agent and one manufacturer.The failure intensity is an increasing function of time and is based on the model proposed by Jackson and Pascual (2008). In this model, the failure hazard,λ(t), is given by(1)λ(t)=λ0+rt;0⩽λ0⩽1whereλ0is the initial failure rate and t is the age of product.The number of product failures in any specified time interval(a,b)follows a Poisson distribution with intensityλ(t), i.e. the expected number of failures in(a,b)is given by∫abλ(t)dt.The warranty price,Pw, is a linear function of warranty period,Twaccording to(2)Pw=βTwwhereβ>0and depends on the number of failures which can be estimated by the manufacturer.The time taken to replace a new product is negligible and will be ignored. In addition, the mean downtime (waiting+repairing) of the product can also be assumed negligible due to the fact that it is very small compared to the mean time of failure (Asgharizadeh & Murthy, 2000).Sales volume for each option depends on its price (Wu et al., 2006, Wu, Chou, & Huang, 2009). In other words, the sales volume decreases exponentially with respect to the price of sale, maintenance or repair.The proposed models for the manufacturer, agent and customer are mathematically formulated in this section.Recall that the manufacturer offers the following two options to the customer:M1:The failed item will be replaced during the warranty period free of charge.No warranty will be given.Based on the two options, the optimal solutions of the manufacturer’s profit functions will be obtained below.If the manufacturer selects option M1, the profit is given byManufacturer’sprofit=salesvolume(saleprice+warrantyprice−productioncost−(productioncost−salvagevalue)×expectednumberoffailuresduringwarrantyperiod)i.e.(3)ΠM1(P1p,Tw)=SM1(P1p+Pw-Cp-(Cp-Ps)E(N2))s.t.Pw=βTwSM1=K0P1p-αM1C1r-αA1By Assumptions 4 and 6, the sales volume of products with option M1 is influenced byP1pandC1r. In other words, the customer pays the sale price to the manufacturer for purchasing the product by free replacement warranty, and after its expiration, pays a repair cost to the agent for fixing each failure. In addition, by Assumption 3, the number of failures,N2is a Poisson process over the warranty period; hence(4)E(N2)=∫0Twλ(t)dt=λ0Tw+12rTw2.Therefore, (3) can be rewritten as(5)ΠM1(P1p,Tw)=K0P1p-αM1C1r-αA1P1p+βTw-Cp-(Cp-Ps)λ0Tw+12rTw2.As the profit functionΠM1(P1p,Tw)is a concave function inTwandP1p(Refer to Appendix A (i)), the optimal warranty period and the sale price for the manufacturer are obtained by applying the first order deviation to (5) resulting in(6)Tw∗=β-(Cp-Ps)λ0r(Cp-Ps).(7)P1p∗=αM1αM1-1Cp-(β-(Cp-Ps)λ0)22r(Cp-Ps).For the option of no warranty, M2, two options of the agent,A2andA3should certainly be investigated. Now the profit is:Manufacturer’sprofit=salesvolume(saleprice-productioncost)i.e.(8)ΠM2(P2p)=SM2(P2p-Cp)s.t.SM2=K0P2p-αM2(t1Pa+t2C3r)(-αA2t1-αA3t2)t1+t2=1t1andt2are considered as the zero-one variables and are based on the customer selection from the agent options. By Assumption 6, the sales volume depends on its price,P2pandPaorC3r. The optimalP2p∗is obtained by applying the first order condition to (8) resulting in(9)P2p∗=αM2αM2-1CpSince the profit functionΠM2(P2p)is a concave function inP2p(refer to Appendix A (ii)), the obtained selling price is optimal.The agent offers three options to the customer:A1:To repair the failed product for a fixed cost per failure after the warranty extended by the manufacturer expires.To repair all failures which occur during the lifetime of the product for a fixed price.To repair the failures which occur during the lifetime of the product at a fixed cost per failure.Based on the three options of the agent the optimal solutions of profit functions are obtained as follows.Under this option, the agent’s profit isAgent’sprofit=salesvolume(revenueofrepairingfailedproductafterexpirationofwarranty-repaircost)×expectednumberoffailuresafterwarrantyperiodexpirationi.e.(10)ΠA1(C1r)=SM1(C1r-Cr′)E(N3)s.t.SM1=K0P1p-αM1C1r-αA1whereN3is the number of failures after the warranty period. Using Assumption 3,(11)E(N3)=∫TwLλ(t)dt=λ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2and therefore(12)ΠA1(C1r)=SM1(C1r-Cr′)(λ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2).The profit functionΠA1(C1r)is a concave function inC1r(refer to Appendix A (iii)). Therefore, the optimal repair cost,C1r∗, is(13)C1r∗=αA1αA1-1Cr′Under this option, the agent’s profit isAgent’sprofit=salesvolume(maintenanceprice-repaircostfortheagent×expectednumberoffailuresduringthelifetimeoftheproduct)i.e.(14)ΠA2(Pa)=SM2(Pa-Cr′E(N1))s.t.SM2=K0P2p-αM2(t1Pa+t2C3r)(-αA2t1-αA3t2)t1+t2=1Please note thatt1andt2are zero-one variables. Using Assumption 3,(15)E(N1)=∫0Lλ(t)dt=λ0L+12rL2.The profit functionΠA2(Pa)is a concave function inPa(refer to Appendix A (iv)). Therefore, the optimalPa∗, is(16)Pa∗=αA2Cr′(λ0L+12rL2)αA2-1.For the third option, the agent’s profit isAgent’sprofit=salesvolume(revenueofrepairingthefailedproductduringitslifetime-costofrepairfortheagent)×expectednumberoffailuresduringthelifetimeoftheproducti.e.(17)ΠA3(C3r)=SM2(C3r-Cr′)E(N1)s.t.SM2=K0P2p-αM2(t1Pa+t2C3r)(-αA2t1-αA3t2)t1+t2=1wheret1andt2are zero-one variables andE(N1)is given by (15). The profit functionΠA3(C3r)is a concave function inC3r(refer to Appendix A (v)). Then the optimalC3r∗is(18)C3r∗=αA3Cr′αA3-1.In the costumer model, the risk parameter on the customer side is considered. Since the agent would only offer the last two options if the manufacturer provides no warranty, the customer has three options to choose:C1:(M1 and A1), PayPwto the manufacturer for price of warranty and after its expiration, pay a repair cost ofC1rper failure to the agent.(M2 and A2), Pay a maintenance pricePato the agent; thereafter, each failure would be repaired free of charge.(M2 and A3), Pay a repair cost ofC3rper failure to the agent during the lifetime of the product.Under option C1, the customer’s quantitative satisfaction isis given by:Customer’smonetaryreturn=salesvolume(revenueobtainedbytheproduct-saleprice-warrantyprice-repaircostafterwarrantyperiodexpiration)i.e.(19)ΠC1=SM1RTw+E∑i=1N3Xi+X∼-P1p-Pw-C1rE(N3).Resulting from Assumption 5,(20)E∑i=1N3Xi+X∼≈Lby considering Eq. (20) and Assumption 6, the customer’s monetary return would be as(21)ΠC1=SM1RL-P1p-Pw-C1rλ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2.Regarding the literature (Murthy & Asgharizadeh, 1999; Asgharizadeh & Murthy, 2000; Baker, 2006; Rinsaka & Sandoh, 2006), the utility function based on the customer’s monetary return and the attitude of customer about risk effect is generally as follows:(22)Ui(C)=1-e-γiΠCiγiγi>0ΠCiγi=0.Please note thatγi=0corresponds to the risk-neutral customers withU(C)=ΠC. Thus, for the first option we have:(23)U1(C)=1-e-γ1SM1(RL-P1p-Pw-C1r(λ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2))γ1When the customer chooses option C2, the quantitative satisfaction would be given asCustomer’smonetaryreturn=salesvolume(revenueobtainedbyproduct-saleprice-costofagent’sservicecontract)i.e.(24)ΠC2=SM2(RL-P2p-Pa)Based on the risk parameter as explained in the previous section, the utility function of the customer under option C2 would be:(25)U2(C)=1-e-γ2SM2(RL-P2p-Pa)γ2Finally, when the customer chooses option C3, the satisfaction isCustomer’smonetaryreturn=salesvolume(revenueobtainedbyproduct-saleprice-repaircostduringtheproduct’slifetime)i.e.(26)ΠC3=SM2(RL-P2p-C3rE(N1)).By considering the impact of the risk parameter in the utility function, the customer model for option C3 is:(27)U3(C)=1-e-γ2SM2(RL-P2p-C3rE(N1))γ2In the following, we describe the components of the three-person game which will be used in the models in the following sections. We have a set of players (N=3), and for each player, we also specify the set of strategies and the corresponding profit available to that player.•N={M,A,C}where the manufacturer, the agent and the customer are represented byM,Aand C, respectively.The set of strategies available to the player i,Si,i=M,A,C, isSM={M1,M2},SA={A1,A2,A3}SC={C1,C2,C3}The payoff of each player i,u(i),i=M,A,C, isu(M)={ΠM1(P1p,Pw,Tw),ΠM2(P2p)}u(A)={ΠA1(C1r),ΠA2(Pa),ΠA3(C3r)}u(C)={U1(C),U2(C),U3(C)}In the following section, we present the non-cooperative games (the static and Stackelberg models) and the semi-cooperative game.In the static model as the non-cooperative game, the players obtain their best strategy simultaneously and separately. In this section, we first present the existence of Nash equilibrium and then prove that the obtained equilibrium is Nash equilibrium.Based on the previous section, our three-person game is a finite game (finite players and action profiles); thus, we are sure that our static and dynamic models have at least one Nash equilibrium Nash (1951).For Nash equilibrium, we have obtained the optimal solution or the best response of the manufacturer, agent and customer’s models. In fact, the optimal warranty period and the sale price of the manufacturer under options M1 and M2 have been determined based on Eqs. (6), (7) and (9) that generate the greatest payoff for the manufacturer regardless of what the agent and customer are doing. In addition, Eqs. (13), (16),(18) are the agent’s optimal policy under options A1, A2 and A3 while Eqs. (23), (25), (27) are the utility functions of the customer under options C1, C2 and C3, respectively. The obtained payoffs of each player are summarized in Table 1.Please note that we have obtained Nash Equilibrium which may be incredible. In the computational results, we present some numerical examples which have credible or incredible Nash Equilibrium.In the Stackelberg model as the dynamic non-cooperative game, we consider that the manufacturer has more power than the agent and the agent has more power than the customer. Therefore, the manufacturer makes the best strategy by dominating the agent, and the agent make the best strategy by dominating the customer in a conventional way (Esmaeili, Aryanezhad, & Zeephongsekul, 2009). The main reason for considering such a model is the relationship between the large companies which is seen today. For example, BMW4https://www.bmw-warranty.co.uk/.4offers third-party warranty in which the manufacturer dominates the agents on the price of warranty and the type of service contract.To obtain SPE, the backward induction method has been used because it is a finite game with perfect recall (Fudenberg & Tirole, 1991). Therefore, the agent makes the first move and the customer then reacts by playing the best move consistent with the available information (the agent-Stackelberg). In the next step, the manufacturer as the leader (the manufacturer-Stackelberg model) maximizes their profit regarding the optimal solution of the agent-Stackelberg model.For a given maintenance pricePaand repair costCrof the agent, the customer obtains the best utility according to the agent’s model, which is given by (23), (25) and (27). The agent then maximizes the profitΠA(Pa,Cr)based on the utility functions of the customer. Thus, the problem is reduced to: Max(28)ΠA(Pa,C1r,C3r)=z1SM1(C1r-Cr′)λ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2+z2SM2Pa-Cr′λ0L+12rL2+z3SM2(C3r-Cr′)λ0L+12rL2s.t.z1U1(C)=1-e-γ1SM1(RL-P1p-Pw-C1r(λ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2))γ1z2U2(C)=1-e-γ2SM2(RL-P2p-Pa)γ2z3U3(C)=1-e-γ2SM2(RL-P2p-C3rE(N1))γ2ziis a zero-one decision variable and when the option i is selected,zi=1, otherwise,zi=0. Therefore, the model is the regular mixed–integer programming whose its optimal solution would be one of following equations:(29)C1r∗=1λ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2RL-P1p-Pw+ln(1-z1U1(C)γ1)γ1SM1(30)Pa∗=RL-P2p+ln(1-z2U2(C)γ2)γ2SM2(31)C3r∗=1λ0L+12rL2RL-P2p+ln(1-z3U3(C)γ3)γ3SM2In the following section, we present the manufacturer-Stackelberg model regarding the obtained results of the agent-Stackelberg model.For given sales pricesP1p,P2p, warranty pricePw, warranty periodTwof the manufacturer and zero-one decision variablezi, the agent obtains the best maintenance costPa∗and repair costsC1r∗,C3r∗according to the manufacturer’s model, which is given by (29)–(31). The manufacturer then maximizes the profitΠM(Pp,Pw,Tw)based onPaandCr. Thus, the problem is reduced to(32)MaxΠM(P1p,P2p,Pw,Tw)=y1SM1P1p+Pw-Cp-Cpλ0Tw+12rTw2+y2SM2(P2p-Cp)s.t.C1r∗=y11λ0(L-Tw)+12r(L-Tw)2RL-P1p-Pw+ln(1-z1U1(C)γ1)γ1SM1Pa∗=y2RL-P2p+ln(1-z2U2(C)γ2)γ2SM2C3r∗=y21λ0L+12rL2RL-P2p+ln(1-z3U3(C)γ3)γ3SM2y1+y2=1y1⩽z1y2⩽z2+z3.Based onziandyjas the zero-one decision variables, the optimal strategy of the manufacturer, the agent and the customer’s model would be obtained by solving (32) as a regular mixed–integer program.In this section, we assume that the manufacturer and the agent cooperate together and act as an integrated service-provider. Therefore, the customer faces the following options:(1)During the warranty period, when a failure occurs, the service-provider tries to repair the fault free of charge, in the specified time (defined in the contract); otherwise, the service-provider replaces it without charge. Please note that after the expiration of the warranty, repair per each fault will appear on the cost ofCr.The customer prefers not to buy the service contract.The customer’s utility under option 1:(33)U(C)=1-e-γSM1(RL-P1p-Pw-CrE(N3))γRegarding the power of the service-provider, the interaction between the service provider and the customer is presented as the Stackelberg game. Therefore, based on the customer’s decision variables, the profit of the service-provider is maximized such that:(34)maxΠSP(P1p,Pw,Cr)=SM1P1p+Pw-(Cp-Ps)∑i=1E(N2)max{0,sgn(Yi-τ)}-Cp-Cr′∑i=1E(N2)max{0,sgn(τ-Yi)}+(Cr-Cr′)E(N3)s.t.1-e-γSM1(RL-P1p-Pw-CrE(N3))-γU(C)=0To illustrate our model, in the following section, we present some numerical examples and managerial insights.In this section, we address some numerical examples which are aimed at illustrating the significant features of the models established in previous sections. We will also perform the managerial insights of four main parameters (risk parameter, price elasticity, lifetime and repair cost) of these models. We note that Examples 1–3 illustrate the non-cooperative static and Stackelberg models, respectively, while Example 4 considers the semi-cooperative game. In all these examples (except for Example 1 in whichCr′=0.3(103)$), we setλ0=0.6(peryear),r=0.3(persquareyear),L=6(years),Cr′=0.1(103)$,Cp=0.8(103)$,β=0.45(103)$,Ps=0.5(103)$,k0=10,αM1=1.2,αM2=1.5,αA1=1.2,αA2=1.5,αA3=1.2,γ=0.2andR=1.5(103)$(perunit).Example 1In the static game, the optimal solution of the manufacturer, the agent and the customer’s models are presented in Table 2.According to Table 2, Nash equilibrium would be (M1,A1,C1). In fact, the manufacturer obtainsΠM2∗=1.98(103)$withP2p=2.37(103)$andSM1=1units. In addition, the optimal solution for the agent and the customer areΠA1∗=6.3(103)$,C3r∗=0.6(103)$andU1(C)=4.95.In other words, both manufacturer and agent preferred their first options which is in lined with the customer’s satisfaction in choosing option one.Example 2In the static game, the optimal solution of the manufacturer, the agent, and the customer’s models are presented in Table 3.According to Table 3, Nash equilibrium would be (M1,A3,C1). In fact, the preference of the manufacturer and the agent are the first and third options respectively, whereas the customer selects the first option. That is to say, the selected option is an incredible Nash equilibrium. Because the agent obtains the maximum profit with the third option while the first options are selected and suggested by the customer and the manufacturer. ThereforeΠM1∗=13.83(103)$,P1p=2.37(103)$,SM1=7units,ΠA3∗=22.5(103)$,C3r∗=0.6(103)$andU1(C)=4.96.Example 3The Stackelberg models produce the following optimal values for our decision variables based on (28) and (32):The result shows that the manufacturer, as the leader of the agent, would choose optionM1. The agent as the follower of the manufacturer and the leader of the customer, would choose optionA1. And the customer has to choose optionC1which makes sense. In other words, the obtained SPE,(M1,A1,C1), is tangible.Example 4In the semi-cooperative model, it is also assumed thatτ=0.007year. Thus, by substitutingCrin the objective function and solving the model, the optimal solution would be:Tw∗=1.5year,Pw∗=0.675(103)$,Pp=0.697(103)$,Cr∗=0.105(103)$.In this section the effects of the parameters risk, price elasticity, lifetime of the product and the repair cost on the choice of options are investigated.The affect of risk parameter on the customer’s selection is considered. As shown in Fig. 1, for more risk-averse customers, for instance (γ⩽0.03), the first option is always chosen because they ensure that the failed product will be replaced by a new one. By increasingγ– the risk aversion of the customer decreases – there would be no difference between the three options for the customer.In addition, based on the relationship between the price elasticity,αij, and profit, the role of price elasticity on the chosen options is investigated. In fact, In fact,αijwould be strategic for the customer, because it may affect their options. As seen in Figs. 2 and 3, by choosing equal price elasticities,αij=α, the first option of the customer would always dominate the two other options. However, no trend for the domination of the manufacturer and agent’s options can observed. This makes sense in the real world because the price elasticity affects the customer’s priorities.According to Fig. 4, in the static model, the first option of the manufacturer dominates the second option when the lifetime is between 4 and 10years (4⩽L⩽10). While based on Fig. 5the second option of the agent is always dominated by the two other options. Furthermore, when the lifetime of the product is more than 6years (L⩾6), the third option dominates the other options. The first option of the customer always dominates the second and third options as shown in Fig. 6.Finally, the effect of the repair cost on the manufacturer, agent’s profit and customer’s satisfaction are shown in Figs. 7–9. In Fig. 7 the manufacturer prefers to offer the first option rather than the second one because it always dominates the second one. In addition, the agent’s third option dominates the other ones when the repair cost is less than0.65(103)(Cr′⩽0.65(103)$). In such a situation, the customer also prefers the first option which is more satisfactory when compared to the other two options.Overall, the results show that the manufacturer and the agent models are sensitive to the repair cost and the product’s lifetime; while the customer’s model is sensitive to the lifetime and the price elasticity. Furthermore, the first option is always chosen for more risk-avers customers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
