@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The k-dissimilar vehicle routing problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem is proposed and named kd-VRP.The goal of the kd-VRP is to generate a set of k dissimilar VRP solutions.A similarity index is designed based on the literature on dissimilar shortest-paths.A mathematical formulation for the kd-VRP is proposed.An iterative metaheuristic to solve the kd-VRP is described, implemented and tested.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Combinatorial optimization,Metaheuristic,Logistics,Risk management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we define a new problem, the aim of which is to find a set of k dissimilar solutions for a vehicle routing problem (VRP) on a single instance. This problem has several practical applications in the cash-in-transit sector and in the transportation of hazardous materials. A min–max mathematical formulation is proposed which requires a maximum similarity threshold between VRP solutions, and the number k of dissimilar VRP solutions that need to be generated. An index to measure similarities between VRP solutions is defined based on the edges shared between pairs of alternative solutions. An iterative metaheuristic to generate k dissimilar alternative solutions is also presented. The solution approach is tested using large and medium size benchmark instances for the capacitated vehicle routing problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many European countries, cash-in-transit companies must by law determine several alternative routes for each of their vehicles when transporting cash. The aim of this measure is to allow a firm to easily change its plans in case of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., accidents, road works) and to increase security by making the vehicle routes more unpredictable. In this paper, we define a new vehicle routing problem—the k-dissimilar vehicle routing problem or kd-VRP—to support this optimization problem.A solution of this novel problem consists of k feasible solutions of a single capacitated vehicle routing problem (VRP). Each of these VRP solutions (which we will consistently call alternative solutions) must obey the traditional constraints of the VRP: all customers are visited exactly once, all vehicles begin and end at the depot, and the capacity of the vehicle is not exceeded. The quality of an alternative solution is measured as the total distance travelled by all vehicles.Assuming that a similarity metric can be calculated between any pair of alternative solutions, a feasible solution to the kd-VRP is a set of k feasible alternative solutions for which the difference between each pair of alternative solutions is larger than a certain threshold. The objective of the kd-VRP is to minimize the cost of the worst alternative solution in the set. To the best of our knowledge, this problem has never been studied before in the literature.The kd-VRP is closely related to the m-peripatetic vehicle routing problem (m-PVRP) studied in Ngueveu, Prins, and Wolfler Calvo (2010a); 2010b). This problem consists in finding a set of edge-disjoint routes of minimal total cost over m periods so that each customer is visited exactly once per period and the edge between a pair of customers can be used at most once during the m periods. “Periods” in the m-PVRP are essentially the same concept as “alternative solutions” in the kd-VRP. The difference between the kd-VRP and the m-PVRP is twofold. In a feasible solution of the m-PVRP, no edge is used twice, while in the kd-VRP the multiple usage of an edge is not explicitly forbidden, but rather limited by a constraint on the similarity between alternative solutions. Second, the m-PVRP minimizes the total cost over all periods, while the kd-VRP minimizes the worst-case cost over all alternative solutions. The motivation for the kd-VRP is that for some real-life applications (e.g., money collection, transportation of hazardous materials), the constraint that imposes k edge-disjoint VRP solutions in which not a single edge is shared between the alternative solutions might be too stringent. The min–max objective function of the kd-VRP is a design choice, that can easily be changed to a total cost objective, in which case the kd-VRP generalizes the m-PVRP.Fig. 1shows an example of a solution for the kd-VRP with k = 3, for which a set containing three dissimilar, but not disjoint, alternative solutions (see Fig. 1(a)–(c)) has been generated.The kd-VRP has many practical applications. A first application, which provided the motivation for this work, can be found in the context of money collection and distribution, also known as the cash-in-transit sector. In this context, a set of customers (e.g., banks, shops, casinos, jewellers) needs to be visited to pick up valuables and cash. As mentioned, companies in the cash-in-transit sector are often required by law (see e.g., the Belgian law reported in SPFI Service Public Federal Interieur, 2003 for more details) to determine several alternative solutions in advance. Additionally, the same alternative solution cannot be used more than two consecutive times. On the other hand, the travel costs of each of these alternative solutions should be minimized for obvious economic reasons. The aim is thus to decrease the predictability of the chosen alternative solution, reducing the risk to be assaulted, while maintaining economic viability.A second application can be found in the transportation of dangerous materials (e.g., the routing of tankers which must serve a set of petrol stations). In this case a limitation of the number of shared edges between the routes might be required in order to better share and mitigate the risk of accidents and spread the risk equitably among the geographical regions crossed by vehicles along different routes (Gopalan, Kolluri, Batta, and Karwan, 1990). In addition, supposing that the probability of an accident increases considerably in case of adverse weather conditions and/or depending on the type of road segment, it is crucial to have several dissimilar routing plans to reduce the risk of potential fatalities (Akgün, Erkut, and Batta, 2000; Sattayaprasert, Taneerananon, Hanaoka, and Pradhananga, 2008).A third application concerns the design of patrol routes for security agents who must follow partially different routes over time (Wolfler Calvo and Cordone, 2003). The design of (spatial and/or temporal) dissimilar patrol routes, that are not necessarily disjoint, might help companies to guarantee high security standards, minimizing at the same time their operative costs.The contributions of this paper are the following: (1) A new NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem is proposed, the k-dissimilar vehicle routing problem or kd-VRP. The kd-VRP requires a similarity measure that can calculate the difference between alternative solutions. We define such an index, starting from the similarity index used for the dissimilar k-shortest path problem. (2) A mathematical formulation for the kd-VRP is presented. (3) A metaheuristic to solve medium and large instances of the kd-VRP is described, implemented and tested.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the literature on the peripatetic VRP and similar problems such as the dissimilar k paths problem and the disjoint paths problem is presented. In Section 3, some indices used to measure the (dis)similarity between paths and alternative solutions are introduced. In Section 4, the k-dissimilar vehicle routing problem (kd-VRP) is described in detail and a mathematical formulation is developed. In Section 5, an iterative metaheuristic to find solutions for the kd-VRP is developed. In Section 6 the solution approach is tested using 51 benchmark instances from the VRP library. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper and provides some suggestions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have presented a new combinatorial optimization problem, including a mathematical formulation the aim of which is to generate a set of k alternative solutions of a single vehicle routing problem instance, in such a way that each alternative solution differs from all the others by at least a given threshold. A distance metric between alternative solutions has also been defined. A min–max objective function minimizes the cost of the worst solution in this set.The kd-VRP is applicable in several practical situations. In the cash-in-transit sector, the kd-VRP can be used to define a set of alternative routes to collect or deliver cash and valuables, something which is often required by law as a preventive measure to add variability and increase unpredictability for crime organizations.Other applications can be found in the fuel distribution or in the transportation of dangerous goods, in which all customers must be served and for specific reasons (e.g., accidents, unavailability of some route edges, security reasons), several alternative routes need to be generated.To solve this problem, we have developed an iterative method (IPM_kd) based on a similar method for the k dissimilar shortest paths problem. The IPM_kd metaheuristic has been tested using 51 VRP benchmark instances varying the number of alternative solutions that need to be generated. The results obtained are encouraging. In a limited computational time we have generated k alternative solutions also for large and medium VRP instances, being k ∈ {1, …, 5}. In particular, for k = 5 and a maximum similarity threshold TS= 0.20, the VRP alternative presenting the highest cost is, on average, only 22.7 percent worse than the best known solutions of the original VRP problems.In the future, we plan to investigate extensions of the kd-VRP, e.g., by including more sophisticated similarity indices (that include spatial and temporal information) and/or additional real-life constraints such as time windows, route length restrictions, and precedence relations between vertices. In addition, more robust metaheuristics which use complex inter-solution local search operators can be developed and compared with the iterative algorithm that is presented in this paper. The development of exact methods based e.g., on a column generation approach and the definition of optimal solutions and bounds for the kd-VRP problem, both present promising research avenues.Here we report some illustrative examples of the intra route (Fig. A.1) and inter route (Fig. A.2) local search operators that are used inside the VND heuristic. Each figure shows a VRP solution before (left side) and after (right side) the application of the corresponding local search operator. The depot is represented by a black square while black circles denote the customers. The length of the edges is proportional to their cost.