@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ant colony system for responsive dynamic vehicle routing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a decision system based on ACS for solving rich vehicle routing problems.Time windows, dynamic, split delivery, heterogeneous fleet constraints are handled.Responsiveness, defined as completing each service as soon as possible, is optimized.The method is illustrated with a real Airport application and using benchmarks.Distance minimization is not equivalent to responsiveness optimization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
DVRPTW,Heuristics,Ant colony system,Airport application,Responsiveness criterion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present an algorithm based on an ant colony system to deal with a broad range of Dynamic Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problems with Time Windows, (partial) Split Delivery and Heterogeneous fleets (DVRPTWSD). We address the important case of responsiveness. Responsiveness is defined here as completing a delivery as soon as possible, within the time window, such that the client or the vehicle may restart its activities. We develop an interactive solution to allow dispatchers to take new information into account in real-time. The algorithm and its parametrization were tested on real and artificial instances. We first illustrate our approach with a problem submitted by Liege Airport, the 8th biggest cargo airport in Europe. The goal is to develop a decision system to optimize the journey of the refueling trucks. We then consider some classical VRP benchmarks with extensions to the responsiveness context.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The starting point of this work is a problem submitted by Liege Airport (LGG), the 8th largest cargo airport in Europe. The goal is to develop a decision system that is able to optimize the journey of the airport’s refueling trucks. The trucks must deliver a standardized product, fuel, to aircrafts during predefined time windows corresponding to a sub period of the time on the ground. There are different types of trucks, operating at different speeds, and some of them are not capable of adequately serving certain models of aircraft. As is sometimes currently done, a delivery may be split between several trucks under certain conditions.In this paper, we give special attention to optimizing a responsiveness objective in a dynamic environment. Indeed, while minimizing traveled distance is a classical objective in Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP), the highest priority for an airport is to complete the deliveries as soon as possible, allowing the aircrafts to return to operations. Airline companies have to pay for the time spent by aircrafts on the ground. As a result, inactive aircrafts not only fail to make money, but cost a lot too. Furthermore, flights must satisfy strict schedules and any delays will lead to financial penalties. In the worst cases, take-off or landing slots may be lost so that the flight has to be rescheduled or canceled. Since unexpected events may occur at any time, there is a strong reason to not only perform all the jobs in the allowed time window, but as soon as possible. This responsiveness is also crucial for many production or service activities in different fields: express parcel deliveries, taxi services, Just in Time production, express repair services, medical care, petrol station replenishment, etc.The second challenge in this area is the uncertain dynamic environment. An airport operates continuously seven days a week. There is no clear end of the planning horizon nor perfect time to start an optimization. Moreover, the airport environment is highly uncertain; flights could be delayed or canceled, for example due to the weather or a breakdown. Similarly, quantities for fuel deliveries are initially only expectations, which will need to be tuned at the last moment depending on the load and weather conditions. We develop an interactive solution to allow dispatchers to take new information into account in real-time.Our goal is therefore to present an approach to dealing with a broad range of dynamic capacitated vehicle routing problems with time windows, (partial) split delivery and heterogeneous fleets, in which this airport refueling problem belongs. Finding the optimal solution for a real size vehicle routing problem remains a challenge. VRPs are complex combinatorial problems, known to be NP-Hard. It is why exact methods in the literature typically focus on well-defined categories with restricted sets of constraints. This work is unique in that it simultaneously takes into account all the previously mentioned constraints, using an ant colony approach. This metaheuristic had already been adapted and proved to be a good strategy for solving the standard VRP and some extensions. In this research, we took inspiration from Gambardella, Taillard, and Giovanni (1999) for the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW) and from Montemanni, Gambardella, Rizzoli, and Donati (2005) for the added dynamic dimension.We illustrate our approach with a specific instance provided by Liege Airport. We also test our algorithm on sets of popular VRPTW benchmarks. We start from the work by Montemanni et al. (2005) and use the same VRPTW datasets in a dynamic context. We also perform experiments utilizing some Solomon’s benchmarks. We compare different dynamic strategies and the impact of the responsiveness criterion.Section 2 provides a brief literature review. In Section 3, the main components of the problem are described in further details. In Section 4, a classical Ant Colony System (ACS) algorithm for solving VRPTW is briefly revisited. In Section 5, our extensions for addressing responsiveness and richer problems are described. Next, Section 6 contains various strategies for improving the quality of the results. The results for the Liege Airport case and for the other benchmarks are presented and commented on Section 7. Finally, conclusions are drawn in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented here a new algorithm for handling rich VRP problems. We explicitly cover the case of dynamic stochastic contexts, heterogeneous fleet and split deliveries. We do not only focus on the traditional objective function based on the minimization of the distance but we propose an approach to optimizing the responsiveness. Responsiveness is a major and natural criterion in lots of practical situations. We tested our approach on a real case in the field of air transportation and sets of well-known benchmarks. This algorithm, based on an ant colony, was proved to be very flexible and was always able to reach good feasible solutions in a limited amount of time. A dynamic interactive version written in PhP, as well as a Java version, were developed and are available on our website. We have shown that traditional algorithms relying on a distance or time criterion do not provide suitable solutions when responsiveness matters. We have also shown that different dynamic strategies may be applied when new information becomes available. In the presence of urgent requests, the best approach is to repeatedly start new optimizations based on the responsiveness criterion as soon as new events occur.