@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An equilibrium efficiency frontier data envelopment analysis approach for evaluating decision-making units with fixed-sum outputs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our method guarantees all DMUs are evaluated based on a common efficient frontier.Each round of adjustment has “memory” which makes the equilibrium possible.Our method deals with fixed-sum outputs from one dimension to multi-dimensions.Our method makes full rank orders of DMUs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Equilibrium efficiency frontier,Extended minimal adjustment strategy,Equilibrium competition strategy,Fixed-sum outputs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Based on the minimal reduction strategy, Yang et al. (2011) developed a fixed-sum output data envelopment analysis (FSODEA) approach to evaluate the performance of decision-making units (DMUs) with fixed-sum outputs. However, in terms of such a strategy, all DMUs compete over fixed-sum outputs with “no memory” that will result in differing efficient frontiers’ evaluations. To address the problem, in this study, we propose an equilibrium efficiency frontier data envelopment analysis (EEFDEA) approach, by which all DMUs with fixed-sum outputs can be evaluated based on a common platform (or equilibrium efficient frontier). The proposed approach can be divided into two stages. Stage 1 constructs a common evaluation platform via two strategies: an extended minimal adjustment strategy and an equilibrium competition strategy. The former ensures that original efficient DMUs are still efficient, guaranteeing the existence of a common evaluation platform. The latter makes all DMUs achieve a common equilibrium efficient frontier. Then, based on the common equilibrium efficient frontier, Stage 2 evaluates all DMUs with their original inputs and outputs. Finally, we illustrate the proposed approach by using two numerical examples.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA), firstly proposed by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), is a mathematical programming approach for evaluating the performance of decision-making units (DMUs) that convert multiple inputs into multiple outputs. Traditional DEA models, such as CCR (Charnes et al., 1978) and BCC (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984), divide DMUs into two groups: efficient and inefficient. Efficient DMUs construct an efficient frontier that envelops inefficient DMUs. Generally, inefficient DMUs can reduce their inputs or expand outputs freely when projecting them onto efficient frontiers for calculating their efficiencies. Traditional DEA models assume inputs and outputs are independent (Banker & Natarajan, 2011, chap. 11 of Handbook on Data Envelopment Analysis; Banker, Charnes, Cooper, & Maindiratta, 1987; Li, Yang, Chen, Dai, & Liang, 2013). However, the dependence among inputs and outputs may exist in some DEA applications. For example, Branda (2013) and Lamb and Tee (2012) described the dependence between the input (risk) and the output (return) in financial performance evaluation In contrast to this kind of dependence, this study focuses on a particular form of dependence among outputs which arises when the sum of DMUs’ outputs is fixed.In the fixed-sum outputs environment, one DMU expanding its outputs may reduce others’ outputs. For instance, the market share of a certain industry is constant, so each firm in the industry attempts to compete for more market share from its competitors. Similar cases also occur in Olympic Games evaluations (Lozano, Villa, Guerrero, & Cortes, 2002; Churilov & Flitman, 2006; Li, Liang, Yao, & Hiroshi, 2008; Wu, Liang, Chen, 2009; Wu, Liang, Yang, 2009), in which the total number of medals is fixed.When evaluating Olympic Achievements, Lins, Gomes, Soares de Mello, and Soares de Mello (2003) observed that increasing the number of medals won by one country will reduce the total number of medals won by the other countries. They proposed two strategies to accommodate the competition among various nations (viewed as DMUs) over a fixed number of medals: one is the same amount reduction strategy, which balances the increase of the outputs of the DMU under evaluation with an equal reduction in the outputs of the others. Nevertheless, the authors are conscious that the strategy will lead to negative outputs when certain DMUs’ actual outputs are smaller than an equal amount reduction. This goes against the fact that all of the variables in traditional DEA methods must be non-negative2In practice, outputs might be negative, such as negative profits of companies. Some scholars have attempted to deal with such the negative data (Kerstens & Woestyne, 2011; Silva Portela, Thanassoulis, & Simpson, 2004). However, the negative data may not be allowed in some of the fixed-sum-output cases, since it might make no sense in practice. For example, the number of medals obtained by participating countries in Olympics and the market share of one company cannot be negative, but sums of medals and market shares are fixed.2(Cooper, Seiford, & Tone, 2000). The other is a proportional reduction strategy, by which the output losses of others are proportional to their true outputs. However, the second strategy will result in that output losses rely heavily on true outputs. More specifically, once the total output augment is known, the output increase that each evaluated DMU derived from any other DMU is determined because the ratio of the true output of each DMU to the sum of outputs of all DMUs can be calculated in advance. However, in actual DMUs, output losses should be determined by free competition (Yang, Wu, Liang, & Liam, 2011) rather than subjectively being assigned by decision-makers. Moreover, Lins et al. (2003) can address only a one-dimensional fixed output problem. Multi-dimensional cases have to be preprocessed to one dimension before the model is applied.To overcome shortfalls in Lins et al. (2003) and Yang et al. (2011) developed a new DEA model, based on a minimal reduction competition strategy, to evaluate DMUs with fixed-sum outputs. By this strategy, the minimal output augment, which the evaluated DMU needs to become technically efficient, is defined to be equal to the sum of the minimal output losses of other competitors. The authors claim that such a competition strategy is the most convenient way for performance improvement by each DMU because both free competition and the potential “opponents” are considered simultaneously. Nevertheless, this strategy may not take into account the problem that all DMUs are evaluated based on different platforms. Specifically, according to this strategy, each DMU takes part in a “no memory” competition, indicating that the results obtained in the previous-round competition are ignored when entering the next round. For example, suppose there are two DMUs, named A and B, with a single fixed-sum output. When DMU A is under evaluation, we place the original data of A and B into the Model (3) in Yang et al. (2011) and obtain the output increment that DMU A needs to be efficient. Naturally, this output increment equals the output loss of DMU B. Next, when DMU B is under evaluation, both the output augment and output loss in A are ignored, and the original data are used to measure the output increment of DMU B and the output loss of DMU A. As a result, DMU A and B are evaluated based on different efficient frontiers via the FSODEA model. In fact, the results in each “no memory” competition will construct a different platform for each DMU evaluation.To solve this problem, we propose an equilibrium efficiency frontier data envelopment analysis (EEFDEA) approach to evaluate DMUs with fixed-sum outputs on a common platform. The approach can be divided into two stages. Stage 1 constructs a common platform (or equilibrium efficient frontier) for evaluation based on two strategies. One is an extended minimal adjustment strategy that ensures that originally efficient DMUs are still efficient. The other is an equilibrium competition strategy that makes all DMUs achieve a common equilibrium efficient frontier. Based on the common frontier, Stage 2 evaluates all DMUs with their original inputs and outputs.The remainder of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews some fixed -sum output DEA models proposed by Yang et al. (2011). Section 3 introduces the EEFDEA approach via two stages: constructing a common equilibrium efficient frontier and proposing a corresponding evaluation model. Section 4 uses two numerical examples to verify and illustrate the EEFDEA approach. Conclusions and directions for future research are provided in Section 5.Suppose there are n DMUs and that each DMUj(j=1,2,…,n) consumes m inputs xij(i=1,…,m) to produce s variable-sum outputs yrj(r=1,…,s), and l fixed-sum outputs ftj(t=1,…,l). Evidently, variable-sum outputs are those whose sum can be expandable. Also, fixed-sum outputs satisfy constraints∑j=1nftj=Ft,∀t∈(1,…,l), where Ftis a constant. The traditional BCC model is formulated to access the efficiency of DMUk(k=1,2,…,n) as follows:(1)ek=Max∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwtftk+μ0∑i=1mvixiks.t.∑r=1suryrj+∑t=1lwtftj+μ0∑i=1mvixij⩽1∀jur,wt,vi⩾0,∀r,t,iwhere ur, wt, viare multipliers of the rth variable-sum output, the tth fixed-sum output and the ith input, respectively. Note that the Model (1) changes to be the CCR model when the variable μ0 equals zero. In order to enable easy solution, the Model (1) can be transformed into a linear program by Charnes–Cooper transformation (Charnes & Cooper, 1962) as follows:(2)ek=Max∑r=1sμryrk+∑t=1lωtftk+u0s.t.∑r=1sμryrj+∑t=1lωtftj-∑i=1mυixij+u0⩽1∀j∑i=1mυixik=1μr,ωt,υi⩾0,∀r,t,iSuppose an optimal solution of the Model (2) isek∗,μ∗,ω∗,υ∗, whereμ∗=μ1∗,μ2∗,…,μs∗,ω∗=ω1∗,ω2∗,…,ωl∗andυ∗=υ1∗,υ2∗,…,υm∗. Then DMUkis efficient ifek∗=1and there exists at least one optimal solution (μ∗,ω∗,υ∗), with μ∗>0 ω∗>0 and υ∗>0. Otherwise, it is inefficient (Cooper et al., 2000).Model (2) can evaluate the efficiency of each DMU in many situations but fails to assess DMUs with fixed-sum outputs. Considering competition over limited resource among DMUs, Yang et al. (2011) proposed the following DEA model, based on a minimal reduction strategy for calculating the minimal aggregated output expansion size for DMUk:(3)Min∑t=1lwtαtks.t.∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwt(ftk+αtk)+μ0∑i=1mvixik=1(3a)∑r=1suryrj+∑t=1lwt(ftj-δtj)+μ0∑i=1mvixij⩽1∀jandj≠k(3b)∑j=1j≠knδtj=αtk0⩽δtj⩽ftj∀t,∀jandj≠k(3c)ur,wt,vi⩾0,∀r,t,i,μ0isfreeIn the Model (3),3Note that the Model (3) in this paper is the same as the Model (3) in Yang et al. (2011). And we find that their model cannot transform to be the linear the Model (11) in appendix of Yang et al. (2011) unless we replace the objective function of the Model (3)Min∑rutβrkwith.Min∑rutβrk/∑ivixik. This mistake also gives rise to incorrect results in numerical examples of their paper.3αtkis the output increment that DMUkderives from others and δtjis the output reduction of DMUj(j≠k) as an offset for the output increase. The objective function of the Model (3) is to minimize the weighted sum of outputs increment of DMUk. The first constraint (3a) makes DMUkbecomes relatively efficient after outputs improving and constraints (3b) ensure other DMUs’ efficiencies cannot be greater than one after reducing outputs. The constraint∑j=1j≠knδtj=αtkin (3c) ensures the total sum of each output is fixed after adjustment. According to this constraint, the objective function of the Model (3) can be changed into minimize the weighted sum of outputs reduction of all DMUs except DMUk. This is the reason why Yang et al. (2011) called it the minimum reduction strategy. The constraints 0⩽δtj⩽ftj∀t, ∀j and j≠k in (3c) ensure the output reduction δtjmust be positive and be smaller than the corresponding actual output ftj.This section introduces an EEFDEA approach via two subsections. Section 3.1 focuses on how to construct a common platform (or equilibrium efficient frontier) for the latter DMUs’ evaluation. And Section 3.2 evaluates DMUs with fixed-sum outputs based on the common platform obtained in Section 3.1.In this subsection, an equilibrium efficient frontier as a common evaluation platform can be achieved on the base of two strategies: an extended minimal adjustment strategy and an equilibrium strategy.To guarantee the existence of an equilibrium efficient frontier, we first propose the Model (4) based on the extended minimal adjustment strategy in this subsection. Note that x, y, f, δ in this model have three indices and should be explained one by one as follows. xikdenotes as the ith input of candidate DMUk.xijp(p=1,2)denotes as the ith input ofDMUjp(jp∈Ep,jp≠k,p=1,2). Similarly, yrkand ftkrespectively denote as the rth variable-sum output and tth fixed-sum output of DMUk.yrjpandftjprespectively denote as the rth variable-sum output and tth fixed-sum output ofDMUjp(jp∈Ep,jp≠k,p=1,2). Andδtjpdenotes as the tth output reduction ofDMUjp(jp∈Ep,jp≠k,p=1,2). After explaining indices of each variable, the Model (4) is written as follows:(4)Min∑t=1lwtαtks.t.∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwt(ftk+αtk)+μ0∑i=1mvixik=1(4a)∑r=1suryrj1+∑t=1lwt(ftj1-δtj1)+μ0∑i=1mvixij1=1∀j1∈E1,j1≠k(4b)∑r=1suryrj2+∑t=1lwt(ftj2-δtj2)+μ0∑i=1mvixij2⩽1∀j2∈E2,j2≠k(4c)αtk=∑p=12∑jp∈Ep/{k}δtjp,0⩽δtjp⩽ftjpfor∀t,∀jp≠k,p=1,2.(4d)ur,vi,wt⩾0,μ0for freeIn the Model (4), E1 and E2 are two dynamic sets initially denoted as E1={j∣DMUjis efficient in the Model(2)} and E2={j∣DMUjis inefficient in the Model(2)}, respectively. Explanations of the word “dynamic” refer to Section 3.1.2.The first constraint (4a) ensures that the evaluated DMU is efficient. Constraints (4b) ensure that originally efficient DMUs are still efficient. These two types of constraints ensure that the evaluated DMU and previously efficient DMUs are included in E1. Constraints (4c) guarantee the remaining DMUs efficiency scores cannot be greater than one. Equations in constraints (4d) guarantee outputs increment of one DMU equals to the sum of outputs decrement of other DMUs. Inequalities in (4d) guarantee that the output decrements must be positive and are not greater than existing outputs. After the final-round processing, all DMUs belong to E1 (i.e., all DMUs are on the efficient frontier). This guarantees the achievement of the final equilibrium efficient frontier.First, we show that the Model (4) is always feasible via the following theorem.Theorem 1The Model(4)is always feasible.See Appendix A.□Note that the Model (4) is a nonlinear program. However, it can readily be transformed into a linear program model (the Model (5)), as below. Let βtk=wtαtkandγtjp=wtδtjp(for ∀t, k, j;p=1,2), then the Model (5) becomes the following model:(5)Min∑t=1lβtks.t.∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1l(wtftk+βtk)-∑i=1mvixik+μ0=0∑r=1suryrj1+∑t=1l(wtftj1+βtj1)-∑i=1mvixij1+μ0=0∀j1∈E1,j1≠k∑r=1suryrj2+∑t=1l(wtftj2+βtj2)-∑i=1mvixij2+μ0⩽0∀j2∈E2,j2≠k∑i=1mvixij⩾ε∀jβtk=∑p=12∑jp∈Ep/{k}γtjp,0⩽γtjp⩽wtftjpfor∀t,∀jp≠k,p=1,2.ur,vi,wt⩾0,μ0forfreewhere ε in the Model (5) is a given positive constant. Denote an optimal solution of the Model (5) asur∗,vi∗,wt∗,βtk∗,γtjp∗for any r, i, t, j≠k, p=1, 2. Then, the minimal output reduction amountδtjp∗forDMUjpand the minimal aggregated output augment amountαtk∗for DMUkareδtjp∗=γtjp∗wt∗(p=1,2)andαtk∗=∑p=12∑jp∈EP/{k}δtjp∗, respectively. Especially, ifwt∗=0, letδtjp∗=0, which is consistent with the minimization of the objective of the Model (4).Based on the Model (5), we have the following theorems:Theorem 2Denote the minimal aggregated output augment amount asαtk∗for DMUk; we then have:(i)If DMUkis inefficient and not weakly efficient, thenαtk∗≠0(for at least one t).If DMUkis strongly efficient, thenαtk∗=0(for all t).See Appendix A.□Theorem 2 is readily accepted because inefficient DMUs need to derive outputs from other DMUs to be efficient.If DMUkis weakly efficient, we cannot ascertain whetherαtk∗equals to 0 or not, because bothαtk∗=0andαtk∗≠0may occur in this situation. In first case whereαtk∗=0,DMUkhas been in the steady state in which DMUkneed not derive any extra fixed-sum outputs from other DMUs to improve its performance.In other case whereαtk∗≠0, outputs of DMUkhave been addedαtk∗, and it may be strongly or weakly efficient. However, no matter how situation DMUkwill be in, it has been in the steady state as described before. In other word,αtk∗=0always holds when DMUkwith output adjustments is treated as a candidate again.Similarly, the above conclusion relative to the case whereαtk∗≠0can also be applied to inefficient and not weakly efficient DMUs. Given this, we can conclude that any DMU in any state (inefficient or efficient) could achieve the steady state through at most one round optimization. This conclusion guarantees that all DMUs can converge to an equilibrium efficient frontier in finite rounds optimization via the Model (5).Theorem 3Ifvi∗,ur∗,wt∗,μ0∗,βtk∗,γtj∗is an optimal solution to the Model(5)with one given positive constant ε, then,ε′εvi∗,ur∗,wt∗,μ0∗,βtk∗,γtj∗(for∀i,r,t,j≠k)is also an optimal solution of the Model(5)with any other positive constant ε′ in the same round optimization.See Appendix A.Theorem 3 shows that theαtk∗andδtj∗obtained by an optimal solution of the Model (5) with any given positive constant ε are optimal in the Model (4). The reason is as follows. Supposevi∗,ur∗,wt∗,μ0∗,βtk∗,γtj∗be an optimal solution of the Model (5) with an arbitrary positive constant ε. According to Theorem 3,ε′εvi∗,ur∗,wt∗,μ0∗,βtk∗,γtj∗is also an optimal solution of the Model (5) with ε′. Then, we getαtk∗=βtk∗wt∗=ε′εβtk∗ε′εwt∗andδtj∗=γtj∗wt∗=ε′εγtj∗ε′εwt∗, which proves the reasoning in the beginning of the paragraph.In this subsection, we present an equilibrium competition strategy based on the Model (4) or (5) to achieve an equilibrium efficient frontier among DMUs. The equilibrium efficient frontier can be achieved by four steps:Step 1: Evaluate all DMUs via the Model (2) and rank them in an ascending order (see Appendix B), and divide all DMUs into two sets: efficient and inefficient DMU set. Take Fig. 14Note: Figs. 1 and 2 which illustrate how DMUs with fixed-sum outputs achieve equilibrium state are not precise figures but sketches.4as an example, there are four DMUs named A, B, C, and D. Each DMU has one input and one fixed-sum output. Based on the Model (2), DMUs A and B are efficient and DMUs C and D are inefficient. Then, all DMUs are divided into two sets: efficient set E1={A,B} and inefficient one E2={C,D}. Denote eA, eB, eC, eDas efficiency scores of DMUs A, B, C, D, respectively. Then, we rank them in an ascending order such that eC<eD<1=eA=eB.Step 2: The most inefficient DMU in the current round is processed via the Model (5). The DMU will become efficient after adjusting its outputs and will be listed in set E1. Note that, in each round, the variation of the outputs has “memory” (i.e., both the output augments of the candidate DMU and output losses of other DMUs are recorded and included in the new adjusted DMUs in the next round). For example, in the first round, DMU C is the most inefficient DMU which is disposed of first via the Model (5). See Fig. 1 again, the piecewise line PABQ is the traditional BCC efficient frontier. By increasing output amountαtC∗(fort=1,2), DMU C moves to C1. Meanwhile, DMU A, B, D, by reducing output amountδtj∗(fort=1,2,j=A,B,D), move to A1, B1, and D1, respectively. Accordingly, the efficient frontier PABQ is changed to be P1A1B1Q1. In terms of constraint (4b) in the Model (4), originally efficient DMUs A, B are still efficient. Constraint (4a) guarantees that DMU C derives outputs from other competitors to become efficient. The inefficient DMU D reduces its outputs to be more inefficient. As a result, DMUs A, B, and C belong to set E1. DMU D becomes the unique element of E2. Then, all altered DMUs are put into the next round.Step 3: Repeating Step 1 and Step 2 until all adjusted DMUs are on the same efficient frontier (i.e., all of them belong to set E1). This final result is called as an equilibrium efficient frontier. Continuing with the above example, based on Fig. 1, we use Fig. 2to show the process of the second-round (i.e. last-round) adjustment in which DMU D is selected to be the candidate. Similar to the first round, after the adjustment, DMU D is efficient and belongs to E1. At the same time, E2 becomes an empty set. It means, henceforth, all DMUs are efficient and lie on the new efficient frontier P2A2B2Q2. So far, the equilibrium efficient frontier has been achieved.Step 4: Comparing the final fixed-sum outputs of DMUs in equilibrium efficient frontier with those of original DMUs, the ultimate gains or losses of each output are captured explicitly. Suppose that the tth final fixed-sum output of DMUjisftj∗. Then, the corresponding variation of the output of DMUjis expressed asΔtj∗=ftj∗-ftj. Evidently,∑j=1nΔtj∗=0and an output gains whenΔtj∗>0, loses whenΔtj∗<0, and remains the same whenΔtj∗=0. This step is necessary becauseΔtj∗is a crucial element of the following EEFDEA model (the Model 6). For details refer to Section 3.2.Section 3.1 shows how to construct a common equilibrium efficient frontier by adjusting fixed-sum outputs among DMUs. Based on such the frontier, this section evaluates each DMUkwith its original outputs yrk,ftkvia the following model:(6)ekEEFDEA=Min∑i=1mvixik+μ0∑r=1suryrk+∑t=1lwtftks.t.∑i=1mvixij+μ0∑r=1suryrj+∑wtftj+Δtj∗⩾1∀jur,wt,vi⩾0,∀r,t,i;μ0is freeIn the Model (6), the objective function is to minimize the output-oriented efficiency of DMUk. It is noteworthy that DMUkis evaluated with its original data: inputs xij, variable-sum outputs yrkand fixed-sum outputs ftk. All inputs and outputs of DMUkare not adjusted.Constraints of the Model (6) show the output-oriented efficiency of each adjusted DMU should be not less than 1. Such adjusted DMUs can be regarded as virtual DMUs with inputs xij, variable-sum outputs yrkand adjusted fixed-sum outputsftj+Δtj∗, where allΔtj∗are obtained based on Steps 1–4 in Section 3.1. Based on Steps 1–4, all these virtual DMUs belong to efficient set E1. Therefore, they construct an efficient frontier for evaluation. Such the frontier is called as the common equilibrium efficient frontier in Section 3.1. In light of the property of the common equilibrium efficient frontier, this frontier satisfies the condition that fixed-sum outputs increment one DMU needs for projecting will be offset by the reduction of other DMUs. Therefore, the Model (6) evaluates all DMUs based on a common equilibrium efficient frontier.The Model (6) is output-oriented. As compared to input orientation, output orientation is chosen for two reasons: (1) the output-oriented model projects DMUs onto efficient frontier in output direction, which the property of fixed-sum outputs is considered; and (2) the output-oriented model is always feasible while the input-oriented in dual VRS version may be infeasible. This finding is confirmed by the following corollary.Corollary 1The infeasible solution of input oriented dual EEFDEA VRS model occurs when inequationmax1⩽j⩽nftj>max1⩽j⩽nftj+Δtj∗holds.See Appendix C.□To solve the Model (6), we also transform this non-linear program into a linear program via a Charnes–Cooper transformation (Charnes & Cooper, 1962) as follows:(7)ekEEFDEA=Min∑i=1mυixik+u0s.t.∑r=1sμryrj+∑t=1lωtftj+Δtj∗-∑i=1mυixij-u0⩽0,∀j∑r=1sμryrk+∑t=1lωtftk=1μr,υi,ωt⩾0∀r,i,t;u0for freeEvidently, the efficiency of DMUk based on Model (7) may be greater than one, which can be regarded as a super-efficiency measure. Consequently, we can completely rank all DMUs in term of efficiencies. In fact, ranking DMUs from the perspective of efficiency is also an initial motivation of many other DEA-based studies (Alcaraz, Ramón, Ruiz, & Sirvent, 2013; Yang, Yang, Liu, & Li, 2013; Ruiz, 2013; Llamazares & Peña, 2013; Lim, Oh, & Zhu, 2014). Ranking is much meaningful in actual managerial decision. For example, according to the performance ranking in Olympics, each participating country can know its relative performance as compared with others. It is much helpful for the country in making and analyzing some managerial decisions such as how to improve its performance in the next Olympic Games.With respect to models (6) and (7), we have the following theorem:Theorem 4Considering the relationship between DEA CCR efficiencyekCCRand EEF efficiencyekEEFDEA-CCRof DMUk, we have:(i)ekCCR⩽ekEEFDEA-CCR;ifekCCR=1, thenekEEFDEA-CCR⩾1whenDMUkisweaklyCCRefficientekEEFDEA-CCR>1whenDMUkisstronglyCCRefficient.See Appendix A.□Similarly, the proposed approach also holds under the assumption of variable returns to scale (VRS). We can obtain corresponding efficiencies and theorems.This section illustrates our new method through two examples. One uses the small data set from Yang et al. (2011) and the other uses data from the appliance industry in China. For the convenience in comparing results between the proposed approach in this paper and the approach from prior literature, all models used here are under constant return to scale (CRS) assumption. In addition, properties of our proposed models under CRS and VRS assumptions are similar and all theorems hold true under both assumptions.We first consider the data of six DMUs used in Yang et al. (2011) as shown in Table 1, where each DMU uses one input to produce two outputs: including one variable-sum output and one fixed-sum output.For the convenience in comparing results, we first give the results of Yang et al. (2011) as shown in Table 2. Table 2 shows the minimal output augment α∗ of each DMUand the minimal output losses of the other DMUs δ∗. These values are calculated based on the Model (3) in Yang et al. (2011) under CRS assumption. For example, row 4 of Table 2 shows that DMU C derives 2.8303 units of output from DMUs A (0.7515 units), B (1.0551 units), D (0.2462 units), E (0.2213 units), and F (0.5562 units). This is quite different from the results given in Yang et al. (2011). Reasons refer to footnote 2 in Section 2. In addition, Table 2 also shows that strongly efficient DMUs, A, B, and F, do not derive any amount of output from others. It is consistent with Theorem 2.Table 3describes the results of the procedure that all DMUs achieve the equilibrium efficient frontier stage-by-stage in terms of Steps 1–4 in Section 3.1. The second column reports initial CCR efficiency scores of DMUs based on the Model (2). It shows that DMUs A, B, and F are efficient and DMUs C, D and E are inefficient. According to Theorem 1, DMUs C, E, and D may need to derive fixed output from others. Therefore, DMUs C, D, and E belong to the inefficient set E2, the others belong to set E1.Now, we deal with DMUs C, E, and D one-by-one in an efficiency ascending order via model (4). The last four columns of Table 3 report the adjusted output and the CCR efficiency score of each DMU in each round. The fourth column shows that DMUs D and C become strongly efficient after processing DMU C in the first round competition. In this case, both DMUs C and D move to E1 from E2 and only DMU E belongs to E2.The last two columns report results of processing DMU E after the second round processing. The last column shows that all DMUs are adjusted to be strongly efficient. Therefore, the adjusted fixed-sum output of each DMU in the fifth column is optimal and corresponds toftj+Δtj∗(∀t,j)in Step 4. And all these adjusted DMUs are on a common equilibrium efficient frontier.Based on the common equilibrium efficient frontier, we evaluate all DMUs with their original inputs and outputs via the Model (6) under CRS assumption. Results are shown in the last two columns of Table 4. For the convenience in comparing results, Table 4 also lists the results based on the traditional CCR model and FSODEA CCR model (Yang et al., 2011), and we name these models and our Model (6) as CCR, FSODEA and EEFDEA, respectively.Table 4 shows that, for efficient DMUs, both the traditional CCR and FSODEA CCR scores are all “1” as well as their ranks, while the EEFDEA CCR scores are not less than one and corresponding ranks also differ. Take DMU D and F as an example, both their inputs and first outputs are identical. Their second outputs are different with the relationOD2nd=1<OF2nd=2. Thus, DMU F dominates DMU D. However, from the perspective of efficiency, their efficiencies obtained by both traditional CCR model and FSODEA model equal to 1. That is, the two DMUs’ performance is identical which contradicts with the conclusion that F dominates D. While according to our EEFDEA method, the result obtained reports eD=1<eF=1.2391. It shows not only discriminative performance and rank orders, but also how much difference of efficiencies between the two DMUs. In this sense, the approach proposed in this paper has more powerful discriminant ability. EEFDEA CCR estimations are more realistic than traditional CCR when fixed-sum outputs are considered. And the EEFDEA model is easier to be understood and explained than the FSODEA model because all DMUs are evaluated based on a common equilibrium efficient frontier.To extend the data of fixed-sum outputs from one to multiple dimensions, we reconsider the data set with two fixed-sum outputs as given in Table 5. Table 6shows the minimal output adjustments based on the CRS framework in Yang et al. (2011). Table 7shows the result of each step of an equilibrium efficient frontier achievement based on our proposed approach. The final adjustments of the two fixed outputs are listed in the penultimate and antepenultimate columns, respectively. After that, all DMUs are adjusted to be CCR strongly efficient. That is, a common equilibrium efficient frontier has been constructed by those virtual DMUs (or adjusted DMUs). Based on this equilibrium efficient frontier, we evaluate each DMU with its original fixed-sum outputs using the Model (6). For the convenience in comparing results, we list the efficiency scores of EFFDEA CCR, FSODEA CCR, and traditional CCR in Table 8. Similar advantages of using EEFDEA approach can be found in this multiple-dimension case.In this subsection, we apply the EEFDEA approach to a real data of appliance industry in 2012 in China. The data collected from China Fortune 500 are shown in Table 9, in which each firm has two inputs (total assets and employees) and two outputs (profits and market5The market is defined as worldwide market.5share). In this paper, both the two outputs are viewed as fixed-sum outputs, because the sum of appliance industry profit in one year and the total market share are constant.Each firm is evaluated based on the EEFDEA approach under the CRS assumption, and results are shown in the last column of Table 10. For convenience of comparison, results based on the traditional CCR and the FSODEA methods are given in the second and third columns of Table 10 as well.Table 10 reports that the efficiency score of Haier Electronics is not less than that of any other firms based on three models (CCR, FSODEA-CCR and EEFDEA-CCR). Three companies (Suning Appliance, Hisense Electric, Zhejiang Supor) have same efficiencies based on the CCR and FSODEA-CCR models. That is, the four companies show identical performances according to the two methods. Nevertheless, those firms can be ranked completely by the EEFDEA approach as follows: eHaier>eSupor>eHisense>eSuning. In prior literature, the super-CCR model proposed by Andersen and Petersen (1993) can also give a full rank order among four efficient DMUs, as follows: eHaier>eSuning>eHisense>eSupor. However, their method neither evaluates DMUs based on a common efficient frontier nor takes fixed-sum outputs into account.An interesting finding in Table 10 is that some companies such as Guangdong Midea and GOME whose efficiency scores are greater than one based on the EEFDEA CCR model, but less than one based on CCR and FSODEA-CCR models. It means that CCR-inefficient DMUs may obtain EEFDEA scores greater than one. This situation occurs when those initially inefficient DMUs are on the outside of the new efficient frontier (equilibrium efficient frontier). In addition, the four CCR-efficient companies’ efficiency scores are all greater than one based on the EEFDEA method, which is consistent with theorem 4 (ii).The numerical example shows that the proposed EEFDEA approach can be applicable to the data from profit sectors i.e. the appliance industry in this subsection. In fact, this approach can also be applied to some non-profit sectors, especially schools and hospitals that do have a fixed population base.In this study, we propose an EEFDEA approach to evaluate DMUs with fixed-sum outputs. A characteristic of the EEFDEA approach is that it evaluates DMUs based on an equilibrium efficient frontier. We first introduce an extended minimal adjustment strategy, in the form of the Model (4), which ensures that the originally efficient DMUs are still efficient. Then, an equilibrium competitive strategy was developed to put all DMUs on a common efficient frontier. Based on this strategy, DMUs with fixed-sum outputs can be evaluated fairly by the proposed EEFDEA model.Specifically, two numerical examples are used to illustrate our EEFDEA approach and compare it with others from prior literature. Results show that the EEFDEA approach is unique one which can satisfy the following four conditions simultaneously when evaluating competitive DMUs with fixed-sum outputs: (i) evaluating based on a common equilibrium efficient frontier, (ii) taking account of fixed-sum outputs, (iii) extending fixed-sum outputs from one dimension to multi-dimensions, and (iv) providing a full rank order of DMUs.From a practical perspective, this study makes all DMUs achieve the equilibrium efficient frontier in an ascending order. However, the competitive order affects the equilibrium efficient frontier and the evaluation of DMUs. Thus, future research may attempt to extend this work to a unique common best-practice frontier regardless of what competitive order is considered. Additionally, we highlight another three issues for further studies namely (1) how to simplify steps for reaching an equilibrium efficient frontier, (2) how to dispose negative and weakly disposability outputs, and (3) how to make a dynamic evaluation in multi-period.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
