@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A framework for performance measurement during production ramp-up of assembly stations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyse the ramp-up process and identify the key performance metrics.We formalise the ramp-up process as a state transition model.We provide a framework for measuring the overall ramp-up performance based on the identified metrics.The performance measure has been shown to improve ramp-up efficiency and reduce time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Manufacturing,Production,Ramp-up,Performance measures,Decision support,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Production ramp-up is an important phase in the lifecycle of a manufacturing system which still has significant potential for improvement and thereby reducing the time-to-market of new and updated products. Production systems today are mostly one-of-a-kind complex, engineered-to-order systems. Their ramp-up is a complex order of physical and logical adjustments which are characterised by try and error decision making resulting in frequent reiterations and unnecessary repetitions. Studies have shown that clear goal setting and feedback can significantly improve the effectiveness of decision-making in predominantly human decision processes such as ramp-up. However, few measurement-driven decision aides have been reported which focus on ramp-up improvement and no systematic approach for ramp-up time reduction has yet been defined. In this paper, a framework for measuring the performance during ramp-up is proposed in order to support decision making by providing clear metrics based on the measurable and observable status of the technical system. This work proposes a systematic framework for data preparation, ramp-up formalisation, and performance measurement. A model for defining the ramp-up state of a system has been developed in order to formalise and capture its condition. Functionality, quality and performance based metrics have been identified to formalise a clear ramp-up index as a measurement to guide and support the human decision making. For the validation of the proposed framework, two ramp-up processes of an assembly station were emulated and their comparison was used to evaluate this work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today, most production systems are highly complex one-of-a-kind systems which are custom engineered to meet specific production requirements. This combined with the frequent need to integrate new technologies and processes to respond to product innovations and market pressure, makes ramp-up a very complex and non-repetitive process which is difficult to plan and structure in advance. Consequently, bringing these complex systems up to the desired operational performance characteristics requires a lot of effort and knowledge. The process is not well understood and often driven by trial and error rather than an overall systematic strategy. This can lead to big delays before the product reaches the market due to costly repetitions and less than optimal decisions. The focus during ramp-up is primarily on achieving the required production volume to enter the market and maximise the likely profit. Hence, the ramp-up phase is often being described in terms of production volume over time, while achieving the desired product quality objectives. Ramp-up is constantly being highlighted by industry as one of the production phases with large potential for further improvement and has gained a lot of attention from the research community (Ceglarek et al., 2004; Fjällström et al., 2009; Haller et al., 2003; Terwiesch and Bohn, 2001; Terwiesch and Xu, 2004).Terwiesch and Bohn (2001) have defined ramp-up as follows. “The period between the end of product development and full capacity production is known as production ramp-up”. Following this definition, the ramp-up phase can be more precisely defined as the process of bringing a production system up to its required operational characteristics after it has been designed and build and before it is taken into full operation. In reality there is rarely such a clear separation between the phases and product changes and system build adjustments take place while the system is being already ramped up. Equally, the system will often be taken into operation before it has reached its full production capacity. In Fig. 1ramp-up is shown in the context of the manufacturing system development and production phases.A lot of the current research highlights the significance of knowledge capturing during the ramp-up phase and the human knowledge loss in order to reduce the time spent (Fjällström et al., 2009; Terwiesch and Bohn, 2001; Terwiesch and Xu, 2004). Knowledge capture aims to harness and improve the expertise of the engineers involved in the ramp-up process. Measurements are required to contextualise good and less desirable practise and strategies during ramp-up. It has also been identified that goal setting and feedback based on clear metrics can affect the performance of humans (Locke and Latham, 2002). Stansfield and Longenecker (2006) study the implication of feedback to the productivity of a manufacturing company and they prove an improvement of 10% in those cases where feedback is provided.This paper proposes a new framework for the systematic measurement of ramp-up performance in order to support a decision making process which will eventually lead to ramp-up time reduction. The focus is placed on the definition of an accurate and comprehensive measurement which captures all the relevant aspects of the ramp-up process and does not solely focus on a singular objective.The structure on the rest of this work is as follows. In part 2 a review of current ramp-up approaches is carried out, followed by a brief survey on performance measurements and their application in manufacturing, as well as performance measurements design methodologies and formalisation of performance indices. Part 3, defines a framework for capturing the dynamics of the ramp-up phase, along with the requirements that should be taken into consideration for measuring performance. In part 4 a mathematical model for measuring performance during ramp-up is presented and illustrated in part 5 with the example of an industrial demonstrator. Finally in part 6 the potential of the proposed approach and future work is discussed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes a new framework to measure the ramp-up progress of manufacturing systems. The framework is based on a formal state-transition model of the ramp-up process. Three performance metrics have been identified to measure the progress and step-by-step status of a system during ramp-up; functionality, quality, and performance optimisation. They correspond to the three main objectives during ramp-up; ensuring that the systems achieves its desired function, ensuring the quality characteristics of the product are met, and improving the performance to the expected level. The new measurement with supporting metrics has been developed following a well-established design methodology and considering the requirements and feedback from industrial experts in the field.The proposed measurement is the first reported approach to support step-by-step decision making during the whole ramp-up process. The inclusion of function and quality focused metrics makes the proposed measurement suitable even for the early ramp-up stages when traditional performance (production volume) focused metrics are still infeasible and impractical to use. It has been demonstrated with the help of a case study that the measurement helps to reduce ramp-up time by providing instant feedback during the process. In addition, the measurement allows a more detailed analysis of ramp-up processes as it links adjustments actions to improvements, ultimately allowing more effective ramp-up strategies to be discovered.Further case studies will be required to more specifically determine the time reduction potential of the proposed metrics when applied during ramp-up. More complex cases will be considered to further validate the proposed framework. Future studies will also consider the impact of different normalisation technics and variation of weights on different ramp-up strategies.Furthermore, one of the key challenges of a discrete state space used to formalise the ramp-up process is its balance between the dimensionality and its level of completeness. The proposed framework provides sound foundation for the better understanding of ramp-up. This can be further extended and be correlated to variations of other key performance indicators such as time, cost or number of steps required to ramp-up a system. Hence additional performance indicators can be associated to the proposed measurement to guide the user during ramp-up.