@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Meta-data envelopment analysis: Finding a direction towards marginal profit maximization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A meta-DEA is developed to find the direction for marginal profit maximization.A meta-DEA illustrates the “frontier about frontier” by marginal productivity.Suggest a direction which can be used in directional distance function (DDF).A comparison of five different directions used for efficiency measure via DDF.An empirical study of U.S. coal-fired power plants operating in 2011.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA),Directional distance function (DDF),Marginal profit maximization,Directional marginal productivity,Coal-fired power plant,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper discusses a new meta-DEA approach to solve the problem of choosing direction vectors when estimating the directional distance function. The proposed model emphasizes finding the “direction” for productivity improvement rather than estimating the “score” of efficiency; focusing on “planning” over “evaluation”. In fact, the direction towards marginal profit maximization implies a step-by-step improvement and “wait-and-see” decision process, which is more consistent with the practical decision-making process. An empirical study of U.S. coal-fired power plants operating in 2011 validates the proposed model. The results show that the efficiency measure using the proposed direction is consistent with all other indices with the exception of the direction towards the profit-maximized benchmark. We conclude that the marginal profit maximization is a useful guide for determining direction in the directional distance function.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA) is a nonparametric approach used to estimate the production function and efficiency of each decision-making unit (DMU) in order to support the performance evaluation of production systems (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978). Given an orientation, although DEA can identify the “position” (i.e., efficiency score) of DMU in the production possibility set, it is not clear to justify the “direction” (orientation) we choose for projecting an inefficient firm to the frontier. In particular, it is an unsolved issue to choose the direction vectors when estimating the directional distance function (DDF) (Färe, Grosskopf, & Whittaker, 2013).Previous studies focus on efficiency estimation, i.e., they estimate efficiency using radial-based or slack-based approach given a specific orientation. Debteu (1951) and Farrell (1957) developed indices of technical efficiency measured as the maximum radial reduction in all inputs consistent with the equivalent production of observed output. However, additional slack may still exist in the use of some, but not all inputs, and as a result, a Farrell efficient producer may not be Koopmans efficient (Koopmans, 1951). Therefore, the Russell measure (Färe & Lovell, 1978), the additive DEA model (Charnes, Cooper, Golany, Seiford, & Stutz, 1985), and the slacks-based measure (Tone, 2001) have been proposed to identify an inefficient firm with additional slack and to support Koopmans efficiency (Koopmans, 1951). In addition, in order to contract input level and expand output level simultaneously, the hyperbolic measure (Färe, Grosskopf, & Lovell, 1985; Färe, Grosskopf, Lovell, & Pasurka, 1989) and the directional distance function (DFF) (Chambers, Chung, & Färe, 1996; Chung, Färe, & Grosskopf, 1997) have been developed, particularly to address the undesirable outputs.1The production of desirable output is typically accompanied by the joint production of undesirable by-products, such as pollution. It implies that the reduction of bads will be costly: either abatement capital must be used, production must be cut back, or fines must be paid (Chung et al., 1997).1The DEA literature focuses primarily on efficiency estimation rather than researching the direction for productivity improvement. Typically, the choice of input-oriented or output-oriented DEA models will depend upon the production process characterizing a firm (i.e., minimize the use of inputs to produce a given level of output or maximize the level of output given the levels of the inputs). Lovell (1993) suggested the use of input-oriented models in cases when producers are required to meet market demand and can freely adjust the input usage, whereas output-oriented models are helpful in cases when producers cannot freely adjust the input usage, but can build the capacity flexibility that allows changing the output. Theoretically, the private sector, which is not subject to budget and personnel limitations, would use an input-oriented model, whereas the public sector would use an output-oriented model.Recent studies have focused on finding the proper direction towards the efficient frontier, including the productivity improvement of an efficient firm on the frontier. Frei and Harker (1999) determined the least-norm projection from an inefficient firm to the frontier, but this direction is non-proportional and is not unit-invariant. Extending their work, Baek and Lee (2009) proposed a least-distance measure to represent the shortest projection satisfying unit-invariant property. Aparicio, Ruiz, and Sirvent (2007) found the closest targets of each inefficient firm according to the similarity calculated by distance functions and interpreted them as the closeness between the inputs and outputs of the assessed unit and the proposed targets. Zofio, Paster, and Aparicio (2013) suggested choosing the direction in the direction distance function (DDF) to move towards the allocatively efficient point, i.e., “When market prices are observed and firms have a profit maximizing behavior, it seems natural to choose as the directional vector that projecting inefficient firms towards profit maximizing benchmarks.” Färe et al. (2013) suggested choosing the endogenous direction vectors based on exogenous normalization constraints when estimating the DDF. However, it is void of economic meanings. Lee and Johnson (2012a), who extended to oligopolistic markets, suggested that each firm should select the direction for improvement in the DDF to move towards its Nash equilibrium benchmark.This paper suggests a direction towards marginal profit maximization. This new approach is based on three ideas. First, it is difficult in practice to apply the output-oriented model without the ability to adjust the input resources; on the other hand, it is also difficult to decrease input levels without a decrease of output level. Second, when attempting to adjust the input and output levels, the lack of a relationship between inputs and outputs (i.e., marginal productivity, MP) makes it difficult to characterize the moving process. Third, it is preferable to adopt a wait-and-see criterion due to an uncertain environment (Benavides, Duley, & Johnson, 1999; Lee & Chien, 2013) rather than assuming that a firm can move towards profit maximization benchmark in one shot. The wait-and-see can also response to the change of the production function and marginal productivity over time during the moving process (Førsund & Hjalmarsson, 1974; Lee & Johnson, 2014).Marginal productivity (MP) has an important role in economic theory and applications. The purpose of estimating a production function is to obtain estimates of the regression coefficients. These coefficients refer to the marginal productivities which characterize how the dependent variable will be affected by changing one extra unit of independent variables. Economists use the word “elasticity” to measure the percentage of how changing one variable affects the other variables. From an engineering perspective, the estimation of MP also contributes to capacity planning and resource allocation. Capacity is the maximal output level of a production process. The output is a result of the total productive capability of a firm’s resources including workforce, machinery, and utilities (Lee & Johnson, 2012b). Capacity adjustment is the ability to adjust the output levels in response to a wide variety of uncertainty, in particular demand fluctuation, by controlling variable resources in the short run (Fine & Freund, 1990). In production theory, capacity adjustment can be interpreted as the MP of the production function, i.e., the extra output generated by one more unit of an input.Generally, we calculate the MP of the production function by the partial derivatives of the production function given a smooth efficient frontier if we have a functional form. In practice, the production function cannot be observed easily, and therefore the piece-wise linear production function is estimated using DEA based on collected observations (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984; Charnes et al., 1978; Fried, Lovell, & Schmidt, 2008). However, a piece-wise linear frontier forms a polyhedral set representing production technologies and thus is not differentiable. Podinovski and Førsund (2010) gave an explicit definition of differential characteristics on a non-differentiable efficient frontier and proposed a directional-derivative approach to calculate elasticity measures without any simplifying assumptions. They applied differential characteristics to the DEA frontier and addressed elasticity measures and marginal rates of substitution. This study uses DDF to develop a directional marginal productivity (DMP) which supports an expectable tradeoff between multiple outputs and identifies the marginal profit maximization given price information.This study both fills the existing gap in the literature as well as contributing to practical capacity planning. We believe that our most significant contribution to the area of productivity research is the stress on “productivity improvement” rather than “efficiency measure”, i.e., finding the improving direction. We construct a model to search the best direction for marginal profit maximization, also termed meta-DEA. In fact, to find a direction for marginal profit maximization is more common in practice, for example, a firm may adjust the input resources to control output level (i.e. MP) for addressing demand fluctuation (Lee & Johnson, 2014). In addition, we claim that the direction in which firms usually want to move is to increase both inputs and outputs (e.g., MP) because no company is willing to take the risk of losing sales or market share by contracting its inputs. Technically, of course, this is not strictly an efficiency improvement, but nonetheless, our proposed model is rather a behavioral models than efficiency models and attempts to identify the direction a firm would really change towards rather than to measure efficiency in that direction.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the estimation of directional marginal productivity. Section 3 presents our meta-DEA approach and suggests the direction towards marginal profit maximization. Section 4 describes a DDF efficiency measure for both desirable outputs and undesirable outputs. We also compare five approaches using different direction vectors in DDF. Section 5 explains our empirical study of U.S. coal-fired power plants operating in 2011. Section 6 concludes.As mentioned, marginal productivity (MP) represents the extra output generated by one more unit of an input. There are two common methods to estimate MP. Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA) estimates the production function with a given functional form, e.g., a simple case of a linear function estimated by ordinary least squares (OLS). The coefficients associated with the independent factors provide estimates of the MP. Data envelopment analysis (DEA) constructs a piece-wise linear production function approximating the true production function, and the dual multiplier linear program to the primal envelopment model represents the MP.Both of these methods have some drawbacks. SFA requires defining a functional form and risks potential misspecification, whereas DEA’s observations on the production frontier do not have unique shadow prices, i.e., it is common to have shadow price values of zero. To overcome the problem of nondifferentiability, Podinovski and Førsund (2010) introduced right-hand and left-hand elasticities, which can be viewed as directional derivatives of the optimal value function in a modified envelopment DEA model, and which can be calculated using a variant of the theorem on marginal values in linear programming (Shapiro, 1979). The regular elasticity measure is obtained when the two one-sided elasticities are equal.This section describes a proposed directional marginal productivity (DMP) model via the directional distance function (DDF). Keeping our model as general as possible, we consider the desirable outputs and undesirable outputs. Recall that the DEA estimator assumes that the good outputs are freely disposable; however, this property cannot be directly applied to bad outputs. Intuitively, we can reduce the level of the good output which in turn will result in a proportionate reduction of the undesirable outputs. In other words, the free disposability assumption in DEA ignores the possibility to decrease undesirable outputs by down-sizing the activity level, i.e., a proportional contraction of good outputs and bad outputs is feasible simultaneously. This property is termed “weak disposability” (Färe & Grosskopf, 2003; Kuosmanen & Podinovski, 2009). We note, however, that the relationship between good output and undesirable output does not present substitutability, i.e., these two outputs are jointly weakly disposable and the undesirable output is a byproduct of good output. Let x represent the input vector, y the desirable output vector, and b the undesirable output vector. The production possibility set can be denoted by T={(x,y,b): x can produce (y,b)}. Thus, the weak disposability of desirable outputs and undesirable outputs will be formulated as: if (x,y,b)∊T and 0⩽θ⩽1, then (x,θy,θb)∊T.Shephard (1974) models the weak disposability in the nonparametric approach using a single abatement factor for all observations in the sample. Recently, Kuosmanen (2005) argues that the Shephard technology is not the minimal weakly disposable technology and claims that we should require the use of multiple different abatement factors (i.e. one for each observed activity in the sample) to satisfy the minimum extrapolation principle. Färe and Grosskopf (2009) reconsider the question of a single versus multiple abatement factors and maintain that a single abatement factor suffices after all. They also point out that the Kuosmanen technology may exhibit strong disposability of undesirable outputs. To clarify the issue, Kuosmanen and Podinovski (2009) provide explicitly theoretical reasons and graphical illustrations to show that the Shephard technology is not the minimal weakly disposable technology even if we relax the convexity axiom entirely.Therefore, we introduce the weak disposability by Kuosmanen’s convex technology with undesirable outputs (Kuosmanen, 2005). Let index i represent the input, index j the desirable output, index q the undesirable output, and index k the firm. Index r represents a specific firm and is an alias of k, and index r′ represents the efficient benchmarks which firm r projects onto the frontier. Observations Xikrepresent the ith input level, Yjkthe jth desirable output level, and Bqkthe qth undesirable output level of firm k. Letλkbe the decision variable representing the intensity weights of the convex combination between firms, μkthe decision variable for weak disposability of Kuosmanen’s technology, and η the decision variable for the efficiency measure.Let i∗ be an index of one specific input, J∗⊂J be the subset of desirable output set, and Q∗⊂Q be the subset of undesirable output whose marginal productivity we wish to investigate. Letgx∈R+Ibe the direction vector for the input.gy∈R+Jandgb∈R+Qrepresent the direction vectors for the desirable output and undesirable output. Given direction vector,(gxi,gyj,gbq), wheregxi=0,gyj≥0, andgbq⩾0, we propose model (1) to define the DDF Do(x,y,b;gx,gy,gb) with respect to the production possibility set T to measure the efficiency η of firm r. We usually set∑j∈J∗gyj+∑q∈Q∗gbq=1for unit simplex (Färe et al., 2013).2The unit of measurement problem that may occur is trivially corrected by introducing appropriate weights, in particular, to ensure compactness (Färe et al., 2013).2(1)Maxη∑j∈J∗gyj+∑q∈Q∗gbq=Maxηs.t.∑k(λk+μk)Xi∗k≤Xi∗r∑k(λk+μk)Xik≤Xir,∀i≠i∗∑kλkYjk≥Yjr+ηgyj,∀j∈J∗∑kλkYjk≥Yjr,∀j∈J⧹J∗∑kλkBqk=Bqr-ηgbq,∀q∈Q∗∑kλkBqk=Bqr,∀q∈Q⧹Q∗∑k(λk+μk)=1λk,μk⩾0,ηis freeLet vi, uj, wqand u0 be the decision variables representing the dual multipliers of the input constraint, the desirable output constraint, the undesirable output constraint, and the convex-combination constraint respectively in model (1). LetXiMax=max{Xik},YjMax=max{Yjk}, andBqMax=max{Bqk}. We transfer model (1) to model (2), which is a dual form of model (1) (for duality theory, see Bazaraa, Jarvis, & Sherali, 2009). Note that the MP is a differential characteristic of the production frontier. Thus, we only discuss the efficient firm r′, i.e., efficiency measure η=0 and∑iviXir′-∑jujYjr′+∑qwqBqr′+u0=0since firm r′ is on the frontier. We eliminate the unit of factors and generate model (2) to estimate the DMP of Yj, j∊J∗, and Bq, q∊Q∗ with respect toXi∗as follows.3The reason for introducing unit simplex and eliminating the measurement units of inputs and outputs is to normalize the weight(gxi,gyj,gbq)which presents a tradeoff among outputs and satisfy unit-invariant property since we use objective function value (i.e. only one value) to calculate MP for multiple outputs. Thus, DMP can present the marginal rate accurately.3(2)Minvi∗s.t.∑iviXir′XiMax-∑jujYjr′YjMax+∑qwqBqr′BqMax+u0=0∑iviXikXiMax-∑jujYjkYjMax+∑qwqBqrBqMax+u0≥0,∀k∑iviXikXiMax+u0≥0,∀k∑j∈J∗ujgyj+∑q∈Q∗wqgbq=1vi,uj⩾0,wq,u0are freeTherefore, we calculate the DMP by∂Yjr′,Bqr′∂Xi∗r′=vi∗Xi∗MaxgyjYjMax,-gbqBqMax,∀j∈J∗,∀q∈Q∗. In this case, firm r referring to efficient benchmark r′ would like to increase desirable outputs and decrease undesirable outputs simultaneously by controlling input level. Knowing the DMP helps the firm’s management to determine a better direction for effective resource allocation, e.g., “Generate more product, but less pollution”. In this case we assume MP towards a decrease of undesirable output because in practice, the firm can purchase pollution abatement equipment. Moreover, we regard the direction vector(gyj,gbq)as the “weightings” between investigated outputs, i.e., the larger the weight the closer the direction of the multi-output MP to the output with the higher weight. In a special case of single input, single desirable output, and single undesirable output, for example, if (gy,gb)=(1,0), the DMP estimated by model (2) is the same as the single-product MP estimated by Podinovski and Førsund (2010) with respect to the single output (Lee, 2013). Fig. 1illustrates the DMP estimation with desirable and undesirable outputs for firm A.We note that it is invalid to estimate the MP on the portion of free disposability with respect to the inputs. First, intuitively, the free disposable portion shows the direction that can reduce its input level while still maintaining the same outputs, i.e., this direction cannot truly reflect MP. Second, MP estimates on the portion of free disposability with respect to inputs are equal to zero by model (2), even though MP in fact may not be zero. This leads to following Proposition 1.Proposition 1If the direction for MP estimation used in model(2)projects to the portion of free disposability with respect to inputs, then the MP estimate is equal to 0.See Appendix A.□As mentioned, a firm wants to move towards its allocatively efficient benchmark based on maximizing its marginal profits. Fig. 2illustrates the frontier with desirable output and undesirable output. We can calculate the firm’s DMP on the surface of the efficient frontier, because we know that different directions i.e., weighting vectors, generate different DMPs. In other words, MPs can make a span like a frontier, although we note that it is associated with MP rather than the levels of inputs or outputs. Thus, DEA forms a “production possibility set” in the level of input x, whereas what we term a “meta-DEA” forms a “marginal production possibility set” towards the level of input x+Δx based on estimated MPs, where Δx is the extra unit of input. In this paper, a meta-DEA frontier refers to “frontier about frontier” and provides further information to describe the differential characteristics of the DEA frontier or production function. Fig. 3illustrates a meta-DEA frontier, where P(x) is an output space referring to the production possibility set given the level of one specific input X0.Given the output price vector (Py,Pb), we can easily and practically find the direction for marginal profit maximization when increasing one unit of single input. First, we manually generate the several DMPs to create a span of MP given stepwise-picked directions. Then calculate the allocative efficiency with respect to the meta-DEA frontier based on these discrete directions/observations (i.e., vectors of DMPs). In practice, we note that different directions form distinct “bins” and represent the resolution, namely, the “bin size” with respect to the direction vectors we assign helps us to determine the best direction. For example of two-output case, the direction can be(gy,gb)=(1,0),(0.9,0.1),(0.8,0.2),…,(0.1,0.9),and(0,0.1)with 0.1 interval. The smaller the interval, the better direction we can find since a higher resolution. Let(Pxi,Pyj,Pbq)be a given vector of input price, desirable output price, and undesirable output price andgyjψ,gbqψbe a vector of “decision variable” representing the ψ th direction we find such that∑j∈J∗gyjψ+∑q∈Q∗gbqψ=1and0≤gyjψ,gbqψ⩽1,∀j∈J∗,q∈Q∗,∀ψ. We mathematically define the approximate optimal direction vectorgyj∗,gbq∗identified for marginal profit maximization.4We focus on the impact on all outputs when increasing one unit of one specific input. Thus, the marginal cost is fixed as a constantPxi∗(i.e. it will not affect the optimization result) and we change the output direction towards marginal revenue maximization. Otherwise, the input prices are needed to estimate profit efficiency when considering multiple-input and multiple-output case.4(3)gyj∗,gbq∗=argmaxgyjψ,gbqψ∑j∈J∗PyjgyjψYjMax+∑q∈Q∗PbqgbqψBqMaxvi∗ψ/Xi∗Max-Pxi∗model(2)givenPxi,Pyj,Pbq,∀ψAn example illustration of DMP and meta-DEA frontier is described in Appendix B.The proposed meta-DEA approach offers several benefits. It complements profit-efficiency analysis (Nerlove, 1965; Zofio et al., 2013). Profit efficiency, which measures a firm’s actual profit relative to the maximum possible profits that can be achieved within the production possibility set, can be decomposed into technical efficiency and allocative efficiency. Technical inefficiency measures the distance to frontier, whereas allocative inefficiency measures the deviation from the optimal mix of inputs and outputs.Obviously, allocative inefficiency relates to the meta-DEA frontier, but for different purposes. First, meta-DEA focuses on “margin” rather than “level”, and finds “direction” rather than “score”. If a technically-efficient firm is allocatively inefficient, it may not clearly illustrate how to change the input mix and output mix towards the allocatively efficient benchmark without MP or elasticity relationships. Most previous studies assume that it is costless to move along the frontier, i.e., resource reallocation is questionable, yet an inefficient firm may not achieve the frontier without adjusting input level. For example, an output-oriented DEA model assumes a direction to achieve the frontier without the change of input, and the linkage between inputs and outputs is implicit. As mentioned, we claim that it is more convincing to change the output level or mix by adjusting the input resource. In fact, the meta-DEA enhances the linkage between inputs and outputs, and provides appropriate tradeoffs among outputs when adding one extra unit of input. Note that even though MP cannot be estimated for inefficient firms, an inefficient firm can refer to the MP estimated by the reference benchmark which an inefficient firm projects onto the frontier via a given orientation.If the panel data is available, another benefit is that meta-DEA places more emphasis on the dynamic representation of resource adjustment, i.e., moving step by step to allocatively efficient benchmarks. A firm may not directly move to allocatively efficient benchmarks in a “one-shot” resource reallocation which is generally characterized by an allocative efficiency score (a level-based analysis). Fig. 4, which illustrates the case, shows a one-input and one-output scenario, where Firm A moves towards the frontier from period t to period t+1 based on marginal adjustment estimated by input-oriented benchmarks. As mentioned, a step-by-step moving is more common in practice since a wait-and-see action to address the uncertain environment (Benavides et al., 1999). Combining MP analysis and a meta-DEA approach is preferable, because it allows constant adjustment of the margin, i.e., a good “level” will result from constantly changing the “margin”.This section discusses the efficiency estimation of each firm by DDF. Recall that choosing the direction vectors to estimate efficiency by DDF is an unsolved issue (Färe et al., 2013). We use meta-DEA to generate the proposed direction vector which we then use for efficiency estimation by DDF. Based on Kuosmanen’s weak disposability technology (Kuosmanen, 2005), we formulate the DDF to estimating technical efficiency as model (4) given the direction vectorg=(gxi,gyj,gbq).ηrepresents the estimate of efficiency. Ifη=0, then firmris efficient; otherwise it is inefficient.(4)Maxηs.t.∑k(λk+μk)Xik≤Xir+ηgxi,∀i∈I∑kλkYjk≥Yjr+ηgyj,∀j∈J∑kλkBqk=Bqr-ηgbq,∀q∈Q∑k(λk+μk)=1λk,μk⩾0,ηis freeTo validate the proposed direction vector generated by meta-DEA, we compare our proposed approach with four common methods deciding the direction vector for evaluating technical efficiency via DDF. First, and the most common, is(gxi,gyj,gbq)=(0,1,1)due to increasing desirable output and decreasing undesirable output (Färe, Grosskopf, & Weber, 2006). Second, one specification of the direction vector is(gxi,gyj,gbq)=(0,y,b), implying that each firm determines its own direction based on current desirable and undesirable output levels (Chung et al., 1997). Third, the endogenous direction vector is chosen based on exogenous normalization constraints (Färe et al., 2013). Fourth, the direction towards the profit-efficient benchmark is chosen (Zofio et al., 2013). We describe the Färe et al. (2013) and Zofio et al. (2013) methods as follows.We extend Färe et al. (2013) to the undesirable output case. Let (gy,gb) be the nonnegative directional output vector and∑j∈Jgyj+∑q∈Qgbq=1. Since gyand gbare the decision variables, model (5) will be nonlinear programming with the nonlinear terms,ηgyjandηgbq, wheregxi=0.(5)Maxηs.t.∑k(λk+μk)Xik≤Xir,∀i∈I∑kλkYjk≥Yjr+ηgyj,∀j∈J∑kλkBqk=Bqr-ηgbq,∀q∈Q∑k(λk+μk)=1∑j∈Jgyj+∑q∈Qgbq=1λk,μk,η,gyj,gbq≥0Thus, Färe et al. (2013) suggest transforming it into a linear optimization problem, i.e., model (6). Letηyjandηbqbe the decision variables for the efficiency measure in DDF.(6)Max∑j∈Jηyj+∑q∈Qηbqs.t.∑k(λk+μk)Xik⩽Xir,∀i∈I∑kλkYjk≥Yjr+ηyj1,∀j∈J∑kλkBqk=Bqr-ηbq1,∀q∈Q∑k(λk+μk)=1λk,μk,ηyj,ηbq⩾0Then, by solving model (6) we obtain the optimal solutionηyj∗andηbq∗. The direction vector for the firm r can be defined asgyj∗=ηyj∗∑j∈Jηyj∗+∑q∈Qηbq∗andgbq∗=ηbq∗∑j∈Jηyj∗+∑q∈Qηbq∗, and so∑j∈Jgyj+∑q∈Qgbq=1is satisfied. Therefore, in considering a case with desirable outputs and undesirable outputs, to obtain the directional vector (gy,gb) in model (5) with exogenous normalization constraint∑j∈Jgyj+∑q∈Qgbq=1, model (6) can be used to estimate the optimal direction vector.Zofio et al. (2013) suggested a direction towards profit maximization, to the undesirable output case. Given the input and output market prices(Pxi,Pyj,Pbq), they determine the profit-efficient benchmark as (x∗,y∗,b∗)=argmax(x,y,b)∈T{Pyy-Pbb-Pxx}and define the direction vector of firmrwe are searching for asgx∗,gy∗,gb∗=(x∗-x,y∗-y,b-b∗). In order to satisfyPygy∗+Pbgb∗+Pxgx∗=1, they define the direction vector towards the profit-efficient benchmark asgx∗,gy∗,gb∗=x∗-x,y∗-y,b-b∗Pyy∗-Pbb∗-Pxx∗-Pyy-Pbb-Pxx-1, which results in monetary values of the efficiency measures (Chambers et al., 1996).Meta-DEA suggests a directiongy∗,gb∗for marginal profit maximization as Eq. (3) when increasing one unit of input. In fact, the direction refers to DMP, i.e.,DMP=x,∂(y,b)∂x=1,gyj∗YjMaxvi∗/Xi∗Max,gbq∗BqMaxvi∗/Xi∗Max. In particular, the direction may contribute to two cases: one for capacity expansion and the other for capacity contraction. In the first case, a firm prefers to expand capacity for marginal profit maximization and suggests a direction1,gyj∗YjMaxvi∗/Xi∗Max,gbq∗BqMaxvi∗/Xi∗Maxgenerated by Eq. (3). In the second case, a firm prefers to contract capacity via a direction-1,-gyj∗YjMaxvi∗/Xi∗Max,gbq∗BqMaxvi∗/Xi∗Maxwhich can be generated given a negative directional vector, g (Lee, 2013). Note that the capacity contraction direction may project the inefficient firm to the benchmarks on the hyperplane with zero output levels (i.e., the x-axis) and get to a meaningless result. Therefore, we prefer a capacity expansion direction, which will be convincible for most of the firms since, in practice, no company will be willing to risk losing sales or market share by contracting the inputs.In the next section we describe applying the proposed meta-DEA approach to find the direction towards marginal profit maximization in an empirical case study of U.S. coal power plants operating in 2011, and compare different direction vectors for efficiency measures via DDF. We name the five measures DDF1 to DDF5 as shown in Table 1. Note that the length of the directional vector influences the efficiency estimates in the DDF. Thus, we use a unit vector as suggested in Lee and Johnson (2012a) and Färe et al. (2013).We conduct an empirical case study to estimate the technical efficiency in U.S. state-level coal power plants operating in 2011.5The reason for using state-level data is because the energy deregulation and the market-based cap-and-trade are commonly applied to state level. Also, the price information about pollutions and electricity is more complete for profit analysis.5In the early 1990s, the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) began to regulate pollution under the federal Clean Air Act (CAA) Amendments. EPA attempted to reduce the annual emission of sulfur oxide (SO2) by 10 million tons below 1980 levels and nitrogen oxide (NOx) by 2 million tons by 2000 via a two-phase restriction imposed on U.S. coal power plants (EPA, 2007). In 1998, EPA conducted a Utility Air Toxics Study to regulate mercury and toxic air pollution from coal- and oil-fired power under the CAA in 2000 (EPA, 2009).In the United States, coal plants are the major sources of air pollution. In 2010, the U.S. domestic coal power sector contributed 78.4% of CO2, 91.9% of SO2, and 74.0% of NOxamong all power sectors in 2010 (EIA, 2011). To address this problem, in 2011, EPA drafted new environmental regulations which asked coal power plants to reduce emissions of 84 toxic chemical levels within four years (EPA, 2011). Around 1400 coal and oil-fired electric generating units (EGUs) at 600 power plants are covered under these new standards. Impatience with the federal government’s slow rate of progress, several states in the northeastern U.S. formed a Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) “to cap and reduce CO2 emissions from the power sector”. The states invest the proceeds from selling emission allowances via auctions in “energy efficiency, renewable energy, and other clean energy technologies” (RGGI, 2013). At the time of writing this paper, the EPA’s most recent proposal, “New Source Performance Standards”, which mandates a maximum of 1000pounds of CO2 per megawatt hour of electricity produced by new coal power plants, is still meeting strong industry resistance and political opposition.Section 5.1 describes the data set. Section 5.2 describes the empirical results of our efficiency estimation in 2011.Our balance state-level yearly data set characterizes 48 states having coal-burning power plants operating in 2011 (EIA, 2011).6We exclude the District of Columbia (DC), Rhode Island (RI), and Vermont (VT) because they do not have coal-fired power plants.6One desirable output is the annual amount of electricity generated in megawatt hours. As mentioned, the three pollutants are the annual amount in tons of CO2, SO2, and NOx. The single input is the annual amount in tons of coal consumption. The coal price is the average sales price of coal combining mine types of underground and surface.7Some states do not produce coal or suggest sales price; therefore, we use the U.S. average price.7The electricity price provided by EIA is a weighted calculation among residential, commercial, and industrial prices measured in $/megawatt hour. Finally, the cost estimates of emissions are the marginal abatement costs based on the shadow prices estimated by Rezek and Campbell (2007).8Rezek and Campbell (2007) employed an approach of the inequality restricted generalized maximum entropy to estimate the shadow price of pollutants in a panel data of 260 coal-fired U.S. electric power plants operating in 1998.8Table 2gives the summary statistics.Table 3lists the five efficiency measures of 48 states and ranked in order.9The resolution used to generate direction for DDF5 is 0.1 units for each bin such that∑j∈J∗gψyj+∑q∈Q∗gψbq=1. We investigate all the combination of four output variables and find the direction for maximizing the marginal profit.9The last column shows the electricity deregulated states marked by “Y” (Quantum Gas & Power Services, 2013). From the table, we observe that only Pennsylvania (PA), Texas (TX), and West Virginia (WV) are efficient in five measures; Pennsylvania is deregulated and Texas is partially deregulated. The states which show poor performance defined as no efficient index in five measures and at least three ranks after 40 are Iowa (IA), Michigan (MI), North Dakota (ND), Oklahoma (OK), Wisconsin (WI), and Wyoming (WY); only Michigan is deregulated. Of the 15 electricity deregulated states, 10 are efficient according to at least one of the five efficiency measures. Generally, the deregulated states have more health and environmental benefits due to pollutant reductions and emissions trading (Fowlie, 2010). Thus, these benefits may lead to higher efficiency scores in the deregulated states.Fig. 5illustrates the electricity deregulated states and efficiency index10Fig. 5 is generated by DIYMaps.Net (2013).10. The number in parentheses represents the time of the state showing efficient in the five DDF measures. The map shows that most efficient states are on the East and West Coasts, whereas most southern and Midwestern states show poor performance. The results justify the federal environmental policy of emissions control. First, the recent regulatory driver, the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) proposed in late 2003, impacts 28 eastern states and the District of Columbia. It is being implemented in two phases (2009 and 2015) under a cap-and-trade program. The sharp increase in SO2 and NOxprices resulting from CAIR, which required further SO2 and NOxreductions from power plants beginning in 2010, caused an increase in the expected pollutant control costs in the future and provided incentives for utilities to purchase allowances and bank them for future use. Second, the advanced NOxemissions control research and development (R&D) efforts undertaken by the National Energy Technology Laboratory in the US Department of Energy (DOE/NETL) will provide more cost-effective options for coal-fired power plants to comply with the expected more stringent emission limits. The program develops NOxcontrol technologies for existing coal-fired power plants and brings advanced technology to marketplace (Lani, Feeley, Miller, Carney, & Murphy, 2008). The program conducts many sub-projects which introduce advanced emissions reduction technologies in the states, including CA, VT, TN, OH, PA, NY, and MA. Thus, these efforts cause a result of productive efficiency as shown in Fig. 5.Table 3 also compares the five approaches. The number of efficient state is 23 in DDF1, 24 in DDF2, 16 in DDF3, 5 in DDF 4, and 16 in DDF5. We discuss two extreme cases first. DDF1 and DDF2 are optimistic using an ad hoc direction, and around half the states are efficient; however, by using a direction for the purpose of profit maximization, DDF4 is pessimistic and shows only 5 efficient states due to an inflexible and too idealistic benchmark. Nevertheless, DDF3 and DDF5 are more flexible and generate state-specific reference benchmarks. DDF3 finds the endogenous direction and DDF5 finds the direction for marginal profit maximization. These two approaches provide a compromise result between two extreme cases.Table 4and Fig. 6investigate the gaps among the five DDF measures. Table 4 shows a correlation coefficient matrix and Fig. 6 divides the efficiency scores into 10 bins and illustrates the frequency-based distribution respectively. “Bin1” represents the number of efficient state. Table 4 and Fig. 6 both conclude that there are positive correlations among these efficiency measures with the exception of DDF4. In particular, DDF4 shows negative correlations with DDF3 and DDF5. Thus, we may claim that though each state is moving towards a profit-maximized benchmark, a “serious” and “absolute” target (i.e. DDF4) may be too idealistic and restricts the adjustable flexibility of the product-mix. This leads to an underestimate of the efficiency score when comparing to the other four.DDF4 and DDF5 complement each other and present different strategic implications. DDF4 illustrates an ideal target and give a direction towards it in the long term; however, DDF5 sets a short-term target and illustrates a step-by-step move towards marginal profit maximization for supporting a “wait-and-see” decision process in practice. DDF4 gives a long-term efficiency measure, whereas DDF5 focuses on the short-term goal. Thus, we could choose the appropriate efficiency measure according to the purpose. In this paper, we suggest DDF5, i.e., meta-DEA for marginal profit maximization, since a step-by-step improvement is more consistent with practice to address uncertain environment. Moreover, in the long term, the target generated by DDF4 should not be fixed and the ideal profit-maximized benchmark should dynamically change over time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
