@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
DEA-based predictors for estimating fleet size changes when modelling the introduction of rights-based management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Modelling fisheries policies requires assumptions as to how the fleet size may change.Economic drivers affect fleet structure, but data are often unavailable.Predictors of fleet changes based on DEA measures are assessed.Capacity utilisation measures appear the best predictor of who may exit a fishery.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Management strategy evaluation,Fleet behaviour,Individual transferable quotas,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The introduction of individual transferable quotas (ITQs) into a fishery is going to change not only the amount of catch a fleet can take, but often also changes the fleet structure, particularly if total allowable catches are decreased. This can have an impact on the economic, social and environmental outcomes of fisheries management. Management Strategy Evaluation (MSE) modelling approaches are recognised as the most appropriate method for assessing impacts of management, but these require information as to how fleets may change under different management systems. In this study, we test the applicability of data envelopment analysis (DEA) based performance measures as predictors of how a fishing fleet might change under the introduction of ITQs and also at different levels of quota. In particular, we test the assumption that technical efficiency and capacity utilisation are suitable predictors of which boats are likely to exit the fishery. We also consider scale efficiency as an alternative predictor. We apply the analysis to the Torres Strait tropical rock lobster fishery that is transitioning to an ITQ-based management system for one sector of the fishery. The results indicate that capacity utilisation, technical efficiency and scale efficiency are reasonable indicators of who may remain in the fishery post ITQs. We find that the use of these measures to estimate the impacts of lower quota levels provides consistent fleet size estimates at the aggregate level, but which individual vessels are predicted to exit is dependent on the measure used.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Modelling the behaviour of fishing fleets following management change is becoming an increasingly important component of management strategy evaluation (MSE) (Fulton et al., 2010; Kell et al., 2007; Smith et al., 1999), itself an increasingly important tool for providing appropriate marine resource management advice. There is substantial evidence that the introduction of rights-based measures such as individual transferable quotas (ITQs) changes the incentives faced by fishers, particularly in relation to fleet size (Costello et al., 2008; Fina, 2011). Consequently, when modelling the introduction of ITQs into a fishery, some assumptions need to be made as to how the fleet might adjust.Earlier models of exit behaviour in fisheries assumed that the decision to exit was a function of vessel profitability, included either explicitly (Mackinson et al., 1997; Pascoe and Revill, 2004; Ward and Sutinen, 1994) or implicitly as a function of prices, costs and catch rates (Pradhan and Leung, 2004; Tidd et al., 2011). Other studies have suggested that the decision to exit a fishery is a combination of monetary incentives and the socio-economic characteristics of the fisher (Muallil et al., 2011), and hence the decision to exit is largely individual and difficult to model even if complete information on the economic performance of individual fishers is available.An approach that has been used in more data-limited circumstances to estimate fleet restructuring has involved the area of productivity analysis, particularly technical efficiency and capacity utilisation (Pascoe, 2007). Capacity utilisation represents the degree to which a vessel is achieving its full capacity output given its characteristics, while technical efficiency is a measure of how well a boat performs relative to its potential output given its characteristics and the level of effort it employs. The measures are derived through catch and effort data of the individual vessels, and hence represent individual performance. In terms of fisheries adjustment, the approach has been previously used to assess what a fleet operating at full capacity given current catch levels may look like (Tingley and Pascoe, 2005a), and the impact of ITQs on the level of excess capacity in fisheries (Dupont et al., 2002). The approach has also been modified to include the costs of quota purchase (Andersen and Bogetoft, 2007), and marginal benefits and costs of increased capacity utilisation (Pascoe and Tingley, 2006) when assessing fleet size changes.Implicit in these analyses is the assumption that technical efficiency and/or capacity utilisation are appropriate predictors of which vessels are likely to exit or remain in a fishery, and this assumption is generally applied to the case of autonomous adjustment under ITQs also (Grafton, 1996). This assumption has not been empirically tested, although some recent studies have confirmed that the technical efficiency of those vessels that remain after a buyback are higher, on average, than those that left (Pascoe et al., 2012).1The study by Dupont et al. (2002) also suggested that the introduction of ITQs halted the ongoing decline in average capacity utilisation over time.1In this study, we further examine this assumption by comparing the relationship between these productivity measures and the decision to exit a fishery. We also consider scale efficiency, which is a measure of how close the vessel is to its optimal configuration. We apply the analysis to the Torres Strait Rock Lobster fishery, a sector in which is transitioning to ITQs in the near future. We use the method also to estimate how the fleet size may change under different quota allocation scenarios, for subsequent use in a MSE model being developed for the fishery. While the results relate to a particular case study, they illustrate the potential benefits of such a method for improving resource management policy advice.The Tropical Rock Lobster (TRL) fishery based on the ornate rock lobster Panulirus ornatus is located in the Torres Strait (TS), which is geographically situated between Papua New Guinea (PNG) and northern Australia. In 2009, the total catch in the fishery was roughly 397 tonnes, of which Australian vessels caught 236tonnes with an estimated value of A$7.5million (Plagányi et al., 2010). Rock lobster is the major commercial fishery for Torres Strait islanders. The fishery is also culturally significant for the local indigenous population (Mulrennan and Scott, 2000; Scott, 2004).Substantial management changes are being introduced into the Torres Strait tropical rock lobster fishery, and a MSE framework is being developed to assess the range of policy options (Plagányi et al., 2013). In 2005, an explicit allocation of the lobster resource was introduced between the Australian indigenous (the traditional inhabitant boat (TIB) sector) and the non-indigenous (the transferable vessel holder (TVH) sector) commercial fishers with an initial allocation 50:50 between the two fleets and the aim of increasing the indigenous commercial share over time to 70% (AFMA, 2011). In contrast, prior to this the TVH sector caught roughly 60–70% of the catch (Fogarty, 2010). Almost half the non-indigenous commercial fleet was removed in 2008 under a voluntary buy-back scheme to help the fleet transition to the lower quota share, resulting in a relative allocation of catch of 46.5:53.5 for the TVH and TIB sectors, respectively (AFMA, 2010). To facilitate future autonomous adjustment, the TVH fleet will be managed using individual transferable quotas (ITQs), while the TIB sector is likely to operate under one of three potential quota management systems: competitive, community, or a hybrid system involving an ITQ system for TIB fishers with high catches and a competitive or community based system for the remaining TIB fishers.The introduction of ITQs and subsequent decreases in quota allocated to the TVH fleet will have implications for the fleet size, and hence the policy options simulated in the MSE model need to factor in these changes in order to ensure that the model-based advice is appropriate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Changes in fisher behaviour following policy change has been considered a source of implementation error in much of the fisheries science and management literature (Fulton et al., 2010). While economics cannot perfectly predict fisher behaviour as individuals often respond to incentives differently (Richardson et al., 2005), there is growing evidence that exit behaviour of fishers under ITQs or buybacks is related to their relative efficiency (Branch et al., 2006; Pascoe et al., 2012; Pradhan and Leung, 2004).The example used in this study represents a relatively small fleet operating in a single-species fishery. The DEA methodology, however, has also been applied to substantially larger and multispecies fisheries to estimate how fleet sizes may change under ITQs or what a fleet operating at full capacity may look like (Andersen and Bogetoft, 2007; Dupont et al., 2002; Pascoe and Tingley, 2006; Tingley and Pascoe, 2005a). These earlier studies, however, did not consider alternative quota levels, and at best considered only capacity utilisation or technical efficiency as the criterion for vessels to choose to stay or exit. These assumptions were not tested. Scale efficiency has also generally not been considered in such studies, but in this study was shown to be potentially influential in the decision to stay or leave in the earlier buyback in the fishery, although this influence was not as significant as capacity utilisation. For relatively small quota changes (or the initial move to ITQs), the assumption that vessels furthest from their optimal scale would exit first resulted in a different set, although not necessarily a different number, of vessels exiting the fishery. Consequently including this consideration into the analysis provides a greater range of possible behavioural characteristics to be captured.A difficulty often encountered when modelling fleet exiting behaviour is the lack of alternative uses of vessel capital – the so-called capital non-malleability problem (Clark et al., 1979). Vessel owners may be reluctant to leave a fishery if there is nowhere else that their capital can be deployed. In the case of the Torres Strait rock lobster fishery, this is less of an issue as most vessels are dual endorsed, with a licence also to operate in the adjacent Queensland east coast rock lobster fishery. For many vessels, this fishery is closer to their home port so has lower costs of access. However, the east coast fishery also has lower productivity (i.e. catch rates) than Torres Straits, so vessels prefer to expend their effort in the Torres Strait fishery. As a consequence, the east coast fishery is relatively underexploited (Department of Employment Economic Development and Innovation (DEEDI), 2010). While the east coast fishery is also managed by ITQs, the quota is currently not binding and is relatively inexpensive to buy (relative to the expected value of the Torres Strait quota).The existence of alternative opportunities may, to some extent, explain the differences in capacity utilisation between vessels (Tingley and Pascoe, 2005b), and may also help to explain why capacity utilisation may be a better indicator of willingness-to-exit than other productivity measures (e.g. technical and scale efficiency). Boats that are more active in alternative fisheries will, by construction, have a lower capacity utilisation than vessels fully engaged in a fishery, and may be more willing to transfer their activity fully into the alternative fishery. In addition, anecdotal evidence (based on discussions with skippers from a range of Australian and European fisheries) suggests that activity levels decrease with skipper age, which would also appear as lower capacity utilisation. These skippers, however, may be relatively efficient due to their experience in the fishery (Kirkley et al., 1995, 1998; Sharma and Leung, 1999). Many owner-operators consider their licence or quota as their superannuation or pension plan, although opportunities to realise the value of these assets is often limited. Offered an opportunity to exit the fishery with an appropriate compensation for their investment is likely to be attractive to fishers considering retiring.The results of the analysis demonstrate that fleet size does not decrease linearly with decreases in quota. Within any fleet, there is considerable heterogeneity in the capacity of fishing vessels, with a high proportion of the potential catch often taken by relatively few individuals. In this case, a 40% reduction in quota (from a 50% share to a 30% share) resulted in over a 55% reduction in the estimated full capacity (post ITQ) fleet size, and a 63% reduction from the pre-ITQ fleet.The results of this analysis were used in the development of policy scenarios under a MSE for the fishery (Plagányi et al., 2013), and the prime motivation of undertaking the analysis was in order to provide some science-based assumptions about fleet behaviour for these scenarios. In the absence of such analysis, some assumptions on fleet size would still be necessary, and the uncertainty around these assumptions could potentially undermine trust in the model results.The major contribution of this work is validation of the assumption that capacity utilisation is a major predictor of behaviour in fleet restructuring. A number of factors drive capacity utilisation, including catch rates, economic conditions, and socio-economic characteristics of the individual fishers (Tingley and Pascoe, 2005b). Hence, the measure embodies many of the attributes assumed to drive adjustment behaviour in other modelling approaches.