@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Financial sustainability and poverty outreach within a network of village banks in Cameroon: A multi-DEA approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Implementation of a multi-DEA (Data Envelopment Analysis) approach.Measurement of financial and social efficiency of microfinance institutions (MFIs).46% of the MFIs implement their double bottom line efficiently.These MFIs do not face a trade-off between sustainability and outreach to the poor.Implementation of benchmarking by using DEA and Performance Indicators (PIs).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Performance indicators,Financial efficiency,Social efficiency,Benchmarking,Ratio analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Microfinance institutions face a double bottom-line. They perform financial tasks by giving microcredits to their customers and support projects aiming at reducing poverty. In doing so, they have to be financially self-sufficient and to target poor people excluded from the traditional financial systems. However, a trade-off may exist between financial sustainability and poverty outreach for these institutions. By using a multi-DEA approach, this paper shows that even if a trade-off exists for 15% of the MC2 (Mutuelles Communautaires de Croissance) in Cameroon, there is no trade-off for 46% of them. In order to increase, without trade-off, financial and social performance of inefficient MC2, a benchmarking approach combing DEA and performance indicators has been developed. DEA is used for identifying best-practices and setting benchmarking goals. Performance indicators are used for characterizing areas needing improvements and following the evolution of MC2 toward their goals, i.e., for implementing benchmarking. Complementarity of both approaches provides a tool box for improving financial and social efficiency and reducing the trade-off between financial sustainability and poverty outreach of microfinance institutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Microfinance, as an activity, can be defined as the supply of financial services to low-income population, which normally does not have access to these services through the traditional financial system. Lack of access to credit is generally seen as one of the main reasons why many people in developing countries remain poor. However, the supply of appropriate financial services to micro-entrepreneurs in low-income groups has a positive potential effect on the economy and on the social conditions in the area served. The promotion of microenterprises in developing countries is justified by their abilities to foster economic growth, alleviate poverty and generate employment. Thus, microfinance institutions (MFIs) have a dual nature. They perform financial tasks, and at the same time, they focus on social matters by giving small loans (microcredits) to low income people excluded from conventional financial institutions. Both things should be done. MFIs face a double bottom-line (Yaron, 1994).An important issue raised in the literature on microfinance deals with the sustainability of microfinance programs. Providing microfinance is a costly business due to high transaction and information costs. At present, a large number of microfinance programs still depend on donor subsidies to meet their costs. On the one hand, institutionists assert that an MFI should be able to cover its operating and financing costs with program revenues. Sustainability is a key to successful provision of financial services to the poor and financial self-sufficiency is a necessary condition for sustainability. On the other hand, welfarists argue that MFIs can achieve sustainability without achieving financial self-sufficiency (Morduch, 2000; Woller, Dunford, & Woodworth, 1999). They consider that donations serve as a form of equity, and as such, the donors can be viewed as social investors, willing to accept a lower expected financial return. They emphasize poverty alleviation, place relatively greater weight on servicing the very poorest of clients relative to servicing large numbers of clients (Brau & Woller, 2004). The microfinance schism (Morduch, 1998) is based on these competing perceptions of financial self-sufficiency and serving the poorest of the poor.The greater emphasis on financial sustainability and the trend toward commercialization of microfinance has raised concerns about the effects on the number (breadth of outreach) and socioeconomic level (depth of outreach) of the clients that are served by microfinance institutions. The existence of a trade-off between financial sustainability and outreach of microfinance programs has been identified. The mission drift (Cull, Demirgüç-Kunt, & Morduch, 2009) is based on the fact that more profitability can be associated with less depth of outreach and a deliberate move away from serving poor clients to wealthier clients in order to achieve higher financial sustainability. Although this issue is the subject of an important debate, there is still a lack of systematic empirical analyses on the nature and determinants of the trade-off (Hermes & Lensink, 2007; Hermes, Lensink, & Meesters, 2011). Recent researches upon this issue suggest that the two requirements of financial sustainability and outreach to the poor may be compatible and even complementary under certain conditions (Gutiérrez-Nieto, Serrano-Cinca, & Mar-Molinero, 2007; Woller & Schreiner, 2002).The objective of this paper is twofold. First, we would like to check if a trade-off between financial sustainability and poverty outreach exists within the MC2 (Mutuelles Communautaires de Croissance) network of village banks in Cameroon. Then, we would like to identify MFIs within this network for which no trade-off exists if any and to provide easy to use guidance to help other MFIs to improve their performance in a direction where they can efficiently and sustainably manage their double bottom-line. For reaching the first objective, the methodology used is based on the implementation of a multi-DEA approach. It allows the identification of best-practices for which no trade-off exists and the definition of goals that should be attained by MC2 for which a trade-off between their financial and social performance exists. For the second objective, we use a set of performance indicators (PIs) for characterizing goals and defining areas where improvements have to be implemented. This complementary use of DEA and PIs allows us to provide a tool box for a successful benchmarking of MC2 and a reduction of the trade-off between financial sustainability and poverty outreach when it exists.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a summary of the literature on the measurement of MFIs’ financial and social performance. In Section 3, we propose a methodology aiming at identifying best practices that can serve as benchmarks for achieving the double bottom-line of MFIs. Section 4 introduces the data used and the variables selected for the empirical analysis. Section 5 describes the results that are discussed in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes.There are two dimensions in measuring the performance of microfinance institutions: financial sustainability and poverty outreach. The inclusion of the latter in assessing performance is brought about by MFIs’ social goal of helping the poorest people. Thus, MFIs work toward a double – financial and social – bottom-line unlike the conventional financial institutions which work solely toward a financial bottom-line. The measurement of financial returns is relatively straightforward. Microfinance has borrowed from the financial accounting and performance standards of the conventional financial sector. The difficulty is in assessing social impact. However, donors and policy makers have a legitimate interest in assessing the social returns of their social investments. Some knowledge of social impact is therefore necessary for MFI management and other stakeholders to assess overall program effectiveness since information on financial performance alone gives an incomplete picture of program performance (Brau & Woller, 2004).Financial sustainability is determined by the extent to which MFIs are efficient in using resources and turning them into services. It implies that the institution generates enough income to at least repay the opportunity cost of all inputs and assets (Chaves & Gonzalez-Vega, 1996). A consensus group composed of microfinance rating agencies, donors, multilateral banks and private voluntary organizations agreed to some guidelines on definitions of financial terms, ratios and adjustments for microfinance (CGAP – Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest, 2003). Many of these performance indicators have become standardized but there is by no means general agreement on how to define and calculate them. Microrate (2003) uses a different list of 21 ratios to assess the performance of MFIs, even if some ratios are identical.The use of financial ratios helps the evaluation of financial and management performance. Two main reasons for using ratios as a tool of analysis are to allow comparison among institutions of different sizes and to control for sector characteristics permitting the comparison of individual ratios with benchmarks. However, Yeh (1996) noted that the major demerit of this approach is its reliance on benchmark ratios that could be arbitrary and may mislead an analyst. Sherman and Gold (1985) noted that financial ratios do not capture the long-term performance and aggregate many aspects of performance such as operations, marketing and financing, with a selection of weights that can be subjective. For Kohers, Huang, and Kohers (2000), financial ratios ignore the current market value of the bank and do not represent economic value-maximizing behavior while, for Berger and Humphrey (1992), they do not consider the input price and the output mix. Due to these difficulties, Berger and Humphrey (1997) concluded that efficient frontier approaches seem to be superior compared to traditional financial ratio analysis in terms of measuring performance of institutions, since they offer an overall numerical objective and a ranking. It is worth mentioning that frontier analyses suffer from the drawback already mentioned for the financial ratios of relying on accounting data and not on market values (Halkos & Salamouris, 2004). But it is generally accepted among analysts that the efficiency of a financial institution is multidimensional from its nature and that the frontier approach can deal with the case of multiple-inputs and multiple-outputs as well as with factors beyond the control of managers.The frontier approach relates to the economic notion of production frontier and efficiency measurement. A production frontier represents maximum outputs generated by a production unit given the level of its inputs. It allows the estimation of overall performance measures and the identification of benchmarking policies. The specification of the inputs and outputs entering the production frontier of financial institutions is based on the literature regarding the definition of the financial or banking production process. Two main approaches exist: the production and intermediation approaches (Sealey & Lindley, 1977).Under the production approach, a financial institution is defined as a producer of services for account holders. That is, they perform transactions on deposit accounts and provide loans. Within this framework, a financial institution uses physical resources such as labor and capital – that are inputs – in order to process transactions such as taking deposits and lending – that are outputs (Soteriou & Zenios, 1999; Vassiloglou & Giokas, 1990). Deposits are considered to be outputs because they are viewed as a service provided by a bank to its customers. Under the intermediation approach, financial institutions collect deposits and make loans in order to generate a profit. Deposits are inputs. Financial institutions are interested in placing loans which are outputs in such a context where banks are just viewed as intermediaries between savers and borrowers (Athanassoupoulos, 1997; Berger & Mester, 1997).The treatment of deposits has been subject of considerable debate in the banking literature. Deposits are inputs from an intermediation point of view and outputs from a production point of view. Facing a dilemma of whether to treat deposits as an input or an output, researchers typically take either the production (e.g., Berger & DeYoung, 1997; Hunter & Timme, 1995) or the intermediation approach (e.g., Banker, Chang, & Lee, 2010; DeYoung & Nolle, 1998). Unfortunately, whether deposits enter a model as an input or an output may have a significant effect on the efficiency results obtained (Hunter & Timme, 1995). Holod and Lewis (2011) consider deposits as an intermediate product that is an output from the first stage of the bank production process and an input in the second stage, taking into account the dual role of deposits in the bank production process.When evaluating financial efficiency of MFIs, previous studies have most often selected the production approach (e.g., Bassem, 2008; Hassan & Tufte, 2001; Nghiem, Coelli, & Rao, 2006) than the intermediation approach (e.g., Gregoire & Tuya, 2006; Paxton, 2007). Only a few studies investigate both dimensions of the financial activity (e.g., Haq, Skully, & Pathan, 2010).Financial sustainability may be a prerequisite for microfinance in making a substantial contribution to poverty reduction (Morduch, 2000; Woller et al., 1999). However, MFIs have a social goal which must also be assessed. Nevertheless, measuring the social return of microfinance is not straightforward.Schreiner (2002) identified 6 important aspects of outreach – worth to clients, cost to clients, breadth, depth, length and, scope – while Woller (2006) added a seventh aspect that is outreach to community. The worth to clients is the value clients place on products and services provided by MFIs, i.e., their willingness to pay for loans through the terms of the contract (amount disbursed, term to maturity and size of the installment) and for deposits (interest rate, minimum balances and withdrawals). The cost to clients is the sum of expenses and transaction costs for a loan application, i.e., direct cash payment for interest and fees, and non-price cost for both non-cash opportunity costs as time to apply for a loan and indirect cash expenses as transport, documents and money needed to use a financial contract. The breadth of outreach is the number of clients reached. The depth of outreach is the poverty status of clients reached. A direct measure is poverty, while indirect proxies are sex (women), location (rural), education (less), ethnicity (minorities), housing (small flimsy houses) and access to public services (lack of access). The length of outreach is the time frame of the supply of products and services, i.e., the sustainability of the microfinance service supply. The scope of outreach is the number of products and services offers to clients, i.e., the number of financial contract types provided by the MFI (Schreiner, 2002; Woller, 2006; Woller & Schreiner, 2004). The outreach to community means the MFI’s interactions and relationships with internal and external stakeholders as the female–male employee ratio among professional staff, the percentage of employees receiving at least 2days of training, the existence of a written and formal code of conduct governing actions towards employees and clients or the percentage of operating revenues reinvested back to the community (Woller, 2006).Dimensions of outreach the most studied in the literature are breadth and depth of outreach as data are more available. The proxy used for breadth of outreach is the number of clients or the number of effective borrowers (Schreiner, 2002). However, other proxies have been suggested for measuring this dimension of outreach as the number of financial accounts, the number of savers, the number of saving transactions (Woller & Schreiner, 2004) or the number of clients with other financial services than loans or with non-financial services as a percentage of borrowers (Woller, 2006). Average loan balance per borrower (average loan size) is an indicator which is used as a measure of the depth of outreach; the smaller the average loan balance, the deeper the reach of the microcredit (Cull, Demirgüç-Kunt, & Morduch, 2007; Olivares-Polanco, 2005). But average loan balance per borrower is criticized as it is measured in monetary units and may mean different things in different countries depending on their per capita income (Morduch, 2000). Therefore, it is taken in relative terms by dividing it by the per capita Gross national income.1According to the World development indicator (WDI), the Gross national income (GNI) is the sum of value added by all resident producers plus taxes and less subsidies not included in the valuation of outputs plus net receipts of primary income from abroad.1As explained in Schreiner (2001), there exist seven aspects of loan size: term to maturity, dollars disbursed, average balance, dollars per installment, time between installments, number of installments, dollar-years of borrowed resources. The proxy average loan balance per borrower encompasses some of the dimensions, while the measure of dollar-years of borrowed resources encompasses all of the seven. Other proxies for depth of outreach that have been used in the literature are the number of women and the poverty indicator. Microcredit empowers women by strengthening their economic roles and increasing their contribution to support their families (Hashemi, Schuler, & Riley, 1996); so that they can play an active role in the development process (Goetz & Gupta, 1996). The number of loans granted to women or the number of women among the clients of an MFI can be easily collected from the MFI’s bookkeeping. At the opposite, poverty is a relative concept that is generally not obvious to measure based on available or easy to collect data. To overcome this problem, Gutiérrez-Nieto, Serrano-Cinca, and Mar-Molinero (2009) proposed a poverty indicator based on the average loan balance per borrower (depth of outreach) and the number of borrowers (breadth of outreach).Many managers of financial organizations would describe benchmarking and best-practice analysis as basic and widely accepted concepts already used in their businesses. These techniques involve that the use of performance indicators (PIs) to assess performance and, to identify and promulgate best practices are based on ratio analysis. In a single input–single output context, this approach is meaningful and easy to use. However, this is not the case where multiple-inputs and multiple-outputs are involved. The difficulty stems from the fact that each PI reflects only one input and one output level and so it is difficult to gain an overall view of the performance of an MFI when not all of its PIs indicate a similar level of performance. These ratios provide only partial measures of efficiency that can be misleading when attempting to draw conclusions about the overall efficiency of institutions. Data envelopment analysis (DEA) does not suffer this constraint (Thanassoulis, Boussofiane, & Dyson, 1996).DEA (Charnes, Cooper, & Rhodes, 1978; Farrell, 1957) provides a way to identify best practices in microfinance institutions. This frontier approach has the benefits of (i) consistency with the logic that managers use to benchmark their own organization’s performance (Fitzgerald & Storbeck, 2003); (ii) consistency with theoretical viewpoints on how firms contest and compete in markets (Devinney, Midgley, & Venaik, 2000) and (iii) capturing the empirical multidimensional nature of performance (Venkatramam & Ramanujam, 1986).The concepts underlying DEA for efficiency measurement rest on the economic notion of a production technology transforming inputs to outputs. It is a non-parametric approach that leads not only to a measure of relative efficiency but also to other information, notably targets which would render an MFI relatively efficient and role models of best-practices. An MFI is efficient if neither any other observed MFI nor combination of observed MFIs can provide a better productive bundle. Otherwise, the efficiency measure provides the amount of inputs to be reduced without changing the current level of outputs in an input-oriented DEA model.2Parametric methods as Stochastic Frontier Analysis can also be used for measuring efficiency overcoming some drawbacks of DEA as the lack of control for measurement errors and other random effects (Paxton, 2007). However, as managers are not familiar with econometric techniques, we developed our approach on DEA that provides information on best-practices useful for managerial implications.2The identification of efficient peers for each inefficient MFI is one of the most valuable outcomes of a DEA assessment. The structure of DEA models ensure that an inefficient unit and its efficient peers would handle a similar mix of products using a similar mix of resources in similar environmental conditions. This usually makes efficient peers suitable role models to emulate in order to improve the performance of MFIs (Berger & Humphrey, 1997; Thanassoulis, 1999).If we assume that there are J MFIs converting N inputs into M outputs, that MFI j consumesxnj⩾0of input n to produceymj⩾0of output m, and that each MFI has at least one positive input and one positive output (Färe, Grosskopf, & Lovell, 1994), the corresponding input-oriented DEA model is:(1)minθ,λjθs.t.∑j=1Jxnjλj⩽θxnjn=1,…,N∑j=1Jymjλj⩾ymjm=1,…,M∑j=1Jλj=1λj⩾0,λjfreej=1,…,JThe model (1) attempts to proportionally reduce inputs of the MFI j under expertise as much as possible while not decreasing its current level of outputs. The process works repeatedly for each MFI. The optimal solution θ* yields an efficient score for a particular MFI. MFIs for which θ*<1 are inefficient, while MFIs for which θ*=1 are efficient. Model (1) is defined under an assumption of variable returns to scale. It implicitly assumes that imperfect competition and constraints to finance may cause MFIs to operate at different returns to scale (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984).The concept of benchmarking is built up on the commonly accepted principle that in an increasing competitive environment only the best performers will survive in the long run. It consists in evaluating and emulating best-performing organizations. Benchmarking is based on three basic steps that analysts agree on (Donthu, Hershberger, & Osmonbekov, 2005): (i) identifying the best-performers, (ii) setting benchmarking goals and (iii) implementing best-practices.DEA is useful in achieving the first step of benchmarking – identifying best-performers. DEA produces an efficient frontier consisting of the set of the most efficient MFIs, allowing a direct comparison to best performers. MFIs on the efficiency frontier are peers that can be emulated by MFIs that are not on the efficient frontier. DEA is also useful in setting benchmarking goals that are measurable, attainable and actionable (Spendolini, 1992) for improving the performance of an MFI. The distance between an MFI and the frontier provides each MFI with an efficiency score that corresponds to its own efficiency relative to the efficient MFIs. It can be used as goal for benchmarking. Using the input-oriented DEA model (1), efficient MFIs that serve as role models to the MFI j are identified by the vector of weightsλj∗=(λ1∗,…,λJ∗)∈RJ. When an efficient MFI is a role model for the MFI j, then the corresponding optimal value in the vectorλj∗is non-zero, otherwise the value is zero. The attainable point on the best-practice frontier is defined by the following so-called virtual MFI:(2)∑j=1Jλj∗MFIj=∑j=1Jλj∗x1j,…,∑j=1Jλj∗xNj,∑j=1Jλj∗y1j,…,∑j=1Jλj∗yMjAs all input–output vectors used in the definition of the virtual MFI (2) are observable, benchmarking goals for efficiency improvement are measurable, attainable and actionable as expected by the second step of benchmarking. Furthermore, each component of this multiple input-multiple output vector receives a specific objective for improving the MFI’s performance and provides feedback concerning areas needing a higher effort.The last step of benchmarking is the implementation of best-practices. At this stage, it is critical to have indicators to judge progress in reaching benchmarking goals. We describe areas where improvements have to be implemented, by key performance indicators (PIs) commonly used in ratio analysis or by MFIs’ controllers or stakeholders. Though often criticize in practice, PIs continue to be the method of choice in reporting performance. They are most often the only readily available information to managers (Thanassoulis et al., 1996).Based on the growing importance of financial viability and sustainability of MFIs, a set of performance indicators has been proposed by CGAP – Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (2003) and Microrate (2003) using financial terms and ratios from conventional financial organizations, adjusted for microfinance institutions. However, recent practices in microfinance try to go beyond the simple promotion of financial self-sufficiency. New sets of ratios have been proposed for promoting achievement of social objectives, i.e., for taking into account the double bottom-line or objective of financial and social performance of MFIs (Schreiner, 2002; Woller, 2006). PIs used for characterizing the length of outreach in Schreiner (2002) and Woller (2006) are those used for characterizing the sustainability and profitability in CGAP – Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (2003) and Microrate (2003); showing that the financial viability of an MFI is important in a long-term perspective but is only one component of the overall performance of an MFI when its social performance is also taken into account. These PIs are used to transcript DEA goals and to guide managers in upgrading their practices in order to improve their financial and social performance and to reduce the trade-off between financial sustainability and poverty outreach.The concept on which the MC2 network is built on, is a community-based development approach conceived by P.K. Fokam to fight poverty by mobilizing savings and resources in a rural community to help people to become self-reliant in a sustainable manner. MC2 slogan is that Victory over Poverty (VP) can be achieved when the Means (M) and Competences (C) of the Community (C) are pooled together: VP=M*C*C=MC2.Each MC2 is the property of its members who also managed it with respect to the socio-cultural values of the rural community in order to favor the development of both individuals and the community as a whole. Each MC2 operates within a traditional kingdom and local authorities are often involved in the management of the MFI. MC2 provide financial services and contribute to the improvement of living for the population and the promotion of agriculture and rural projects. From a regulatory perspective, official texts established by the Ministry of Finance in 2005 organize the microfinance sector in Cameroon that is controlled by a regulatory authority called COBAC (Commission Bancaire de l’Afrique Centrale). An accreditation and a license are necessary before launching the activity of an MFI. MC2 are identified as MFIs accepting savings and providing credits only to its members. Each MC2 is independent but linked as a network by its name and a tri-party support arrangement with two other organizations: the Afriland First bank and ADAF (Appropriate Development for Africa Foundation) a non-profit organization specialized in the fight against poverty and for sustainable development.MC2 micro-banks were created for serving population in rural remote areas and solving the problem of unprofitable operations in these areas for commercial banks due to high costs associated with a low volume of transactions, an insufficient knowledge of the market and the lack of conventional guaranties. Loans can be guaranteed from an MC2 using objects that have a value within the community as a gift from the king. Otherwise, an MC2 includes as members urban population originated from the community. This part of the population provides an important share of financial resources necessary to launch the village bank. They also participate to its life and development.The main two objectives of MC2 are an economic objective based on economic and financial sustainability of the village banks and a social objective targeting the poor by providing support for the development of micro- and small-scale activities. The access to credit requires being a member of the micro-bank as an individual or a group, having paid the entrance fee (membership: 2500 FCFA31000 FCFA: around €1.50 and US$2.3and equity shares: a minimum of 10 social shares or 10,000 FCFA) and saving a minimum of 1000 FCFA per month. As MC2 are the property of their members, each micro-bank set the interest rates they operate with. The remuneration of savings varies between 2.5% and 4% per year. Credits are usually lent at an annual cost of 10–15%. Interest rates are inferior to that of the conventional banking system (on average 22%) and the informal system (25–30%). As MC2 consider that it is not normal to impose high rates to the poor within a strategy of fighting poverty, 15% is the maximum authorized interest rate. In order to control their costs, MC2 put the emphasis on other elements, such as the portfolio quality and the volume of deposits and are grouped in a network to reach economies of scale and reduce management costs. The reimbursement rate of loans is high with an average of 90%. Most of the loans focus on productive activities promoting agriculture, livestock rearing and rural development projects (trading, crafts or small industries). However, MC2 also grant social loans (school expenses, rehabilitation of houses, funerals or marriage) that very often allow people not to resort to the usurer or to urgently sell their assets. When MC2 are able to generate enough revenues from their microcredit activity, they invest in economic and social community projects such as the construction of health centers, drugstores or schools.The data set contains 52 MC2 in 2009 having more than 5years of existence. We do not considers MC2 with less than 5years in operations to avoid the subsidies and donations bias that can occur (Morduch, 1999) due to the fact that external and reimbursable funds can be granted to MC2 in the most marginalized areas for not impeding the creation of the micro-banks. However, each MC2 must be autonomous from external funds when they reach the 5th year of activity. The dependency on subsidies is reduced at a rate of 20% per year. Data were collected at ADAF, which ensures the general secretary of the MC2 network and, centralizes and controls financial statements before their transmission to the regulatory authority.The specification of what is an input and what is an output is crucial in the DEA efficiency measurement process. In our specific case, the selection is determined by our understanding of what a microfinance institution does. As we looked at the complementarity vs. the trade-off between financial sustainability and poverty outreach, we have to define different DEA models for measuring each component of the financial and social function of an MFI.In a first step, we use a two-stage process (Zhu, 2000) based on models that are prevalent in the banking literature, as described in Fig. 1, for evaluating financial efficiency of MFIs. The first stage transforms inputs in deposits based on the production approach. Selected inputs are personal costs, financial capital – equities –, material capital – assets – and, other expenses – financial and operating costs. In the second stage the deposits are used as inputs to provide loans and other financial revenues in accordance with the intermediation approach. Thus, the financial efficiency of each MFI is evaluated by taking into account the specific role of deposits as an intermediate product that can be an input or an output depending on the theoretical banking production function used.4This approach differs from the Holod and Lewis (2011) specification in the sense that these authors used a network DEA approach for measuring financial efficiency of bank holding companies while we used a two-stage DEA approach. However, the idea of defining deposits as an intermediate product is the same in both papers.4Finally, the overall financial efficiency of each MFI is measured based on inputs from the production approach and outputs from the intermediation approach. It provides an evaluation of the financial sustainability of each MFI and its capacity to durably provide loans to its clients.The second step is devoted to the evaluation of MFIs’ social efficiency. As described in Fig. 1, the outputs from the financial activity are used as inputs for providing social outputs, namely the most commonly used measures of breadth of outreach, evaluated by the number of clients, and depth of outreach, measured by the number of women and the number of poor served by an MFI. These last two targets are selected because they contribute to the Millennium Development Goals (2000) of eradication of extreme poverty and hunger and promotion of gender equality and empowerment of women. The number of poor is evaluated using the poverty indicator defined by Gutiérrez-Nieto et al. (2009).Finally, the global (financial and social) efficiency of MFIs is evaluated based on the inputs from the first step and the financial and social outputs from the first and second steps, as described in Fig. 1. Financial and social outputs are jointly introduced in the global model, allowing the identification of MFIs that manage efficiently their double bottom-line.Definitions and descriptive statistics of inputs and outputs are provided in the Appendix (Tables A.1 and A.2).Ratio analysis is a financial management tool that enables managers of microfinance institutions to assess their progress in achieving sustainability. Taken together, financial ratios provide a perspective on the financial health of the lending/savings and other operations of financial institutions. No one ratio tells it all. Ratios must be analyzed all together. Based on financial ratios (CGAP, 2003; Microrate, 2003), on outreach ratios (Schreiner, 2002; Woller, 2006) and on data availability, the performance indicators used for characterizing benchmarking goals provided by the different DEA models are presented in Table 1.Table 2provides an overview of average DEA efficiency scores of the 52 MC2 in our sample for each DEA model defined in Section 4.2. From a global (i.e., both financial and social) point of view, MFIs look relatively efficient. The average score is of 0.8 and the range of scores is between 0.4 and 1. Furthermore, 75% of the MC2 have a score above 0.70 and 25% above 0.97. Only 25% of the MC2 have a score between 0.4 and 0.7; showing a real weakness in performing their financial and social activities. Thus, MC2 in Cameroun manage relatively well their global performance.When the global efficiency score is decomposed in different components, it appears that MC2 are more efficient in their financial function than in their social function, with an average difference of almost 0.2 between the financial and social scores. Highest score differences are at the minimal value (0.34) and at the median value (0.29). At quartile 1 level, the difference is only of 0.20. Only 25% of the MC2 are efficient with both the financial and social DEA models. When decomposing the financial function of MC2, it appears that they are more performing in their production activity than in the intermediation one. The score difference is on average of 0.26. At the minimal value, this difference is the highest with 0.38. At the median, it is reduced to 0.30 while the difference is only of 0.1 at quartile 3 level. No more difference exists at the maximal value.Thus, highest average scores are obtained with the production, financial and global DEA models. Two third of the MC2 have a score above 0.7. Half of the MFIs have a score above 0.9 with the production and financial DEA models. Average scores obtained with the intermediation and social DEA models are between 0.6 and 0.7. Half of the sample is below 0.6; meaning that they are less performing when the focus is only on the intermediation or social function of MFIs. Intermediation corresponds to the function of transforming deposits into loans; the financial function supporting the social activity of these MFIs. Thus, a trade-off between financial sustainability and poverty outreach to the poor may exist.Table 3lists efficient MC2 identified by the global DEA model and provides scores they received with other DEA models focusing only on the production, intermediation, financial or social function of MC2. The last two columns give information on the number of times the efficient MC2 is used as a role model and the weight of its contribution in defining goals for inefficient MC2.From Table 3, we can say that two MC2 are efficient with all DEA models, namely Bahouan and Mamfe. They are relatively often used as benchmarks by the global DEA model with a contribution of 14% and 17%, respectively. Two other MC2 are globally, financially and socially efficient, namely Fongo Tongo and Kribi-Campo. While Fongo Tongo is not often used as benchmark by the global DEA model, Kribi-Campo is most often used as role model (9 times) but its contribution to the building of goals for inefficient MC2 is relatively low (2%). Fongo Tongo has a low production score while Kribi-Campo has a low intermediation score; meaning that some weaknesses have been identified by specific DEA models even if both MC2 manage efficiently their double bottom-line. The other MC2 most often used as benchmarks are Banka and Doumbouo. Banka is globally and financially efficient. This MC2 receives a bad score for its intermediation function (0.5) while its social score (0.75) is at quartile 3 level. Doumbouo appears to be efficient globally that is when the financial and social dimensions of its activity are analyzed jointly. However, Doumbouo is not completely efficient when specific DEA models are run; its financial and social scores are at 0.98 and 0.95, respectively.Thus, 24 MC2 (46%) are globally efficient; meaning that there is no trade-off for these MFIs. Specific scores for these 24 MC2 highlight good performance in the financial function – 18 globally efficient MC2 (34%) are also financially efficient – but weaknesses in the social function – only 8 globally efficient MC2 (15%) are also socially efficient. Financial scores are only between 0.7 and 1 while social scores are between 0.26 and 1. Thus, even if no trade-off exist between financial sustainability and poverty outreach for these MC2, 38% of them are not efficient with individual DEA models focusing on either their financial or social performance. Furthermore, global efficient MC2 are more performing in their production function than in their intermediation function; the financial function supporting the social activity of these MFIs. Production scores are between 0.6 and 1 while intermediation scores are between 0.17 and 1. These results point out that an MC2 can manage efficiently its double bottom-line without being equally efficient in all the components of its global performance. Not all the globally efficient MC2 can be used in the same manner as benchmarks for others inefficient MC2. The level of performance in individual components of their activity will influence their selection as role models as the direction for upgrading practices of less performing MC2.Table A.3 in the appendix presents benchmarks provided by the separate DEA models focusing on the production, intermediation, financial or social component of efficiency.Table 4describes MC2 by efficiency group based on their age and their location in Cameroon (West vs. other provinces) in order to identify if there is an impact of maturity on efficiency (a learning over time effect) or of their area of activity.Globally efficient MC2 are similar in age with the overall sample (mean at 10.1 and median at 10.5). Furthermore, the DEA model has identified globally efficient MC2 among the youngest (5years old) and the oldest of the sample (18years old). It is difficult to conclude that there is an impact of maturity on efficiency. Due to the network structuration of the village banks, this result shows that all MC2 whatever its age benefit from the learning effect through a sharing of the knowledge and competencies in microfinance practices.Table 4 also shows that financially efficient MC2 are younger (mean at 8.2); 50% of these MFIs having less than 7years of activity. However, there is no difference in the age structure between efficient MC2 either in the production or the intermediation component of the financial activity. Social efficient MC2 are slightly older with a mean at 11.8, a median at 11 and no MC2 with less than 7years of activity. These results are in accordance with the fact that financial sustainability is the primary concern of MC2 since they must be autonomous from subsidies 5years after their creation. After being financially sustainable and generating revenues on individual or group loans, MC2 involve themselves in economic and social community projects aiming at developing the rural community as a whole. However, as 50% of the inefficient MC2 have more than 13years of activity, the maturity of the MFIs is also in connection with less involvement in the achievement of the double bottom-line of MC2.Results on the location of MC2 show that inefficient and intermediation efficient MC2 are more often in the west province while globally and financially efficient MC2 are more often in the other provinces. However, the impact of the location is significant only for intermediation efficient and inefficient MC2. For other efficiency groups, the percentage of MC2 in the west province or the other provinces is relatively similar.Fig. 2provides an analysis based on ratios defined in Table 1 (see Section 4.3) by efficiency group. The average value of each ratio has been calculated for each efficiency group, ranked and normalized on a 0–10 scale for comparison purpose with 10 for the top and 0 for the bottom of the ranking. Then, an average of normalized ranks for each category of ratios has been calculated in order to provide an overall score for each component of the ratio analysis.Globally efficient MC2 do not have the highest ranks in all the dimensions of the financial and social performance indicators. They perform efficiently when the financial and social objectives of MFIs are jointly taken into account. However, when each dimension is analyzed separately by means of ratios, they are still room for improvements in various dimensions of the financial and social performance.Financial efficient MC2 have a higher financial sustainability but are less performing in other dimensions. Social efficient MC2 are better in the portfolio quality and financial management than other efficient MC2. The position of inefficient MC2 in the 4 financial dimensions is similar to those of the globally efficient MC2 but with a lowest performance; except in financial management. This result is in accordance with the fact that these MC2 are older; letting us thinking an erosion of the involvement in the achievement of the double bottom-line with years in operations. Furthermore, efficient MC2 in the financial production activity are more involved in financial management and portfolio quality than efficient MC2 in the financial intermediation that focus more of financial sustainability. Globally efficiency MC2 are less involved in the depth, worth of outreach and outreach to community than socially or production efficient ones. Their costs of outreach are lower than those of production efficient and globally inefficient MC2, but they receive a similar rank as financial efficient MC2 for the length of outreach.DEA benchmarking goals are transcribed in terms of ratios and each optimal ratio is compared to its current value for providing information easy to use by managers of MC2. For instance, Baham has been identified as globally inefficient at 0.734. An improvement of its performance could be achieved by implementing practices from Banka, Doumboua and Melong with the following weighting: 0.419, 0.276 and 0.304, respectively. Within the depth of outreach performance indicators, the observed number of women of Baham is 623 while it is 709, 779 and 764 respectively for the 3 MC2 that can serve as guide for efficiency improvements; meaning that Baham could reach a higher (or optimal) number of women evaluated at: 789=(0.419*709+0.276*779+0.304*764) by adopting best-practices identified by the global DEA model for achieving its benchmarking goal that is an increase of 166 in the number of women members of the MC2 Baham.Table 5provides the proportion of MC2 that should increase (+), decrease (−) or maintain unchanged (nc) performance indicators (PIs) for becoming globally (both financially and socially) efficient.Table 5 focuses on MC2 that are globally inefficient. Financial ratios dealing with sustainability and profitability of the MC2 or length of outreach should increase for 65% and more of the inefficient MC2. At the opposite, ratios on financial management and cost of outreach are too high for 55–70% of the globally inefficient MC2. For portfolio quality and worth of outreach, we can consider that no specific direction is given, since for almost half of the inefficient MC2, selected ratios should increase while for the others, they should decrease. Ratios selected for describing financial efficiency and productivity show that operational self-sufficiency could increase for 85% of the inefficient MC2 while costs should decrease. Furthermore, it appears that for 50% of the inefficient MC2, the number of clients or breadth of outreach can increase while for 45% no change is necessary for improving their global efficiency. At the same time, based on information collected for depth of outreach, it seems that this increases has to be in favor of women served rather than poor. The average loan size can increase for 75% of the inefficient MC2. Finally, when considering the outreach to community, no specific direction is drawn; it is rather a case by case solution.Expected evolution of performance indicators for becoming globally efficient when MC2 are only financially or socially inefficient are provided in Table A.4 in the Appendix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
