@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integer programming approach for solving the p-dispersion problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Discuss relationship between the p-dispersion problem and a node packing problem.Design an exact algorithm for solving the p-dispersion problem.Demonstrate effectiveness of the proposed method through a computational study.Application of the problem in locating traffic sensors on a highway network.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Location problem,Max–min diversity,Integer programming,Traffic sensor location,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Given a collection of n items (elements) and an associated symmetric distance dijbetween each pair of items i and j, we seek a subset P of these items (with a given cardinality p) so that the minimum pairwise distance among the selected items is maximized. This problem is known as the max–min diversity problem or the p-dispersion problem, and it is shown to be np-hard. We define a collection of node packing problems associated with each instance of this problem and employ a binary search among these node packing problems to devise an effective procedure for solving the original problem. We employ existing integer programming techniques, i.e., branch-and-bound and strong valid inequalities, to solve these node packing problems. Through a computational experiment we show that this approach can be used to solve relatively large instances of the p-dispersion problem, i.e., instances with more than 1000 items. We also discuss an application of this problem in the context of locating traffic sensors in a highway network.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We consider the problem of selecting a subset P (of size p) of items (elements) from a given collection N (of size n) so as to maximize diversity among the selected elements. Typically there is a characteristic vectorsi=(si1,si2,…,siK)associated with each element i in this collection, where sikrepresents the state or the value of the kth attribute of this element, and the difference between two elements i and j is defined as a normed distance dijbetween their corresponding characteristic vectors. For example, by a Euclidean distance measure we havedij=∑k=1K(sik−sjk)2.As stated in Kuo, Glover, and Dhir (1993) and (Resende, Marti, Gallego, & Duarte, 2010), there are basically two approaches to formulate this problem: the max-sum model and the max–min model. In the max-sum model the objective is to maximize the summation of all pairwise distances between the selected elements in the set P, while in the max–min model the objective is to maximize the minimum pairwise distance among these elements. Resende et al. (2010) refer to the former as the maximum diversity problem (MDP) and to the latter as themax–min diversity problem (MMDP). Both models have numerous applications and they have been the subject of several research articles in the past few decades. The former problem (MDP) has been studied in Kuby (1987); Kuo et al. (1993), and Pisinger (2006), while the latter (MMDP) is addressed in Erkut (1990); Kuby (1987), and Resende et al. (2010). Based on these studies it appears that from the point of view of their computational requirements MDP (max-sum) problem is somewhat easier to solve, but as argued in Kuo et al. (1993) the notion of diversity is better achieved through the max–min criterion (MMDP).In this paper we address the max–min diversity problem (MMDP), which is also known as the p-dispersion problem (Erkut, 1990 and Resende et al., 2010). More specifically, for each subset P of N we define its associated minimum dispersion, denoted by Φ(P), as the smallest distance dijbetween any pair of elements i and j in this set, i.e.,Φ(P)=mini,j∈Pi≠j{dij}. The p-dispersion problem is then defined as the problem of finding a subset P, with a given cardinality p, that has the largest associated minimum dispersion Φ(P) among all such subsets.The p-dispersion problem arises in a number of well documented applications in various fields. Moon and Chaudhry (1984) discuss its application in several network location problems. Erkut (1990) discusses its application in selecting the location of missile silos as well as in selecting locations for branches of a chain (franchise) so as to minimize mutual competition between similar shops or service stations. Pisinger (2006) discusses the application of this problem in telecommunications, such as in selecting locations for radio trans-receivers to service cellular phones in order to minimize interference. Kuo et al. (1993) discuss applications of this problem in several contexts such as in market planning (Keely & Ann, 1989), plant breeding (Porter, Rawal, Rachie, Wien, & William, 1975), social problems (Swierenga, 1977), and locating polluting industry (Dasarathy & White, 1980), among others.We encountered this problem in the context of a traffic network where we wish to select a collection of locations to install weigh-in-motion sensors so as to obtain (collect) diverse information about the nature of traffic in the network. Due to budget constraints we limit the total number of sensors to p, and we wish to select p locations for these sensors (from among a given collection of n potential locations on the network) so as to maximize diversity in the collected traffic data. To this end, as discussed in Sayyady, Stone, List, Jadoun, and Kim (2013), maximizing the minimum truck traffic dissimilarity among the selected locations would be an appropriate objective function. We shall further discuss this application in Section 5.In theory, solving the p-dispersion problem is relatively straightforward since it has only a finite number of feasible solutions, i.e., we can enumerate all possible subsets of p elements in the set N and select the subset that has the largest minimum dispersion. But the computational requirements of this approach can be prohibitively large even for relatively small instances of the problem, i.e., instances with relatively small values of n and p. Hence there is a need to develop computationally effective algorithms for solving the problem. As we discuss in the next section, several approaches for solving this problem are proposed in the open literature, and it is shown that these approaches can be employed to effectively solve relatively small to medium size instances of the problem (i.e., with n ≤ 80) within a reasonable execution time. But the computational requirements of these methods become excessive for larger instances of the problem.In this paper we propose an alternative approach for solving the p -dispersion problem and show that this approach can be used to solve larger instances of the problem (e.g., withn=1000) within a reasonable execution time. The approach that we employ is based on the strong relationship between the p-dispersion problem and a corresponding node packing problem (Nemhauser, George, & Wolsey, 1988), and we employ existing methods for solving the latter problem to solve the former.In Section 2 we review the related literature and discuss several methods that are previously proposed for solving the p-dispersion problem. In Section 3 we discuss the relationship between the p-dispersion problem and a corresponding maximum cardinality node-packing problem. We then use this relationship to devise an exact procedure for solving the p-dispersion problem. In Section 4 we present the results of a computational experiment with the proposed method and show that the resulting procedure is indeed effective in solving relatively large instances of the problem. In Section 5 we discuss the application of this problem in the context of determining a set of locations for traffic sensors within the highway network in the state of North Carolina and present our findings. Section 6 contains a few concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
