@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A note on supply chain coordination for joint determination of order quantity and reorder point using a credit option

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Evaluation of credit options for coordination under continuous review assumptions.Illustration of problems with the credit option approach to coordination.Definition of a per order rebate payment as a coordination incentive.Two-level supply chain under continuous review with uncertain demand.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Continuous review,Coordination,Credit option,Rebate,Uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Credit options and side payments are two methods suggested for achieving coordination in a two-echelon supply chain. We examine the credit option coordination mechanism introduced by Chaharsooghi and Heydari [Chaharsooghi, S., & Heydari, J. (2010). Supply chain coordination for the joint determination of order quantity and reorder point using credit option. European Journal of Operational Research, 204(1), 86–95]. This method assumes that the supplier’s opportunity costs are equal to the reduction in the buyer’s financial holding costs during the credit period. In this note, we show that Chaharsooghi and Heydari’s method is not applicable when buyer and supplier opportunity costs are not equal. We introduce an alternate per order rebate method that reduces supply chain costs to centralized management levels.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This note is concerned with a two-echelon supply chain (SC) consisting of a buyer and a supplier. The buyer seeks to fulfill the randomly received orders of its customers while minimizing its inventory holding, ordering, and shortage costs. Many previous studies have proposed models that provide mechanisms for the parties in a two-echelon SC to coordinate their inventory policies. These incentives include quantity discounts, side payments, buyback contracts, and credit options. Li and Wang (2007) published a review of research in this area in the European Journal of Operational Research.This note addresses the case where the buyer in a two-echelon SC selects an order quantity and a reorder point as policies in a continuous review model. There are a limited number of previous studies that specifically address inventory management in a SC under these assumptions where demand is stochastic. Li and Liu (2006) find analytical solutions for an optimal order quantity given a previously established reorder point when a quantity discount is used to coordinate the SC. Shin and Benton (2007) consider a situation where the buyer uses its economic order quantity but selects a reorder point that minimizes inventory and transportation costs. Chaharsooghi, Heydari, and Kamalabadi (2011) expand the Li and Liu (2006) quantity discount model to a setting where both order quantity and reorder point can be selected to minimize SC costs.Credit options and per order rebate payments as coordinating incentives in SCs where the buyer operates under a continuous review inventory system will be examined. Demand is a random variable and both the inventory order quantity and a safety stock level will be chosen with the goal of minimizing inventory costs in the SC. A method suggested by Chaharsooghi and Heydari (2010) (hereafter CH) that selects an appropriate credit term to coordinate inventory policies will be evaluated.To employ the CH technique, the supplier allows the buyer to delay payment for a portion of each order cycle, in exchange for agreeing to establish inventory policies that would be optimal if the SC were centralized. The benefit for the buyer is a reduction in the financial portion of its holding costs during the credit period. The supplier incurs opportunity costs associated with the delay in receiving its payment for the delivered goods.The CH method assumes the reduction in holding costs for the buyer are exactly equal to the credit incentive costs paid by the supplier. This assumes that the supplier’s opportunity costs of delaying receipt of its payment is somehow determined by the buyer’s inventory level and the buyer’s financial holding cost. A modified inventory cost function for the supplier that considers its true opportunity costs is presented. The range of potential values for the credit term where both parties benefit is narrower than shown by CH and the method is not guaranteed to reduce SC costs. After a study of the CH model, an alternate SC coordination plan is proposed that employs a per order rebate as an incentive for participation.The remainder of the note is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 define notation and describe the CH credit option model. Section 4 illustrates the application of the credit option model through analysis of an example problem. Section 5 introduces an alternate method that employs a per order rebate to the buyer as a coordinating incentive. Section 6 presents results from three test problems. Section 7 summarizes and concludes the paper.In the two-echelon SC considered in this note, the buyer randomly receives demand for a product from its customers and in turn places orders for good from the supplier. The supplier receives these orders and ships inventory to the buyer.A significant portion of the notation from CH has been retained, but since the holding costs in the model will be explicitly divided into storage and financial holding costs, some terminology is slightly different. The notation used for the model is shown in Table 1. Parameters for test problems used by CH are also shown in this table and will be referenced later.Subscripts b and s will be used to represent results for the buyer and supplier, respectively. Subscripts or superscripts d and c denote results obtained from operating in the decentralized and centralized modes, respectively.The model under consideration allows a buyer experiencing uncertain demand to select both an order quantity and safety stock factor to minimize its costs. Both decentralized and centralized modes of operation will be considered. In the decentralized mode, the buyer selects optimal values for the decision variables that minimize its own costs without regard for the supplier’s costs. The supplier reacts by selecting its own order quantity based on the number of units ordered by the buyer. In the centralized mode, the buyer and supplier simultaneously select their order quantities and safety stock level to minimize the total SC costs. If the SC is decentralized, a coordination mechanism may entice the buyer to choose the optimal centralized order quantity and safety stock level in exchange for an incentive (a credit option and a per order rebate will be considered).The model defined in this section is similar to the one defined by CH, except that the problem has been re-stated to explicitly show the financial and storage parts of the holding costs of the buyer and supplier as separate values.The expected annual cost function for the buyer is(1)TCb(Q,k,C)=Ab·DQ+B·Sk(k)·σX·DQ+(sb+P1·hb)·[0.5Q+k·σX]-CI(Q,k,C),where the coordination incentive, CI, is(2)CI(Q,k,C)=P1·hb·DQ·C(Q-0.5DC+kσX).The coordination incentive is equal to the financial holding costs of the buyer during the credit period of length C (measured in years); this is equal to the financial holding cost per unit per year, P1·hb, multiplied times the area from time [0, C] in Fig. 1for each order cycle. The terms preceding CI in (1) are the ordering cost, shortage cost, and holding cost before considering savings due to credit terms, all measured on an annual basis.In the buyer’s annual expected cost Eq. (1), the firm is assumed to hold average safety stock of k·σX. This is the product of the safety stock factor and the standard deviation of lead time demand, which is assumed to be normally distributed. The buyer’s inventory reorder point is determined as μX+k·σX. The expected shortage factor per replenishment cycle, Sk, is calculated for a given k as(3)Sk(k)=∫k∞(z-k)·12πe-z2/2dz.The supplier receives orders of size Q from the buyer. CH assume the supplier’s order quantity will always be an integer multiple (N, N⩾1) of Q when costs are minimized, such that the average inventory is (N−1)Q/2. This means that the supplier’s total cost function is(4)TCs(Q,k,N,C)=As·DNQ+(ss+P2·hs)·(N-1)·Q2+CI(Q,k,C).The supplier’s cost function is the sum of its ordering costs, holding costs, and the concession made to the buyer to participate in the coordinated model. The coordination incentive, CI, defined in (2) and deducted from the buyer’s cost function is added to the supplier’s cost function.The next three sub-sections describe the optimal inventory policies in the SC under decentralization, centralization, and coordination.In the decentralized mode, the supplier does not offer a credit period to the buyer, so the buyer assumes C=0 and sets the optimal policy by finding(5)Qd∗,kd∗=ArgMin(Q,k)TCb(Q,k,0).The resulting total cost isTCbd=TCbQd∗,kd∗,0. CH provide a partial solution that states the optimal value for Q as a function of the optimal value of k asQd∗=2DAb+BSkkd∗σXsb+P1·hband1-Φkd∗=(sb+P1·hb)Qd∗DB,where Φ(·) is the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal random variable. Evaluating the expression in (5) requires using the two equations above in an iterative approach.The supplier also assumes C=0 and finds the following solutionNd∗=ArgMinN∈(1,2,3,…)TCsQd∗,kd∗,N,0.The resulting total cost for the supplier isTCsd=TCsQd∗,kd∗,Nd∗,0. The total cost in the SC in the decentralized model isTCd=TCbd+TCsd.In the centralized two-echelon SC model, we assume that both parties cooperate to establish the optimal inventory policies that reduce total costs over the entire chain. Because actions of the parties are synchronized there is no need for an additional incentive and C=0. The centralized total cost function is(6)TCc(Q,k,N)=TCb(Q,k,0)+TCs(Q,k,N,0).The optimal valuesQc∗,kc∗, andNc∗are found through an iterative evaluation of the equationsQc∗=2DNc∗Ab+As+Nc∗BSkkc∗σXNc∗sb+P1·hb+Nc∗-1·(ss+P2·hs)and1-Φkc∗=(sb+P1·hb)Qc∗DB.The total cost in the SC in the centralized mode isTCc=TCcQc∗,kc∗,Nc∗=TCbc+TCsc=TCbQc∗,kc∗,0+TCsQc∗,kc∗,Nc∗,0.The reduction in total SC costs that occurs through centralization of the inventory policies is TCc+=TCd−TCc.In the decentralized and centralized modes, the SC members have not required or pursued an incentive to reduce costs through coordination of optimal policies, so the credit term was equal to C=0. In the coordinated model, the supplier must provide the credit term as an incentive for the buyer to participate in the coordination effort. Thus, the credit term, C, is an incentive for the parties to agree to coordinate, utilize the policiesQc∗,kc∗, andNc∗, and split the reduction in SC costs. CH define upper and lower bounds on C, and these will be calculated for the example problem in the next section.CH use the three test problems with parameters in Table 1 to illustrate their model. This section will use CH test Problem 3 with σX=50 as a basis to discuss the CH method. The other two test problems will be utilized later in the note. For the buyer, the total holding cost is sb+P1·hb=5, and 80% of this per unit cost is a financial holding cost, as specified by CH. For the supplier, total holding cost is ss+P2·hs=15.For the decentralized case, the solutions to the problem areQd∗=225,kd∗=1.32,Nd∗=1,TCbd=1453,TCsd=1335,TCd=2788.The results for the centralized case areQc∗=428,kc∗=0.93,Nc∗=1,TCbc=1669,TCsc=701,TCc=2370.Examining the results shows that potential cost savings of TCc+=418 exist if the two parties can coordinate. CH suggest the credit term incentive to encourage the buyer to raise its order quantity. The buyer will only accept the credit term incentive for values of C whereTCbcQc∗,kc∗,C⩽TCbdQd∗,kd∗,0.Substituting the optimal values into the buyer’s cost function gives two solutions: C=0.026 and C=0.448. The larger of the two is greater than one order cyle in the centralized mode, which is of lengthQc∗/D=0.214years. Therefore, the smaller of the two solutions is Cmin=0.026years.The supplier will only accept the credit term incentive for values of C whereTCscQc∗,kc∗,Nc∗,C⩽TCsdQd∗,kd∗,Nd∗,0.Substituting the optimal values into the supplier’s cost function gives two solutions: C=0.088 and C=0.386. Since0.386>Qc∗/D, the smaller of the two solutions is Cmax=0.088. Any value for C in the interval [0.026, 0.088] is a potential credit term that divides TCc+ between the two parties. These results are identical to those shown by CH in their Table 2(note that their credit period is shown in days).Suppose that the buyer and supplier agree on the valueC¯=(0.026+0.088)/2=0.057, operate in the coordinated mode, and incur expected costs of TCb=1226 and TCs=1144. Total costs in the SC are TCc=2370. In the coordinated mode, the buyer’s overall holding costs on inventory increase due to its larger order quantity, and its shortage costs are slightly higher; however, the increased holding and shortage costs are more than offset by an ordering cost reduction and the coordination incentive.For the supplier, ordering costs are reduced significantly by 634 but it pays credit incentive costs to the buyer as follows:CreditIncentiveCosts=C¯·Qc∗-0.5·D·C¯+kc∗·σX·P1·hb·DQc∗=443.This amount equals the financial portion of the holding costs of the buyer for the credit term of 0.057years, multiplied by the number of order cycles each year.The CH-derived supplier credit incentive costs above seem to understate the true cost to the supplier. In the CH model, the supplier’s credit incentive costs, CI, are based on both the buyer’s inventory level and the buyer’s financial holding cost percentage. This is not the true cost of providing this incentive to the buyer.Sheen and Tsao (2007) observe that when offering a credit period in a SC model, the supplier incurs an opportunity cost for the cost of the goods sold to the buyer. Thus, we need to find the actual opportunity cost to the supplier of providing the credit terms in the CH model.The accurate supplier cost is straightforward to determine. First, the buyer places an order forQc∗units and purchases them at P1, so the supplier would ordinarily receive a payment ofQc∗·P1=428·100=42,800at the beginning of each cycle. On each order cycle, though, the supplier waits 0.057years to receive this payment. If the supplier received this payment at the beginning of the cycle, they could make an investment and earn hs=10%; after all, this is the opportunity cost of the supplier on funds invested in its own inventories. Over the 0.057year credit period, the supplier could have earned 42,800·10%·0.057=244. There areD/Qc∗=4.67order cycles per year, so the total foregone investment income stated on an annual basis is 4.67·244=1139. This can be summarized asTrueCreditIncentiveCosts=Qc∗·P1·hs·C¯·DQc∗=P1·hs·C¯·D=1139.Given the true credit incentive costs, the supplier’s total costs of operating in the coordinated mode with C=0.057 are 1840 and the total SC costs have increased to 3168. In the decentralized mode, total costs are only 2788.If we replace CI(Q, k, C) in the supplier’s total cost function in (4) with P1·hs·C·D and again solve for the maximum value of the credit term the supplier would accept, we find thatCmaxR=0.032years. Since the value for Cminis not affected by the supplier’s cost function, this means the two parties could agree on any C in the interval [0.026, 0.032]. The interval for potential negotiation is now much narrower than what the CH method computes.In summary, use of the CH model requires the buyer and supplier’s opportunity costs to be equal, but we can see from the previous example that this may not always be a valid assumption. The next section offers a per order rebate method that allows the buyer and supplier to divide all the cost savings associated with operating in the centralized mode under any set of cost parameters for the buyer and seller.To divide cost savings from using the centralized order quantity and safety stock levels, the CH cost functions can be revised to include a rebate per order, V, that is paid by the supplier and received by the buyer. The new buyer cost function is(7)TCb(Q,k,V)=(Ab-V)·DQ+B·Sk(k)·σX·DQ+(sb+P1·hb)·[0.5Q+k·σX],and the corresponding supplier cost function is(8)TCs(Q,N,V)=AsN+V·DQ+(ss+P2·hs)·(N-1)·Q2.The calculations in the previous model made to determine the decentralized solution,Qd∗,kd∗,Nd∗, and the centralized solutionQc∗,kc∗,Nc∗are made using the process outlined earlier in the paper with V=0. None of these solutions are affected by the changes in the cost functions, because Eqs. (1) and (4) with C=0 are exactly the same as the cost functions in (7) and (8) with V=0.Operating in the coordinated model requires the two parties to agree upon a rebate, V, in the interval [Vmin, Vmax]. The buyer will accept a value for V that ensuresTCbQc∗,kc∗,V⩽TCbQd∗,kd∗,0.Solving for V givesVmin=1DQd∗DAbQd∗-Qc∗+0.5Qc∗Qd∗P1·hbQc∗-Qd∗+sbQc∗-Qd∗+Qc∗Qd∗σXP1·hbkc∗-kd∗+sbkc∗-kd∗+B·D·σXQd∗Skkc∗-Qc∗Skkd∗.The problem has only one solution because the buyer’s cost function is no longer quadratic in the decision variable. In the previous example, Vmin=46.The supplier will accept a value for V that ensuresTCsQc∗,Nc∗,V⩽TCsQd∗,Nd∗,0.Solving for V givesVmax=AsDNc∗Qc∗-Nd∗Qd∗+Nc∗Nd∗Qc∗Qd∗0.5-0.5Nc∗Qc∗+0.5Nd∗-0.5Qd∗(hsP1+ss)DNc∗Nd∗Qd∗.For the CH test Problem 3, the unique solution is Vmax=136.Our proposed CH cost function modifications reduce costs to the centralized level for any value in the interval [Vmin, Vmax]. The next section will provide additional analysis for three CH example problems.To further understand the models discussed in the previous sections, results from three CH test problems with parameters in Table 1 are provided in this section. The values are taken from CH, except for the holding cost parameters hb, sb, hs, and ss. These are consistent with the holding costs and the financial holding cost as a percentage of total holding costs provided by CH.The results for the revised CH model and the alternate rebate model are presented in Table 2. This table shows the optimal values for the decision variables and total costs for each party in the decentralized and centralized modes. The savings from moving to the centralized modes is shown in the TCc+ row. The buyer and supplier can potentially split TCc+ by coordinating policies.The values CminandCmaxRfrom the CH model with the revised supplier cost function are shown. The valuesTCbR(buyer),TCsR(supplier), and TCRare the SC costs realized if the buyer and supplier agree onC¯=Cmin+CmaxR/2. The annualized coordination incentives paid by the supplier, CIs, and received by the buyer, CIb, are also shown. The final row related to the revised CH solutions gives the percent change from the decentralized costs. In two cases, there is some improvement gained by implementing the revised credit option as compared to the decentralized case, but in test Problem 2, total SC costs are actually higher. Using the credit option in these problems does not allow a reduction in total SC costs to the centralized levels.Any rebate value in the [Vmin, Vmax] interval shown in Table 2 can be used to achieve coordination with full cost savings. The table shows the costs for the buyerTCbV, supplierTCsV, and SC (TCV) that would be achieved by using a per order rebate ofV¯=(Vmin+Vmax)/2. To obtain the total annualized cost of this incentive, the valueV¯is multiplied byD/Qc∗. Of course, by using the rebate, we ensure that the supplier’s costs are in no way affected by the buyer’s inventory level or investment opportunity cost. In all scenarios for these test problems, the alternate rebate solution reduces costs in the SC to a greater extent than the revised CH model. In fact, costs are always reduced to the centralized level, as intended in the original CH model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has investigated credit options and a per order rebate as coordinating incentives in a SC where order quantity and reorder point are jointly determined. As formulated, the method presented by Chaharsooghi and Heydari (2010) relies on one major assumption: the supplier and buyer opportunity costs due to the credit option are identical.A more accurate representation of the supplier’s opportunity cost, however, requires that the cost be based on its own investment cost and the purchase price of the inventory ordered by the buyer. When this adjustment is made to the cost function of the supplier, the method loses much of its effectiveness to coordinate the actions of the buyer and supplier.An alternate method based on a per order rebate paid by the supplier to the buyer was introduced after the analysis of the credit option. This method can be implemented to allow the SC members to divide the SC costs that would be incurred in a centralized mode of operations.In future research, we would like to apply the per order rebate method as a coordination incentive in a supply chain for consumable military aircraft items involving a common depot servicing multiple maintenance facilities. We would also like to develop a per order rebate method for use in coordinated SCs under other sets of assumptions, e.g., a model where inventory is ordered at fixed intervals.