@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mean–variance optimal portfolios in the presence of a benchmark with applications to fraud detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We derive bounds on Sharpe ratios of strategies in the presence of background risk.We show that this can be useful for fraud detection.We derive optimal strategies for investors with correclation constraints.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mean–variance,Fraud detection,Optimal portfolio,Correlation constraints,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We first study mean–variance efficient portfolios when there are no trading constraints and show that optimal strategies perform poorly in bear markets. We then assume that investors use a stochastic benchmark (linked to the market) as a reference portfolio. We derive mean–variance efficient portfolios when investors aim to achieve a given correlation (or a given dependence structure) with this benchmark. We also provide upper bounds on Sharpe ratios and show how these bounds can be useful for fraud detection. For example, it is shown that under some conditions it is not possible for investment funds to display a negative correlation with the financial market and to have a positive Sharpe ratio. All the results are illustrated in a Black–Scholes market.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Markowitz (1952) and Roy (1952) were first in proposing a quantitative approach to determine the optimal trade-off between mean (return) and variance (risk). Their framework is nowadays known as mean–variance analysis and has become very influential as it combines algebraic simplicity with practical applicability. Markowitz pursued the study of optimal investment portfolios and his seminal works initiated a tremendous amount of research heading in several directions, ranging from the study of other notions for measuring risk, multi-period models (Cui et al., 2013; Mossin, 1968), non-negative final wealth (Korn & Trautmann, 1995) and imperfect markets (Lim, 2004; Xia & Yan, 2006) to the inclusion of ambiguity on the returns (Goldfarb & Iyengar, 2003) or an uncertain horizon (Martellini & Urosevic̀, 2006). See also Leung, Wong, and Ng (2012) and Zhang, Zhang, and Xiao (2009). More recently, several authors have been working on quadratic hedging or mean–variance hedging, which corresponds to the problem of approximating, with minimal mean squared error, a given payoff by the final value of a self-financing trading strategy in a financial market; see e.g., Lim (2006), Pham (2000) and Schweizer (1992, 2010), to cite only a few.In an important contribution, Basak and Chabakauri (2010) have fully characterized time-consistent dynamic mean–variance optimal strategies. At any date prior to maturity, a time-consistent optimal strategy is the best possible mean–variance efficient allocation of wealth, assuming that an optimal mean variance strategy is also selected at each later instant in time. Mean–variance optimal strategies that are derived in a static setting1By a “static setting”, we mean that the strategy is derived at the initial time t=0 as the mean–variance efficient optimum with respect to the terminal wealth WTwithout consideration for its properties at intermediate dates.1violate time-consistency in the sense that it may become optimal for a mean–variance investor to deviate away from this optimal mean–variance strategy during the investment horizon. However, these optimal strategies (derived in the static setting) can still be justified by assuming that the investor is pre-committed at time 0 and thus executes the dynamic investment strategy that has been decided at time t=0. While time-consistency is a natural requirement, the assumption of pre-commitment is compatible with an investment practice in which a (retail) investor purchases a financial contract (from a financial institution) and does not trade (herself) afterwards.2This is also consistent with the work of Goldstein, Johnson, and Sharpe (2008) who propose a tool that allows consumers to specify their desired probability distribution of terminal wealth at maturity.2It also fits with the behavior of an investment manager who revisits (optimizes) his portfolio periodically and sticks to his strategy between two dates. In practice, managers and other investors may also have additional constraints when optimizing their portfolio. One motivation for having constraints is that optimal (unconstrained) strategies are typically long with the market index and perform poorly in poor economic situations (Bernard, Boyle, & Vanduffel, 2013). In this paper, we show that the static setting is well suited to deal with a certain type of constraints that we motivate economically. See also Wang and Forsyth (2011) for a numerical approach of mean variance efficiency in a time-consistent framework and numerical comparisons of pre-committed strategies and time-consistent strategies.Traditional mean–variance optimization consists in finding the best pre-committed allocation of assets assuming a buy-and-hold strategy or a constant-mix strategy (which requires a dynamic rebalancing to ensure a constant percentage invested in each asset). The question raises then how pre-committed mean–variance efficient portfolios can be derived when all strategies are allowed and available. Of course, allowing for more trading strategies and thus more degrees of freedom will further enhance optimality. The first contribution in this paper is to derive optimal mean–variance strategies in this setting. We show that the optimal portfolio consists of a short position in the stochastic discount factor used for pricing derivatives and a long position in cash. We are also able to compute the maximum possible Sharpe ratio (Sharpe, 1967) of an optimal (mean–variance efficient) strategy. Bounds on the Sharpe ratio can be useful to regulators or other market participants for fraud detection, i.e. to assess whether the reported performance of a strategy is feasible or not. Recall for example that the Sharpe ratio of Madoff’s strategy lied far above the maximum Sharpe ratio for plausible strategies (Bernard & Boyle, 2009).In the second part of the paper we extend our study to the case when there is additional information on the strategy, for example on the way it interacts with the financial market or any other benchmark asset as a source of background risk. Our second contribution is then to derive tighter bounds on the Sharpe ratio. This is useful for improved fraud detection or abnormal performance reporting. For example, it is shown that under some conditions it is not possible for investment funds to display negative correlation with the financial market and to have a positive Sharpe ratio.Considering the interaction with a benchmark asset is also a natural way to make mean–variance efficient strategies more resilient against declining markets. Indeed, the mean–variance efficient portfolios derived in the first part of the paper provide no protection against bear markets. In practice, many investors reward strategies that offer protection or, more generally, that exhibit some desired dependence with any other source of background risk (which we refer to as a benchmark). Our third contribution is to derive mean–variance optimal allocation schemes for investors who exhibit state-dependent preferences in the sense that they care about the first two moments of the strategy’s distribution and additionally aim at obtaining a desired correlation or dependence with a benchmark asset.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The optimal portfolio problem and the assumptions on the financial market are presented in Section 2. Section 3 provides explicit expressions for mean–variance efficient portfolios when there are no trading constraints as well as a first application to fraud detection. Sections 4 and 5 extend these preliminary results to the case when there are constraints on the correlation (respectively the dependence) with a benchmark and illustrate how these results are particularly useful to improve fraud detection tools. Final remarks are presented in Section 6.In this section, we provide our main assumptions and definitions. Let(Ω,F,P)be a probability space that describes a financial market. Assume that all market participants agree to use a (non-negative) stochastic discount process (ξt)tfor pricing, i.e. the price at time 0 for a strategy with terminal payoff XT(paid at time T>0) writes as(1)c(XT)=E[ξTXT].Note that the price of the unit cash-flow at time T is given byc(1)=E[ξT]and we define the risk-free rate r such thate-rT=E[ξT]. All payoffs XTare assumed to be square integrable ensuring that c(XT)<+∞. In particular var(ξT)<+∞. We remark that this practice is usually motivated by assuming a frictionless and arbitrage-free financial market where the usual definition of absence of arbitrage is employed.3The no-free-lunch with vanishing risk (NFLVR) concept is the prevalent way to describe absence of arbitrage. In their fundamental theorem of asset pricing, Delbaen and Schachermayer (1994) essentially state that NFLVR is equivalent to the existence of a stochastic discount factor (also called state-price density process).3In particular, we do not take into account transaction costs (Pelsser & Vorst, 1996). When the market is complete (all payoffs can be replicated) the stochastic discount factor ξTis uniquely given, but in general an infinite number of choices is possible. However, using a milder notion of arbitrage, Platen and Heath (2009) argue that under some conditions, the stochastic discount factor ξTcorresponds to the inverse of the so-called Growth Optimal Portfolio (GOP)4The Growth Optimal Portfolio is a diversified strategy which ultimately outperforms all other strategies with probability one. In the literature it also appears as the Kelly portfolio.4and also that the latter can be proxied by a market index. This motivates why in the remainder of the paper we refer to 1/ξtas “the market index” and we denote it bySt∗. The pricing formula (1) can then be interpreted as the arithmetic average of the possible outcomes all expressed in units of the market index. Note how low values for the market indexSt∗correspond to high values for the discount factor ξt. This is consistent with economic theory in the sense that the states of a downturn are usually the most expensive states to insure and therefore correspond to the states ω where the highest values for the discount factor ξT(ω) are observed.In the remainder of the paper, we consider an investor with a fixed horizon T>0 without intermediate consumption. We denote by W0>0 her initial wealth. For convenience, we assume that all ξt(t>0) are continuously distributed.Roy (1952) and Markowitz (1952) propose a quantitative approach to find mean–variance efficient allocation among risky assets assuming a buy-and-hold strategy. Their technique can also be applied in the context of constant-mix strategies. In this section we study mean–variance efficient portfolios when there are no restrictions on the possible strategies. Finding optimal policies turns out to be surprisingly simple. Indeed, let us first observe that an optimal mean–variance efficient final payoffXT∗must necessarily be the cheapest possibility to generate a maximum mean for the given variance level.5In other words, the optimal mean–variance portfolio must be cost-efficient in the sense defined by Bernard, Boyle, et al. (2013).5Otherwise it is easy to contradict the optimality of this payoff. Indeed, if the optimum is not the cheapest strategy then there is thus another strategy that is cheaper and also has maximum mean. The cost benefit can be invested in the risk free account and one obtains a strategy that has a higher mean for the same variance, which contradicts the mean–variance efficiency of the strategy.Constructing a cheapest strategy amounts to minimizing the price (1). Observe that sincestdXT∗and std(ξT) are both fixed and finite, minimizing the price (1) is equivalent to minimizing the correlation6corr(XT,ξT)=E[ξTXT]-E[ξT]E[XT]std(ξT)std(XT). As the moments of ξTare given, it follows that for given momentsE[XT]and std(XT) minimizingE[ξTXT]is equivalent to minimizing correlation corr(XT,ξT).6betweenXT∗and the discount factor ξT. It is then a standard result in statistics that this occurs if and only if the optimal payoffXT∗is linear in ξT(with a negative slope): the correlation is then minimized and equal to −1. The following proposition is now rather intuitive. A formal proof follows.Proposition 3.1(Mean–variance efficient portfolios).Assume that the investor aims for a strategy that maximizes the expected return for a given variance s2for s⩾0. The solution of the following mean–variance optimization problem(2)maxvar(XT)=s2c(XT)=W0,E[XT]is denoted byXT∗and given asXT∗=a-bξT,where a and b are non-negative and equal to(3)a=W0+bEξT2erT,b=svar(ξT).Let us choose a and b⩾0 such thatXT∗=a-bξTsatisfies the constraints of Problem (2), that is a and b verifyvarXT∗=s2andcXT∗=W0. We find (3). Observe thatcorr(XT∗,ξT)=-1andXT∗is thus the unique payoff that is perfectly negatively correlated with ξTwhile satisfying the stated constraints. Consider next any other strategy XTwhich also verifies these constraints (but is not negatively linear in ξT). We find that(4)corr(XT,ξT)=E[ξTXT]-E[ξT]E[XT]var(ξT)var(XT)>-1=corrXT∗,ξT.Sincevar(XT)=s2=varXT∗andE[ξTXT]=W0=EξTXT∗it follows from (4) thatE[ξT]E[XT]<E[ξT]EXT∗,which shows thatXT∗maximizes the expectation and thus solves Problem (2). □Note that the maximal expected returnEXT∗is given as(5)EXT∗=(W0+bvar(ξT))erT⩾W0erT,because b⩾0, reflecting that taking risk results in a positive risk premium. Proposition 3.1 shows that, in case all trading is permitted, mean–variance efficient portfolios amount to holding a cash amount (a⩾0) combined with a short position (b⩾0) in the stochastic discount factor ξT. While the benefits are limited to receiving a at the maximum, the investor suffers unlimited losses when the market indexST∗=1/ξTgoes to zero. The monotonicity of the optimal payoff with the market index may not suit investors who may wish to have some degree of protection for their portfolio in bad economic scenarios (i.e. in a declining market). Adding constraints on correlation or on the dependence can partly address this issue as we will see later in Section 4.Rather than maximizing the expected return for a given (risk) variance, one can also consider the dual problem of minimizing the variance for a given expected return. We obtain the following result.Proposition 3.2(Mean–variance efficient portfolios – Dual setting).Assume that the investor aims for a strategy that minimizes the variance for a given expected wealth. The solution of the following mean–variance optimization problem(6)minE[XT]=W0emTc(XT)=W0var(XT)where m⩾r, is denoted byXT∗and given asXT∗=a-bξT,where a and b are non-negative and equal toa=W0emT+be-rT,b=W0e(m-r)T-1var(ξT).As the proof of Proposition 3.2 is rather similar to Proposition 3.1, we give it in Appendix A.1.□Note that the requirement m⩾r is natural to ensure the problem is well-posed for mean–variance investors who prefer more to less. Otherwise, investing the initial wealth at the fixed risk-free rate r would always ensure higher final wealth with zero variance.Mean–variance optimization is similar to maximizing quadratic utility. As the following result readily follows from Propositions 3.1 and 3.2, we omit its proof.Corollary 3.1(Optimizing quadratic utility). Assume that the investor has a utility functionU(x)=x-α2x2(where0<α⩽e-rTW0andx⩽1α).7Note that imposingα⩽e-rTW0is natural to ensure the investor is also considering (utility of) wealth levels x>W0erT, when optimizing her expected utility. In the opposite case, optimizing quadratic utility gives rise to portfolios that exhibit variability for a lower expected return than what can be obtained by simply investing at the fixed rate r. In addition, the requirementx⩽1αis needed to ensure the utility function is non-decreasing on admissible wealth levels.7The solution of the following expected utility maximization problem(7)maxc(XT)=W0E[u(XT)]is denoted byXT∗and is given byXT∗=a-bξT, where a and b are non-negative and given bya=1αandb=e-rT-αW0αEξT2.Let us show how the results apply in a Black–Scholes market. While this setting does not always allow to accurately reflect true market behavior, its tractability makes it a reference model used in practice and a traditional work-horse employed in the finance literature to develop new ideas and get insights. In the Black–Scholes setting, there is a bank account earning a constant risk-free rate r>0 and a risky stock with the following dynamics under the real-world probability measure(8)dStSt=μdt+σdWt.Here Wtis a standard Brownian motion, μ>r is the instantaneous expected return and σ is the volatility. The unique stochastic discount factor process (ξt)tin the Black–Scholes setting is given by(9)ξt=e-rte-θWt-12θ2t,θ=μ-rσ.Furthermore, we also find thatdSt∗St∗=θσμ+1-θσrdt+θdWtso that the market indexSt∗amounts to a constant mix strategy, where at time t a fractionθσis invested in the risky asset and the remaining fraction1-θσin the bank account. The solution to the mean–variance optimization problem (2) is thus given by(10)XT∗=a-bST∗,where a, b are non-negative and given bya=W0erT+seθ2Teθ2T-1andb=serTeθ2T-1. It is clear that a similar result can be derived for Problem (6).The Sharpe ratio is a well-known measure balancing risk (variance) and return (mean) of a portfolio XT(see Sharpe (1967)). It is defined asSR(XT)=E[XT]-W0erTstd(XT).It is clear that mean–variance optimality of a portfolio is tied to the maximality of the Sharpe ratio.Proposition 3.3(Maximal Sharpe Ratio).All mean–variance efficient portfoliosXT∗have the same maximal Sharpe ratio given by(11)SR∗=var(ξT)E2[ξT]=erTstd(ξT).Furthermore, a portfolio is mean–variance efficient if and only if it has maximal Sharpe ratio.The proof of this proposition is given in Appendix A.2. □In the specific context of a Black–Scholes market (see (8)), Proposition 3.3 can also be found in Goetzmann, Ingersoll, Spiegel, and Welch (2002)8In the appendix in Goetzmann et al. (2002) the maximal Sharpe ratio is proved to be exp(θ2Δt)−1, where in the context of this paper Δt is the investment horizon. Note that this result does not appear in the published version of Goetzmann, Ingersoll, Spiegel, and Welch (2007).8but our result is more general and holds in a fairly general market setting. This maximum Sharpe ratio applies for all mean–variance efficient strategies as well as any admissible trading strategy in the financial market. Hence it can be used for fraud detection in the sense that it allows to trace Sharpe ratio of fund managers which are too high to be “feasible”. When the Sharpe ratio of a strategy violates the upper bound SR∗, this can be interpreted as a signal that there might be a fraud, or a mistake regarding the reported returns. In practice, to apply fraud detection one needs to construct an estimator for the Sharpe ratio which can be achieved using the reported returns of the fund at hand. The upper bound itself requires the estimation of the standard deviation of the stochastic discount factor ξT. While this variable is not really observable in the market, several methods exist to estimate its distributional properties; see for example Aït-Sahalia and Lo (2001). We now pursue the basic idea of fraud detection in some more detail in the Black–Scholes setting.Fraud detection in the Black–Scholes model: In the Black–Scholes market one finds from (9) thatE[ξT]=e-rTandEξT2=e-2rTeθ2T. Hence, in this setting the expression (11) for the maximal Sharpe-ratio SR∗ can be made explicit and we find that(12)SR∗=eθ2T-1.Using observed market data one can now readily estimate SR∗ and next compare Sharpe ratios of funds (derived from reported data) with this maximum. This was used by Bernard and Boyle (2009) to show that the returns from the option strategy pursued by Madoff were too good to be true.Fraud detection in a general market: The Black–Scholes setting does not always comply with real markets which implies that fraud detection based on the expression (12) is prone to some model error. A possible way to address this drawback consists in a better use of the available market data allowing to obtain a non-parametric estimator for SR∗. The following proposition exhibits the Sharpe ratio in terms of observable option prices.Proposition 3.4(Fraud detection).Assume that ξT=f(ST) (where f is typically decreasing and STis the risky asset) and that all European call options on the underlying STmaturing at T>0 are traded.9There is often a large (but finite) number of options available in the market, in which case assuming a continuum of strikes could be seen as a reasonable approximation of reality.Carr and Chou (2002)note that it is “analogous to the continuous trading assumption permeating the continuous time literature”. See alsoBreeden and Litzenberger (1978).9Let C(K) denote the price of a call option on STwith strike K. Then, the Sharpe ratio SR(XT) of any admissible strategy with payoff XTsatisfies the following upper bound(13)SR(XT)⩽e2rT∫0+∞f(K)∂2C(K)∂K2dK-1.The proof of Proposition 3.4 is given in Appendix A.3.□Note that in an incomplete market, the pricing kernel ξTis not unique anymore. The upper bounds (11) and (13) are then still valid upper bounds for the Sharpe ratio of a given strategy XT(with respect to the pricing kernel ξTthat is used to price this strategy). However, these bounds may not be attainable anymore because the market is incomplete. In other words, a dynamic strategy that achieves the maximum Sharpe ratio may not exist (if a−bξTis not attainable). The fact that a−bξTis not attainable is not a real problem for the application to fraud detection since it is still an upper bound.It is important to understand that the violation of the upper bound as derived in Proposition 3.4, or as given in (12) for the specific case of a Black–Scholes model, has to be seen as an indication (a signal) that there could be a fraud, but not as a formal proof of it. We already explained that the calculation of the upper bound is subject to model error, thus a violation of this upper bound does not always imply a fraud. There might be other reasons that explain why an observed manager’s Sharpe ratio can be higher than the upper bound even if there is no fraud.Firstly, the Sharpe ratio of a strategy is based on the average and the standard deviation. In practice, one has to estimate these two moments and hence only confidence intervals for the Sharpe ratio can be obtained but not the true value. Hence, the observed Sharpe ratio may violate the upper bound but this fact is not necessarily (statistically) meaningful.10It is well-documented in the literature that optimal portfolio choice is subject to parameter uncertainty, in that a small perturbation of the inputs may lead to a large change in the optimal portfolio. Robust portfolio selection techniques have been developed to deal with this issue (Ben-Tal & Nemirovski, 1998; Goldfarb & Iyengar, 2003; Tütüncü & Koenig, 2004). For a complete discussion of robust portfolio optimization and the associated solution methods, see Fabozzi, Kolm, Pachamanova, and Focardi (2007) and the references therein.10Secondly, the upper bound that we propose has been derived in a continuous time framework by optimizing over all self-financing strategies that are adapted to the market information on the security prices. In practice, the manager may be able to capture information outside the financial market and to use this extra information to optimize his portfolio. In particular, a manager with insider information has a strategy that is also (partially) based on this “future information”and thus not adapted to the prices filtration. In this case, the Sharpe ratio of such strategy may lie above the theoretical bound (that is derived among all adapted self-financing strategies). A violation of the upper bound may thus also serve as a potential signal for detecting insider trading. Similarly, a manager who is rebalancing his portfolio on a daily basis may use an extra source of information to decide if he goes long or short in the risky asset for the next business day. There is then always a chance that he consistently makes the right decision and thus achieves a higher Sharpe ratio (by luck). In the context of a multidimensional financial market with n stocks, there is a small probability to always pick the best stocks while rebalancing the portfolio. Being an outstanding stock picker was one of the arguments used by Madoff to explain the exceptionally high Sharpe ratio of his investment strategy.To conclude, it is important to understand that the violation of the upper bound derived in Proposition 3.4 or given in (12) for the specific case of a Black–Scholes model should be seen as a signal that there could be a fraud, but not as a proof.The fraud detection mechanism described in the previous section can be greatly improved by taking into account additional information available in the market. Indeed, the maximum Sharpe ratios derived in Propositions 3.3 and 3.4 do not take into account the dependence features between the investment strategy and the financial market. Regulators, however, can estimate the Sharpe ratio of a hedge fund but can also investigate correlations of the fund with indices in the market, and this additional source of information may be useful for refining the process of fraud detection. A popular strategy amongst hedge funds is the so-called “market-neutral” strategy. One of its key properties is that it typically ensures very low correlation with market indices. We show that in this instance the maximum possible Sharpe ratio is significantly reduced compared to the unconstrained case.Furthermore, recall that unconstrained mean–variance efficient payoffs have bounded gains but no protection against a market crash giving rise to unlimited losses (Propositions 3.1 and 3.2). An investor may then be interested in choosing the dependence with a benchmark of her choice so that, for instance, her investment strategy is no longer decreasing when the market index decreases. It appears as a suitable reference point for her investment, and it allows to better control the states in which cash-flows are received. The worst outcomes for the strategy do no longer necessarily coincide with bad scenarios for the market index.Hence, in this section we focus on investors who care about the first two moments of the distribution of a strategy and additionally aim at obtaining a desired correlation (Section 4) or dependence (Section 5) with a benchmark asset BT.The following proposition gives a mean–variance optimal allocation policy for an investor with a fixed correlation constraint.Proposition 4.1(Optimal portfolio with a correlation constraint).Let BTbe a benchmark which is linearly independent from ξTwith var(BT)<+∞. Let ∣ρ∣<1 and s>0. Consider the following mean–variance optimization problem(14)maxvar(XT)=s2c(XT)=W0,corr(XT,BT)=ρE[XT]Let a, b and c be uniquely determined by the set of equationsρ=corr(cBT-ξT,BT)s=bvar(ξT-cBT)W0=ae-rT-b(EξT2-cE[ξTBT]),thenXT∗given asXT∗=a-b(ξT-cBT), is a solution to Problem(14).Consider the function f(c)≔corr(cBT−ξT, BT) and observe that limc→−∞f(c)=−1 and limc→+∞f(c)=1. Since f(c) is continuous it follows from the intermediate value theorem that the equation ρ=f(c) has a solution when solving for c. Moreover, this solution is unique asf′(c)=var(BT)var(ξT)-(cov(ξT,BT))2(std(cBT-ξT))3std(BT)>0.It is now clear thatXT∗=a-b(ξT-cBT)is the unique payoff that is linear in ξT−cBTwhile satisfying all constraints and note that b>0. It remains to show that it is the optimal solution to Problem (14). Hence, consider any other payoff XTthat satisfies the constraints and which is non-linear in ξT−cBT. We have thatcorr(XT,ξT-cBT)=E[XT(ξT-cBT)]-E[ξT-cBT]E[XT]std(ξT-cBT)std(XT)>-1=corr(XT∗,ξT-cBT)Since both XTandXT∗satisfy the constraints we have thatstd(XT)=stdXT∗,E[XTξT]=EXT∗ξTandcov(XT,BT)=covXT∗,BT. Hence the inequality holds true if and only ifEXT∗>E[XT]. This ends the proof. □In the Problems (2), (6) and (14), the equalities in the constraints can sometimes be replaced by inequalities without impacting the solution. First, the solution to Problem (2) is also the portfolio, which maximizes the expectation such that the variance is less than s2 instead of being equal to s2 (as we do). This feature clearly appears from the solution a−bξT, as b decreases if s decreases and thus the expected final value of the portfolio decreases as well. Similarly, in the dual problem (6), the solution that minimizes the variance of the terminal value of the portfolio for a given expected value is also the solution to a variance minimization with minimum expected value. However, for the correlation constraint in Problem (14), replacing the equality by an inequality usually affects the solution. For example, let us assume that we replace the constraint “corr(XT,BT)=ρ” by the constraint “corr(XT,BT)⩽ρ” and also assume that the optimum a−bξTthat was derived in the unconstrained case (as a solution to Problem (2)) satisfies this inequality constraint. Clearly, the unconstrained optimum a−bξT(for Problem (2)) will then also be the optimum for the constrained Problem (14). However, it is clear that one can also have that corr(a−bξT,BT)>ρand in this instance the unconstrained solution fails to be the optimum of the constrained Problem (14). Note also that it is possible to solve Problem (14) in presence of inequality constraints on the correlation, i.e. when ρ1⩽corr(XT,BT)⩽ρ2 for some −1⩽ρ1⩽ρ2⩽1. Finding the optimal strategy consists of two-step optimization in which we derive first the optimum, sayXTρ, of Problem (14) for each ρ1⩽ρ⩽ρ2 and next we find the optimal solution by optimizingEXTρon the interval [ρ1,ρ2].Note that in the case when the benchmark BTis not a function of the stochastic discount factor ξT(or equivalently of the market indexST∗), the worst case outcomes for the optimal strategyXT∗=a-b(ξT-cBT)do not necessarily occur when the market index is low. Bad outcomes for the market indexST∗might be compensated by good outcomes for the benchmark asset. In contrast, when BTand thus alsoXT∗depends onST∗only, then the optimum may or may not provide protection against downturns (depending on its precise functional relationship with the market index). We now provide an illustration of the theoretical results.Illustration in the Black–Scholes Market when the benchmarkBT=ST∗: Consider a Black–Scholes market as in (8). Let us solve Problem (14) when the benchmark BTis the market index, that isBT=ST∗. From Proposition 4.1, the optimal solution is of the formXT∗=a-b(ξT-cST∗), where c is computed from the equationρ=corr(cST∗-ξT,ST∗),bis derived fromb=svar(ξT-cST∗)anda=W0erT+b(e-2rT+θ2T-c)erT.Fig. 1shows that constraining the strategy to be (sufficiently) negatively correlated can improve the returns during a crisis (whenST∗is low). However this goes at the cost of a lower performance when the market index increases significantly. Note that the unconstrained optimal strategy also appears as an optimal strategy in presence of a (redundant) correlation constraint, that is whenρ=corr(a-bξT,ST∗)(which is close to 1 in this example).It is clear that adding constraints reduces degrees of freedom for trading strategies and thus lowers the maximum possible Sharpe ratio. We obtain the following proposition.Proposition 4.2(Constrained Maximal Sharpe Ratio).Any mean–variance efficient portfolioXT∗which satisfies the additional constraintcorrXT∗,BT=ρwith a benchmark asset BT(that is not linearly dependent to ξT) has the same maximum Sharpe ratioSRρ∗given by(15)SRρ∗=erTcov(ξT,ξT-cBT)std(ξT-cBT)⩽SR∗=erTstd(ξT).where SR∗is the unconstrained Sharpe ratio found inProposition 3.3and where c is determined uniquely by the equation corr(ξT−c BT,BT)=ρ.The proof of Proposition 4.2 is given in Appendix A.4.□Note that the constrained strategy exhibits a strictly lower Sharpe ratio unless c=0 which just means that the unconstrained optimal strategy happens to satisfy the correlation constraint. The proposition shows that for fraud detection it is useful to incorporate correlation features of displayed returns. We illustrate this point in a numerical example in the next paragraph in the Black–Scholes setting. In particular, we observe that maximum Sharpe ratios can be significantly lower than in the unconstrained case.Illustration in the Black–Scholes Market:Fig. 2displays the maximum Sharpe ratio for the unconstrained case (which is approximately equal to 0.1 for the parameter set used in Fig. 2) and constrained Sharpe ratio for different levels of correlation constraints when the market indexST∗is the benchmark (see Fig. 3).Observe that for low correlation levels (ρ∈[−0.1,0.1]), the maximum Sharpe ratio is 0.02 only, which is five times lower than when there are no constraints. Adding the information on the dependence between the strategy’s performance and the market index can thus greatly improve fraud detection. Observe also that for negative correlation levels, the maximum Sharpe ratio can be negative,11At first, it might look counter intuitive that an optimal strategy has a lower return than what can be achieved risk-free. However, enforcing a negative dependence with the market comes at some cost. A similar observation can be drawn for the put option: it has a low expected return but provides protection when markets fall.11thus if hedge fund returns display a negative correlation with the financial market and a positive Sharpe ratio, then there could be some suspicion about these returns. This is strongly different from what we observed in the unconstrained case as the maximum Sharpe ratio is always positive in this case because of (5).Finally, observe that the constrained case reduces to the unconstrained one when ρ is equal to the correlation of the unconstrained optimum a−bξTwith the market indexST∗(which happens when ρ is close to 1). The constraint is thus redundant in that case.In practice, investors may consider more than one benchmark when making investment decisions. Likewise, a fund manager’s portfolio returns are observed in conjunction with the returns of many other market indices. In particular, one may have at hand a correlation matrix between a given fund and n market indices, and having this information allows to develop an improved upper bound on the Sharpe ratio. In this section, we derive optimal strategies (and thus also the maximum Sharpe ratio) amongst strategies that satisfy the correlation matrix. Using not only information about the marginal distribution (computed as the Sharpe ratio of the portfolio) but also the correlation matrix significantly improves the upper bound, and thus may facilitate fraud detection.To do so, consider investors who care about the first and second moments of the distribution of their investment strategy but now in addition aim at fixing the correlations with n linearly independent benchmark assetsBTi(i=1,2,…,n). Their correlation matrix Σ(i.e.Σij≔corrBTi,BTj) is positive definite. Without loss of generality, we can further assume that all benchmarks have expectation 0 and variance 1.It is well-known that there is a unique Cholesky decomposition Σ=AA⊤ where A is a triangular matrix. It also follows that the vectorD⊤=DT1,DT2,…,DTndetermined through D=A−1B withB⊤=BT1,BT2,…BTnis a vector of orthogonal benchmarks all with expectation 0 and variance 1. It is now clear that the following mean–variance optimization problem(16)maxvar(XT)=s2c(XT)=W0,corr(XT,BTi)=ρi(i=1,2,…,n)E[XT]can also be alternatively formulated as(17)maxvar(XT)=s2c(XT)=W0,cov(XT,DTi)=di(i=1,2,…,n)E[XT]for appropriate choices for di.Proposition 4.3(Optimal portfolio with multiple correlation constraints).The optimal solutionXT∗to Problem(17)when the disatisfy12This condition is needed for the problem to be well posed. Note indeed thatXT∗can be expressed asXT∗=EXT∗+∑i=1ncovξT,DTiDTi+εwhere εis a random variable with zero mean that is orthogonal (uncorrelated) to the differentDTi(i=1,2,…,n).12∑i=1ndi2⩽s2(with s2>0) is given by(18)XT∗=a-bξT+∑i=1nciDTi,where a, b and ci(i=1,2,…,n) are as follows:ci=di+bcovξT,DTib=s2-∑i=1ndi2varξT-∑i=1ncovξT,DTiDTia=W0erT+berTEξT2+∑i=1ncierTcDTi.The proof is given in Appendix A.5. □Correlation is only one property related to dependence. It measures the linear relationship between strategies but falls short in depicting dependence fully. A useful device for reflecting the interaction between the strategy’s payoff XTand BTis the copula. Indeed Sklar’s theorem shows that the joint distribution of (BT,XT) can be decomposed as(19)P(BT⩽y,XT⩽x)=C(FBT(y),FXT(x)),where C is the joint distribution (also called the copula) for a pair of uniform random variables U and V over (0,1) and whereFBTandFXTdenote respectively the (marginal) cdf of BTand XT. Hence, the copulaC:[0,1]2→Rfully describes the interaction between the strategy’s payoff XTand the benchmark BT. A constraint on the copula is much more informative than a correlation constraint. A copula is a function and contains full information about the interaction between two variables. A correlation is a single number and cannot describe the complex nature of dependence fully.13Note that even when two variables are normally distributed their dependence is not described by their correlation coefficient. Knowledge of the correlation coefficient is sufficient for depicting the dependence when the variables follow a bivariate normal distribution, but this is an assumption which actually imposes a lot of structure on the interaction between both variables.13Similarly, Value-at-Risk is only a single number and will never describe the risk as well as knowing the exact loss distribution.The partial derivativecu(v)≔∂∂uC(u,v)has an interesting property, namely it can be interpreted as a conditional probability:(20)cu(v)=P(V⩽v|U=u).Property (20) is extremely useful for constructing payoffs with desired dependence properties. For example, cU(V) is a uniform variable that depends on U and V and which is independent of U. Conversely, if U and T are independent uniform random variables thencU-1(T)is a uniform variable (depending on U and T) that has copula C with U.The following propositions give mean–variance optimal allocation schemes in the presence of a benchmark. We use the notation C(·,·) to reflect the desired dependence for the coupleBT,XT∗that is between the benchmark BTand the final value of the investment strategyXT∗at the investment horizon T.The first proposition in this section provides mean–variance efficient portfolios when the market indexST∗, and thus ξT, is used as the benchmark.Proposition 5.1Optimal portfolio when the market index is the benchmarkLet BT=ξT. For t∈(0,T), define the variableAtasAt=(cFξT(ξT))-1[jFξT(ξT)(Fξt(ξt))],where the functions ju(v) and cu(v) are defined as the first partial derivative for (u,v)→J(u,v) and (u,v)→C(u,v)respectively, and where J denotes the copula for the random pair (ξT,ξt). Assume thatE[ξT|At]is strictly decreasing inAt. For s>0, a solution of the following constrained mean–variance optimization problem(21)maxvar(XT)=s2c(XT)=W0C:copulabetweenXTandBTE[XT]is given byXT∗,(22)XT∗=a-bE[ξT|At].Here a, b are non-negative and given bya=(W0+bE[ξTE[ξT|At]])erT,b=sstd(E[ξT|At]).Note that the maximal expected return ofXT∗is given as(23)EXT∗=(W0+bvar(E[ξT|At]))erT>W0erT.Actually, comparing (23) with (5), one observes that adding dependence constraints decreases the expected return of the optimal strategy and this decrease is directly proportional tovar(ξT)-var(E[ξT|At]).ProofThe proof of Proposition 5.1 can be found in Appendix A.6□We now formulate a few important remarks.Remark 5.1(i) In general, the Mean–Variance optimal portfolios discussed in this section are not unique as the choice of t is arbitrary. (ii) On may wonder what happens if in Proposition 5.1 the non-decreasingness property forE[ξT|At]is not fulfilled. Then, it still follows that mean–variance efficient portfolios, provided they exist, must write asf(At)for some non-decreasing f. Unfortunately, it is then not clear how to find a function f that minimizescorr(f(At),ξT), or equivalently, that minimizescorr(f(At),E[ξT|At]). (iii) WhenE[ξT|At]is increasing inAtthen it holds for the mean–variance efficient portfoliof(At)(provided it exists) thatE[f(At)]⩽W0erT, meaning that the imposed benchmark constraint comes at significant cost.We remark from the previous proposition that fixing the dependence with ξTdoes not generally result in unique mean–variance efficient portfolios. However, when the benchmark is not functionally dependent with ξT, the optimal allocation can become unique as the following proposition shows.Proposition 5.2Constrained mean–variance efficiencyLet s>0. Assume that the benchmark BThas a joint density with ξT. Define the variableAas(24)A=(cFBT(BT))-1[jFBT(BT)(1-FξT(ξT))],where the functions ju(v) and cu(v) are defined as the first partial derivative for (u,v)→J(u,v) and (u,v)→C(u,v) respectively, and where J denotes the copula for the random pair (BT,ξT). Furthermore, assume thatE[ξT|A]is decreasing inA. Then, the solution to the problem(25)maxvar(XT)=s2c(XT)=W0C:copulabetweenXTandBTE[XT]is uniquely given asXT∗=a-bE[ξT|A],where a, b are non-negative and equal toa=(W0+bE[ξTE[ξT|A]])erTandb=sstd(E[ξT|A]).Similarly as the case when the benchmark is the market index, the maximum expected return verifiesEXT∗=(W0+bvar(E[ξT|A]))erT⩾W0erT.We specialize the results by considering a Gaussian dependence14We say that two variables X and Y have a gaussian dependence with correlation coefficient ρ0 if (X,Y) is distributed as (f(N), g(M)), where f and g are increasing, and where N and M are (bivariate) standard normally distributed random variables that exhibit a correlation coefficient equal to ρ0.14and by taking the market index as the benchmark.Proposition 5.3(CaseBT=ST∗).LetBT=ST∗. Assume that ρ0⩾0. Then, the solution to the problem(21)when the copula C is the Gaussian copula with correlation ρ0, i.e.Cρ0Gauss, is given byXT∗,(26)XT∗=a-bGTc.Here GTis a weighted average of the benchmark and the market index. It is given asGT=St∗αST∗with α,1α=tTρ0T-tt11-ρ02-1,and where the coefficients a, b and c are given asa=W0erT+berTEξTGTc,b=svarGTcc=-αt+T(α+1)2t+(T-t).The proof of Proposition 5.3 can be found in Appendix A.8.□(CaseBT=St∗).LetBT=St∗(0<t<T) be the benchmark. Assume thatρ0⩾-1-tT. Then, the solution to Problem(25)when the copula C is the Gaussian copula with correlationρ0,Cρ0Gaussis given byXT∗,(27)XT∗=a-bGTc.Here GTis a weighted average of the benchmark and the market index. It is given asGT=St∗αST∗with α,α=ρ0T-tt11-ρ02-1,where the coefficients a, b and c are given asa=W0erT+berTEξTGTc,b=svarGTcc=-αt+T(α+1)2t+(T-t).The proof of Proposition 5.4 can be found in Appendix A.9.□The Black–Scholes setting allows to derive an explicit expression for the Maximal Sharpe ratio. We obtain the following result.Proposition 5.5Constrained Maximal Sharpe RatioAll mean–variance efficient portfoliosXT∗which satisfy the additional constraint that the copula between their final valueXT∗and the market portfolioSt∗(for all t⩽T) is the Gaussian copula, have the same maximal Sharpe ratioSRρ0,G∗given by(28)SRρ0,G∗=erTEξTGTc-EGTcstdGTc⩽SR∗.HereE[GTc]=eM+V2andvarGTc=(eV-1)e2M+V, withM≔ElnGTc=cr+θ22(αt+T)andV≔varlnGTc=c2θ2(α2t+T+2αt). MoreoverEln(ξT)+lnGTc=M-rT-θ22Tandvarln(ξT)+lnGTc=θ2(c2α2t+(c-1)2T+2c(c-1)αt)so thatEξTGTcreflects the expectation of a lognormal which can be computed from these two first log-moments similarly as we did forGTc.We omit the proof as it is a straightforward calculation. □Proposition 5.5 is fundamentally different from the result in Proposition 4.2, which only derived the maximum Sharpe ratio with a given correlation. Imposing that the dependence between the portfolio and a benchmark is specified by a Gaussian copula with given correlation coefficient is more informative than imposing a correlation constraint as done in Proposition 4.2. There are indeed infinitely many copulas that can result in the same level of correlation and the Gaussian copula is just one example. In practice it is easier to estimate the correlation than the copula and Proposition 4.2 might thus be more useful for practical application. However, if one has a good idea of the desired copula, the result in Proposition 5.5 will be strictly better in the sense that the upper bound will be smaller and thus the fraud detection scheme will be improved.Observe in Fig. 3 that the constrained case reduces to the unconstrained maximum Sharpe ratio when the correlation in the Gaussian copula isρ0=t/T. The reason is that the copula between the unconstrained optimum andSt∗is the Gaussian copula with correlationρ0=t/T. The constraint is thus redundant in that case. Let us illustrate this last proposition by a numerical example in the Black–Scholes setting.In this paper we first analyze mean–variance optimal portfolios when there are no constraints on trading and dependence. We show that optimal portfolios consist in having a short position in the stochastic discount factor. Next, we depart from the classical setting and assume the investor also seeks for portfolios satisfying dependence constraints. We are able to provide optimal portfolios and also derive bounds for maximum possible Sharpe ratios. Throughout the paper we explore how the results can be useful for fraud detection.The approach that we propose for dealing with state-dependent constraints is technically rooted in the theory of stochastic dependence and bounds on copulas. In a recent paper, Bernard, Chen, and Vanduffel (2013) characterize optimal strategies for investors who specify dependence with a benchmark, under worst-case scenarios only, and show that the new strategies outperform traditional diversified strategies; see also Bernard, Jiang, and Vanduffel (2012) for the technical background. Finally, Bernard and Vanduffel (in press) explore the connections between the pricing of financial and insurance (non-financial) claims and bounds on copulae are a technical device in doing so.Throughout the paper we dealt with several examples of state-dependent constraints by looking at the dependence between the portfolio and the benchmark. The static setting considered in the paper allows to solve for explicit optimal strategies in the presence of these constraints. It is not straightforward to handle such constraints in a time-consistent setting (Basak & Chabakauri, 2010) and we leave it for future research. Another interesting future direction is to improve optimal mean–variance hedging using our results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
