@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An explicitly solvable Heston model with stochastic interest rate

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The analytical treatment of a Heston model with stochastic interest rate is illustrated.A pdf as a one dimensional integral of an elementary integrand function is given.Explicit formulas for the moments of the price variables are derived.Closed-form formulas to approximate European option prices are proposed.A calibration procedure is applied to option prices and U.S. government bond yields.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finance,Option pricing,Stochastic volatility models,Calibration procedure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper deals with a variation of the Heston hybrid model with stochastic interest rate illustrated in Grzelak and Oosterlee (2011). This variation leads to a multi-factor Heston model where one factor is the stochastic interest rate. Specifically, the dynamics of the asset price is described through two stochastic factors: one related to the stochastic volatility and the other to the stochastic interest rate. The proposed model has the advantage of being analytically tractable while preserving the good features of the Heston hybrid model in Grzelak and Oosterlee (2011) and of the multi-factor Heston model in Christoffersen et al. (2009). The analytical treatment is based on an appropriate parametrization of the probability density function which allows us to compute explicitly relevant integrals which define option pricing and moment formulas. The moments and mixed moments of the asset price and log-price variables are given by elementary formulas which do not involve integrals. A procedure to estimate the model parameters is proposed and validated using three different data-sets: the prices of call and put options on the U.S. S&P 500 index, the values of the Credit Agricole index linked policy, Azione Più Capitale Garantito Em.64., and the U.S. three-month, two and ten year government bond yields. The empirical analysis shows that the stochastic interest rate plays a crucial role as a volatility factor and provides a multi-factor model that outperforms the Heston model in pricing options. This model can also provide insights into the relationship between short and long term bond yields.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The pricing of derivative products is probably one of the most challenging topics in modern financial theory. The modern fixed income market includes not only bonds but also derivative securities sensitive to interest rates. In this paper we consider a modified version of the hybrid model illustrated in Grzelak and Oosterlee (2011). This model is described by a system of stochastic differential equations (SDEs) which combines different models for equity, interest rate and volatility in order to efficiently price European vanilla call and put options with short and long maturities.Specifically, we focus on the model which combines the Heston model 1993 for equity and its volatility and the Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985) (CIR) model for interest rate. Roughly speaking, the proposed model can be interpreted as the Heston multi-factor model introduced by Christoffersen, Heston, and Jacob (2009) where one volatility factor is the stochastic interest rate. Indeed, a multi-factor Heston-like stochastic volatility model capable of explaining some stylized facts on interest rate volatility and of forecasting bond yields with different maturities has been introduced by Trolle and Schwartz (2009). This model describes the yield using a stochastic differential equation where the drift and the coefficients of the stochastic variances are dependent on time and maturity date.Furthermore, Cieslak and Povala (2014) propose the joint use of a short term yield with another stochastic factor as an efficient tool to explain the volatility of the yields. Motivated by the results of these papers, the hybrid model proposed here has been applied to option pricing (see Sections 4.2 and 4.3) and, at a very preliminary stage, to bond yield analysis (see Section 4.4).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We present a Heston model with a stochastic interest rate. This model can be seen as a modified version of the model in Grzelak and Oosterlee (2011) as well as of the multi-factor Heston model in Christoffersen et al. (2009) where a volatility factor is the interest rate. This hybrid model is analytically tractable. The analytical treatment is based on a simple “trick” which allows us to suitably parameterize the transition probability density function. That is, the transition probability density function is expressed as a one-dimensional integral of a smooth integrand function which depends on a real parameter q. Thanks to this formula and suitable choices for the parameter q, we deduce explicit elementary formulas for the moments and mixed moments of the price and log-price variables as well as efficient formulas to approximate the option prices.We conduct an empirical analysis of three different data-sets. The empirical analysis of European call and put options on the U.S. S&P 500 index shows that the hybrid Heston model outperforms the Heston model in interpreting both call and put option prices. In fact, the use of a two stage calibration provides empirical evidence that the stochastic interest rate plays a significant role as a volatility factor in the option pricing. Moreover, the hybrid Heston model outperforms the Heston one even when the Credit Agricole policy values are analyzed. This result is not surprising since the assumption of constant interest rate is not realistic in the pricing of long-term products.Finally, the preliminary results of the empirical analysis on U.S. government bond yields confirm the validity of the Heston-like multi-factor stochastic volatility models to interpret bond yield term structure. The use of short-term yields as a volatility factor is a recent approach of Cieslak and Povala (2014) that deserves further investigation.In conclusion, the hybrid model seems to interpret satisfactorily call and put option prices and, consequently, the volatility implied by these prices. It also holds promise in analyzing the term structure of yields.The use of this model to forecast implied volatility as well as the use of the moment formulas to calibrate the model following the approach of Date and Islyaev (2015) will be the object of future research.