@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Job-shop production scheduling with reverse flows

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We provide a linear model for the job-shop scheduling problem with reverse flows.We present a new heuristic to solve the 3-machine case.The heuristic offers goods results, especially when the two flows are balanced.We suggest a hybrid approach to solve the m-machine case.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scheduling,Job-shop,Reverse flows,Heuristics,Linear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we conduct a study of the job-shop scheduling problem with reverse flows. This NP-hard problem is characterized by two flows of jobs that cover the same machines in opposite directions. The objective is to minimize the maximal completion time of the jobs (i.e., the makespan).We start by analyzing the complexity and identifying particular cases of the problem. Then, we provide a mathematical model that we use in conjunction with a solver to determine the computational times. These times are often too long because the problem is NP-hard. Thus, in this paper, we present a new heuristic method for solving the NP-hard 3-machine case. We evaluate the performance of this heuristic by computing several lower bounds and conducting tests on a Taillard-based benchmark. These tests give satisfying results and show that the heuristic ensures good performance when the two flows have comparable numbers of jobs. Then, we suggest a hybrid method that consists of a combination between a heuristic and a solver-based procedure to address the m-machine problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Growing environmental concerns and other economic challenges have led many companies to take into account the return and recycling of their end-of-life products (Amaro & Barbosa-Povoa, 2008). This is reflected by a new type of physical flow in supply chains: reverse flows. In classical supply chains, the flows move from the suppliers to the plants, and the finished products are then delivered to customers. In contrast, the end-of-life products move from their typical final destination (customers, in most cases) back to the manufacturer, which decides whether the products should be reintroduced to the production process or sent to waste disposal systems, such as incinerators. Over the last 15 years, research activities on reverse logistics have made visible progress. Material recycling has become an important issue in a large number of areas: the glass industry (Salema, Barbosa-Povoa, & Novais, 2010), electronic devices (Krikke, Bloemhof-Ruwaard, & Van Wassenhove, 2003), carpet materials (Realff, Ammons, & Newton, 2004), etc.Reverse flowscan also be considered within a single production unit, as is the case in the assembly/disassembly plants (Brennan, Gupta, & Taleb, 1994) that handle products having reverse sequences in their operating process. However, despite applications in various industrial sectors (the automotive industry, electronic devices, weapon systems, etc.), the literature on this type of reverse flow is less extensive. Most of the research deals with the return of products in a supply chain (Krikke, Bloemhof-Ruwaard, & Van Wassenhove, 2003; Salema, Barbosa-Povoa, & Novais, 2009), where the optimization criteria are often economic and the proposed solutions concern long-term planning problems (i.e., establishing the role of each supply chain entity in terms of production).In this paper, we study one of these factory configurations, specifically the case where the operating range of the products to disassembly is exactly the opposite of the one to assembly and products of both flows use the same machines. After a brief literature review on flow-shop and job-shop scheduling, we provide a mathematical formulation and analyze the complexity of the problem. Then, we determine various particular cases that can be solved by known methods, and we identify dominance rules for this problem. After setting the limits of exact solutions using a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model, we present an algorithm based on the Nawaz, Enscore and Ham (NEH) approach (Nawaz, Enscore, & Ham, 1983) to solve the NP-hard 3-machine case. The performance of this method is evaluated by computing lower bounds and carrying out an experimental study on a Taillard-based benchmark. Then, we develop a hybrid approach based on the NEH heuristic and mathematical optimization to solve the m-machine problem.The problem we address in this study consists of a workshop where n jobs must be scheduled on m machines. Only two operating ranges are available here: the first one skims through the machines in the order M1, M2, …, Mm (direct jobs), and the second one covers them in the opposite direction (reverse jobs). We define E1 as the set of direct jobs and E2 as the set of reverse jobs (Fig. 1).The other assumptions for this problem are as follows:•All jobs are independent and available for processing at time 0.There is only one machine of each type.All machines are continuously available.Each machine can process at most one job at a time, and each job can be processed only on one machine at a time.The processing of a given job on a machine cannot be interrupted once started (no preemption is allowed).The aim then consists of finding the best scheduling sequence of n jobs on m machines to minimize the completion time of the last job on the last machine (the makespan). We give below an illustrative example (Ex1) with three direct (J1, J2 and J3) and three reverse (J4, J5 and J6) jobs to schedule on three machines. Table 1displays the durations of the jobs on each machine, and Fig. 2 shows a feasible solution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
