@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical scales generated individually for analytic hierarchy process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper discusses the individual choice of numerical scale in AHP.We present an algorithm to obtain the linguistic individual characteristics in AHP.We set individual numerical scales to optimally match the individual characteristics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision analysis,AHP,2-Tuple linguistic representation model,Numerical scale,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Because individual interpretations of the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) linguistic scale vary for each user, this study proposes a novel framework that AHP decision makers can use to generate numerical scales individually, based on the 2-tuple linguistic modeling of AHP scale problems. By using the concept of transitive calibration, individual characteristics in understanding the AHP linguistic scale are first defined. An algorithm is then proposed for detecting the individual characteristics from the linguistic pairwise comparison data that is associated with each of the AHP individual decision makers. Finally, a nonlinear programming model is proposed to generate individual numerical scales that optimally match the obtained individual characteristics. Two well-known numerical examples are re-examined using the proposed framework to demonstrate its validity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) (Ishizaka et al., 2011b; Saaty, 1980; Vaidya and Kumar, 2006), a decision maker first provides several linguistic pairwise comparison matrices (LPCMs). Then, selecting a numerical scale to quantify the LPCMs obtains numerical pairwise comparison matrices (NPCMs). Finally, priority vectors are derived from the NPCMs (Dong et al., 2008b; Siraj et al., 2012b; Srdjevic, 2005). However, a recurring problem is how to select a reasonable numerical scale for quantifying LPCMs and then for obtaining NPCMs. Harker and Vargas (1987) argued that selecting a numerical scale is an open research question in AHP. Proposed numerical scales include the Saaty scale (Saaty, 1977), the Ma–Zheng scale (Ma and Zheng, 1991), the geometrical scale (Finan and Hurley, 1999; Ji and Jiang, 2003; Lootsma, 1993), and the Salo–Hämäläinen scale (Salo and Hämäläinen, 1997). Dong et al. (2008b) presented two performance measurement algorithms and comprehensively compared several existing numerical scales (in terms of average). Ishizaka et al. (2011a) analyzed the influence of aggregation and measurement scale on ranking a compromise alternative in AHP.In the field of computing with words, words mean different things to different individuals (Herrera and Herrera-Viedma, 1997; Mendel and Wu, 2010). To reflect individual differences in words, Mendel and Wu (2010) proposed a model based on type-2 fuzzy sets, and Dong et al. (2009) extended the 2-tuple linguistic representation model developed by Herrera and Martínez (2000, 2001). In the AHP field, Huizingh and Vrolijk (1997) showed that the AHP linguistic scale has different numerical meanings to different people. Poyhonen et al. (1997) argued that empirical evidence does not support the superiority of any single numerical scale since the interpretation of the AHP linguistic scale depends on the user. Srdjevic (2005) argued that the best prioritization method relies on the content of a NPCM and that no single prioritization method is superior. Inspired by the works of Srdjevic (2005) and Dong et al. (2011) developed a 2-tuple linguistic multi-criteria approach to select the individual numerical scales. This linguistic multi-criteria approach selects the “best” one from five alternative numerical scales as the individual numerical scale for each LPCM.A challenge for analysts is how to individually produce new numerical scales that optimally match the individual characteristics in understanding the AHP linguistic scale. In order to do so, two subproblems need to be solved.(1)How to obtain the individual characteristics.How to individually generate new numerical scales that optimally match the obtained individual characteristics.Motivated by these challenges, this study proposes a novel framework for producing individual numerical scales in the AHP. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information about the 2-tuple linguistic representation model developed by Herrera and Martínez (2000) and the AHP proposed by Saaty (1980). The framework for producing individual numerical scales is presented in Section 3. Following this, individual characteristics in understanding the AHP linguistic scale are defined, and then in Section 4 an algorithm is proposed to obtain the individual characteristics. Subsequently, Section 5 develops a model to produce new numerical scales that optimally match the obtained individual characteristics. Two numerical examples are provided in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Since interpretations of the AHP linguistic scale vary for each user, this study focuses on how to produce individual numerical scales for each user. The main points presented are as follows:(1)The framework for producing individual numerical scales is proposed. This framework has two phases: obtaining individual characteristics in understanding the AHP linguistic scale, and producing individual numerical scales.By using the concept of transitive calibration, individual characteristics in understanding the AHP linguistic scale are defined. An algorithm is proposed for detecting the individual characteristics from the LPCMs associated with each of the AHP individual decision makers.A nonlinear programming model is proposed for generating individual numerical scales that optimally match the individual characteristics.The AHP group decision making model has been studied intensively (Altuzarra et al., 2010; Dong et al., 2010; Groselj and Stirn, 2012; Pedrycz and Song, 2011a, in press; Srdjevic, 2007). Meanwhile, Chiclana et al. (1998), Herrera-Viedma et al. (2002) and Zhang et al. (2004) have studied group decision making models with different preference formats. Therefore, the results of this study provide a basis for investigating the AHP group decision making problems with different numerical scales. Moreover, we argue that it will be interesting in any future research to see if a better algorithm for obtaining the optimal solution to model (15) is proposed.