@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A resource constrained scheduling problem with multiple independent producers and a single linking constraint: A coal supply chain example

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a RCSP with multiple producers and a single linking constraint.The problem is decomposed and solved with column generation techniques.Additional stabilisation techniques and improvements are explored.The CG algorithm is compared with a Lagrangian relaxation algorithm.Detailed computational experiments and results are also presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Distributed decision making,Coordinated scheduling,Resource constrained scheduling,Column generation,Job scheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper examines a resource constrained production planning and scheduling problem motivated by the coal supply chain. In this problem, multiple independent producers are connected with a resource availability (or, linking) constraint. A general description of such problems is provided, before decomposing the problem into two levels. In the first level, we deal with production planning and in the second level, we deal with tactical resource scheduling. A real-world coal supply chain example is presented to anchor the approach. The overall problem can be formulated as an integrated mixed integer programming model which, in several cases, struggles to find even a feasible solution in reasonable amount of time. This paper discusses a distributed decision making approach based on column generation (CG). Computational experiments show that, the CG scheme has significant advantages over the integrated model and a Lagrangian relaxation scheme proposed by Thomas et al. (2013). This paper concludes with detailed discussions on the results and future research directions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper, we consider a resource constrained planning and scheduling problem in a supply chain in which many independent producers (or service providers) coordinate with a resource manager who provides resources such as trucks, trains or infrastructure, to transport products to their destinations. In such supply chains, producers independently make planning decisions and the resource manager (an independent decision maker) makes scheduling decisions that collectively affect the efficiency of the supply chain. The supply chain’s objective is to ensure a feasible allocation of resources that minimises total system cost.There are several real-life supply chains of this sort. In coal supply chains, multiple independent mines (producers) are often connected to a shipping terminal via a shared rail network. A single rail operator (resource manager) often coordinates rail schedules with the mines, to schedule trains (or, trips) between the mines and the shipping terminal in order to meet shipping orders (or, demand) of each mine (see, for example, Singh et al., 2012 and Thomas et al., 2013). A similar problem is also observed in wine supply chains (see Singh et al., 2005) in which, each grower has contracts with many wineries. Each winery needs certain varieties of grapes based on their production requirements. These need to be delivered to them in a preferred sequence. The winery needs to coordinate harvesting and transport of grapes to minimise wastage and waiting time (reducing perishability) and to maximise resource utilisation (of crushers, fermenters). See Singh et al. (2005) for a detailed analysis of coordinated scheduling problems wine supply chains in Australia.In a general problem, each independent producer receives a set of orders from their customers. These orders can be satisfied with different combinations of shared/common resources. The resources are often be grouped into classes based on their properties. The resource manager has a finite number of resources in each class. Therefore, there will be a conflict if the producers’ requests exceed the availability of these resources. At the production planning level, producers are not concerned about resource availability in each class. For producers, fulfilment of orders of all customers is of far greater importance. An optimal allocation and scheduling of resources is subsequently necessary to improve the overall performance, which can be achieved via either a cost minimisation, profit maximisation or a makespan or tardiness objective.It is possible to formulate (and maybe solve) the above supply chain problem in an integrated manner. In such a model, we could consider a single decision-making problem that includes all producers and the resource manager. Such an integrated model is likely to be large and complex. Most scheduling problems are NP-hard (see Brucker and Knust, 2006; Lenstra et al., 1977). The integrated scheduling problem adds to this complexity because the producers and the resource manager are independent decision making entities who are often reluctant to coordinate fully and transparently, to share their competitive information.In this paper, we develop an approach, using a customised column generation (CG) scheme, to solve resource allocation and resource scheduling problems. In the production planning stage, each producer defines a possible allocation of resources. This means that resource allocation and its scheduling can be carried out sequentially. Thus, the original problem is decomposed into smaller solvable sub-problems. Essentially, we develop a distributed decision making framework which is solved using a decomposition approach. Even though we explain the proposed solution approaches in the context of a coal supply chain, our method can be extended to other similar supply chains too. Section 2 provides a summary of related work. Section 3 describes the problem and its features. Section 4 explains the production planning problem for each producer. In Sections 5 and 6 we present a CG algorithm and its improvements, respectively. Section 7 gives an overview of the datasets and performance measures. Section 8 summarises detailed results and comparisons of the different modelling approaches.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We study a resource constrained scheduling problem (RCSP) with multiple producers and a single linking constraint. This is motivated from a real-world mining example. We present mathematical models for the integrated problem, which includes production planning and resource scheduling. The integrated problem is decomposed and solved with the column generation (CG) techniques and compared with a similar Lagrangian relaxation (LR) approach (see Thomas et al., 2013). The distributed modelling, solved using a decomposition approach has many advantages over the integrated modelling approach, in term of the quality of solutions and computational time. Computational experiments show that the CG outperforms LR and IM. Although the methods that have been developed in this paper are tested within the context of a coal supply chain, it can be extended to other general RCSPs in contexts such as airline, wine, automobile manufacturing and the service industry.Two major decisions are considered in our approach: production planning and resource scheduling. The upper bound of the distributed model can be further strengthened by the proposed heuristics. Different stability functions can also be explored to further strengthen the performance of the CG. In future research, we plan to develop new algorithms for cases with partial information sharing and also for cases where there are multiple objectives. Ongoing research extends this study by including a third level of decision related to procurement and warehousing. For example, the coal supply chain problem can be extended to truck operations and terminal management operations. It is necessary to test the efficiency of our method on extensions that include more than two sets of decision makers.An alternative approach is decentralised decision making which requires (i) multiple stakeholders, (ii) information asymmetry, (iii) conflict in objectives, and (iv) a negotiation protocol. Our model considers multiple mines that do not interact/share-information with other mines while they constantly interact with the rail operator. The mines and the rail operator possess different sets of information. Hence the decision model has an inherent information asymmetry. This means that the decision model meets the first two requirements. The objectives of (each of) the mines and the rail operator are not same. Every mine expects the rail operator to send a train to the mine to load the coal and deliver it on-time at the terminal. However, the rail operator may have different priorities and constraints. Hence there is a conflict in the objectives of the players. The fourth requirement of ‘negotiation mechanisms’ is not available in our model. In that sense, ours is not a decentralised decision making framework. In our approach, the negotiation protocol is only partially implemented using the CG algorithm which is (in a sense) ‘controlled’ by the ‘honest broker’ rail operator. We made this assumption just so that we could converge to a solution to that is in fact a very difficult real-world problem.In this paper, we have proposed a solution approach for a distributed supply chain which has information asymmetries, and conflict in objectives amongst the partners. The distributed framework can be upgraded to a decentralised framework by introducing a honest broker. A decentralised framework would also have a negotiation scheme. The honest broker who manages the negotiation decides whether a decision is a wrong or right and manages the compensatory schemes for bad solutions that any one producer receives. In our paper, the negotiation protocol is only partially implemented using the CG algorithm which is (in a sense) ‘controlled’ by the ‘honest broker’ rail operator. Further research will need to include proper negotiation mechanisms and ensuring that the rail operator is no longer a ‘de facto honest broker’.