@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bi-objective robust optimisation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Study bi-objective robust optimsation for problems with one uncertain objective.Introduce and analyse four different robustness concepts.Focus on proposing approach to derive a meaningful robust Pareto front.Develop algorithm to compute robust solutions for discrete optimisation problems.Application of concepts to aircraft route guidance and hazardous materials routing problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple objective programming,Robust optimisation,OR in transportation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It is important, in practice, to find robust solutions to optimisation problems. This issue has been the subject of extensive research focusing on single-objective problems. Recently, researchers also acknowledged the need to find robust solutions to multi-objective problems and presented some first results on this topic. In this paper, we deal with bi-objective optimisation problems in which only one objective function is uncertain. The contribution of our paper is three-fold. Firstly, we introduce and analyse four different robustness concepts for bi-objective optimisation problems with one uncertain objective function, and we propose an approach for defining a meaningful robustPareto front for these types of problems. Secondly, we develop an algorithm for computing robust solutions with respect to these four concepts for the case of discrete optimisation problems. This algorithm works for finite and for polyhedral uncertainty sets using a transformation to a multi-objective (deterministic) optimisation problem and the recently published concept of Pareto robust optimal solutions (Iancu & Trichakis, 2014). Finally, we apply our algorithm to two real-world examples, namely aircraft route guidance and the shipping of hazardous materials, illustrating the four robustness concepts and their solutions in practical applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many real-world optimisation problems are modelled as bi- or multi-objective optimisation problems (MOP) acknowledging that many decisions are based on multiple conflicting objectives (Ehrgott, 2005). On the other hand, real-world optimisation problems often depend on uncertain parameters, such as weather conditions, uncertain processing times, or delays in public transportation systems. To deal with this uncertainty, different approaches such as stochastic optimisation (Birge & Louveaux, 1997) and robust optimisation (Ben-Tal, Ghaoui, & Nemirovski, 2009) have been developed.As much attention has been given to both MOPs and robust optimisation, a natural next step is the combination of the two concepts. In this paper we analyse such a combination for bi-objective optimisation problems with one uncertain objective:(1)minx∈Xz(x,ξ):=(z1(x)z2(x,ξ)),whereXis the feasible set, the first objective is z1 and the second uncertain objective is z2(x, ξ) which depends on an uncertain parameter ξ, see Section 4. Such problems arise in many application areas, e.g., in the aircraft route guidance problem or when shipping hazardous materials; see Section 8for details.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We compare four different robustness concepts for bi-objective optimisation with one uncertain objective function and propose an algorithm for the most common case of finite or polyhedral uncertainty sets. From our experience with two real-world applications we conclude that robust efficient solutions to such problems can be computed in a reasonable time, and that different types of robust solutions can be identified. Comparing the four concepts, representative light robustness turns out to be the most promising since it can be used to derive a robust Pareto front that represents a set of alternatives for a decision maker that are not too similar, that cover a range of available trade-offs, and that have good worst-case performance.We plan to further investigate more efficient algorithms to solve the bi-objective problems. The filtering algorithms proposed in Section 6 are only applicable to problems with finite efficient sets. It would be worthwhile to consider cases involving infinite efficient sets or to investigate other types of network problems. Research into optimisation over the efficient set has helped analysts select one from the many efficient solutions that may be found for MOPs (Yamamoto, 2002). Extending these ideas to uncertain bi-objective optimisation would be another interesting avenue of future work.