@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Two-level decomposition algorithm for crew rostering problems with fair working condition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two-level decomposition algorithm is proposed for crew rostering problem.The original problem is decomposed into the upper level master problem and the lower level subproblems.Effective cuts are developed to reduce search space.Computational results show that 1.6% of the duality gap can be obtained for a practical problem with 81 duties and 6 rosters.The performance is shown to be effective by comparing with that of the constraint programming solver.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Railway scheduling,Crew rostering,Two-level decomposition algorithm,Cut generation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A typical railway crew scheduling problem consists of two phases: a crew pairing problem to determine a set of crew duties and a crew rostering problem. The crew rostering problem aims to find a set of rosters that forms workforce assignment of crew duties and rest periods satisfying several working regulations. In this paper, we present a two-level decomposition approach to solve railway crew rostering problem with the objective of fair working condition. To reduce computational efforts, the original problem is decomposed into the upper-level master problem and the lower-level subproblem. The subproblem can be further decomposed into several subproblems for each roster. These problems are iteratively solved by incorporating cuts into the master problem. We show that the relaxed problem of the master problem can be formulated as a uniform parallel machine scheduling problem to minimize makespan, which is NP-hard. An efficient branch-and-bound algorithm is applied to solve the master problem. Effective valid cuts are developed to reduce feasible search space to tighten the duality gap. Using data provided by the railway company, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method compared with that of constraint programming techniques for large-scale problems through computational experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The crew scheduling problem is a significant problem for railway companies. The problem is currently solved in two phases: a crew pairing problem to find a set of a crew duties and crew rostering problem to construct a set of working schedules for crew members that is called a roster. The crew rostering problem is a rotating workforce scheduling problem that has high relevance for a broad range of work places in railway companies. The problem seeks to determine a set of rosters that is a cyclic sequence of daily shifts when a set of crew duties is given. Each crew duty has a start time and finish time. The aim is to find an assignment of duties and cyclic schedules that satisfy several workforce requirements. It is extremely difficult to solve the problems due to the complexity of several workforce regulations and personnel requirements.Railway crew rostering problems have been widely studied (Caprara et al., 1998, Caprara, Toth, Vigo, & Fischetti, 1998; Hartog, Huisman, Erwin, & Kroon, 1998; Sodhi & Norris, 2004). Heuristic methods (Bianco, Bielli, Mingozzi, Ricciardelli, & Spadoni, 1992; Caprara et al., 1998; Maenhout & Vanhoucke, 2010; Teodorovic & Lucic, 1996; Zeghal & Minoux, 2006) and meta-heuristic methods (Lucic & Teodorovic, 1999; Souai & Teghem, 2009) and their integration with constraint programming techniques (Caprara et al., 1998; Dawid, Konig, & Strauss, 2001; Medard & Sawhney, 2007; Sellmann, Zervoudakis, Stamatopoulos, & Fahle, 2002) have been addressed. Column generation methods are used to solve the problem efficiently in (Freling, Lentink, & Wagelmans, 2004; Gamache, Soumis, Marquis, & Desrosiers, 1999; Saddoune, Desaulniers, Elhallaoui, & Soumis, 2011; Sellmann et al., 2002).Fairness of working condition can be achieved by embedding the objective of the minimization of the maximum working times for crews. A common approach to considering fair working condition is to minimize the sum of the deviation of average working time or to impose the minimum and maximum working time constraints. However, it requires appropriate parameters of average or minimum and maximum working times. In this study, we examine the min–max approach to obtain a fair working condition that does not require any parameters. It becomes extremely difficult for column generation methods to treat the min–max type problems such as minimization of maximum working time.A decomposition approach for the crew rostering problem with a graph-based model has been developed (Sugiyama, Nishi, Inuiguchi, Takahashi, & Ueda, 2012). In this work, we propose a two-level decomposition algorithm with the improvement of lower bounds by using a cell-based model with application to practical-sized instances. Also, we study the two-level decomposition algorithm for the crew rostering problem with aiming for fair working condition. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.•The crew rostering problem for fair working condition is formulated as a large scale integer programming problem to minimize the weighted sum of total days of rosters and the maximum value of working time.A two-level decomposition algorithm is presented. The original problem is decomposed into the upper-level master problem and the lower-level subproblems. The upper-level master problem determines an assignment of duties to the set of rosters. The lower-level subproblem generates a feasible cyclic sequence with considering several workforce regulations. Effective cuts are developed to reduce the feasible search space to tighten the duality gap.We show that no more than 1.6% of the duality gap can be obtained by the proposed method for the practical data with 81 duties and 6 rosters.The performance of the proposed method is shown to be effective by comparing the performance with that of constraint programming techniques.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article, we proposed a two-level decomposition approach to solve the railway crew rostering problem with the objective of fair working condition. In the proposed approach, the original problem is decomposed into the upper-level master problem and the lower-level subproblem. Effective cuts were proposed to reduce the feasible search space to tighten the duality gap. Computational results demonstrated the advantage of the proposed method. In future works, more effective cuts should be developed. We will further apply the proposed approach to shift scheduling problems.