@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Decomposing technical inefficiency using the principle of least action

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We show how technical efficiency can be decomposed into two new terms.We apply the Principle of Least Action in order to determine closest targets.We introduce a new Measure of Inefficiency Proportions (MIP).We show the interesting properties that satisfies the new MIP.The new approach is applied to a dataset on airlines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Technical efficiency decomposition,Closest targets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In for-profit organizations, profit efficiency decomposition is considered important since estimates on profit drivers are of practical use to managers in their decision making. Profit efficiency is traditionally due to two sources – technical efficiency and allocative efficiency. The contribution of this paper is a novel decomposition of technical efficiency that could be more practical to use if the firm under evaluation really wants to achieve technical efficiency as soon as possible. For this purpose, we show how a new version of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions (MIP), which seeks the minimization of the total technical effort by the assessed firm, is a lower bound of the value of technical inefficiency associated with the directional distance function. The targets provided by the new MIP could be beneficial for firms since it specifies how firms may become technically efficient simply by decreasing one input or increasing one output, suggesting that each firm should focus its effort on a specific dimension (input or output). This approach is operationalized in a data envelopment analysis framework and applied to a dataset of airlines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Profit inefficiency (i.e., overall inefficiency) is usually defined as the amount by which a firm’s observed profit deviates from its maximum possible profit. In production economics literature, since Farrell (1957), profit (in)efficiency has usually been decomposed into two components, technical (in)efficiency and allocative (in)efficiency. While technical efficiency can be interpreted as ‘to do things right’, allocative efficiency can be seen as ‘to do the right things’ (Bogetoft, Färe, & Borge, 2006).Most existing measures of technical efficiency often generate demanding targets that are not easily achievable by firms. Therefore, research needs to be directed at developing measures of technical efficiency capable of yielding achievable targets. In this paper, we propose a method of technical inefficiency decomposition in order to evaluate whether inefficient firms need to make an extra effort to reach the efficient frontier. To do that, we specifically show that a new measure linked to the application of the principle of least action (PLA1The PLA, a well-known law in physics, states that nature always finds the most efficient course of action. The historical origin of this concept can be traced back at least to Pierre Louis Maupertuis and Leonhard Euler in the XVIII century.1), which minimizes the total technical effort of the assessed firm and allows a lower bound of the value of technical inefficiency related to the directional distance function (DDF) to be determined.Total technical effort reflects here a change in the inputs and outputs required by a firm to become technically efficient2We use the directional distance function for measuring technical inefficiency as a component of profit inefficiency. It is well known that the directional distance function neglects slacks (see Ray, 2004) and that it yields projections belonging to the weakly efficient frontier. For this reason, the notion of technical efficiency used in this paper coincides with that originally proposed by Debreu (1951) and Farrell (1957), in contrast to the Pareto-Koopmans definition of technical efficiency (see Cooper, Seiford, & Tone, 2000).2; and the application of the PLA always yields the efficient targets associated with the least technical effort. The application of the PLA will allow us to decompose the DDF into two sub-components. While the first sub-component of the DDF will be related to a measure of technical inefficiency, satisfying the principle of least action, the second sub-component will allow us to identify whether the projection suggested by the DDF requires an extra effort to be made in order to reach the frontier. Indeed, the second component may be of interest for situations in which a central manager supervises the performance of a set of departments or divisions within an organization (e.g., branches of a bank) and has to incentivize the inefficient units into exerting effort in order to achieve efficiency in a subsequent period of time. For example, for two firms with the same or similar values of technical inefficiency yielded from the DDF, it seems fairer that the central manager promises more incentives to the firm with the highest second sub-component since this firm will have to make more effort to become technically efficient in the subsequent period.In order to decompose the directional distance function, we introduce a new version of a well-known weighted additive (WA) measure of technical inefficiency,3For the related weighted additive measure of technical inefficiency, see, e.g., Cooper, Park, and Pastor (1999) and Cooper, Pastor, Borras, Aparicio, and Pastor (2011b), among others.3i.e., the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions (MIP) by Cooper et al. (1999). In this paper, however, we define the MIP under the application of the principle of least action, and then show that this measure could be beneficial for firms, since the projection point generated by this tool specifies how firms could become technically efficient simply by decreasing one input or increasing one output. In other words, the new approach suggests how the firm should focus its effort on a specific input or output dimension in order to achieve technical efficiency. For empirical execution, this technical inefficiency decomposition is operationalized in data envelopment analysis (DEA).In for-profit organizations, profit inefficiency measurement is important for firms in the world of changing prices since the resultant profit change has implications for their revenue growth and cost control exercises. A firm may decide to change its input and output quantities if this leads to economic gains. Obviously, the measurement of this type of inefficiency requires data not only on physical inputs and outputs, but also on their market prices. From a managerial perspective, analyzing the sources of such inefficiency is very much relevant so that necessary policy actions can be taken to improve profit in subsequent production periods.To the best of our knowledge, the most famous decomposition of profit inefficiency is by Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1998). In their decomposition method, the technical inefficiency component is derived from the directional distance function (DDF) using duality theory.4The directional distance function allows completing duality theory in microeconomics. As Färe and Primont (2006, p. 243) showed, the different functional representations of technology can be displayed in a diamond-shaped figure in which the relationship between the directional distance function and the profit function involves the bottom and top of the diamond.4Specifically, they show that the DDF is the lower bound of profit inefficiency, establishing a Mahler inequality. In this way, and following Farrell’s tradition, the allocative inefficiency component could be retrieved as a residual. Note that although a number of alternative methods of profit inefficiency decomposition exist in the literature (see, e.g., Cooper et al., 1999; Portela & Thanassoulis, 2007; and Cooper, Pastor, Aparicio, & Borras, 2011a; among others), so far none of these have exploited the duality relationship between the DDF and the profit function.In this contribution, we apply the principle of least action for the decomposition of technical inefficiency. According to this principle, the path a firm follows to achieve the efficient frontier should be the one that minimizes its total technical effort. In other words, the coordinates of the projected input-output vector of the assessed firm should be as similar as possible to its observed one. In this sense, determining the efficient projection using the principle of least action can provide key information as to how technical efficiency can be achieved in the easiest possible way.Note that the concept of the principle of least action is very much related to the notions of ‘closest projection’ and ‘least distances’ in DEA literature. In particular, the problem of deriving the closest projection has been one of the relevant issues in recent DEA literature (see, e.g., Briec, 1998; Coelli, 1998; Gonzalez & Alvarez, 2001; Portela, Castro, & Thanassoulis, 2003; Aparicio, Ruiz, & Sirvent, 2007; Cook & Seiford, 2009; Ando, Kai, Maeda, & Sekitani, 20125In this paper, we work in the same framework as Briec (1998), where the shortest distance (the minimum effort) is measured with respect to the weakly efficient frontier. This point contrasts with the Hölder measures used by Ando et al. (2012), where the shortest distance is searched over the strongly efficient frontier, a subset of the weakly efficient frontier.5; and Aparicio & Pastor, 2013; among others). The general argument underlying these approaches is that by moving towards the frontier suggested by a particular approach, an inefficient firm could achieve technical efficiency with a minimum amount of effort.Accordingly, decomposing the DDF into two new sub-components using the principle of least action is a way of relating the DDF to the models based on the closest projection in DEA literature. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one paper, by Jahanshahloo, Mehdiloozad, and Roshdi (2013), that has attempted to relate the DDF to the closest targets. In their paper, a new family of Hölder norms is defined, based on the directional distance function, with the aim of determining the closest projection. Consequently, we believe the new linkage between the DDF and the model based on the closest targets, as shown in the following section, could be viewed as an additional contribution to this study.Note that the contribution of our study is more practical than theoretical in nature, showing how the new MIP is able to provide closer (achievable) targets in comparison to the targets yielded from other existing measures such as the directional distance function. Indeed, in order to demonstrate the ready applicability of our proposed approach in empirical works, we conduct an empirical analysis based on a real-life dataset of 28 international airlines from North America, Europe, and Asia/Oceania, one which was used earlier in Coelli, Grifell-Tatje, and Perelman (2002). In our application, we find that some airlines may reach the efficient frontier by simply changing one input or output by a reasonable amount, determined by the optimization model associated with the new MIP, instead of decreasing all inputs and increasing all outputs simultaneously through the directional distance function. From a managerial point of view, it can be considered more interesting to focus exclusively on increasing the number of passengers by 5.8% (using marketing techniques) instead of decreasing all inputs (laying off employees, conserving fuel, etc.) by 2.9% and increasing all outputs (passengers and freight) by 2.9%.The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows: In Section 2, we briefly present the concept of the directional distance function along with its main characteristics. In Section 3, we first introduce a new weighted additive measure based on the principle of least action; second, we show that it is the lower bound of the technical effort associated with the directional distance function. Then, we show how to decompose the directional distance function into two sub-components followed by a numerical illustration; third, we discuss various properties of the new weighted additive measure followed by a detailed discussion on the steps involved in its implementation. We present an illustrative empirical application of airlines in Section 4. Finally, we conclude with some remarks in Section 5.The economic behavior of firms is usually modeled in three ways: (1) cost minimization, (2) revenue maximization and (3) profit maximization. The selection of a particular modeling approach depends precisely on the availability of data on market prices of inputs and outputs, and the underlying objective of firms. Given that input prices are available, and the underlying objective is cost minimization, by using the duality theory, Shephard’s input distance function can be related to the cost function (Shephard, 1970). Using this relationship, cost efficiency, defined as the ratio of the (optimal) minimum cost to the actual cost, can be decomposed into (input) technical efficiency, i.e., Shephard’s input distance function and (input) allocative efficiency (Färe & Primont, 1995).Similarly, given that output prices are available, and the underlying objective is revenue maximization, by using the duality theory, the relationship between Shephard’s output distance function and the revenue function can be established (Shephard, 1970); and accordingly, revenue efficiency, defined as the ratio of actual revenue to the (optimal) maximum revenue, can be decomposed into (output) technical efficiency, i.e., Shephard’s output distance function and (output) allocative efficiency.However, the case of profit maximizing behavior, assuming that prices of both inputs and outputs are available, requires that at the profit-maximizing input-output bundle, the chosen input bundle not only minimizes the cost of producing a given output bundle, but also that the chosen output bundle generates the maximum possible revenue from the selected input bundle. In this case, there is no particular reason to select either the input- or output-oriented measure of technical efficiency. Since the profit maximization of a firm generally requires an alteration of both inputs and outputs, it is desirable to use a measure of technical efficiency that requires not only a reduction in inputs but also an increase of outputs. One such measure is the well-known DDF-based measure of technical efficiency by Chambers et al. (1998).Let us now consider a reference DEA-technology set (T) comprising n decision making units (DMUs). Each DMUjconsumes an input vectorXj=(x1j,…,xmj)∈R++mto produce an output vectorYj=(y1j,…,ysj)∈R++s. The relative efficiency of DMUjin the sample is assessed with reference to T, which can be empirically constructed in DEA from actual observations of n firms by assuming several postulates. Under variable returns to scale (VRS), T can be set up as (Banker, Charnes, & Cooper, 1984):(1)T=(X,Y)∈R+m+s:X⩾∑j=1nλjXj,Y⩽∑j=1nλjYj,∑j=1nλj=1,λj⩾0,j=1,…,nIn order to measure technical efficiency, it is necessary to isolate a certain subset of T. We are referring to the (weak) efficient set of T, defined as∂(T)={(X,Y)∈T:Xˆ<X,Yˆ>Y⇒(Xˆ,Yˆ)∉T}. Throughout this paper, with the aim of measuring technical efficiency, we compare the actual performance of each DMU with respect to the points belonging to the efficient set ∂(T).The technical inefficiency of DMU0 with (X0,Y0) can be computed by setting up the following DDF-based measure,D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy):(2)D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)=maxβs.t.∑j=1nλjxij⩽xi0-βgix,i=1,…,m∑j=1nλjyrj⩾yr0+βgry,r=1,…,s∑j=1nλj=1,λj⩾0,j=1,…,nwhereG=(gx,gy)∈R+m×R+sis the non-negative directional input-output vector.The directional distance function projects (X0,Y0) onto the boundary of T in the direction of (−gx, gy). See Chambers et al. (1998) for a detailed discussion on various properties of the directional distance function such as translation invariance, continuity, monotonicity, concavity, etc. Moreover, after several unsuccessful attempts to find a distance function having a natural dual correspondence with the profit function, the directional distance function is the first measure that satisfies these properties (Färe & Primont, 2006). This means that with given input and output price vectors, it is possible to recover the profit function from the directional distance function, and with given input and output quantity vectors, it is also possible to retrieve the directional distance function from the profit function.Using duality theory, Chambers et al. (1998) show that the directional distance function is the lower bound of the (normalized) profit inefficiency measure, i.e.,(3)Π(W,P)-Π0∑r=1sprgry+∑i=1mwigix︸Profit Inefficiency⩾D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)︸Technical Inefficiency,where Π0 represents the actual profit of DMU0 and Π(W,P) denotes the maximum profit given the output price vectorP=(p1,…,ps)∈R++sand the input price vectorW=(w1,…,wm)∈R++m.Following the Farrell tradition, it is straightforward to use (3) to decompose profit inefficiency into technical inefficiency and allocative inefficiency, where allocative inefficiency can be defined as a residual, i.e., the difference between the profit inefficiency and the directional distance function.The duality theory has led us to infer that the directional distance function is the benchmark against which to confront a firm’s technical performance when profit maximization is its supposed economic behavior (Färe & Primont, 2006). In the following section, we introduce a scheme to decompose the directional distance function using the principle of least action to identify whether the solution suggested by the directional distance function requires the completion of extra effort by the firm.We now show how to decompose the directional distance function into two components. For this, we introduce a new version of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions (MIP) based on the minimization formulation of a weighted sum of slacks instead of the customary maximization formulation corresponding to weighted additive measures in data envelopment analysis. The optimal value of the new MIP will provide both the closest projection on the frontier and the estimation of the minimum total effort needed by each assessed firm to achieve technical efficiency.Given(X0,Y0)∈R++m×R++s, we defineMIPTmin(X0,Y0)as the optimal value of the optimization problem that minimizes a specific weighted ℓ1-distance from the evaluated point (X0,Y0) to the set of efficient points (X,Y) that dominate (X0,Y0):(4)MIPTmin(X0,Y0)=MinSx,Sy∑i=1msixxi0+∑r=1ssryyr0:(X0-Sx,Y0+Sy)∈∂(T),Sx,Sy⩾0Note that the objective function used in (4) is the same as that utilized by the original Measure of Inefficiency Proportions (Cooper et al., 1999, p. 8), but with a striking difference: the original measure maximizes the objective function and, consequently, maximizes the individual slacks instead of minimizing them as the new version does. Also, given an optimal solution (Sx*,Sy*) for (4), eachsix∗, i=1,…,m, represents the input-specific absolute change and eachsry∗, r=1,…,s, represents the output-specific absolute change required to reach the efficient frontier, ∂(T). Therefore, the optimal value of (4) consists of the sum of the relative changes in inputs and outputs. In this sense, it represents the extent of minimum total effort needed by DMU0 to become technically efficient.We now go on to demonstrate the relationship between the directional distance function and the new version of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions, i.e.,MIPTmin(·). To start with, we first need to show the expression of the total technical effort associated with the directional distance function in Proposition 1.Proposition 1For DMU0 with the input-output vector(X0,Y0)∈R++m×R++sand the direction vectorG=(gx,gy)∈R++m×R++s, the total technical effort needed to be technically efficient related to the directional distance function ise→=∑i=1mgixxi0+∑r=1sgryyr0D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy).By definition,(X0-D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gx,Y0+D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gy)∈∂(T).Therefore, we may defineSx:=D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gx⩾0andSy:=D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gy⩾0since (X0,Y0)∊T. In this way, we have thate→=∑i=1msixxi0+∑r=1ssryyr0=∑i=1mD→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gixxi0+∑r=1sD→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gryyr0=∑i=1mgixxi0+∑r=1sgryyr0D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy).□By Proposition 1, it is not hard to find that the value of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions based on the principle of least action is a lower bound fore→regardless of vector G.Proposition 2For DMU0 with the input-output vector(X0,Y0)∈R++m×R++sand the direction vectorG=(gx,gy)∈R++m×R++s,MIPTmin(X0,Y0)⩽e→.Following the proof of Proposition 1,Sx:=D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gxandSy:=D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gyis a feasible solution for model (4). Consequently,MIPTmin(X0,Y0)⩽e→.□Regarding the selection of reference vector G6See, e.g., Kerstens, Mounir, and Van de Woestyne (2011) for an excellent discussion on how the efficiency scores obtained by the DDF-based measure can be very sensitive to the choice of direction vector G.6, it is worth mentioning that if one considers the most standard case, i.e., gx=X0 and gy=Y0, then the directional distance function is equivalent to the graph-type extension measure (i.e., the generalized proportional measure) of Farrell technical efficiency introduced by Briec (1997). In this particular case, we can prove that the minimum average technical effort is no more than the directional distance function.Corollary 1For DMU0 with input-output vector(X0,Y0)∈R++m×R++sand directional vector G=(X0,Y0),D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)⩾1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0).If G=(X0,Y0), then by Proposition 1,e→=(m+s)D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0). Finally, applying Proposition 2, we prove the result.□Using Corollary 1,D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)can be decomposed as:(5)D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)︸Technical Inefficiency=1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0)︸Principle of Least Action+ResidualFrom (5), technical inefficiency can be decomposed into two components: the first one is due to the application of the principle of least action; and the second one, called the residual, is due to the follow-up strategy that is different from the one that minimizes the total technical effort of DMU0. This residual will allow us to determine whether the implementation of the solution suggested by the directional distance function requires an extra effort, and if yes, then by how much.Let(X0DDF,Y0DDF)be the target point associated with the directional distance function (2) when DMU0 is assessed. From the geometrical interpretation of the DDF,(X0DDF,Y0DDF):=(X0-D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gx,Y0+D→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)gy).If (gx,gy)=(X0,Y0),then(X0DDF,Y0DDF)=(X0-D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)X0,Y0+D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)Y0).On the other hand, from each optimal solution vector(S0x∗,S0y∗)of (4), it is possible to define a target point as(X0MIP,Y0MIP)=(X0-S0x∗,Y0+S0y∗). It is obvious that model (4) could have multiple optimal solutions, something that is not uncommon when one resorts to slacks-based measures in DEA (see, e.g., Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2007; Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2009). In this respect, letQ0MIPbe the set of target points corresponding to the new version of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions when DMU0 is evaluated. We end up with the following results.Proposition 3Letcard(Q0MIP)=1, then(X0DDF,Y0DDF)=(X0MIP,Y0MIP)if and only ifD→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)=1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0).If we assume that(X0DDF,Y0DDF)=(X0MIP,Y0MIP)then, by the definition of these points, we have thatD→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)X0=S0x∗andD→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)Y0=S0y∗. Hence,1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0)=1m+s∑i=1msi0x∗xi0+∑r=1ssr0y∗yr0=D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)since(S0x∗,S0y∗)is the optimal solution of (4) associated with(X0MIP,Y0MIP). And we have proved the first part of the result. For the proof of the second part, let us suppose thatD→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)=1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0), then the optimal value of program (4) isMIPTmin(X0,Y0)=(m+s)D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0). DefiningS0x,DDF=D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)X0⩾0andS0y,DDF=D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)Y0⩾0, we have that(X0-S0x,DDF,Y0+S0y,DDF)=(X0DDF,Y0DDF)∈∂(T)and, regarding the objective function value of (4) at(S0x,DDF,S0y,DDF),∑i=1msi0x,DDFxi0+∑r=1ssr0y,DDFyr0=(m+s)D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0). Consequently,(S0x,DDF,S0y,DDF)is the optimal solution of (4) and(X0MIP,Y0MIP)=(X0-S0x∗,Y0+S0y∗)=(X0-S0x,DDF,Y0+S0y,DDF)=(X0DDF,Y0DDF).□The last proposition works on the hypothesis that program (4) has only one optimal solution. In the case of presenting multiple optimal solutions, we end up with a more general result, which is shown in the following proposition.Proposition 4(X0DDF,Y0DDF)∈Q0MIPif and only ifD→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)=1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0).The proof is similar to that of Proposition 3.□Q0MIPis the set of all the target points related to optimal solutions of (4), i.e., the set of all the efficient points that are more easily attainable from the original point (X0,Y0). Proposition 4 establishes that if the solution suggested by the directional distance function is one that minimizes the firm’s total technical effort, then the residual in the decomposition (5) is zero, indicating that an extra technical effort is not needed. On the other hand, if we detect that the residual is nil, then necessarily the target point associated with the directional distance function has to be one attainable by the application of the principle of least action.In order to clarify as much as possible the process of decomposing the value of the directional distance function and the determination of a suitable target point for each feasible scenario, we next show how one would have to proceed in order to determine an appropriate target point related to the principle of least action, denoted as(X0PLA,Y0PLA).Step 1. Solve model (2) for (X0,Y0) with (gx,gy)=(X0,Y0) to obtainD→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)and(X0DDF,Y0DDF)=(X0-D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)X0,Y0+D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)Y0).Step 2. Solve model (4) for (X0,Y0) to obtainMIPTmin(X0,Y0)and(S0x∗,S0y∗).Step 3. Compute1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0),(X0MIP,Y0MIP)=(X0-S0x∗,Y0+S0y∗)and the residual in (5).Step 4. If the residual is strictly positive, then(X0DDF,Y0DDF)∉Q0MIPand it is necessary to perform an extra technical effort to achieve the (weakly) efficient frontier. In this case,(X0PLA,Y0PLA):=(X0MIP,Y0MIP). Otherwise, go to step 5.Step 5. If the residual is zero, an extra technical effort is not needed and we have two possibilities:(a)(X0DDF,Y0DDF)≠(X0MIP,Y0MIP): In this case model (4) has multiple optimal solutions. One such solution,(S0x,DDF,S0y,DDF)withS0x,DDF=D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)X0andS0y,DDF=D→T(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)Y0, generates the target point corresponding to the directional distance function. Under this scenario, we suggest defining(X0PLA,Y0PLA)as(X0DDF,Y0DDF)since the directional distance function is the cornerstone of the evaluation of technical inefficiency in modern production theory.(X0DDF,Y0DDF)=(X0MIP,Y0MIP): Take(X0PLA,Y0PLA)=(X0DDF,Y0DDF).Continuing with our analysis, when G=(X0,Y0), the directional distance function is constructed around a technical component, β in (2), that involves an equiproportional reduction and expansion in all inputs and outputs, respectively. For example, a value of β*=0.15 means that an inefficient firm needs to reduce each input by 15% and increase each output by 15% in order to achieve technical efficiency. From a practical point of view, this proportional interpretation of the graph-type extension measure of efficiency facilitates the utilization of benchmarking results in managerial contexts.However, as several authors (see, e.g., Briec, 1997; Chambers & Mitchell, 2001; Portela et al., 2003; Mahlberg & Sahoo, 2011; and Sahoo, Luptacik, & Mahlberg, 2011) argue, given the real-life market situation, that it is not always possible or desirable to expand (contract) outputs (inputs) in equal proportions. A well-known drawback of radial measures is the arbitrariness in imposing targets on the efficient frontier by preserving the mix of inputs and/or outputs when the firm’s main reason for changing its input and output levels is often the intention to change the mix due to different opportunity costs. Therefore, one would consider an efficiency measure realistic if it took into account differential output expansions (input contractions) due to tradeoffs between outputs (inputs).In this context, the new Measure of Inefficiency ProportionsMIPTmin(·)can be considered an ideal measure of technical inefficiency satisfying the criterion of closest targets, one desirable feature of any ideal efficiency measure. A weakness of traditional DEA efficiency measures is that they either impose strong restrictions on the projections of inputs and outputs towards the efficient frontier or they aim at maximizing slacks. In both cases, the efficient targets obtained are not of practical relevance to firms, since the further the targets are from the unit under evaluation; the more effort is needed to achieve technical efficiency.Note also that several contributions exist in relating the directional distance function to the weighted additive measures in DEA literature (see, e.g., Fukuyama and Weber (2009) and Färe and Grosskopf (2010), among others). One major difference of theMIPTmin(·)regarding these alternative approaches is that the objective function is expressed in the form of minimization instead of maximization. However, linkage exists between theMIPTmin(·)and the directional slacks-based inefficiency measure of Fukuyama and Weber (2009), which maximizes12((1/m)∑i=1m(six/gix)+(1/s)∑r=1s(sry/gry)). It is clear that when G=(X0,Y0), the weights used in (4) are similar but not identical to those proposed by Fukuyama and Weber (2009). However, the directional slacks-based inefficiency measure maximizes the objective function and, consequently, maximizes the individual slacks. So, the yielded projection (target) point(xi∗=xi0-six∗,i=1,…,m,andyr∗=yr0+sry∗,r=1,…,s)will be far from the evaluated DMU0. Thus, while Fukuyama and Weber’s approach for benchmarking provides the furthest targets of the assessed DMU0, our approach yields the most easily attainable (closest) targets.Let us now analyze the case in which the reference vector G for the directional distance function is different from the usual selection (X0,Y0). In this scenario, we need to modify the original definition of the version of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions that we introduced in this section,MIPTmin(·), in order to obtain a result similar to Corollary 1. In particular, it is necessary to incorporate the components of the vectorG=(gx,gy)=(g1x,…,gmx,g1y,…,gsy)into the definitionMIPTmin(·). In this sense, we define a new version of the MIP asMIPTmin(X0,Y0;gx,gy):=MinSx,Sy∑i=1msixgix+∑r=1ssrygry:(X0-Sx,Y0+Sy)∈∂(T),Sx,Sy⩾0.Note that the weights have been modified in the objective function ofMIPTmin(X0,Y0;gx,gy), changing (X0,Y0) for (gx,gy). Then, following the same steps as in Proposition 1, Proposition 2, and Corollary 1, it is possible to derive the following result.Proposition 5For DMU0 with the input-output vector(X0,Y0)∈R+m×R+sand the directional vectorG=(gx,gy)∈R++m×R++swith G≠(0m,0s), we have thatD→T(X0,Y0;gx,gy)⩾1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0;gx,gy).As a consequence, the directional distance function may also be decomposed into the same sub-components above even if the pre-fixed directional vector is different from G=(X0,Y0). Nevertheless, this decomposition requires the definition of a new version of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions based on closest targets and the components of the selected directional vector.Finally, we wish to highlight that we are working within the same framework as Briec (1998), where the shortest distance (the minimum technical effort) is measured with respect to the weakly efficient frontier. This point contrasts the Hölder measures used by Ando et al. (2012), where the shortest distance is searched over the strongly efficient frontier, a subset of the weakly efficient frontier. In this way, the directional distance function could yield non-dominated projection points in the sense of Pareto, while its sub-component, i.e., the new MIP, could generate targets on the weakly efficient frontier. This fact prevents the residual in (5) to be interpreted as allocative inefficiency for the corresponding assessed unit. Instead, this residual allows one to determine whether the implementation of the solution suggested by the directional distance function requires an extra effort to be technically efficient.We now empirically illustrate technical inefficiency decomposition using a simple example dataset consisting of four DMUs, labeled A, B, C, and D, where each unit produces one output using one input. The input and output data are A=(1, 2), B=(2, 4), C=(5, 6), and D=(2, 2). The production frontier exhibited in Fig. 1finds A, B, and C technically efficient, and D technically inefficient.An evaluation of technical inefficiency of any inefficient DMU, say D, using the DDF formula, requires computingD→T(2,2;gx,gy)using (2). Consider G=(gx,gy)=(XD,YD)=(2,2).D→T(2,2;2,2)projects DMU D onto point D′ of the production frontier. Here,D→T(2,2;2,2)=0.33. By Proposition 1, this result implies that the total technical effort associated to the DDF ise→=0.66, i.e., the DDF-projection suggests reducing the input by 33% and increasing the output by 33%.We now decomposeD→T(2,2;2,2)(=0.33) throughMIPTmin(·).MIPTmin(2,2)projects D onto the efficient frontier at point A, yieldingMIPTmin(2,2)= 0.50. WhileD→T(2,2;2,2)=0.33requires D to scale down and scale up respectively its input and output by the same percentage (33%), implying a total technical effort of 0.66, the solution forMIPTmin(2,2)involves only a reduction of the input by 50%. Here, D needs to make an extra effort to reach point D′. This extra effort is nothing but the residual (= 0.08) representing the difference in inefficiency scores betweenD→T(2,2;2,2)=0.33and the average effort,12MIPTmin(2,2)=0.25. This extra effort is found here to be 24% of the directional distance function.We would like to make a few comments regarding the interpretation of the residual component and its impact on technical inefficiency. First, the magnitude of this sub-component signals whether the solution suggested by the usual directional distance function implies a great effort in comparison with the feasible solution associated with the principle of least action. Second, if the residual turns out to be zero, the directional distance function equals the new version of the Measure of Inefficiency Proportions, implying that strategies involved in reaching the efficient frontier through either the directional distance function or the new Measure of Inefficiency Proportions represent the minimum effort required to attain technical efficiency. Third, the total technical effort of the evaluated firm, i.e.,∑i=1msix∗xi0+∑r=1ssry∗yr0, can be interpreted as the sum of the individual input-specific and output-specific technical efforts in order to be technically efficient. This particular representation enables us to empirically examine the contribution of each individual input and output towards technical inefficiency. This representation was also explored in the earlier study by Mahlberg and Sahoo (2011), where the contributions of each specific input and output towards eco-productivity change and its drivers were examined. Finally, if the residual takes on a positive value, it means that an efficient projection exists, allowing the corresponding firm to achieve technical efficiency with less effort than the solution proposed by the directional distance function. At this point, we recall that, in accordance with the duality theory, the directional distance function is the benchmark against which to confront the evaluation of technical performance of a firm when profit maximization is the assumed economic behavior (Färe & Primont, 2006). Accordingly, the directional distance function is the tool that should be used to evaluate technical inefficiency when inputs and outputs may be changed. In this respect, our proposed decomposition could be useful for analyzing whether or not the DDF-projection onto the efficient frontier requires an extra effort.Let us now examine the relevant features of our new measure. In particular, we show how the minimum average technical effort satisfies several interesting properties of an ideal efficiency measure. An efficiency measure is considered ideal if it satisfies properties such as units invariance, monotonicity, etc. (Färe & Lovell, 1978). As some authors (see, e.g., Cooper et al., 1999) have pointed out, any inefficiency measure satisfying these properties can be considered synonymous with satisfying the goodness of fit criterion of an inefficiency measure. Following this, we argue that1m+sMIPTmin(·)can be considered a well-defined measure of technical inefficiency. It is worth mentioning that most of the results we show in this section are directly derived from some results proved by Briec (1998) for Hölder distance functions, since our new MIP, in contrast to the traditional MIP, may be seen as a weighted Hölder norm.Proposition 6For(X0,Y0)∈R++m×R++s,1m+sMIPTmin(·)satisfies the following properties:0⩽1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0)⩽1,regardless of the types of returns to scale.1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0)=0⇔(X0,Y0)is Debreu-Farrell efficient.1m+sMIPTmin(·)is invariant with respect to a change in the units of measurement.An increase/decrease in one input/output does not decrease1m+sMIPTmin(·).1m+sMIPTmin(·)yields the closest targets.(a) By the definition ofMIPTmin(·),1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0)⩾0. On the other hand, for G=(gx,gy)=(X0,Y0),D→(X0,Y0;X0,Y0)⩽1. Consequently, by Corollary 1,1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0)⩽1.(b), (c), and (d) correspond to Proposition 2(1), Proposition 2(4), and Proposition 2(3) in Briec (1998), respectively.(e) It is trivial by the definition ofMIPTmin(·).□Some comments are in order. Results (a) and (b) are related to the property of indication. Property (c) establishes that the inefficiency measure is units invariant. Property (d) shows that the minimum average technical effort satisfies the condition of weak monotonicity. Finally, property (e) states that the new MIP yields the most easily attainable benchmarking information for the assessed inefficient unit.Note that property (a) is a very interesting characteristic for the inefficiency measures based on additive models. Only under variable returns to scale, it is possible to show that efficiency measures (e.g., the Range-Adjusted Measure of Cooper et al., 1999) based on additive models take values between zero and one. To the best of our knowledge, the only efficiency measure based on the additive model accounting for different types of returns to scale, and satisfying this interesting property, was developed by Cooper et al. (2011b). They added some new constraints to the original technology to form a new ‘bounded’ technology. Using this bounded technology under constant returns to scale, they showed that the resultant efficiency measure satisfies the indication property. However, in our new scheme, we did not modify the original DEA technology to meet this indication property. Property (a) in Proposition 6 establishes that the minimum average effort always lies between zero and one regardless of the types of returns to scale.Notice that the set up ofMIPTmin(·)in (4) is not, by definition, a standard linear programming problem, which makes its implementation more difficult than usual. We, therefore, show a procedure where one can computeMIPTmin(·)by considering only a minimum finite number of linear programs. Our procedure is particularly based on the seminal ideas of Briec (1998) about weighted Hölder distance functions.In the following proposition we establish how to calculate the new Measure of Inefficiency Proportions based on the principle of least action through the computation of m+s directional distance functions. In this respect, we introduce some new notation. Let1m(i)=(0,…,0,1,0,…,0)∈R+mbe a vector of zeros with the ith element equal to one, let1s(r)=(0,…,0,1,0,…,0)∈R+sbe a vector of zeros with the rth element equal to one, let X0(i)=(0,…,0,xi0,0,…,0) be a vector of zeros with the ith element equal to xi0 and, finally, let Y0(r)=(0,…,0,yr0,0,…,0) be a vector of zeros with the rth element equal to yr0.Proposition 7For(X0,Y0)∈R++m×R++s,MIPTmin(X0,Y0)=mini,r{1xi0D→T(X0,Y0;1m(i),0),1yr0D→T(X0,Y0;0,1s(r))}.By Corollary 3 in Briec (1998), we have thatMIPTmin(X0,Y0)=mini,r{D→T(X0,Y0;X0(i),0),D→T(X0,Y0;0,Y0(r))}. On the other hand, by a change of variables, it is easy to prove thatD→T(X0,Y0;X0(i),0)=1xi0D→T(X0,Y0;1m(i),0),i=1,…,m, andD→T(X0,Y0;0,Y0(r))=1yr0D→T(X0,Y0;0,1s(r)),r=1,…,s, which completes the proof.□Therefore, the procedure proposed for the computation of the new MIP requires the determination of the optimal values of m+s directional distance functions. In our case, each directional distance function only changes one input or one output in order to project the assessed DMU onto the efficient frontier. Accordingly, the minimum technical effort is related to modifications of only one dimension (input or output). In other words, the new version of the MIP suggests that the firm should focus its effort on a specific input or output with the aim of achieving technical efficiency.In order to demonstrate the ready applicability of our proposed decomposition of technical inefficiency, we now present an efficiency analysis of a set of 28 international airlines from North America, Europe, and Asia/Oceania for the year 1990.8A detailed description of the data can be found in Coelli et al. (2002).8The primary objective here is not to provide a detailed discussion of the performance of these airlines, but to show how useful our proposed approach could be in an empirical application. Each airline produces two outputs – passenger services (in passenger-kilometers flown) and freight services (in freight ton-kilometers flown) – using four inputs – labor (in number of employees), capital (the sum of maximum takeoff weights of all aircraft flown multiplied by the number of days flown), fuel (in millions of gallons), and other kind of inputs (in millions of U.S. dollar equivalents) excluding labor and fuel expenses.Table 1presents the results concerning the scores of the directional distance function in (2),1m+sMIPTmin(·), and the residual based on the directional vector G=(gx,gy)=(X0,Y0) in (5).Table 1 reveals that the new measure enables researchers identifying airlines to reach the frontier via shorter distances, and hence, yields closer targets, as compared to the directional distance function. The residuals, i.e., the inefficiency differential between the directional distance function and the new Measure of Inefficiency Proportions, measure the extent of extra effort needed by an airline to attain the efficient frontier if it were to follow the directional distance function.Based on the DDF-based estimates, we now draw our attention to six airlines, all of which have to change all their inputs and outputs by a quantity greater than or equal to 5%: Garuda (DDF=0.159), Malaysia Airlines (DDF=0.134), British Airways (DDF=0.053), Iberia (DDF=0.113), SAS (DDF=0.065), Eastern (DDF=0.088), and USAir (DDF=0.064). In all these cases, the new MIP takes on a lower value. Consider, for instance, the case of British Airways. While the DDF-based score suggests an average improvement in inputs and outputs of 5.3%, the new measure suggests an average improvement of 1.8% (cf. Table 1).Furthermore, Table 2compiles all the information on the targets generated by the new approach and the approach based on the DDF for the technically inefficient airlines. To be precise, we have reported the value of each airlinés inputs and outputs in the first row, the targets corresponding to the application of the DDF in the second row, and the targets corresponding to the application of the new MIP based on closest targets in the third row. After determining the new MIP, we have also calculated the percentage improvements in inputs and outputs (reported in parentheses) by hand in order to assess the minimum effort needed to achieve efficiency. Specifically, let(S0x∗,S0y∗)be an optimal solution of model (4) for DMU0, then the targets are determined byxi0-si0x∗for inputs andyr0+sr0y∗for outputs; the percentage improvements in input i, i=1,…,m, and output r, r=1,…,s, are calculated by100·[(xi0-(xi0-si0x∗))/xi0]=100·(si0x∗/xi0)and100·[((yr0+sr0y∗)-yr0)/yr0]=100·(sr0y∗/yr0),respectively. The same quantities were calculated for each input and output corresponding to the solution associated with the DDF.As shown in Section 3.3, the solution associated with the new MIP is related to modifications of exactly one dimension (input or output). This means that for each inefficient airline, an optimal solution vector(S0x∗,S0y∗)exists where only one component is strictly positive. This is the reason why, for each row in Table 2, the percentage scores for inputs and outputs are all zero except for one, which is associated with the dimension that allows for achieving technical efficiency with the least effort. In other words, the specific input or output to be improved is determined as a solution of the new MIP and, therefore, the model is used for selecting the dimension considered most appropriate for each airline. Additionally, we have added the symbol of minus for inputs and plus for outputs to each percentage, signaling that the corresponding input should be decreased and the corresponding output should be increased.Going into details, the solution yielded for British Airways by our new measure suggests that this airline could achieve technical efficiency by exclusively reducing input FUEL by 10.9% (cf. Table 2), whereas the targets by the directional distance function suggest that this airline improves each of its inputs and outputs by 5.3%. In other words, this airline should lay off employees and reduce fuel and other expenses by 5.3%. It should also reduce takeoffs by 5.3% and at the same time, increase passenger-kilometers flown and freight ton-kilometers flown by 5.3%.Note that our new measure and the directional distance function are in complete agreement in identifying technically efficient airlines. However, for the inefficient airlines, we find significant differences in the results between both measures. In some cases, the DDF-based results suggest making substantial improvements in all inputs and outputs in cases of airlines that are quite close to the efficiency frontier, thus yielding the erroneous signal that much needed effort is warranted to improve their performance. For example, the DDF-based solution suggests that Delta should reduce its staff, fuel, other expenses, and takeoffs by 2.9% each and increase its passenger-kilometers flown and freight ton-kilometers flown by 2.9% each. However, the new approach suggests that Delta could be technically efficient by exclusively increasing passenger-kilometers flown by 5.8% (cf. Table 2), for example, through a strategy of attracting new customers.Finally, we wish to make some points regarding the value of1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0), the average of input and output inefficiencies, and the targets associated with this (graph) inefficiency measure. Given the optimal solution of the new MIP,(S0x∗,S0y∗)(as defined in (4)), the lower bound of the directional distance function is not directly the optimal value of (4), i.e.∑i=1m(si0x∗/xi0)+∑r=1s(sr0y∗/yr0), but rather the average of input and output inefficiencies, i.e.,1m+s(∑i=1m(si0x∗/xi0)+∑r=1s(sr0y∗/yr0)). This expression is similar to other well-known graph-type measures based on slacks like, for example, the Range-Adjusted Measure (RAM) by Cooper et al. (1999).9The objective function associated with the RAM is(1/(m+s))(∑i=1m(six/Ri-)+∑r=1s(sry/Rr+)), whereRi-=max1⩽j⩽n{xij}-min1⩽j⩽n{xij}andRr+=max1⩽j⩽n{yrj}-min1⩽j⩽n{yrj}.9Indeed, the value of the directional distance function may also be interpreted as an average of the input and output inefficiencies. For instance, the directional distance function score for Delta of 0.029 means that the airline should reduce each of its inputs by 2.9% and increase its outputs by 2.9% each, yielding an inefficiency of 0.029 for each individual dimension. In this way, if we calculate the arithmetic average for all these individual inefficiencies, we then obtain the original value of the directional distance function as 0.029. Therefore, it seems natural to compare the directional distance function with respect to the average of all input and output inefficiencies,1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0), instead of directly using the sum of the individual inefficiencies. In our case,MIPTmin(X0,Y0)=∑i=1m(si0x∗/xi0)+∑r=1s(sr0y∗/yr0)=0.058>0.029for Delta, while1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0)=0.010<0.029, thus allowing the researchers to decompose the directional distance function into1m+sMIPTmin(.)and the residual. However, in contrast to the RAM and other measures, we have shown in Section 3.3 that the optimal targets associated withMIPTmin(X0,Y0)and, consequently, related to1m+sMIPTmin(X0,Y0), are such that the evaluated unit only needs to change one input or one output to reach the efficient frontier. This means that the inefficiency is zero for all the remaining dimensions. This information is required when a graph-type technical inefficiency measure is estimated. For this reason, we use(1/(m+s))(∑i=1m(si0x∗/xi0)+∑r=1s(sr0y∗/yr0))in this paper to estimate technical inefficiency rather than∑i=1m(si0x∗/xi0)+∑r=1s(sr0y∗/yr0), even though we are well aware that only one term in the sum does not vanish.In this paper, we have proposed a scheme to decompose the technical inefficiency component of profit inefficiency into two meaningful components that serve a practical purpose for managers in their decision making to improve overall performance. In particular, we have resorted to the directional distance function as a measure of technical inefficiency because the most famous decomposition of profit inefficiency uses this type of measure. Specifically, we have exploited the principle of least action, linked to the determination of closest efficient targets, to decompose the directional distance function into two sub-components. The first one is a new version of the well-known Measure of Inefficiency Proportions (MIP), and the second has the potential to be used for checking whether the solution yielded from the directional distance function is far from the one that minimizes the total technical effort for the assessed unit.Furthermore, we show how our new MIP measure based on the PLA specifies how firms can become technically efficient by decreasing only one input or by increasing only one output. That is, our approach suggests strategies for firms that require minimum effort to reach the frontier. However, the solution strategies yielded by other measures, such as the directional distance function, on the contrary, suggest improvements in both inputs and outputs. Nevertheless, how “realistic” the solution proposed by our new measure really is depends precisely on the magnitude of the improvement in the corresponding dimension. In our application, the new approach has permitted us to detect some airlines that could reach the technically efficient frontier by changing only one factor (input or output) by a reasonable percentage (for instance, improving their number of passengers). In contrast, for these same airlines, the “standard” solution, yielded by the directional distance function, suggests decreasing all inputs and increasing all outputs (laying off employees, bargaining with the corresponding labor unions, saving fuel, increasing the number of passengers, etc.). We note, however, that despite this finding, for its robustness it would be essential to apply our new measure to other real-life datasets to see whether or not the targets obtained are realistic. Indeed, this exercise could be used as a good avenue for further research.To the best of our knowledge, we are the first in relating profit inefficiency to a sub-component derived from the estimation of the shortest distance to the efficient frontier or, equivalently, from the determination of closest technically efficient targets. Despite the upsurge in interest by DEA researchers to contribute to the literature on closest targets, none of them have yet studied this relationship. Anyway, this topic clearly deserves further research. However, the other issue that needs more attention is the fact that we resorted in our approach to the Debreu-Farrell notion of technical efficiency, due to the nature of the original definition of the directional distance function, obviating that circumstantially both the target points corresponding to the directional distance function and the projection of the new MIP could achieve dominated points in the sense of Pareto. In this respect, it seems fair that both measures, the DDF and the new MIP, are redefined in order to restrict their projection onto the strongly efficient frontier (see Fukuyama and Weber, 2009).As for practical implications, our proposed measure could be useful for devising incentive schemes in situations where a central manager has the possibility of running such types of programs as a way of motivating the units under his/her control. If, in particular, the objective is to encourage the inefficient units to become technically efficient in a subsequent period of time, comparing the solution provided by the directional distance function with that generated by the new Measure of Inefficiency Proportions may be of special interest. Note that, in this respect, it is fairer for central management to promise more incentives to the inefficient units with the greatest difference between the DDF score and the new MIP score, since these units will have to make an extra effort to become technically efficient in the subsequent period. However, the empirical examination of this issue is also beyond the scope of this research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
