@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Approximate dynamic programming for the dispatch of military medical evacuation assets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider the dispatching of aerial military medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) assets.A Markov decision process model of the MEDEVAC dispatching problem is formulated.We utilize approximate dynamic programming to obtain high quality dispatch policies.In a representative scenario, our policy improves system performance by 31%.Our work benefits military medical planners seeking to save lives on the battlefield.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Approximate dynamic programming,Emergency medical dispatch,Least squares temporal differences,Markov decision processes,Military medical evacuation (MEDEVAC),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Military medical planners must consider the dispatching of aerial military medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) assets when preparing for and executing major combat operations. The launch authority seeks to dispatch MEDEVAC assets such that prioritized battlefield casualties are transported quickly and efficiently to nearby medical treatment facilities. We formulate a Markov decision process (MDP) model to examine the MEDEVAC dispatching problem. The large size of the problem instance motivating this research suggests that conventional exact dynamic programming algorithms are inappropriate. As such, we employ approximate dynamic programming (ADP) techniques to obtain high quality dispatch policies relative to current practices. An approximate policy iteration algorithmic strategy is applied that utilizes least squares temporal differencing for policy evaluation. We construct a representative planning scenario based on contingency operations in northern Syria both to demonstrate the applicability of our MDP model and to examine the efficacy of our proposed ADP solution methodology. A designed computational experiment is conducted to determine how selected problem features and algorithmic features affect the quality of solutions attained by our ADP policies. Results indicate that the ADP policy outperforms the myopic policy (i.e., the default policy in practice) by up to nearly 31% with regard to a lifesaving performance metric, as compared for a baseline scenario. Moreover, the ADP policy provides decreased MEDEVAC response times and utilization rates. These results benefit military medical planners interested in the development and implementation of cogent MEDEVAC tactics, techniques, and procedures for application in combat situations with a high operations tempo.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
United States military medical planners must consider the dispatching of aerial military medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) assets when preparing for and executing major combat operations. MEDEVAC involves the rapid transport of prioritized battlefield casualties from the point of injury (POI) to the nearest appropriate medical treatment facility (MTF) by dedicated, standardized MEDEVAC platforms with onboard medical personnel providing care en route.Aerial MEDEVAC operations involve the use of dedicated helicopters, specifically the UH-60 A/L Blackhawk. Helicopters are well suited for MEDEVAC operations because of their ability to travel faster, farther, and access terrain not accessible to ground vehicles. The ability to simultaneously treat and quickly transport casualties from the POI to an MTF greatly increases the probability of survival for casualties. Recent experience indicates that survivability of injuries on the battlefield is at a historic high; 90% of all casualties survive in post 9/11 combat operations, compared to 84% in Vietnam and 80% in World War II (Eastridge et al., 2012). This improvement is attributed primarily to the speed with which casualties are able to receive proper medical attention.Military medical planners must consider many important aspects when designing a deployed military emergency medical service (EMS) system (Department of the Army, 2007). Such aspects include determining MEDEVAC unit locations, identifying a MEDEVAC dispatching policy, and considering the redeployment or relocation of MEDEVAC units after a mission starts or terminates. The determination of locations for MEDEVAC assets to support combat operations is influenced by the tactical situation. Location decisions require a balance between maximizing coverage and minimizing response time subject to resource, force protection, and logistical constraints. The decision of which MEDEVAC unit to launch (i.e., dispatch) to a given service call is an important aspect of the military EMS system and is the focus of this paper. The MEDEVAC launch authority (i.e., the dispatching authority) typically defaults to a myopic policy in which the nearest MEDEVAC unit is launched to a POI regardless of its categorized priority (among three possible tiers). Redeployment of MEDEVAC assets from an MTF directly to a new POI without returning to the MEDEVAC unit’s originating base is possible; however, refueling and medical resupply requirements, armed escort availability, communication challenges, and crew basing limitations often make MEDEVAC redeployment difficult, and it is not often performed within a theater of operations. For similar reasons, the temporary relocation of idle MEDEVAC assets to a different base is also not routinely performed.In this paper, we consider the MEDEVAC dispatching problem in which a dispatching authority must decide how to dispatch MEDEVAC units to prioritized requests for service. We develop a Markov decision process (MDP) model of the MEDEVAC dispatching problem. The large size of the motivating problem instance yields a high-dimensional and uncountable state space, rendering classical dynamic programming methods inappropriate. As such, we apply approximate dynamic programming (ADP) techniques to obtain high quality dispatch policies. We develop an approximate policy iteration (API) algorithm that utilizes least-squares temporal difference (LSTD) learning for policy evaluation. We define a set of basis functions within a linear architecture to approximate the value function around the post-decision state. To demonstrate the applicability of our MDP model and to examine the efficacy of our proposed solution methodology, we construct a notional, representative planning scenario based on contingency operations in northern Syria. A designed computational experiment is conducted to determine how selected problem features and algorithmic features affect the quality of solutions attained by our ADP policies.The unique military aspect of the MEDEVAC dispatching problem warrants discussion. The lack of unclassified historical, extensible data presents difficulties for those interested in examining military EMS systems. We cannot simply analyze computer-aided dispatch (CAD) data to obtain the necessary parameters for our MDP model. When seeking to inform decisions regarding the dispatching of MEDEVAC assets (e.g., in anticipation of a major combat operation), it is necessary to have notions of the anticipated mission, enemy disposition, terrain, weather, friendly forces disposition, logistical support availability, time constraints, and civil authority considerations. Within a military context, disposition denotes whether a unit is passively defending an area, actively patrolling it, or conducting some other deliberate operation. Calls for service result from the interaction of the opposing forces in hostile actions. Such actions are very fluid with respect to both location and intensity. Even when the sizes, locations, and dispositions of friendly forces are relatively stable, the locations and dispositions of adversary forces are dynamic and challenging to predict. We develop a simulation of the MEDEVAC process that implicitly considers such information. For example, deliberate selection of the casualty cluster centers within the Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971) governing casualty event arrivals embeds the information concerning the interaction of friendly and adversary forces. The Hawkes process assumes that subsequent events are more likely to occur in close proximity to prior events, and so it works well when simulating the spatiotemporal aspects of both criminal and terrorist activity (Egesdal et al., 2010; White, Porter, & Mazerolle, 2013); moreover, Lewis, Mohler, Brantingham, and Bertozzi (2012) show that this process well represents casualty incidents within a country fighting an insurgency. We utilize the MEDEVAC process simulation within our ADP algorithm to obtain simulated trajectories of the system and to measure the performance of the MEDEVAC dispatch policies obtained from our ADP algorithm.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of pertinent literature concerning civilian and military EMS systems. Several ADP papers that inform the development of our model and solution methodology are also reviewed. Section 3 presents a description of the MEDEVAC dispatching problem. Section 4 describes the MDP model formulation of the MEDEVAC dispatching problem and presents our ADP approach. In Section 5 we demonstrate the applicability of our model and examine the efficacy of our proposed solution methodology. Section 6 provides conclusions and directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper examines the medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) dispatching problem. The intent of the research is to determine policies that improve the performance of a deployed military emergency medical service system and ultimately to increase the survivability of battlefield casualties. Development of a Markov decision process (MDP) model of the MEDEVAC dispatching problem enables examination of many different military medical planning scenarios. Solving the MDP requires the design, development, and implementation of an approximate dynamic programming (ADP) algorithm. We develop an approximate policy iteration algorithm that utilizes least squares temporal difference learning for policy evaluation. We define a set of basis functions within a linear approximation architecture to approximate the value function around the post-decision state. To demonstrate the applicability of our MDP model and to examine the efficacy of the policies produced by our ADP algorithm, we construct a notional, representative military medical planning scenario based on contingency operations in northern Syria.The ADP policy is able to increase overall expected total discounted reward by nearly 31% compared to the myopic policy in our baseline scenario. Moreover, MEDEVAC busy time was decreased by over 8%, indicating a more efficient utilization of MEDEVAC aircraft. Examination of basis function coefficients determined by our ADP algorithm revealed MEDEVAC aircraft in close proximity to higher likelihood casualty clusters are more valuable than aircraft based further away. This is an intuitive result. These higher value MEDEVAC units should likely not be dispatched for low priority casualty events when the lower value MEDEVACs may be dispatched instead. The ADP approximation architecture is able to capture the overall time it would take for any MEDEVAC unit to service any casualty event. This is an important result, as a MEDEVAC unit may become available that could service a casualty event faster than an idle MEDEVAC that is further away. The average cruise speed of the MEDEVAC aircraft greatly impacts system performance. Results indicate that a 25% increase in speed increases expected total discounted reward by 50%. Even with such increased aircraft speed greatly improving myopic policy performance, the ADP policy still outperforms the myopic policy.The research presented in this paper is of interest to military medical planners and relevant combatant command dispatch authorities. Military medical planners can apply this model and solution approach to compare policies for planning scenarios with fixed medical treatment facility (MTF) and MEDEVAC station locations. Moreover, planners may utilize the model to evaluate different potential MTF and MEDEVAC station allocation and location schemes to maximize overall MEDEVAC system performance. Military staffs can leverage current military intelligence and operational experiences to identify areas in which casualties are likely to occur. Once these areas are identified, planners can make informed decisions about the value of each MEDEVAC unit and ultimately achieve greater utilization of resources. Our results indicate the criticality of the MEDEVAC platform’s travel speed. Military medical planners and acquisition specialists (i.e., those personnel responsible for implementing new technology into the military) can leverage this model to examine the impact of speed and capacity. This comparison informs the future design and development of a replacement for the UH-60 A/L. Perhaps a mix of large capacity UH-60 A/L’s and a new lower-capacity, high-speed design would improve overall casualty survivability.One limiting assumption made in this paper is that MEDEVAC units must return to their own station to refuel and re-equip after delivering patients to the MTF prior to servicing a queued call. Some bases may have both an MTF and a co-located MEDEVAC station. On such bases, it is reasonable for MEDEVACs based elsewhere to refuel after delivering patients to the MTF and then immediately proceed to service a queued call. Our restriction for MEDEVACs to return to their own bases to refuel before servicing a subsequent demand represents a simplifying assumption for this initial effort. Modifying our problem formulation and the corresponding MDP model to allow the refueling and dispatch of MEDEVACs immediately after patient delivery at an MTF with a co-located helicopter base is intended as a future extension to this work.Other extensions to our approach include the explicit modeling of the number of casualties at the casualty event as well as the capacity of the MEDEVAC platform. One could then investigate the trade-offs associated with employing a smaller capacity, but faster MEDEVAC platform versus the currently fielded larger capacity, but slower MEDEVAC platforms. Two important aspects pertaining to the overall design of a deployed MEDEVAC system also remain of interest: determining the number of MEDEVAC units and selecting the home stations for each unit. Examining the impact of these two issues on the best dispatching policy and demonstrating the advantage of the ADP policy over the myopic policy when making such decisions would be a valuable future contribution.Implementing an ADP policy into active dispatch operations at the aeromedical evacuation coordination center (AECC) is a difficult proposition. The myopic policy is often used in practice because it is simple to implement and performs fairly well as long as casualty events arrive less frequently. In the representative scenario we analyzed, the ADP policy and the myopic policy performed equally well when casualty events arrived every two hours. However, when casualty events arrived more frequently, the myopic policy underperformed. The important point for the military medical planning community is recognizing that a myopic policy is not always best and understanding that there are operations research techniques available that may improve MEDEVAC system performance. Yet, important challenges remain. Although this research demonstrates the potential improvement of an ADP policy over a myopic policy, it is subject to challenges concerning changing battlefield conditions. Indeed, although a MEDEVAC dispatching decision can be computed nearly instantaneously using a particular ADP policy, if the assumptions embedded within the MDP model change (e.g., with respect to the casualty event arrival process or the locations and numbers of MEDEVAC units and MTFs), then a new ADP policy must be determined. Recognizing that a new ADP policy must be determined and then actually conducting an analysis to determine the new ADP policy would pose a great challenge for AECC personnel. Further investigation on this matter will be examined in a sequel to this research.