@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrated optimization of safety stock and transportation capacity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
highlightsWe study the impact of safety stock on transportation requirements.In an (r, s, q) system backorders increase the variance of the transportation demand.We calculate the probabilities of the transportation demand.We propose integrated inventory and transportation optimization.Results are relevant for multi-level safety stock optimization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Vehicle fleet size,Excess transportation capacity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we consider a segment of a supply chain comprising an inventory and a transportation system that cooperate in the fulfillment of stochastic customer orders. The inventory is operated under a discrete time (r, s, q) policy with backorders. The transportation system consists of an in-house transportation capacity which can be extended by costly external transportation capacity (such as a third-party logistics provider). We show that in a system of this kind stock-outs and the resulting accumulation of inventory backorders introduces volatility in the workload of the transportation process. Geunes and Zeng (2001) have shown for a base-stock system, that backordering decreases the variability of transportation orders. Our findings show that in inventory systems with order cycles longer than one period the opposite is true. In both cases, however, inventory decisions and transportation decision must be taken simultaneously.We present a procedure to compute the probability distribution of the number of transportation orders and the resulting excess transportation requirements or rather transportation costs. We show that the increase of transportation costs resulting from a safety stock reduction may offset the change of the inventory costs. This effect may have a significant impact on general optimality statements for multi-echelon inventory systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we investigate the relationship between the performance of an inventory system and a subsequent transportation process within a supply chain. We show that inventory decisions may have a significant impact on the required transportation capacity (and transportation costs) when backorders occur, which is usually the case in inventory systems with uncertain demand.The relationship between inventory and transportation under random demand conditions has been discussed in many papers. However, most of the research has concentrated on inbound transportation and only comparatively few papers considered the interaction among inventory management and outbound transportation.Many authors examined the option of using faster inbound transportation modes or selecting a faster supplier at premium costs in order to shorten a stockpoint’s replenishment lead time and to reduce the required safety stock through the associated multiple lead time options. Thereby, the focus often is on the influence of the inbound shipping time on the demand during the replenishment lead time. Related works include Axsäter and Grubbström (1979), Allen, Mahmoud, and McNeil (1985), Tyworth (1992), Gallego and Zipkin (1999), Bookbinder and Çakanyildirim (1999), or Kiesmüller, de Kok, and Fransoo (2005). Similar to using multiple lead time options is order expediting, where after the release of a replenishment order, depending on the state of the inventory system, an expediting decision is made (Lawson & Porteus, 2000; Özsen & Thonemann, 2014). Yano and Gerchak (1989) considered the simultaneous determination of safety stock and inbound transportation capacity (in terms of time between shipments and vehicles per shipment) for a production facility. Here, in the event that the contracted transportation capacity for an assembly line with 100 percent service requirements is busy, costly emergency shipments are made. Henig, Gerchak, Ernst, and Pyke (1997) examined the joint optimization of a periodic inventory policy in combination with a supply contract about a prepaid, basic inbound transportation capacity. If the replenishment quantity exceeds this basic transportation capacity the excess demand is shipped at a premium cost. By building up an additional safety stock when basic transportation capacity is still available, requirements for premium shipments are reduced.Cachon (2001b) as well as Tanrikulu, Şen, and Alp (2010) studied a multi-item system where a stockpoint is replenished from an ample warehouse with the help of an unlimited number of trucks. Through the dispatching of the vehicle fleet, the stockpoint’s inbound transportation costs are affected, which in turn has an impact on the optimal replenishment frequencies. The authors propose coordinated replenishment policies which take the inbound transportation costs into account. Gürbüz, Moinzadeh, and Zhou (2007) considered a single item delivered from a supplier to multiple retailers. The replenishments of the retailers are coordinated by a centralized decision maker who accounts also for the transportation costs to the retailers.Madadi, Kurz, and Ashayeri (2010) studied an inventory system comprising a warehouse and multiple retailers. They assume that for each retailer and for the warehouse the order size determines the required transportation capacity (number of trucks) which is then included in the replenishment order size decision. The impact of the order size on the number of required trucks is also taken into account by Alp, Erkip, and Güllü (2003) under the assumption of deterministic and dynamic demands as well as random discrete lead times.Compared to the above-mentioned literature, the current study focusses on the interaction between inventory management and outbound transportation. Only a comparatively small number of authors have analyzed this relationship under random demand conditions.Ernst and Pyke (1993) addressed stocking and transportation capacity decisions within a two-level distribution system in which the warehouse and the retailer operate under base-stock policies. They assume that both excess demand and excess transportation capacity requirements in the warehouse are always met by an external source. Hence, the demand for transportation capacity is equal to the product demand with the result that transportation and inventory decisions can be made in isolation. The decision variables are the safety stocks and the in-house transportation capacity (truck fleet size), with regard to holding, in-house transportation costs and shortage costs. Ernst and Pyke show that in their scenario higher product demand variability tends to make maintaining an in-house truck fleet uneconomical.Geunes and Zeng (2001) extend the work of Ernst and Pyke by assuming that excess demand in the base-stock inventory system is backordered. This smoothens peak transportation requirements and postpones them into future periods with the result that the variability of the demand for transportation capacity decreases. The authors show that in this case inventory and transportation decisions cannot be made independently anymore, because the safety stock decision has an impact on the variability of the transportation requirements and hence on the transportation costs.Kutanoglu and Lohiya (2008) considered a system with multiple stockpoints for service parts using a base-stock inventory policy, where the delivery of the items to geographically spread customers is subject to a response time window constraint. If a demand can be filled from a stockpoint’s on hand inventory, then delivery is performed by a transportation mode that is fast enough to meet the target response time window. If the on hand inventory is depleted, then the demand is fulfilled through a direct emergency shipment from a warehouse. Hence, backorders do not occur and their impact on the variability of transportation demand that we focus on in the current study is not an issue.Çetinkaya, Tekin, and Lee (2008) analyzed an inventory system where demands are not satisfied from available inventory immediately upon arrival. By contrast, in order to save transportation costs, the demands are shipped only after a waiting time caused by a quantity-based shipment consolidation. The authors present a model for the simultaneous calculation of the optimum replenishment order size and the optimum shipment quantity taking holding costs, transportation costs and penalty costs related to waiting into account.Zhao, Chen, Leung, and Lai (2010) studied a warehouse and several subsidiaries operating a vendor-managed inventory system, where the warehouse (the vendor) makes decisions about the quantities to be delivered to the subsidiaries, taking into consideration holding and transportation costs, whereby the latter depend on the required transportation capacity. They propose to represent the problem as a Markov decision process.Tempelmeier (2005) considered a discrete time inventory system and a subsequent transportation process with a limited number of vehicles. In this system, customer demands may observe a waiting time in the inventory system as well as in the transportation system. The author approximates the probability distribution of the backlog that exists at the arrival of a replenishment order and then he uses a discrete-time Markov chain to model the development of the transportation backlog over time. Eventually an optimization model for the simultaneous computation of the optimal safety stock and the optimal number of vehicles under the constraint of a given average total customer waiting time is formulated. Compared to this research, in the current paper we propose an improved characterization of the arrival process of transportation orders (the departure process from the inventory system). In addition, we assume that the in-house vehicle fleet can be extended by external capacity. Therefore, all transportation orders are delivered without delay.Büyükkaramikli, Gürler, and Alp (2014) considered a warehouse that observes Erlang-Q demands from a retailer using a continuous review reorder-point reorder-quantity (r, Q) inventory system with Poisson unit sized demands and backorder penalty costs. The warehouse is an ample supplier (hence backorders do not occur) with a fixed transportation capacity. As in the model of Tempelmeier (2005), waiting times in the transportation system may occur. In this setting, the transportation system can be represented as a queueing system with Erlang-Q arrivals, deterministic service times (the travel time of a truck) and multiple servers (the capacitated vehicle fleet). Based on these assumptions, the waiting time distribution of the retailer is calculated and an optimization model is used to find the optimum safety stock for the retailer and the optimum order size as well as the optimum number of vehicles. In an extended setting, the authors assume that the warehouse uses a base-stock policy and that it serves multiple retailers. In this case, the transportation process is modelled as a G/D/K queueing system. Like Geunes and Zeng (2001), the authors observe a smoothing effect on the transportation demand caused by the backorders which may now occur in the warehouse. They construct an optimization model that includes all decision variables in the whole system, namely the order-up-to level and the vehicle fleet in the warehouse as well as the reorder point and the order quantity of the retailer. Our study differs from this paper in that we assume a discrete time axis, an inventory policy other than a base-stock policy leading to longer reorder cycles, an arbitrary demand distribution and an in-house vehicle fleet that is extended, if required, by external capacity. Hence, waiting times in the transportation system do not occur.In particular, we study the case that an(r=1,s,q)inventory policy is in effect. With this policy the inventory is reviewed every r periods. If it has reached or has fallen below the reorder point s, an order of size q is released such that the inventory position rises to a level between s ands+q. In contrast to the general definition of the (r, s, n · q) policy that allows for the case that a multiple n of q is ordered, we assume that in each period at most one order of size q is released. The (r, s, q) policy is often used in industrial practice when fixed ordering costs play a significant role and hence replenishment cycles significantly longer than one period are economically favorable. We show that in this case, when backorders occur, the variability of the transportation requirements does not decrease (as observed by Geunes and Zeng (2001) and Büyükkaramikli et al. (2014) for the case of a base-stock policy), but in fact it increases. The reason is that whenever demands are backordered, the arrivals of orders in the transportation system are interrupted and resumed only after the next replenishment. Hence, after a time period with no transportation demand follows a single period with large transportation demand.We state several optimization models that explicitly take into account this phenomenon and demonstrate that neglecting it may lead to significant cost penalties. As a result, inventory decisions must be made under consideration of their impact on the subsequent transportation process, as a cost decrease caused by a safety stock reduction may be offset by an associated increase of the transportation costs. Consequently, whenever transportation plays a role in a distribution process, which is certainly the case in multi-echelon distribution systems with stock points located in different geographical regions, inventory decisions and transportation decisions must be made simultaneously.Under the above-mentioned (r, s, q) inventory policy, the arrival process of orders in the transportation system is interrupted, when the inventory is depleted. This is shown in Fig. 1, where in periods 12 and 13 the inventory on hand is zero. The lower the inventory-related service level is, the longer is the duration of this out-of-stock situation. In these periods incoming customer orders are backlogged and the forwarding of orders to the transportation system is stopped. When stock is replenished again, all backlogged customer orders are processed by the inventory system in addition to the newly incoming customer orders of that period. This generates a peak in demand for transportation capacity. Hence, in an inventory system with comparatively long replenishment cycles a low safety stock (or rather service level) increases the variability of the transportation demand, which again effects the transportation costs.The remainder of this article is organized as follows: In Section 2, we analyze the number of transportation orders as a function of the inventory decision. Next, in Section 3, we demonstrate the quality of the approximation with a numerical experiment. In Section 4 we consider optimization models, whereby transportation costs are included into the inventory decisions. We close with conclusions in Section 5.Consider a distribution process comprising two subsystems as depicted in Fig. 2.The inventory subsystem operates under an(r=1,s,q)inventory policy with periodic (e.g. daily) review. The replenishment lead time ℓ is deterministic. Customer orders arrive on a discrete time axis (e.g. daily) at the inventory system, are processed and (after a possible delay caused by unavailability of stock) forwarded to the transportation system.In general, the demand process under periodic review can be represented by the pair of random variables (At,Dta) (t=1,2,…), whereby Atdenotes the number of customer orders in period t andDtais the demand size per customer order. However, for simplicity, in our analysis it is assumed that the demand process is characterized by the i.i.d. random variables Dt(t=1,2,…,T) whereby Dtis the total demand resulting from multiple individual customer orders (of equal size).Our analysis is based on the following assumptions:1.Time is divided into discrete periods, e. g. days, with demand per period, Dt, and periodic inventory review.The demand Dtin period t is an i.i.d. discrete random variable resulting from individual orders of equal size d.The inventory system operates under an(r=1,s,q)policy with backorders and partial order fulfillment allowed. Due to high setup times and/or setup costs, the replenishment lot size q, which is given, is sufficiently large that in any period at most q units are reordered from the outside supplier. This assumption is met if q is always larger than a period demand.Unmet demand in the inventory system is backordered.Each demand unit filled in the inventory system becomes a transportation order.The transportation system has an in-house capacity of v (transportation orders) per period. If required, this capacity can be extended by external capacity (provided by a common carrier).The in-house transportation costs include a fixed cost cvper capacity unit and a variable transportation cost ciper order shipped. The cost per order shipped via the common carrier are ce.The sequence of events in each period is as follows: arrival of a replenishment order; processing of all backorders by the inventory system; arrival of period demand; processing of demand by the inventory system; passing the orders to the transportation system; delivery of the orders by the transportation system according to the FCFS rule; review of the inventory position and triggering a replenishment order as required.Table 1shows the symbols used in the following.The inventory system is controlled by an(r=1,s,q)policy. At the end of each period t, e.g. a day, the inventory positionItd(defined as the net inventoryItnplus the inventory on orderIto) is monitored. If the inventory position has dropped below the reorder level s, a replenishment order q is placed. We assume that q is sufficiently large to raiseItdto a value between s ands+q. The replenishment order arrives after a deterministic lead time of ℓ periods at the beginning of periodt+ℓ+1. Any demand that cannot be met from stock on hand is backordered and fulfilled as soon as stock is available again.The demand Dtof a period t is an i.i.d. discrete random variable resulting from individual Atcustomer orders of equal size d. Hence, the reorder point s as well as the reorder quantity q are integer multiples of d.In order to study the relationship between the inventory system and the transportation system, we consider a typical order cycle, as illustrated in Fig. 3.Assume that the reorder point s (as well as the order quantity q) is given. The order cycle starts after a replenishment in periodt=ℓ,and ends immediately before the next replenishment, in periodt+ℓ. In Fig. 3, in period τ the inventory position drops below the reorder point and at the end of this period a replenishment order is launched, which arrives after a lead time of 2 periods, at the beginning of the periodτ+ℓ+1. Note that because of the discretization of the time axis, in period τ the inventory positionItphas already fallen below the reorder point s and an undershoot Uτhas occurred. Every customer order that leaves the inventory system is forwarded to the transportation system. LetAtTdenote the number of transportation orders arriving in period t in the transportation system.From the point of view of the transportation system, the inventory system generates an arrival stream of transportation orders of equal size. As shown in Fig. 1, the non-stationary arrival process within a typical order cycle comprises four phases:1.In the first phase, which is the period following a replenishment (period 2 and 10 in Fig. 3), all accumulated backorders are processed by the inventory system and passed to the transportation system, in addition to the newly arrived customer orders of that period, which are fulfilled without delay. LetBI=max(0,[Y☆−s])denote the number of backorders immediately before a replenishment. Then, under the assumption that the order size q is large enough to fill all outstanding backorders, the number of transportation orders isAT(1)=BI+D. The length of this phase is exactly one period. Let Y⋆ be the sum of the demand during the lead time, Y, plus the undershoot U. In the considered case of discrete demand, the undershoot has the following probability distribution (see Hill (1988)):(1)FU(x)=∑d=0x(1−FD(d))E{D}The number of transportation orders in the first phase of the replenishment cycle is then approximated by the following probability distribution:(2)FAT(1)(x)={P{BI+D≤x},x<q;1,x≥qIn the second phase, all demands are processed in the inventory system and immediately forwarded to the transportation system. This phase may last multiple periods. In Fig. 3, these are periods 3–7. The probability distribution of the number of transportation orders in this phase is(3)FAT(2)(x)=FD(x)The third phase comprises at most a single period 8, which is the period when net inventory possibly drops to zero. Let ΔD denote the customer demand which is filled in this period. ΔD can be interpreted as the age in a delayed renewal process, which for s → ∞ has the distribution(4)FΔD(x)=∑d=0x(1−FD(d))E{D}As the reorder point s is usually small, this equation is an approximation. The probability distribution of the number of transportation orders in this phase is approximated as follows:(5)FAT(3)(x)≈FΔD(x)In addition, this phase is reached only when backorders occur, which happens with probability P{Y⋆ > s}.Finally, in the last phase, when net inventory is negative, all incoming customer orders are backordered and henceAT=0.The number of transportation orders in this phase has the probability(6)FAT(4)(x)=1The length of this phase may comprise multiple periods.In order to calculate the stationary probability distribution of the number of transportation orders per period, we approximate the probabilities for the different phases, pi(i=1,2,3,4), within a typical replenishment cycle as follows.LetE{CL}=qE{D}denote the average length of a replenishment cycle and let pibe phase i’s proportion of the replenishment cycle length. Then we can define the following equations:(7)p1=1E{CL}(8)p3=P{Y☆>s}E{CL}(9)∑i=14pi=1(10)∑i=14E{AT(i)}·pi=E{D}This leads to(11)p2=1−E{BI}+E{D}+E{ΔD}·P{Y☆>s}E{CL}·E{D}and(12)p4=1−p1−p2−p3The stationary probability distribution of the number of arriving orders in the transportation system in any period of a replenishment cycle is then a mixture of the phase-specific distributions:(13)FAT(x)=∑i=14pi·FAT(i)(x)As we assume discrete demand distributions, the probability distributions (13) is evaluated with a numerical procedure involving convolutions. The variance of this distribution is(14)V{AT}=∑i=14[(E{AT(i)}−E{AT})2+V{AT(i)}]·pi(15)=(V{BI+D}+(E{BI+D}−E{AT})2)·p1+(V{D}+(E{D}−E{AT})2)·p2+(V{ΔD}+(E{ΔD}−E{AT})2)·p3(16)+(0−E{AT})2·p4The varianceof the transportation demand depends on the reorder point s, which has a significant impact on the amount of backorders BI, and on the variance of the period demands. In contrast to the results found by Geunes and Zeng (2001) for a base-stock system, in the current case of an (r, s, q) inventory policy, backordering increases the variance of the demand for transportation capacity and hence makes transportation more costly.In order to illustrate the quality of the proposed approximation, we report the results of a simulation experiment using two data sets. The approximation quality is measured in terms of the variance of the number of transportation orders per period and of the expected demand for external transportation capacity. The length of the simulation runs was 1,000,000 periods with 50 warm-up periods.In the first data set we assume normally distributed demands with meanμ=10and standard deviationσ=3. Withq=100the average order cycle length is 10. The replenishment lead time isℓ=10. The reorder point iss={25,30,…,150}with a resulting range of β service levels between 20 percent and 100 percent. The in-house transportation capacity isv={8,10,12,14}which is in the range of 80–140 percent of the average required transportation capacity. For the calculations the (continuous) normal distribution was replaced by a discretized normal distribution in the same way as proposed by Cachon (2001a). Hence, the demand of period t consists of a discrete number Dtof individual units of sized=1.Figs. 4 and 5 show the computed and the simulated variances of the total transportation demand as well as the external transportation requirements for different values of the in-house transportation capacity v as a function of the reorder point s. The results demonstrate that the approximations are very good even for very low service levels.With decreasing service level (i.e. with increasing backorders) the variability of the transportation demand sharply increases. Associated with this increase of the variance is the increase of the expected excess transportation demand that must be satisfied by a costly external provider. Note that for low service levels the sensitivity of the external transportation demand to the size of the in-house transportation capacity v is lower than for high service levels.In the second data set, we consider Poisson-distributed period demands. The average demand per period is 4. The other parameters areℓ=5andq=40. As above, the reorder point s and the in-house transportation capacity v are varied as shown in Figs. 6 and 7. Again, the approximation is very good. The curves show the same development as those in Figs. 4 and 5.In both cases the order size is significantly larger than the average period demand and the assumption that in any period at most one order may be released is met. In order to show the influence of the order size on the external transportation demand we consider the case of normally distributed demands withμ=10andσ=3,lead timeℓ=10and in-house transportation capacityv=10,and vary the order sizes fromq=15toq=200as well as the reorder point from−50and 150. Fig. 8shows the simulated and the computed external transportation demands.For high reorder points with a service level of 100 percent, when the variability of the transportation demand is almost equal to the variability of the customer demand, the expected external transportation demand isE{[AT−10]+}=1.19. This is the case for s > 120, independently of the order size used. Then, with decreasing s (going from right to left) an almost linear increase of the external transportation demand follows. When s is further decreased, the external transportation demand reaches its maximum. In this case, the complete customer demand is backordered. The maximum external transportation demand increases with the order size according to the relationshipq−vE{CL}. Note that changing the length of the replenishment lead time ℓ does not affect the shape of the curve of the expected transportation demand (for a given q). It leads only to a horizontal shift of the curve, as the reorder point s is a function of ℓ.As stated above, in the approximation it is assumed that in any period at most one order is released. Forq=15this assumption is likely to be sometimes violated (with a probability of 4.78 percent). If the order size is further decreased, the quality of the approximation deteriorates. The minimum order size which will still allow a good approximation of the variance of the transportation demand depends on the maximum demand that may occur in a period. According to our computational experience, reliable approximations are achieved if the order size at least covers a period demand with probability, say, 0.97.From the above analysis it is quite evident that safety stock decisions must be made under consideration of the impact they have on the transportation system. In this section, we show with the help of several optimization models that there may be a significant value in integrating inventory and transportation decisions.As a basic case, we compute the optimum number of in-house transportation capacity for a given reorder point. As noted above, the transportation system receives a random number of transportation orders which depends on the performance of the inventory system, particularly on the reorder point s. Following Geunes and Zeng (2001), we assume that the transportation system has an in-house transportation capacity of v units with fixed costs cvper capacity unit. Each capacity unit handles exactly one transportation order. In addition, for each order shipped variable transportation costs cioccur. If the transportation capacity v is exhausted, then the excess transportation orders are shipped by an external logistics provider (common carrier) at higher costs per order ce> ci. In this case, a classical make-or-buy decision arises.The expected amount of required external transportation capacity, E{O}, is a function of the arrivals of transportation orders which in turn depend on the reorder point s in the inventory system, as shown above, and of the in-house transportation capacity v. In particular,E{O(s,v)}=E{[AT(s)−v]+}.If the probability distribution of the number of arriving orders in the transportation system for a given value of the reorder point s,FAT(s)(x),is known, then the problem for the transportation planner is to find the cost-optimal value of the in-house transportation capacity v:(17)minimizeTC(v|s)=cv·v+ci·E{I(s,v)}+ce·E{O(s,v)}where(18)E{I(s,v)}=[E{AT(s)}−∑a=v+1∞(a−v)·P{AT(s)=a}]describes the expected demand that is shipped by the in-house transportation capacity. Eq. (17) is a newsvendor type function which has the solution(19)vopt(s)=maxv[P{AT(s)≤v}≤1−cvco]+1whereco=ce−ciandP{AT(s)≤v}=FAT(s)(v). See Tempelmeier (2011). It is obvious that the variability of the order arrival process which depends on the reorder point s, as well as the ratio of external and in-house transportation costs play a major role in the calculation of the optimal value of vopt(s).In the following, we use the above results to support integrated safety stock and transportation decisions. In particular, two scenarios are considered:1.A single stockpoint with a target service level β⋆A One-Warehouse-N-Retailer supply chain.A single stockpoint with a target service level β⋆. In the first case, the overall optimization problem is to find the optimum combination of the reorder point s and the in-house transportation capacity v with respect to a target service level β⋆. As for a given reorder point s the optimum in-house transportation capacityvopt(s)is defined by Eq. (19), the overall two dimensional optimization problem reduces to the following non-linear optimization problem with the reorder point s as the major decision variable:(20)minimizeTC(s)=Ch(s)+cv·vopt(s)+ci·E{I(s,vopt(s))}+co·E{O(s,vopt(s))}subject to(21)β(s)≥β☆While the inventory costs Ch(s) are monotonically increasing in s, the development of the in-house and the external transportation costs depend on the ratiocvco. This is illustrated with a numerical example with Poisson-distributed period demands with mean 4,ℓ=5,q=40,ch=1,cv=1. Fig. 9 shows the development of the objective function forco=4. In this case, the optimum reorder point is monotonically increasing in s such that the optimum reorder point is determined only by the target service level and the transportation costs have no influence on the solution. Furthermore the figure shows that the in-house transportation capacity becomes uneconomical with declining service level or rather increasing variability of the transportation demand.On the other hand, for a relative high valueco=10,the function of the total costs exhibits a kind of U-shaped pattern with a minimum ats=16,as depicted in Fig. 10.Here we observe the following: If the reorder point is high, then because of the low variance of the transportation demand AT, the optimum in-house transportation capacity is relatively low. With decreasing reorder point and increasing variance of the transportation workload AT, the optimum in-house transportation capacity increases until a critical reorder point (or rather service level) is reached, from which on the in-house transportation capacity decreases again. Associated with the development of the in-house transportation capacity, the external transportation capacity increases without completely substituting the in-house transportation capacity. The optimum value of the reorder point can easily be found by a search procedure in the region between s(β⋆) ands(β=1). Thereby it may be optimal to provide a higher service level than requested by the market, due to the behavior of the total cost function. In the case considered in Fig. 10, for a target service level of, say,β☆=0.7,the minimum reorder point iss(0.7)=10with associated total costs of 25.23, whereas the optimum reorder point iss=14with associated total costs of 24.72 and an actual service level ofβ=0.8. This result is quite counter-intuitive, as it shows a situation when it is cost-optimal to provide a higher service level than requested (and paid) by the customers.In both figures, for the total cost functions in addition to the approximated values also the simulated values are displayed as dotted lines. These are almost invisible, which shows the quality of the approximation.A One-Warehouse-N-Retailer supply chain. As a second optimization scenario, consider a multi-stage supply chain with a central warehouse and regional warehouses spread over a geographical area. The regional warehouses send replenishment orders to the central warehouse which are delivered after a possible inventory-related delay caused by stock unavailability and after a transportation time. In this case, the planner has to find the optimum allocation of safety stock among the central warehouse and the regional warehouses. If the safety stock in the central warehouse is low, then the inventory-related delay and consequently the replenishment lead times of the regional warehouses tend to become long. This increases the safety stock in the regional warehouses that is required to meet a target service level for the end customers. On the other hand, if the safety stock in the central warehouse is high, then the replenishment lead times will be relatively short and the required safety stock in the regional warehouses will be comparatively low.In the literature there are numerous research papers studying the problem of finding the cost-optimal allocation of the total safety stock among a central warehouse and a number of regional warehouses. Many of these papers include managerial insights concerning safety stock allocation. Axsäter (2003b) provides a comprehensive overview over the research in this area. Based on the analysis of the most important contributions to multi-echelon inventory optimization, he comes to the conclusion that it is typical that upstream inventory locations should have very low stocks compared to downstream inventory locations. According to Axsäter, in a One-Warehouse-N-Retailer (OWNR) model often the service level in the central warehouse is quite low, whereby values of about 50 percent are not uncommon.Most managerial implications, however, are based on models which neglect the interaction among the safety stock decision and the outbound transportation system of the central warehouse. Transportation issues are usually accounted for by taking a fixed delay for transportation between the central warehouse and the regional warehouses into consideration. Thereby the transportation capacity is assumed to be unlimited.A typical objective function of a OWNR model reads as follows (see Axsäter (2003a)):(22)minimizeC(sw)+∑i=1NCi(sw,siopt(sw))where swis the warehouse reorder point andsiopt(sw)is the optimum reorder point of retailer i for a given warehouse reorder point sw.The minimum of this objective function results from the trade-off between the holding costs in the warehouse and the holding costs at the retailer level. Neglecting the impact of the warehouse reorder point swon the variability of the transportation demand and hence on the transportation costs in the calculation of the relevant costs for the warehouse makes low warehouse reorder points and hence low service levels in the warehouse more favorable. In this case, the optimization result is biased towards decentralization of safety stock. Consequently, it is likely to be suboptimal.This issue is illustrated with the following numerical example based on the OWNR model described in Axsäter (2003a). We consider a central warehouse and three retailers facing Poisson distributed period demands. All nodes in this supply network apply (s, q) policies with given order quantities. The average demand in the warehouse resulting from the retailers is 12 units per period. The warehouse order quantity is 36. The holding costs are equal to 1 for all stock points. With given order sizes of the retailers and given fixed transportation times, using the approximation algorithm proposed by Axsäter (2003a) we find the optimum warehouse reorder point of 6, which leads to a warehouse service level of about 50 percent. This solution is depicted in Fig. 11as a black point minimizing the objective function (22).However, when the transportation from the central warehouse to the retailers is carried out by a combination of in-house and external capacity, as discussed above, then the solution is not necessarily optimal. Let us assume that the in-house transportation capacity isv=14. Fig. 11 shows the total costs that result when the transportation costs are added to the objective function (22), whereby different values of coare assumed. For the construction of these curves we analyzed for each value of swthe resulting transportation demand and the associated in-house and external transportation capacity used. Based on these data the transportation costs between the warehouse and the retailers were calculated and added to the total inventory costs. The open circles mark the minimum total costs (holding plus transportation costs) which are achievable if the different co-values are assumed. As can be seen, taking the transportation costs into account may increase the warehouse reorder point significantly. Again, in order to show the quality of the proposed approximation, in addition to the calculated values Fig. 11 also shows the simulated values of the total costs for the different co-values as dotted lines. Observe that for all co-values the simulated as well as the approximated cost functions lead to the same cost-optimal warehouse reorder point.Note that this numerical example serves only to demonstrate that neglecting relevant parts of the transportation costs in a multi-echelon inventory optimization may lead to non-optimal safety stock allocations. Thereby we assumed a predetermined in-house transportation capacity v. It is clear, that a different value of v may result in a different development of the total cost function. The simultaneous optimization of the allocation of safety stock within the OWNR system and the transportation capacity requires the inclusion of v as a variable in the OWNR model. This will possibly warrant the development of a new solution approach for this type of problems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
