@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reducing patient-flow delays in surgical suites through determining start-times of surgical cases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a surgery-scheduling system for multiple operating rooms.We determine surgery starting times under service time uncertainties.Patient waiting times, idling of OR, and completion times are used for evaluation.A fuzzy logic based flexible job shop scheduling with time-lag model is used.Appropriate ratio of operating rooms and PACU resources is examined.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surgery scheduling under uncertainty,Downstream resource constraint,Flexible job shop scheduling with time-lag,Multi-objective problem,Fuzzy sets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A scheduling strategy to determine starting times of surgeries in multiple operating rooms (OR) is presented. The constraints are resource limit of a downstream facility, post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), and the service time uncertainties. Given sets of surgeries that need to be done on a day, this problem is formulated as a flexible job shop model with fuzzy sets. Patient-waitings in the process flow, clinical resource idling, and total completion times are considered for evaluation. This multi-objective problem is solved by a two-stage decision process. A genetic algorithm is used for determining relative order of surgeries in the first stage and definite starting times for all the surgical cases are obtained by a decision-heuristic in the second stage. The resultant schedule is evaluated by a Monte-Carlo simulation. The performance is shown to be better than our previous approach, a simulation based scheduling which already outperforms simple scheduling rules in regional hospitals. Additionally, the ratio of PACU to OR is examined using the proposed scheduling strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Surgical suite is the most cost and revenue intensive area in hospital. It accounts for more than 40% of revenues and it takes similar proportion of their expenses (Cardoen, Demeulemeester, & Beliën, 2010; Denton, Viapiano, & Vogl, 2007; Min & Yih, 2010). In addition, growing and aging population in these days causes significant increase in demand of elective surgeries. Thus it is natural to draw a considerable attention on the problems in surgical operations management. Managing the operations of the surgical suite, however, is very challenging due to its conflicted preferences and priorities from many stakeholders and limited resources to meet the needs (Cardoen et al., 2010). If we consider uncertain nature of surgical operations, particularly, surgical service durations, it becomes more complex.This study focuses on the operating room (OR) scheduling, particularly surgery starting times, in the tactical level as classified by Gupta (2007). Most of the hospitals in the US practice block-scheduling as their surgery booking rule (Gupta, 2007). Under this scheduling system, a certain amount of OR time (blocks of OR time) is solely assigned to a surgeon or a group of surgeons and they book their surgical cases into the assigned block of OR time. The time management in the block is performed individually by the surgeon or the group of surgeons. However, after the surgery, all the patients go to downstream facilities such as Post-Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU), which is a shared resource. In this transaction, the delays in admission into PACU possibly occurs due to the unavailability of PACU beds or nurses (Dexter, Epstein, Marcon, & Matta, 2005; Min & Yih, 2010). Then, it can be said that each block schedule is affected by the PACU availability. Fig. 1conceptually illustrates this transaction. The goal of this study is to determine surgery starting times for multiple number of operating rooms given the number and the sequence of surgeries for each OR while reducing the conflict in PACU admission.When there is congestion in admission to PACU, patients stays in OR until any PACU resource is available and the next surgery cannot begin until current patient is transferred to PACU (Dexter et al., 2005; Price et al., 2011; Marcon & Dexter, 2006). This may cause consecutive waiting delays for the following surgeries. Moreover, if a patient cannot get a prompt post-operative care, this should be under severe consideration. We propose a sophisticated surgery scheduling to resolve this issue.The problem is formulated as a flexible job shop scheduling model with uncertain task durations. This type of scheduling problem have been widely studied in the last decades (Fortemps, 1997; Lei, 2010; Niu, Jiao, & Gu, 2008; Gonzalez-Rodriguez, Puente, Vela, & Varela, 2008; Wang, Wang, Xu, & Liu, 2013). However, to the best of the knowledge, our problem structure is unique in terms of adding weight on every individual’s waiting between two consecutive streamline processes (OR to PACU). We adopt fuzzy sets to model the uncertainties of activity durations. One advantage of using fuzzy sets over probability distributions is the computational simplicity with expressive ability of uncertain events (Gonzalez-Rodriguez et al., 2008). Scheduling surgeries with our approach only needs experts’ (e.g. surgeons) estimated duration of cases. Thus, the solution is little affected by data. On the other hand, it should be noted that fuzzy set-based scheduling cannot provide a schedule with definite times. We propose a heuristic for determining a particular time within an interval, which provides a usable time schedule for administrators. In this paper, we call it a ‘crisp time schedule’.This article is organized as follows. The next section overviews the previous literature in surgical scheduling. Section 3 describes the problem including its decision criteria and the problem’s representation under the fuzzy scheduling framework. In Section 4, we provide the methodology to tackle this problem and how we evaluate the obtained solutions. The experimentation results are presented in Section 5 and final concluding remarks are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
