@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Testing over-representation of observations in subsets of a DEA technology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper proposes a test for whether data are over-represented in a subset of a DEA estimated production possibility set.The binomial test the number of observations inside a zone to a discrete probability weighted relative volume of that zone.A Monte Carlo simulation illustrates the performance of the proposed test.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA),Over-representation,Data density,Binomial test,Benchmarks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a test for whether data are over-represented in a given production zone, i.e. a subset of a production possibility set which has been estimated using the non-parametric Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) approach. A binomial test is used that relates the number of observations inside such a zone to a discrete probability weighted relative volume of that zone. A Monte Carlo simulation illustrates the performance of the proposed test statistic and provides good estimation of both facet probabilities and the assumed common inefficiency distribution in a three dimensional input space. Potential applications include tests for whether benchmark units dominate more (or less) observations than expected.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper introduces a test for whether observed data points are over-represented in certain production zones, i.e. subsets of (input sets of) the production space. The test is based on considerations of the relative volumes of these zones, weighted by probability estimates of observation frequencies. Specifically we consider the number of observations located in a certain zone, relative to the number that could be expected based on its relative weighted volume.To motivate the need for such a test, consider for example the hypothesis of rational inefficiency put forward by Bogetoft and Hougaard (2003). Given a set of common and known input prices, one might expect all observations to be located close to the cost minimizing input combination if the production units are assumed to be rational. Within the rational inefficiency framework, arguments are made, however, that it is still rational to be located inside the cone dominated by the cost minimizing point since production units may derive utility from the consumption of excess resources, leading to the notion of rational inefficiency. Thus, according to the rational inefficiency hypothesis, one should expect over-representation of data point within this cone. If we further assume that a Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) estimated frontier is a good approximation of the true underlying production possibilities, rejection of a test for no over-representation of data points inside the cone dominated by the cost minimizing input combination provides empirical support for the hypothesis of rational inefficiency. In this paper, we will derive such a test based on a Data Generating Process (DGP) suggested in Simar and Wilson (2000).Another potential use of the proposed test concerns benchmarks in DEA, where the set of undominated observations is typically considered as benchmark units for the inefficient producers. However, not all benchmarks may be equally influential (Thanassoulis, 2001, Chapter 5) and part of the literature on outlier detection uses counts of how many times a given efficient firm enters as part of a benchmark to detect outliers, see e.g. Tran et al. (2010). Such methods undoubtedly provide important information, but to the best of our knowledge no formal test-statistics exist that allow us to test whether a given benchmark unit dominates more observations than what is expected.1Several other outlier detection methods exists which are more remotely related to the approach proposed in this paper. One example is the Wilson (1995) outlier detection based on leave-one-out efficiency.1The test-statistic proposed in this paper fills this gap by allowing a formal test of under/overrepresentation of observations in areas of the input space dominated by frontier facets spanned partly by any of the efficient firms.Since the proposed test considers the number of points in certain zones relative to the weighted volumes of those subsets of the production space, what we call over-representation could also be viewed as higher (weighted) data density. Empirical investigation of data density can be approached in different ways. Statistical cluster analysis aims at identifying groups or clusters of data points. Parametric cluster analysis (Fraley and Raftery, 1998, 1999; McLachlan and Peel, 2000) is based on the assumption that each group of data points is represented by a density function belonging to some parametric family. The analysis then estimates the number of groups and their parameters from the observed data. In contrast, non-parametric statistical clustering approaches identify the center or mode of various groups and assign each data point to the domain of attraction of a mode. These approaches were originally introduced by Wishart (1969) and have subsequently been expanded on by especially Hartigan (1975, 1981, 1985). Common for the statistical cluster analysis approaches is that they aim at detecting the presence of clusters rather than considering differences in density in pre-specified production zones.Within the realm of DEA, data density is at least indirectly considered in the recently quite popular bootstrapping approaches (see e.g. Simar and Wilson, 2000). For example, a distinction is made between a homogeneous and a heterogeneous bootstrap, reflecting whether or not it is reasonable to assume that the inefficiency distribution is independent of the choice of output levels and of input mix. Bootstrapping, in this context, analyzes the sensitivity of efficiency estimates to sampling variations of the estimated frontier and is used as a tool for bias correction and statistical inference. Hence, this stream of the bootstrapping literature has focussed on estimating statistical properties of the efficiency estimators.The focus in this paper is quite different since we aim at getting estimators of the probabilities of being located in pre-specified production zones and to the best of our knowledge no test like the one proposed here, building on such probabilities, has been developed before. Yet, our approach is related to that of Simar and Wilson (2000a) where a density estimation approach combining a bootstrap estimator of a distance function with a general multidimensional Gausian kernel based density estimation is proposed. The test we propose in this paper could alternatively be constructed by specifying an estimatorpˆof the probability of a projected data point being located within a specific production zone from the Simar–Wilson density estimator. Specifically, in principle an estimatorpˆcould be provided by plugging the estimator of Simar and Wilson (2000a) into our Eq. (9) in the following.Compared to the rather complicated and computationally intensive Simar–Wilson density estimator, we propose a more direct approach based on a discrete approximation of the true density, using the facet structure of the DEA-estimation to define discrete areas. The probability related to each of these areas is estimated based on probability estimates on (i) input mix in cones spanned by facets, and (ii) distance function values in certain intervals. It is worth noting that while the Simar–Wilson estimator is consistent, we here through Monte-Carlo simulations only demonstrate that our estimator seems to converge. It is, however, left for future research to explicitly compare these two different approaches for testing over-representation of observations.To sum up, we derive a binomial test that relates the number of observations inside certain production zones to a discrete probability weighted relative volume of these zones. This is done by considering the ratio between the volume of the zone and the volume of the total production possibility set, where these volumes are weighted by probability estimates of observations belonging to given facets and efficiency levels. The ratios of volumes provide estimates of expected frequencies which are then related to the observed frequencies given as the ratio between the number of observations inside the zone and the total number of observations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
