@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Can hazardous waste supply chain ‘hotspots’ be identified using an input–output framework?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper attributes hazardous waste streams to regional economic activity.There is a tightening regulatory framework around hazardous waste.The methods adopted provide information for decision makers.Input–output attribution methods are used for the analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Decision support systems,Input–output tables,Hazardous waste management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper examines a method to attribute hazardous waste streams to regional production and consumption activity, and to connect these same waste streams through to different management options. We argue that a method using an input–output framework provides useful intelligence for decision makers seeking to connect elements of the management of the hazardous waste hierarchy to production and to different patterns and types of final consumption (of which domestic household consumption is one). This paper extends application of conventional demand driven input–output attribution methods to identify hazardous waste ‘hotspots’ in the supply chains of different final consumption goods and consumption groups. Using a regional case study to exposit the framework and its use, we find that domestic government final consumption of public administration production indirectly drives hazardous waste generation that goes to landfill, particularly in the domestic construction and sanitary services sectors, but also in the manufacture of wood products.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Input–output accounting and analytical (multiplier) techniques have been shown to be useful tools in assessing a range of issues relating to economic structure and related environmental issues (see Miller & Blair, 2009; Nakamura & Kondo, 2009). This paper uses input–output analysis techniques to better frame the connections between the production of hazardous waste, final consumption of goods driving this production, and the management of these waste streams. For decision makers, including policy makers, the techniques explained in this paper, and illustrated through a UK regional case study, improve the understanding of the demand and supply pathways and linkages underlying hazardous waste production. We show how the integration of data on regional economic structure and hazardous waste generation permits a detailed exploration of the regional hazardous waste economy as it relates to local production. The approach provides valuable information for decision makers in developing waste strategies and policy support as it relates to hazardous waste minimisation. The paper also shows how demand-driven input–output attribution methods can be used to identify hazardous waste hotspots in the supply chains of different final consumption goods and consumption groups, again yielding valuable information for decision makers.The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background on the need to understand the drivers of hazardous waste flows, the connections between consumption and hazardous waste management options, and provides an outline of the policy and regulatory framework. Section 3 describes the methodology and Section 4 discusses the results from our hazardous waste economy case analysis, showing the types of information that lever value for decision makers. Section 5 discusses the further implications of these results and concludes by providing directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper started with the challenge of better understanding the processes and drivers underlying hazardous waste production in an economy, set in the context of tighter regulation and mounting concerns on the externalities associated with selected management options. The paper shows that there is decision making value in more accurately examining how the different components of final demand for the commodity outputs of different sectors impact the supply of hazardous waste and then the requirements for different management options.The developed approach enabled us to connect hazardous waste production in one industry and the indirect demands driving hazardous waste production elsewhere. This transaction tracking approach is vital in connecting how activity in one industry (and its consumption profile) impacts on another industry’s production of waste, and resulting management options. In consequence, the approach adopted allows the speculation of how structural change in an economy might affect overall volumes of hazardous waste production, and forecasting requirements for different management options, by taking due account of both direct and indirect waste production levered by economic changes.The demand-driven input–output attribution method used here identifies hazardous waste hotspots in the supply chains of different final consumption goods. The results in Section 4 of the paper allow detailed decomposition analyses of how hazardous waste in one industry meets the final demands for goods and services from its own sector, but also how far hazardous waste production in one industry serves other sectors’ final demands. This allows analysis of how far one sector’s hazardous waste production is embodied in intermediate sales to other regional industries. The corollary is the identification of hazardous waste hotspots in the supply chains of different final consumption groups including households, government, capital formation, tourism or exports.The approach also provides information on the hazardous waste embodied in regional exports (another final consumption group). This allows the identification of how the production of externalities by industries in one area is associated with consumption choices in other places. In the location of management options such as hazardous waste landfill and/or incineration there can be community concerns that it is local people who incur the costs for consumption decisions made elsewhere. The review in Section 2 of the paper shows that there has been a great deal of interest in the operations management field in the routing of hazardous waste flows and location of management options such as landfill and incineration. In considering future management options there might be advantages in better communicating where the economic benefits (in terms of wages, salaries and profits) of industrial production that creates hazardous waste occur and then where the full economic costs of managing the externalities occur, in our case within or outside the regional economy. The present method provides some information that may contribute to such a cost-benefit type analysis.A limitation of the analysis is its restricted breakdown of the trade in hazardous waste intensive goods and services. For example, while the analysis presented in section four of the paper provides better intelligence on the hazardous waste content of exports out of Wales, there is rather less information available on the hazardous waste embodied in regional imports, such that it is not possible to comment on a hazardous waste ‘balance of trade’.To conclude, in developing this work further, it would be useful to explore possibilities and methods to overcome some of the general limitations of the input–output framework in respect of fixed technical coefficients and prices (see Miller & Blair, 2009). In particular to enable an assessment of the implications of changes in the costs of management options, or, for example, were there to be a step change increase in hazardous waste production, how the supply side of the local economy may change to accommodate this. This would involve the development of a computable general equilibrium (CGE) approach where the sectoral information content of input–output would be retained while building in more flexibility and economy dynamism (see Partridge & Rickman, 2010, for a review of regional CGE modelling approaches and issues).8In Turner, Munday, McGregor, and Swales (2012) we attempt an integrated input–output accounting and CGE analysis for the case of carbon generation in Wales.8This research could also be extended to other regions of the UK, in the first instance for comparative analysis of results. As hinted earlier in this section, building in information from other regions allows the possibility of connecting Welsh industry purchases of imported goods with hazardous waste production elsewhere in the UK, and vice versa.