@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Easy, reliable method for mid-term demand forecasting based on the Bass model: A hybrid approach of NLS and OLS

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our method combines non-linear least square and ordinary least square.The key idea is to use the linearization of the Bass diffusion model.Comparing with other typical methods, ours has better accuracy and stability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,New product diffusion,Nonlinear least square,Ordinary least square,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For mid-term demand forecasting, the accuracy, stability, and ease of use of the forecasting method are considered important user requirements. We propose a new forecasting method using linearization of the hazard rate formula of the Bass model. In the proposal, reduced non-linear least square method is used to determine the market potential estimate, after the estimates for the coefficient of innovation and the coefficient of imitation are obtained by using ordinary least square method with the new linearization of the Bass model. Validations of 29 real data sets and 36 simulation data sets show that the proposed method is accurate and stable. Considering the user requirements, our method could be suitable for mid-term forecasting based on the Bass model. It has high forecasting accuracy and superior stability, is easy to understand, and can be programmed using software such as MS Excel and Matlab.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While it requires significant time and money to develop and manufacture new products and services in a market, more frequent product launches and shorter product life cycles make for intense competition among producers. Therefore, accurate demand forecasts for new products are among the top managerial priorities for business success (Mostard, Teunter, & de Koster, 2011). Accurate forecasts enable the just-in-time purchasing of components as well as timely allocations of adequate manufacturing capacity and resources, which in turn enables consumers to buy the available product or service (Carbonneau, Laframboise, & Vahidov, 2008; Huawei, Aimin, & Ruxin, 2012; Yan & Ma, 2011). Thus, producers can successfully minimize production costs and simultaneously maximize sales. Otherwise, in cases affected by underestimation, consumers may not have a chance to buy the product as a result of an out-of-stock or not-in-service condition, which implies a loss of sales, the factor necessary to compensate for the R&D, production, and marketing costs involved in the development of the product. Overestimation, on the other hand, may result in excessive production, followed by high inventory costs and early obsolescence.Innovative high-tech industries such as consumer electronics, the semiconductor industry and telecommunications industry tend to change rapidly. Many firms have developed and incorporated several strategic management techniques, such as supply chain management (Lin & Lin, 2006), to reduce costs and meet customer service standard. However, they continue to rely on traditional demand planning in which the basis of a demand forecast is either an internal marketing judgment based on customer projections or traditional time-series forecasting methods (e.g., moving averages).To ascertain facts pertaining to demand forecasting in the high-tech industry, face-to-face interviews were conducted with demand planners of several leading global companies based in Korea (in this case, Samsung Electronics, Hyundai Motors, and LG Electronics). Demand planners in other industries were also interviewed, specifically Internet portal service providers (NHN Corp.), airlines (Korean Air), and machinery equipment manufacturers (Doosan Infracore). The top two requirements for the forecasting model were ‘ease of use’ and ‘reliability of the forecasting results’. Regarding the time horizon, mid-term forecasting for strategic decisions was the most pertinent type of demand forecasting when searching an appropriate method or model. In this case, the typical decision problems could be, for example, the final order before production discontinuation, inventory policy during a period of dramatic growth, and a supply plan after a takeoff period where a fast growth of demand begins (Hong, Kim, & Lim, 2008). To resolve the demand forecasting issues, including the requirements identified during the interviews, many researchers and practitioners have proposed several methods/models and made claim as to their superiority. The availability of several models, however, makes it difficult to select the model that best describes the historical data of a given set of products and generates accurate forecasts. Demand planners state that the most conventional methods for demand forecasting are too difficult to understand and use in their jobs. Even when a refined method or model is used, the forecasting accuracy has seldom compensated their efforts and met the expectations of top management. Demand planners, therefore, widely use the moving average method and market forecast reports for short-term and long-term demand forecasting, respectively. Moreover, they use internal judgment methods by top management or the sales department to finalize forecast values. Regarding mid-term forecasting, no specific method or model is preferred to the judgmental forecasting method. However, a more reliable method is required to predict demand and identify its causes.In this paper, a simple, reliable method is proposed for mid-term demand forecasting by combining two main estimation methods: the ordinary least square (OLS) and nonlinear least square (NLS) methods. The Bass diffusion model (Bass, 1969) is used as the base demand function, which is suitable for products with a bell-shaped life-cycle. The Bass model, even though it is not a generic model for mid-term demand forecasting, is chosen owing to its thriftiness and explanatory power, which can provide demand planners with the causes of the resulting demand (see Section 2). The Bass model has been familiar to demand planners as well as researchers. Especially, the interpretation of the three parameters (m, p, q; the market potential, the coefficient of innovation, and the coefficient of imitation, respectively) supports the everlasting popularity of the Bass model. The market potential provides the notion of the market size, which can be compared with management judgments. The coefficient of innovation, which is highly related to the early adopters, assists marketing managers to determine the demand management plan for early market including the advertising budget for the new products. The coefficient of imitation makes it easier for demand planners to promote demand by applying several verbal marketing tools such as sampling and social media advertising. The ratio of the two coefficients is also a good parameter for decision making pertaining to effective market penetration strategies.Contrary to the academic advantages of the Bass model, the estimation issues raise technical difficulties for the demand planners. The issues are: (i) OLS is simple but provides relatively poor performance, (ii) NLS is a good performer but is definitely dependent on the starting point of estimates, which quite frequently leads to abnormal termination of the estimation procedure using local search methods, and (iii) recently developed methods insisting on superior performance are too complicated for demand planners to use on the job.The key idea for resolving the estimation issues is to use the linearization of the hazard rate formula of the Bass model (with some loss of accuracy), followed by the accurate estimation by NLS using the parameter values obtained from the linearized model, as a starting point. The ease of use of the OLS method and the accuracy of the NLS method are used simultaneously to develop a hybrid method of OLS and NLS (referred to as HON hereafter). Consequently, HON resolves the inherent issues of OLS and NLS—the poor performance and the lack of a guarantee of a plausible solution, respectively. Overall, HON is easy to use, and its forecasting performance is the best among the following methods: (a) the conventional OLS; (b) OLS–NLS, which is an NLS with the estimates by the conventional OLS as a starting point; (c) the original NLS; (d) genetic algorithm (GA); (e) GA–NLS, which is an NLS with the estimates by a genetic algorithm as a starting point; (f) HON; and (g) HON–NLS, which is an NLS using HON estimates as a starting point. Moreover, the variation in the demand forecasts by HON is smaller than the other five methods (OLS, OLS–NLS, NLS, GA, and NLS–GA); therefore, the HON offers users a demand forecasting method with good accuracy and reliability. While the other five methods are currently available methods for mid-term forecasting, HON is easy for demand planners to understand and apply using general package programs such as MS Excel, and Matlab. HON can be coded as a few dozens of lines in such package programs. Excellent accuracy and relatively small variation in its forecasting, which HON shows in diverse simulation cases and in 29 actual historical data cases, is critical to the quality of mid-term forecasts.This paper is organized in five sections. Section 2 describes conventional estimation methods. Section 3 describes the proposed method. Section 4 uses simulations and actual data to compare the performances of the estimation methods. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusion and suggestions for future research.The Bass model is a corner stone for modeling the diffusion of new products (Bass, 1969; Chandrasekaran & Tellis, 2007; Jiang & Jain, 2012; Mahajan, Muller & Bass, 1990; Özkaya, 2008). It has the unique ability to interpret the power of innovation and imitation. Thus, the Bass model has been very popular due to its parsimony and explanatory power (Chandrasekaran & Tellis, 2007). Since Frank M. Bass published his work on a diffusion model in 1969, the number of publications based on the Bass diffusion model has risen to 750 (Meade & Islam, 1998; Özkaya, 2008). The Bass model assumes that two factors affect the adoption rate of a new product – coefficient of innovation (p) and the coefficient of imitation (q). The coefficient of innovation refers to the effect of mass media or magazines. The coefficient of imitation is mainly caused by the word-of-mouth effect. As the market potential is m, the Bass model is expressed as follows (Bass, 1969):(1)dN(t)dt=(m−N(t))(p+qN(t)m).Here, m is the market potential, p and q are the coefficients of innovation and imitation, respectively, and N(t) represents the cumulative adopters until time t. The cumulative adopters, N(t), form an s-shaped curve and the net adopters,n(t)=dN(t)/dt, form a bell-shaped curve as shown in Fig. 1. The takeoff point and the saturation point are the inflection points of the s-shaped curve in Fig. 1. The takeoff point is when the rapid growth of demand begins and the saturation point is when the demand growth reaches almost the limit. The peak point is when the demand is highest.Previous works related to the Bass model consist of four types. The first type relies on extensions of the model parameters or variables. This type of research consists of two categories: (a) increasing the flexibility by adding one or two parameters, (Easingwood, Mahajan, & Muller, 1983; Hong & Uhm, 2009); and (b) increasing the interpretation power by adding market mix variables such as income or price (Horsky, 1990; Kalish, 1985; Robinson & Lakhani, 1975). The second type focuses on changing the model structure by incorporating social networks (Delre, Jager, & Janssen, 2007; Goldenberg, Han, Lehmann, & Hong, 2009; Goldenberg, Libai, Muller, & Peres, 2006; Guseo & Guidolin, 2009; Rahmandad & Sterman, 2008; Toubia, Goldenberg, & Garcia, 2014) or dual markets (Goldenberg et al., 2006; Vakratsas & Kolsarici, 2008; Van den Bulte & Joshi, 2007). The third type includes the estimation methods (Boswijk & Franses, 2005; Satoh, 2001; Schmittlein & Mahajan, 1982; Srinivasan & Mason, 1986; Venkatesan, Krishnan, & Kumar, 2004). The last type involves empirical research with several diffusion cases (Bayus, 1987; Dellarocas, Zhang, & Awad, 2007; Hong et al., 2008; Jun & Park, 1999; Mahajan, Muller, & Bass, 1995; Marshall, Dockendorff, & Ibáñez, 2013). Researchers have tried to improve the estimation methods in all types of research since the early 1990s. Typical estimation methods are ordinary least squares (OLS), maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), and nonlinear least squares (NLS) methods. The OLS method may be the simplest (Bass, 1969). However, if a diffusion model cannot be transformed into a linear regression model, this method is not applicable. The conventional OLS utilizes the following equation (Srinivasan and Mason (1986):(2)X(i)=pm+(q−p)N(ti−1)−qmN2(ti−1)+ɛ(i),=α1+α2N(ti−1)+α3N2(ti−1)+ɛ(i)In Eq. (2), X(i) is the net adopters at time period i, N(ti) is the cumulative adopters up to and time period i, and ɛ(i) is the random variation at time period i.Mahajan and Sharma (1986, pp. 332–333) point out that the conventional OLS has several shortcomings: (i) in the presence of few time-series data points and multi-collinearity between variablesN(ti−1)andN2(ti−1), one may obtain parameter estimates that are unstable or possess wrong signs (negative values); (ii) this OLS procedure does not directly provide standard errors for the parameter estimates since p, q, and m are nonlinear functions of α1, α2 and α3; (iii) as discussed by Schmittlein and Mahajan (1982), since the left-hand side of Eq. (2) should theoretically be the derivative of N(t) and not the difference represented by X(i), X(i) will underestimate dN(t)/dt for time intervals before the takeoff point and overestimate after that. That is, this OLS procedure contains a time interval bias since discrete time series data are used to estimate a continuous model.The MLE method allows the computation of approximate standard errors for the diffusion model parameters (Schmittlein & Mahajan, 1982). However, it is occasionally difficult to construct a likelihood function and find parameter estimates to maximize the likelihood function owing to the nonlinearity involved.The NLS is a straightforward method because growth curves are nonlinear functions (Srinivasan & Mason, 1986). Moreover, computer packages are more readily available for NLS than for MLE. The NLS approaches are applicable to diverse diffusion models for which cumulative adoption can be expressed as a closed-form solution, although there are still some problems when attempting to optimize the nonlinear function.Among the three methods, the NLS is the best performing method and the OLS is the simplest method (Srinivasan & Mason, 1986). The most popular method has been the NLS estimation proposed by Srinivasan and Mason (1986). Despite its popularity, the NLS has several limitations such as starting point dependency, three-dimensional search, and bias in the case of insufficient data. Starting point dependency means that the NLS may produce different answers, or even exhibit a failure to converge, depending on the starting point (initial parameter values) of the optimization routine. Among the three limitations, starting point dependency confuses users or leads to unreliable results. For the OLS, although an improved method was proposed (Satoh, 2001), it has not attracted much attention from researchers as a consequence of its insufficient validation by simulation analysis. Recently, a few published papers have insisted on the need to improve the optimum search performance (Hong & Uhm, 2009; Venkatesan et al., 2004). Venkatesan et al. (2004) applied GA to the NLS in an effort to resolve the starting point dependency of the NLS. Venkatesan et al. (2004) insisted on using GA as a means of performance improvement. Demand planners may find the GA as applied to NLS (GA–NLS) difficult to use because they need to use GA software and must understand this complex method. In addition, the GA–NLS is a heuristic method, which means that its efficiency varies across cases.The HON method is developed to take advantage of the easiness of the OLS method and the accuracy of the NLS method simultaneously. The fact that the hazard rate of the Bass model has a linear formula was important here. The hazard rate is defined as the instantaneous rate of failure for the survivors to time t during the next instant of time, i.e.dN(t)/dtm−N(t)(Evans et al., 1993; Bass, 2004; Van den Bulte & Joshi, 2007). In our case, ‘survivors’ are remaining non-adopters (or ‘holdouts’), and ‘failure’ is adoption; thus, the hazard rate is the instantaneous rate at which holdouts adopt the product. The hazard rate equation can be obtained from Eq. (1). Dividing Eq. (1) bym−N(t)yields(3)dN(t)/dtm−N(t)=p+qN(t)m.(4)dN(t)m/dt1−N(t)m=p+qN(t)m.IfN(t)m=F(t)anddN(t)m/dt=dF(t)dt=f(t), then(5)f(t)1−F(t)=p+qF(t).Here,f(t)1−F(t)and F(t) are termed the hazard rate and the penetration rate, respectively. With the penetration rate Xtand the hazard rate Yt, the linear equation below is formulated:(6)Yt=p+qXt.Thus, if the values of (Xt, Yt) are obtained, the coefficients of the linear equation (p, q) can then be estimated by the OLS method. Xtand Ytcan be generated by this definition as follows:(7)Xt=N(t)m,Yt=dN(t)/dtm−N(t)=N(t)−N(t−1)m−N(t).dN(t)/dt in Eq. (7) can be approximated with net adopters in period t, as it is the rate of change of the cumulative adopters at time t.Thus, given m, the hazard rate and penetration rate can be obtained by the cumulative adopters, N(t) assuming that p and q can be easily obtained using the OLS method. Although Phillips (2007) also mentioned the linearity of the hazard rate and the penetration rate, no explicit application of the linearity feature has been found yet in the literature.Compared to the conventional OLS, the HON is free from multi-collinearity between independent variables and requires no transformation of parameters. Thus, the HON has more chances to provide adequate estimates to be used as a seed for NLS. In order to validate the superiority of the HON, the two methods are added to the performance comparison, which are the conventional OLS and the NLS using OLS for seed generator.If the value of m is specified, p and q can be easily obtained by the OLS so that a specific s-curve function is determined by the Bass model. The objective function for the overall parameter estimation process is as follows:(8)minm∑t=1T[N(t)−N^(t;m)]2orminm∑t=1T[N(t)−N^(t;m,p(m),q(m))]2.For Eq. (8), a one-dimensional search is deployed for m in order to determine the value of m. The one-dimensional search in this case is a simple local search from the lower bound to the upper bound value. The lower bound of the value of m can be determined as the maximum number of cumulative adopters. The upper bound can be the total population of the product market. The detailed procedure of the HON method is depicted in Fig. 2.The estimation procedure of the HON method consists of four steps. Step 1 determines the lower and upper bound values of the market potential m and divides the interval with certain increments, which will give one value of the market potential, mk, at the end of Step 1. Step 2 is done to prepare the data set for the linear function in Eq. (6), given mk. The data set is generated from(N(t)mk,N(t)−N(t−1)mk−N(t)).Step 3 estimates the parameters pkand qkby the OLS in Eq. (6). In this case,Xt=N(t)mandYt=N(t)−N(t−1)m−N(t). In Step 4, the estimation procedure increments k by 1, increments m by Δm, and repeats Steps 1–3, iterating m from mLto mU. Then, the estimates m*, p*, and q* corresponding tomkare chosen so that they can minimize the sum of squared errors in Eq. (8).The entire procedure can be expressed by a pseudo-code, as follows:Let Nt = vector of cumulative adoptersLet Xt = vector of net adopters (or difference in Nt elements)Let m = mL (lower bound of m)Do while m ≥ mL and m ≤ mU (upper bound of m)X = Nt/m, Y = Xt/(m − Nt)Linear regression for Y = p + qXLet error = SSE based on NtLet m = m + ΔmLoopFind minimum error and corresponding m, p, and qAs shown in the pseudo-code, the HON does not require a complex improvement algorithm, unlike the NLS or the MLE. Because the HON method mainly uses the simple OLS, a method that is manually calculable, demand planners may feel comfortable with it, easily understand it, and thus apply the HON estimation method. The HON is simple and easy enough to be implemented with Excel VBA or Visual Basic, which is familiar to many practitioners. In the case of Excel, the entire procedure of the HON method can be implemented with the help of regression tools and functions. If Matlab is used, a dozen code lines are sufficient for the HON method. This simple characteristic is far different from those used with the NLS or with a GA, which requires some understanding of the methods when applying the solution-improvement algorithms provided in the related statistical packages or program libraries. As shown in the pseudo-code, the structural simplicity implies that the HON may not require much computing power. Compared to the NLS, MLE, or GA methods, the HON—composed of repetitive simple deterministic calculations—needs less computing resources in general.In order to validate the performance of the HON, the next section is organized to correspond with two major user requirements of the desired forecasting model—accuracy and stability.Accurate and reliable demand forecasting is essential for mid-term decision making as regards a new product or service. Given demand information, demand planners estimate the forecasting model parameters, interpret the forecasting result, and make decision alternatives about supply and demand management for a mid-term period, for example, several months or years. In the end, decision makers finalize their managerial decisions for areas that include marketing, production, logistics, and inventory.The basic needs and requirements for the forecasting model are accuracy, stability, and ease of use. Demand planners expect the forecasting model to estimate the demand pattern precisely and reliably. In reality, it is difficult to determine the reliability of the forecasting results, as the data series is related to only one new product and the estimation result is reflective of one forecasting analysis. Therefore, the forecasting model should be reliable and stable. Hence, the stability may be more important than the accuracy of the forecasting model in some situations.In this section, validation assessments with actual demand data and simulation data are run to measure the levels of accuracy and stability. The OLS, OLS–NLS, NLS, GA, and GA–NLS methods are used to compare the proposed methods (HON and HON–NLS).Actual demand data is used here as much as possible to validate the performance of the proposed methods. For more variation of the demand patterns, diverse simulation data are generated and utilized. HON is compared with OLS, OLS–NLS, NLS, GA, and GA–NLS. A new NLS with a starting point generated by HON (HON–NLS) was also compared. HON–NLS is added to correspond to OLS–NLS and GA–NLS.The 29 actual demand data sets, summarized in Table 1, consist of 14 data sets from the US market and 15 from the Korean market. The products are mostly consumer electronics but also include some machinery. In order to make a reasonable comparison among the data sets, the takeoff point and the peak point are used as the time criteria for estimation or forecasting (see Figs. 1 and 3). The entire data series for each data set is used only for the purpose of calculating the takeoff point and the peak point by estimating the Bass model parameters. Two combinations of estimation and forecasting are designed for validation (see Fig. 3): (i) estimation by the data until the takeoff point and forecasting to peak point, and (ii) estimation by the data until the peak point and forecasting to saturation point in Fig. 3. The forecasting time window could extend until the end, but in this case, we set the forecasting time to be the peak point because demand planners of several leading global companies based in Korea (Samsung Electronics, Hyundai Motors, and LG Electronics, NHN Corp., etc.) insisted that the main concern at takeoff point is the demand pattern till peak point.A statistical analysis of performance validation requires a large number of data sets as well as various demand patterns. However, it is difficult to obtain sufficient data sets from the real world. In order to overcome this limitation, a simulation analysis is designed here. The simulation data are generated based on the Bass model. Errors are introduced to incorporate the randomness of demand in the real world. The simulation data are generated according to the following formula:N^(t)=N(t;p,q,m)(1+z),where N(t; p, q, m) denotes the cumulative adopter function and z ∼ N(0, σ2) represents the white errors.The market potential, m, is fixed to 10 for all simulation analyses without any loss of diversity. In the diffusion theory, the Bass model parameters are known to have values of certain levels. The coefficient of innovation, p, has an average value of 0.03, though it can have a value less than 0.01. The coefficient of imitation, q, tends to have a value ranging from 0.3 to 0.5 and the average value is known to be 0.38 (Mahajan et al., 1995). Thus, p was set to 0.01, 0.02, and 0.03, and q was set to 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. Further, the variance of white error is assumed to be 3%, 5%, or 10%. The combinations of estimation and forecasting are determined to be the identical to the cases with actual data (see Fig. 3). Consequently, there can be 54 simulation data sets. However, there are 36 final simulation data sets as those with a takeoff point of less than 5 periods have inappropriate results for any method. Thus, for a more accurate comparison, 36 data sets with run lengths of 100 are used.Seven methods are considered, OLS, OLS–NLS, NLS, GA, GA–NLS, HON, and HON–NLS, in this validation process. NLS tries to improve the sum of squared errors with a starting point. GA tries to keep the superior gene as crossbreeding different solutions. As a result of the mutation mechanism, GA may lead to evacuation from a local optimum to another better local optimum. GA–NLS is an NLS method with a starting point determined by a GA. Because the NLS performance is sensitive to the starting point, GA–NLS could be an appropriate method for resolving the NLS problem. Similar to the GA–NLS, the HON can generate a good starting point for the NLS method. Thus, the HON–NLS is added to the compared methods group. For the starting points of the original NLS, random numbers are generated from normal distributions of m, p, and q. The mean of m is set to be the maximum number of adopters, mean of p is set to 0.03, and the mean of q is set to 0.38, which are average values in general (Mahajan et al., 1995).When a forecasting model is said to be accurate, this can refer to two types of accuracy: estimation accuracy and forecasting accuracy. Estimation accuracy refers to how well the model fits the given demand data. Thus, estimation accuracy is generally measured by the mean squared error (MSE). Forecasting accuracy is usually concerned with the proportional error of the actual versus forecast demand; hence, the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) is the most popular measure to assess the accuracy of forecasts.Decisionmaking in the context of demand forecasting aims to plan an appropriate supply and demand management system. The demand in this case can be either period-by-period demands or a whole future demand (for all periods to be forecast). We analyze the models' performances for both ways of measuring demand. Period-by-period demand information is essential for managing production, logistics, inventory, marketing, and other related factors. The whole future demand is necessary for strategic decision making regarding long-term capacity planning and final orders, representing the last production or purchasing order for a specific product.Considering the two types of demand information, two decision points were set: the takeoff point and the peak point. It was assumed that the whole future demand should be determined at the takeoff point or peak point. In the former case, the whole future demand is assumed to be generated from the takeoff point to the peak point, while in the latter case, the whole future demand is assumed to be the demand after the peak point. Thus, in the first case the model parameters are estimated using data up to the takeoff point and the whole future demand is forecast from the takeoff point to the peak point. In the second case, the model parameters are estimated using data up to the peak point and the whole future demand is forecast from the peak point to the last time period, which is the end point in real data cases and the saturation point in simulation data cases (see Fig. 3).MAPE is used to measure the accuracy of the forecast. The overall result shows that the HON is the preferred method based on both actual data and simulation data. HON–NLS and GA–NLS constitute the second best group. The HON shows relatively weak performance in cases where the simulation data sets have insufficient data (i.e., with data only up to the takeoff point). In those cases, HON–NLS and GA–NLS show better accuracy. MAPE for the period-by-period demand is calculated by,100T−Te∑t=Te+1T|Nt−N^(m^,p^,q^;t)|/Nt,where T(Te) is the last period for forecasting (estimation) and them^,p^,q^are the estimates ofm, p, q.Similarly, MAPE for the whole future demand is calculated by,100×|NT−N^(m^,p^,q^;T)|/NT.For period-by-period forecasting, HON, HON–NLS, and GA–NLS methods constitute the best performing group (see Tables 2 and 3). The ‘Mean’ and ‘Std. dev.’ in Table 2 correspond to the mean and standard deviation of MAPE of the models' forecasting results. In Tables 2–8, ‘overall’ in the bottom panel deals with all the values of the performance measures of the Case 1 and the Case 2 in Fig. 3. Thus, the mean of the ‘overall’ panel in Table 2 is calculated by averaging 58 MAPE's (29 MAPE's from Case 1 and also 29 MAPE's from Case 2). The accuracy comparison is determined by a paired t-test, which is a two-tailed test with a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10% (Lombardi & Hurlbert, 2009). In Tables 2–8, asterisks indicate the significance levels of the two-tailed paired t-test: * indicates 10%, ** indicates 5% and *** indicates 1%. Regarding the real data, HON–NLS is the best method, which has no better accuracy than HON in the t-test. However, HON–NLS is better than GA–NLS significantly in the t-test. For the case of simulation data, the GA–NLS and HON methods make up the best group and HON–NLS has slightly lower accuracy than the best group. NLS shows not the best but remarkable levels of accuracy only when using the takeoff point as a decision point with the simulation data. GA has far lower accuracy in all cases.For the whole future demand forecasting, the HON method shows the best performance (see Tables 4 and 5), except in cases where the takeoff point is used as a decision point with the simulation data. The HON–NLS and GA–NLS methods show the next best results.As a result of its forecasting accuracy, the HON method is recommended for the whole future demand forecasting and any of the three method—HON, HON–NLS, and GA–NLS—can be used for period-by-period forecasting.The mostaccurate method among the seven methods is HON–NLS in terms of estimation accuracy, which refers to how well the estimated model fits the demand data. A total of 29 actual data sets and 36 simulation data sets are used. The simulation run length is 100 observations. For both actual data and simulation data, HON is better than OLS, NLS and GA.Table 6 shows the estimation results of the seven methods with the real data sets. In order to avoid the effect of different scales with respect to the products, the value of the maximum cumulative adopters is set to one for each product. The mean in Table 6 is the average MSE of the 29 data sets.Table 7 shows the estimation results with simulation data sets. The overall results show that the HON–NLS is the most accurate method for minimizing the estimation error for the 36 simulation data sets. Paired t-tests were carried out with the average value of the MSEs for each simulation data set. Based on the statistical validation assessments, the OLS, OLS–NLS, NLS, GA, and HON are less accurate than the GA–NLS and HON–NLS methods. However, the HON is much closer in accuracy to GA–NLS than it is to others.For the simulation data, HON–NLS shows the best overall accuracy while OLS–NLS shows the lowest level. For the case with a small amount of data (estimation using data from the product launch to takeoff point), NLS is slightly more accurate than the HON. When using a large amount of data (estimation using data from the product launch to the peak point), HON is slightly better than NLS. In total, the HON and NLS methods show no differences in terms of estimation accuracy for the simulation data sets.When demand planners use the diffusion models, the fact that they cannot trust the estimation result is a critical issue. The ‘coefficient of variation’ (CV) is used here as a measurement means in the reliability levels of the estimation results.In this case, 36 combinations of simulation data generate 100 runs for each combination. For each run of a specific combination, seven models in Table 8are used to estimate the model parameters. The stability measure, CV, is calculated as follows:Coefficientofvariation=max(σmμm,σpμp,σqμq),Here μ denotes the mean and σ is the variance of the estimates for each combination with 100 runs.The smaller the CV is, the more similar the estimates are. Thus, a smaller CV implies better stability. A small CV will likely generate stable estimation results with new information. This stability measure is not always a good indicator. If a method has an extremely small CV and poor forecasting accuracy, this may mean that the method is too stationary to reflect new critical changes in demand patterns. On the other hand, if a method has a high CV and good accuracy, the method may be overfitting and too swift to reflect new information, causing the estimation results to vary drastically with respect to the demand data. This will lead demand planners to doubt the reliability of the forecasting result.Table 8 shows the means and standard deviations of CVs for 36 combinations. According to the results, the HON is the best method in total. HON–NLS displays the best performance for small data cases. OLS, OLS–NLS, NLS, GA, and GA–NLS have quite high CVs. GA–NLS is the most interesting method, because it has high accuracy and the stability result is relatively poor.The validation results are summarized in Figs. 4 and 5. In Fig. 4, the rank scores are given by the descending orders of the average performance values in Tables 2–8. If the average value is the worst, then the rank value is 1. If the average value is the best, then the rank value is 7. In Fig. 5, the rank scores are given by the number of the compared methods that are significantly worse than the corresponding method in the t-test.In Fig. 4, HON is the best in stability and ‘in total’ forecasting. HON–NLS is best in all two estimation dimensions and period-by-period forecasting with actual demand data. In case of period-by-period forecasting with simulation data, GA–NLS is the best. In aggregate, HON shows excellent performance in stability and almost all types of forecasting. HON–NLS has excellence in estimation accuracy with great performance in forecasting and stability. GA–NLS has great performance for forecasting and estimation except stability.In Fig. 5, OLS, OLS–NLS, NLS, and GA are shown to be poor methods from all perspectives. GA–NLS appears useful in forecasting the period-by-period demand, whose pattern could be accurately fitted by the Bass model because it is the best method for period-by-period forecasting with the simulation data sets based on the Bass model. HON–NLS provides the best performance when estimating all types of data sets. From the perspective of total forecasting, the HON is overwhelming. Moreover, this method shows great performance in terms of stability and overall forecasting. Fig. 5 shows that if a demand planner hopes for a stable forecast, then the HON method would be the most appropriate choice. For tight estimation with possible stable estimates, HON–NLS is recommended.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
