@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Changes in technical efficiency after quality management certification: A DEA approach using difference-in-difference estimation with genetic matching in the hospital industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze changes in hospital efficiency after quality management certification.The study is based on German acute care hospitals over a 10-year period.We employ a novel approach to control for self-selection bias for certification.The international ISO 9001 certification has a negative impact on efficiency.The hospital-specific KTQ certification has a positive impact on efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Quality management,Data envelopment analysis,Certification,ISO 9001,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hospitals in Germany have been required to have an internal quality management system (QMS) since 2000. Although formal certification of such systems is voluntary, the number of certifications has increased steadily. The most common standards in Germany are ISO 9001, which is also widely used internationally, and KTQ (Kooperation für Transparenz und Qualität im Gesundheitswesen), which was developed specifically for the German health care sector. While a large body of literature has investigated the impact of QMS certification on performance in many industries, there is only scarce evidence on the causal link between QMS certification and technical efficiency. In the present study, we seek to elucidate this relationship using administrative data from all German hospitals from 2000 through 2010 combined with information on certification. Our analysis has three steps: First, we calculated efficiency scores for each hospital using a bootstrapped data envelopment analysis. Second, we used genetic matching to ensure that any differences observed could be attributed to certification and were not due to differences in sample characteristics between the intervention and control groups. Third, we employed a difference-in-difference specification within a truncated regression to examine whether certification had an impact on hospital efficiency. To shed light on a potential time lag between certification and efficiency gains, we used various periods for comparison. Our results indicate that hospital efficiency was negatively related to ISO 9001 certification and positively related to KTQ certification. Moreover, coefficients were always larger in the period between first certification and recertification.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A quality management system (QMS) consists of a set of fixed business procedures and rules, which shall ensure that a product, process or service meets a set of standards (Tzelepis, Tsekouras, Skuras, & Dimara, 2006). Since quality is difficult to measure and to observe, in particular from outside the organization, quality standards ought to be certified. For that purpose, national and international, comprehensive and industry-specific QMS standards have been established. The most prominent QMS certification is the ISO 9000 series, which has been established in 1987. At the end of 2006, over 870,000 certifications had been granted in 140 countries worldwide (Heras-Saizarbitoria, Casadesús, & Marimón, 2011), demonstrating its persistence.While research generally agrees on the reasons for which a firm strives for certification (Prajogo, 2011), understanding the effects of these standards on performance has always been a topic of great controversy (Benner & Veloso, 2008; Dick, Heras, & Casadesús, 2008; Terziovski, Power, & Sohal, 2003; Terziovski, Samson, & Dow, 1997). Several researchers have invested in the consolidation of prior findings (Chatzoglou, Chatzoudes, & Kipraios, 2015; Corbett, Montes-Sancho, & Kirsch, 2005; Dick et al., 2008; Sampaio, Saraiva, & Guimarães Rodrigues, 2009; Sampaio, Saraiva, & Monteiro, 2012), yet without conclusive insights. Several of these reviews categorize prior studies by the nature of its data. Most studies on the certification-performance link are based on cross-sectional data. From a methodological point of view, a longitudinal study design is necessary to draw causal conclusions. Therefore, researchers advocate a before-and-after comparison of intervention and matched control groups (Corbett et al., 2005; Levine & Toffel, 2010; Lo, Pagell, Fan, Wiengarten, & Yeung, 2014; Sharma, 2005; Yeung, Lo, & Cheng, 2011). This methodological approach helps to disentangle the changes in performance as a result of certification from changes in performance over time, but has been scarcely applied to analyze the effects of certification.The inconsistency of prior findings might also be partially explained by the quite distant relationship between certification and financial performance, the latter being most frequently used as dependent variable. Providing empirical evidence that the choice of performance measure significantly affects the results, Naveh and Marcus (2005) showed that implementing the ISO 9000 standard led to improved operating performance, but did not directly lead to improved business performance. Lima, Resende, and Hasenclever (2000) questioned the use of accounting indicators and called for studies analyzing the productive efficiency of certified and non-certified firms. Levine and Toffel (2010) pointed out that they found no prior research that examined how the ISO 9001 quality standard affects product or process quality or employees. Hence, analyzing the link between QMS certification and efficiency remains a research gap.Additionally, in comparison to manufacturing industries, research is scarce in the service industry, and very few studies have been undertaken in the hospital industry. The paucity of studies in the hospital industry stands in contrast to its high relevance for a nation's economy, and the increasing number of certifications issued within this sector. In particular, hospitals account for the greatest share of health expenditure in most EU Member States (European Commission eurostat, 2015), and strategies to increase efficiency and reduce costs in the hospital sector have become central to efforts at health system reform in many countries. At the same time, stakeholders continue to expect high-quality treatment and increased transparency. To this end, policymakers in a number of European countries have encouraged or even required the use of QMS in hospitals, leading to the adaptation of standards from other industries, such as the ISO 9000 series, or to the development of national QMS systems specifically for the health care sector (Shaw, Bruneau, Kutryba, Jongh, & Sunol, 2010). Hospitals in Germany have been required to have an internal QMS since 2000, but are free to choose which internal system they wish to implement. Formal certification of the QMS through costly third-party audits is not legally required. Although the certification of such systems is voluntary, the number of certifications has increased each year. The most common types of certification in the German hospital sector are ISO 9001 and KTQ (Kooperation für Transparenz und Qualität im Gesundheitswesen; “Cooperation for Transparency and Quality in the Health System”), which was developed for the German health care sector.The purpose of the present study is to examine the relationship between QMS certification and technical efficiency, estimated via data envelopment analysis (DEA). It thereby differentiates between an international, comprehensive QMS standard (ISO 9001:2000) and a national, industry-specific standard (KTQ). It uses the hospital industry as a research setting and draws on panel data from the years 2000 through 2010, allowing certified organizations to be contrasted with non-certified organizations using a difference-in-difference approach. Data analysis comprises a sample of 374 certified and 374 matched non-certified hospitals in Germany applying the genetic matching method. The results are subsequently discussed alongside implications for practice and research.Section 2 of this study provides an overview on ISO 9001 and KTQ certification and reviews the relevant literature on the impact of certification on performance. Section 3 presents the data and the estimation strategy we used to explore this relationship. Section 4 presents and discusses the results of our analysis, and Section 5 gives a summary and suggests topics for future research.As a process-oriented, international standard originally developed for the manufacturing industry, ISO 9001 belongs to the ISO 9000 series of standards and is used to assess QMS in whole hospitals or, more frequently, in parts of them, such as hospital departments (Shaw, Kutryba, Braithwaite, Bedlicki, & Warunek, 2010). In Germany, the number of whole hospitals certified according to ISO 9001 increased from 26 in 2000 to 211 in 2010. ISO 9001 provides QMS standards based on eight principles: customer focus, leadership, involvement of people, process approach, system approach to management, continual improvement, factual approach to decision making, and mutually beneficial supplier relationships. To obtain ISO 9001 certification, a QMS must not only be established, implemented, maintained, and continually improved. It must also be documented, including documented statements of a quality policy and quality objectives; a quality manual; documented procedures required by the ISO 9001 standard; documents needed by the hospital to ensure the effective planning, operation, and control of its processes; and records required by the ISO 9001 standard (International Organization for Standardization, 2008). Internal audits are also required at regular intervals to check for evidence of conformity and the effectiveness of the QMS. Implementation of the standard is reviewed by official external auditors, and a certificate can be awarded if there is no major nonconformity. The certification is valid for a maximum of three years, after which time recertification is necessary. As the standard is continually being revised by standing technical committees and advisory groups, there exist several versions: ISO 9000:1987, ISO 9000:1994, ISO 9001:2000, ISO 9001:2008, and ISO 9001:2015 forthcoming. Between the ISO 9000:1994 version and the ISO 9001:2000, significant changes with respect to its focus on process optimization have occurred. Additionally, the 2000 version required a higher involvement of upper executives, the measurement of the effectiveness of tasks and activities, expectations of continual process improvement and a tracking of customer satisfaction (Tamayo-Torres, Gutierrez-Gutierrez, & Ruiz-Moreno, 2014; Tzelepis et al., 2006). Finally, it also aims at better meeting service sector organizations' needs (Terziovski et al., 2003).Available only at the whole hospital level, KTQ certification is based on a range of standards and assessment procedures that are carried out by franchised organizations (Shaw et al., 2010). The number of KTQ-certified hospitals has increased from nine in 2002, when it was introduced, to 462 in 2010, making this the most common form of standards-based assessment in Germany. KTQ certification is based on a catalogue containing the categories patient-centeredness, employee-centeredness, safety in the organization, information and communication, leadership, and quality management (Kooperation für Transparenz und Qualität im Gesundheitswesen, 2015). To obtain KTQ certification, a hospital must produce a comprehensive report assessing the quality of its patient-care processes according to the criteria in the catalogue. Although required, a QMS is therefore only part of the KTQ standard. Subsequently, a team of external auditors evaluates this self-assessment and can award certification if at least 55 percent of the points in each category are achieved (Kooperation für Transparenz und Qualität im Gesundheitswesen, 2015). The auditors evaluate the QMS, as well, but by spot checks. Like ISO 9001 certification, KTQ certification is valid for three years, after which time recertification is necessary.Both ISO 9001 and KTQ aim at implementing QMS standards and comprise several dimensions. They differ with respect to the emphasis, which is predominantly targeted at process standardization for ISO 9001, while KTQ has a somewhat broader approach and also includes structure- und outcome-related aspects. Furthermore, ISO 9001's requirements must be met without exception, are partially difficult to be translated to the hospital context, and a high documentary workload is associated with certification. KTQ seems a little bit more lean, directly adapted to the hospital context, and leaves some discretionary space by not demanding to fulfill all points.While the majority of certification research has relied on cross-sectional data, calls for a longitudinal study design have been increasing (Dick et al., 2008; Sampaio et al., 2012). Among the studies with a longitudinal design, most studies analyze the impact of QMS certification on financial performance, based on indicators such as return on assets (ROA), return on sales (ROS), sales growth, earnings per share, and stock prices. Some of the most rigorous studies are present below.Using an event study method with 27 certified Spanish stock firms and the complete market as control group for the 1993–1999 period, Nicolau and Sellers (2002) only find a positive stock price effect on the day of certification itself. Applying an event study method as well, Corbett et al. (2005) compare changes in ROA, ROS, and the cost of goods sold between 554 certified and 554 matched non-certified manufacturing firms for the 1987–1997 period. They find that ISO adoption is followed by significant modest abnormal improvements in financial performance, though the effect depends on the specification of the control group. Benner and Veloso (2008) use a sample of 75 automotive supplier companies in the U.S. with data for the years 1988 to 1997 and apply a longitudinal panel data design with firm fixed effects and year controls. They observe that performance benefits of ISO adoption are moderated by timing and firm-specific technological coherence. Dick et al. (2008) compare sales revenues and ROA of 400 ISO 9001 certified companies and 400 non-certified companies matched by industrial sector in the 1994–1998 period applying an attribution testing method. They detect that there is some evidence to indicate that QMS certification has some causal influence on business performance, while there is also evidence for the existence of reverse causality, i.e., a self-selection of better performing firms to certification. Yeung et al. (2011) use a sample of 185 certified and 185 matched non-certified U.S. manufacturing firms within the 1994–2006 period and analyze differences in the changes in CEO compensation and ROA with the event study method approach. They found a significantly positive net effect of certification on CEO compensation, and a significantly negative net effect of certification on ROA.The longitudinal studies which have analyzed productivity changes after certification are heterogeneous with regard to the productivity measures used, the data analysis methods, and the findings. Naveh and Marcus (2005) analyzed, among others, the impact if certification on perceived operating performance improvement (incl. defect rates, cost of quality, productivity, on-time delivery, and customer satisfaction) using a sample of 313 US firms and 309 matched control firms between 1990 and 2000. Using hierarchical linear models (HLM) and validating results via the event study method, they partially observe significantly positive effects of certification on operating performance. Martínez-Costa, Martínez-Lorente, and Choi (2008) measured productivity as income per employee and conducted t-tests for differences of ISO 9000 and non-ISO 9000 companies in a new variable created as the difference between the 2-year average productivity after and before ISO 9000 implementation. They found that certification had no significant impact on productivity. Levine and Toffel (2010) analyzed the effect of ISO 9000 certification on inputs (i.e., employment) and outputs (i.e., sales) separately. In the sales model, they estimated regressions with and without employment as an independent variable. For data analysis, they used a difference-in-difference approach in which they compared changes in the dependent variables for certified hospitals in comparison to changes in the dependent variables for a matched group of non-certified hospitals. Matching was performed based on propensity scores, which allows taking into account a variety of observable factors. They found that the significantly positive effect of certification on sales became insignificant when employment was introduced as explanatory variable, indicating that certification is not related to an increase in labor productivity. Lo et al. (2014) analyzed the effect of OHSAS 18000 certification, which is an international occupational health and safety management system specification, on the ratio of operating income to number of employees as indicator of labor productivity. Following the event study method, they applied paired-sample t-tests (Wilcoxon sign-rank and significance tests). They found a positive effect of OHSAS 18000 certification on labor productivity. Using a more holistic productivity measurement, Tzelepis et al. (2006) analyzed the relationship between technical efficiency and ISO 9000 certification using stochastic frontier analysis (SFA) and found that adopting ISO 9001 reduced managerial inefficiency. However, they collapsed the panel structure of their data set to a cross-sectional structure, limiting possible causal conclusions about the relationship. Hence, results on the impact of certification on productivity are inconclusive, and research analyzing the causal link between certification and efficiency with a longitudinal design is scarce.Further, to our knowledge, there exists only one quantitative study that tackles the research gap related to the hospital industry. Makai, Klazinga, Wagner, Boncz, and Gulacsi (2009) assess the impact of QMS certification (ISO 9000 and Hungarian Hospital Care Standards, HHCS, certification) on patient safety with data collected from 102 Hungarian hospitals in 2005. In a cross-sectional analysis using linear regressions, they find no significant relationship between ISO or HHCS certification and the number of patient safety activities.Although these studies have generated valuable initial insights into the effects of certification, the generalizability of their findings remains limited. The majority of studies relies on data of the 90s and assesses the benefits of ISO 9000:1994 certification. Empirical evidence suggests that the ISO 9000:1994 and the ISO 9001:2000 version differ in their impact on internal processes (e.g., Total quality management (TQM) implementation, Martínez-Costa, Choi, Martínez, & Martínez-Lorente, 2009) and on external reactions (e.g., stock prices, McGuire & Dilts, 2008). While some studies compared changes in performance of certified firms to changes of performance of none-certified firms, only few studies ensured that baseline characteristics were balanced across the corporatized and non-corporatized firms. Those studies which applied matching strategies only matched on individual characteristics, such as industry, firm size, and pre-certification ROA. The only exception to that is Levine and Toffel (2010), who used propensity score matching. Only one study (Tzelepis et al., 2006) estimated efficiency as a combination of multiple inputs and outputs using SFA, and there is no longitudinal study using DEA for efficiency estimation. In general, DEA is the most frequently used approach to measuring efficiency in health care (Hollingsworth, 2008). Within the hospital industry, there is no study assessing the impact of ISO certification on performance with a longitudinal study design and quantitative data. Further research in this field is therefore needed to confirm these preliminary findings.Our study has a number of strengths compared to previous investigations of certification. First, it is, to our knowledge, the only study so far to examine the effects of certification on hospitals' technical efficiency, and to assess the impact of two different types of QMS certification (ISO and KTQ) with a longitudinal study design. Second, we used the novel genetic matching method, which is superior to existing methods, to generate a control group for the certified hospitals. Third, we apply the difference-in-difference method, which allows estimating the net effect of certification while controlling for a variety of time-variant and time-invariant factors. This method has only been applied by Levine and Toffel (2010) yet, but not in combination with genetic matching. Our sample is extracted of all German hospitals, comprising 273 hospitals with KTQ certification, 101 hospitals with ISO certification, and 456 non-certified hospitals for the 2000–2010 period.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
