@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A synergy of multicriteria techniques to assess additive value models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A synergy of MAUT-MACBETH-UTA multicriteria methods is proposed.An original revised MACBETH technique is outlined.A set of original robustness measures and rules is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple criteria,Decision analysis,Additive value model,Robustness,Ordinal regression,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The assessment of additive value functions in Multicriteria Decision Aid (MCDA) has to face issues of legitimacy and technical difficulties when real decision makers are involved. This paper presents a synergy of three complementary techniques to assess additive models on the whole criteria space. The synergy includes a revised MACBETH technique, the standard MAUT trade-off analysis and UTA-based methods for the assessment of both the marginal value functions and the weighting factors. The paper uses a set of original robustness measures and rules associated with revised MACBETH and UTA in order to manage multiple linear programming solutions and to extract robust conclusions from them. Finally, to illustrate the methods’ synergy, an application example is presented, dealing with the planning of metro extension lines.Today, the additive value model is the most popular one for Multicriteria Decision Aid (MCDA) activities, especially when a decision analyst wishes to obtain a complete ranking of a set of actions evaluated on a consistent family of criteria. The assessment of additive value functions has to face issues of legitimacy and technical difficulties when real decision makers are involved.There is a plethora of classical well known techniques to assess additive value functions on the whole criteria space based on Multi-attribute Utility Theory (MAUT). For a detailed presentation of these techniques, see for instance Fishburn (1967), Keeney and Raiffa (1976), Keeney (1980, 1992), and Farquhar (1984). Nevertheless, this kind of technique, which requires explicit trade-offs between economic, political and social criteria, seems to be difficult to implement in real world decision environments, usually because of the amount of cognitive effort needed, or for ethical reasons.A promising technique to overcome some of the above difficulties is the MACBETH method (Measuring Attractiveness by a Categorical Based Evaluation Technique) proposed by Bana e Costa and Vansnick (1994, 1997). Using MACBETH, a single Decision Maker (DM) is aided in an interactive way to obtain a global and additive evaluation of a set of actions A from their evaluations on multiple criteria. Firstly, the method estimates the marginal values of the actions for every separate criterion (on a scale from 0 to 100). These values are interpreted in terms of the actions’ attractiveness. In fact, the DM has to make a pairwise comparison of all the actions, for each criterion separately, on a pure ordinal scale of attractiveness. Secondly, using a similar mode of questioning to compare the criteria, their relative importance (weights) are determined. MACBETH has been extensively applied in different domains of management (see Bana e Costa & Vansnick, 1997). An up-to-date comprehensive overview of the MACBETH approach to MCDA is recently published by Bana e Costa, De Corte, and Vansnick (2012).The MACBETH computational procedure corrects many undesirable difficulties of Saaty’s well-known AHP method thanks to linear programming techniques (cf. Bana e Costa & Vansnick, 2008). However, because the method requires pairwise comparisons between actions, it is unable to handle large sets of actions such as when assessing stocks or combinations of stocks in a stock market. Another difficulty is that it is not possible to assess the decision model on the whole criteria space. In order to overcome these difficulties a new version of MACBETH is proposed in this paper.Furthermore, since the weights involved in an additive value model are trade-offs between criteria attractiveness that are preference-independent and constant, the determination of the criteria weights faces issues of legitimacy (see Keeney & Raiffa, 1976, for instance). The estimated weights (trade-offs) may not in fact be preference-independent and constant – or indeed the DM may refuse a reasoning based on trade-offs between certain criteria. These difficulties are addressed by the other methods in our synergy.On the other hand, important research efforts have gone into the inference of additive value functions from global preference structures. This paradigm is the disaggregation or ordinal regression approach initiated by the well-known UTA methods of Jacquet-Lagrèze and Siskos (1982, 2001). For an overview of UTA methods, see Siskos, Grigoroudis, and Matsatsinis (2005). The preference disaggregation approach refers to the analysis (disaggregation) of the global preferences (judgment policy) of the DM in order to identify the criteria aggregation model that underlies the preference result. Contrary to the traditional aggregation paradigm, where the criteria aggregation model is known a priori and the global preference is unknown, the philosophy of preference disaggregation aims to infer the preference models from given global preferences. The goal of this approach is to support the DM to improve her(his) knowledge about the decision making problem and her(his) way of preferring in order to allow a consistent decision to be achieved.UTA-based methods include robustness analysis to take account of the gap between the DM’s “true” model and the model resulting from the disaggregation computational mechanism. Roy (2010) considers robustness as an enabling tool for decision analysts to resist the phenomena of approximations and ignorance zones. It should be emphasised that robustness refers mainly to the decision model, in the light of the assertion “robust models produce a fortiori robust results”. However, robustness should also refer to the results and the decision support activities (e.g. conclusions, argumentation). In UTA methods robustness uses LP as the main inference mechanism. In this spirit several UTA-type methods have been developed such as UTAGMS (Greco, Mousseau, & Słowiński, 2008), GRIP (Figueira, Greco, & Słowiński, 2009), and RUTA (Kadzinski, Greco, & Slowiński, 2013) to provide the DM with robust conclusions, Extreme Ranking Analysis (Kadzinski, Greco, & Slowiński, 2012a) to determine the extreme ranking positions taken by the actions, and finally the robustness measurement control based on Monte Carlo sampling techniques (stochastic ordinal regression, see Kadzinski & Tervonen, 2013a, 2013b; entropy measurement control, see Greco, Siskos, & Słowiński, 2012).This paper presents a synergy of three complementary techniques to assess additive models on the whole criteria space which includes a revised MACBETH technique, the standard MAUT trade-off analysis and UTA-based methods for the assessment of both the marginal value functions, which are piecewise linear, and the weighting factors. The paper also uses a set of robustness measures and rules associated with MACBETH and UTA, in order to manage multiple linear programming solutions and extract robust conclusions from them.The rest of the paper is organised as follows: The additive value model and its legitimacy conditions are presented in Section 2 while the MACBETH-MAUT-UTA synergy is outlined in Section 3. Section 4 presents a set of cardinal measures of robustness and visualisation rules associated with MACBETH and UTA. Section 5 illustrates the methodology via a case application dealing with planning of metro extension lines. Section 6 concludes the paper. Finally, a brief presentation of MACBETH technique and a part of numerical results are respectively presented in Appendices A and C, while UTA II method is sketched in Appendix B.A multicriteria value function is supposed to be additive if it has the following form:(1)u(g)=∑i=1npiui(gi)under the following normalisation constraints:(2)∑i=1npi=1(3)ui(gi∗)=0,ui(gi∗)=1∀i=1,2,…,nwhere ui, i=1,2,…,n represent the marginal non decreasing value functions defined on the respective criteria gi;gi∗andgi∗are respectively the worst and the best evaluation level of the criterion gi;g=(g1,g2,…,gn) is the multicriteria evaluation vector; and piis the relative (positive) weight of the function ui. In MACBETH method (presented in Appendix A) the functions uiare normalised between 0 and 100, i.e.uigi∗=100for every i.For every pair of actions a and b from a set of actions A, with respective multicriteria evaluations on the n criteriag(a) andg(b), the value function u must verify the following properties:(4)∀(a,b)∈A:u[g(a)]>u[g(b)]⇔a≻b(preference)u[g(a)]=u[g(b)]⇔a∼b(indifference)The necessary hypothesis to validate an additive value function is the preference independence of the criteria (see for instance Bouyssou & Pirlot, 2005; Keeney & Raiffa, 1976; Keeney, 1980, 1992). Concerning the weighting factors pi, these inter-criteria parameters must be constant substitution rates or trade-offs between uiand they must be assessed accordingly.According to the common definition a substitution rate or trade-offsirgbetween the criterion giand a reference criterion gris the amount of units that must be gained on criterion grto the evaluation vectorgin order to compensate exactly the loss of one unit of the criterion gi. Consequentlysirgis defined in such a way that the following fictitious actions are indifferent:(5)(g1,g2,…,gi,…,gr,…,gn)∼(g1,g2,…gi-1,…,gr+sirg,…,gn)When u(g) is differentiable this definition could be written as follows:(6)sirg=∂u(g)∂gi∂u(g)∂grIn fact the relations (5) and (6) are equivalent. It holds:(7)du(g)=∑i=1n∂u(g)∂gidgifrom which, by applying (5):(8)∂u(g)∂grsirg-∂u(g)∂gi=0which gives the relation (6).The trade-off vector to the multicriteria evaluation vectorgis the following line vector (9) which is collinear of the gradient of u:(9)srg=s1rg,s2rg,…,sirg,…,1,…,snrgOf course the rth component is equal to 1srrg=1.The decision model for a single DM is supposed to be an additive value function if and only if the trade-offssirgbetween giand gr, for every i, are independent of the values taken by the criteria within the vectorg(condition of preference independence). On the other hand, these trade-offs must remain constant if they are considered as trade-offs between the marginal values ui(gi) within the weighted sum model (1).The methodology proposed in this paper is based on a synergy of three complementary approaches: MACBETH, MAUT and UTA, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Several techniques are drawn from these approaches in order to simplify the DM’s own assessment of the preference model, making it both reliable and legitimate.Assessment of marginal value functions can be done in several ways according to the cognitive capabilities of the involved DM. The synergy begins with MAUT methods that necessitate the stronger cognitive capability from the DM and ends with indirect assessment methods like MACBETH or UTA. If the DM refuses or is unable to make the cognitive effort to assess the marginal value functions and the weights separately, the synergy methodology proposes the use of UTA-type disaggregation methods to assess both the marginal value functions and the weights (see Fig. 1).For the assessment of a single marginal value function, the direct assessment method asks the DM her(him) self to determine the value of several points of the criterion scale. For example, the following question could be asked: “What percentage of value would you give to the point gmin relation to the ideal point g∗?”. Then the assessed points can be connected either by linear pieces or using some multi-parametric fitted functions as in MIIDAS software (Siskos, Spiridakos, & Yannacopoulos, 1999).In case of a continuous criterion scale, the Mid-Value-Splitting Technique from the MAUT philosophy consists in asking to the decision maker to fix the “middle value” pointgimbetweengi∗etgi∗, in such a way that the gain ofgim-gi∗orgi∗-gimunits exactly compensates the same loss on a reference criterion. Then we have:(10)ugim-u(gi∗)=ugi∗-ugim⇒ugιm=0.5The same questioning regarding the separated pieces of the scale should find the middle value points of value 0.25 and 0.75.Another simple and pragmatic way to assess a marginal value function is to use the MACBETH technique. Such a function is interpreted as an attractiveness function, normalised between 0 and 100, and is supposed to be piecewise linear. The proposed methodology provides a different version of MACBETH than that provided by its authors (see Appendix A). Through this methodology, each marginal value/attractiveness function ui(gi) is estimated over the entire evaluation scalegi∗,gi∗by comparing in terms of attractiveness αiinterior points of the scale. This supposes that each evaluation scale is already discretised, as follows:(11)gi∗,gi∗=gi∗,gi1,gi2,…,giαi,gi∗The revised MACBETH technique presents four important advantages:(1)The additive value model to be assessed is independent of A, the current set of actions. It could be used to evaluate other sets of actions in the future especially in repetitive MCDA situations, for instance in problems of employee performance evaluation, country creditworthiness evaluation, evaluation of retail outlets, etc.The decision analyst has direct control on the number of questions that will be posed to the DM in terms of pairwise comparisons. In classical MACBETH this number is fixed to nm(m−1)/2, where n is the number of criteria and m is the number of actions that is impracticable in case of large sets of actions A.The revised MACBETH offers the possibility of evaluating very large sets of actions.In MACBETH computational procedure (see Appendix A) the (MC1) linear programming formulation does not in fact provide a single estimation of a marginal value function. However, the revised method uses a special robustness analysis (see Section 4.1) to manage the infinity of such estimation solutions, and to support the DM in choosing her(his) own preference model.On the technical level, the decision analyst has firstly to fix the evaluation scalegi∗,gi∗for each criterion gi. If the scale is quantitative, s(he) has to discretise the scale by choosing the number αiof equidistant interior points on which the value function will be estimated; αicould generally vary from 2 to 5. If the scale is qualitative, αishould be equal to the number of interior levels in the ordinal scale. For instance, regarding the gicriterion, for αi=3, the number of pairwise comparisons to ask the DM will be the number of combinations of the 5 points of the scale, i.e. (αi+2)(αi+1)/2=10 (see the illustrative example in Section 5).Then, three alternative methods are proposed to estimate the weights piof the marginal value functions: MACBETH, MAUT and UTA.The Multi-Attribute Utility Theory (MAUT) provides a very direct estimate of the additive value function, but in such a way that the DM must have sufficient knowledge of the concepts of value function and substitution rates or trade-offs. MACBETH tries to be more pragmatic, asking the DM, first to rank the criteria from the most important to the less important, then to make pairwise comparison of criteria in terms of importance, without explicit reference to the notion of substitution rate. To do so it adds a fictitious criterion g0 of null importance. Before authorising the use of MACBETH it is necessary to verify if the weights obtained by the method are the DM’s substitution rates and that they are constant on the space of value functions. If this condition does not hold, the additive model is considered as an imperfect representation of the DM’s preferences and we should switch to the disaggregation phase.In UTA, the DM’s overall preferences are expressed on a set ARof real or fictitious reference actions, in the form of a ranking or pairwise comparison of these actions. UTA methods (UTA I, UTASTAR, UTA II, UTAMP, UTAGMS, GRIP, RUTA, etc.) infer a set of additive value functions that are compatible with the DM’s preferences. Because there is no unique compatible value function, special techniques of post-optimality analysis in linear programming are employed to define a polyhedron of acceptable functions. This philosophy is currently called “Robust Ordinal Regression” (ROR, see Greco, Słowiński, Figueira, & Mousseau, 2010 for instance); an updated review and unified framework based on ROR for multiple criteria ranking has been recently published by Corrente, Greco, Kadzinski, and Slowiński (2013).The disaggregation phase of the methodological synergy belongs to the general category of UTA-based decision support systems (DSSs) as described in Siskos et al. (2005). Among UTA-based DSSs, MIIDAS (Multicriteria Interactive Intelligence Decision Aiding System see Siskos et al., 1999) is an interactive DSS that implements the extended UTA II method. In the first step of the decision-aiding process, the system constructs the DM’s value functions, while in the next step, the system infers the DM’s preference model from her(his) overall preferences on a reference set of actions. The system uses artificial intelligence and visual techniques in order to improve the user interface and the interactive process with the DM. Another important UTA-based DSS is GRIP (Generalized Regression with Intensities of Preferences) developed by Figueira et al. (2009). Generalising both classical UTA and UTAGMS methods to infer the set of all compatible additive value functions, GRIP adopts all features of UTAGMS and takes additional information into account, in the form of comparisons of intensities of preference between actions. These comparisons may be expressed comprehensively (on all criteria) and/or partially (on each criterion). Of course MACBETH’s interaction schemes utilising the seven attractiveness categories (see Appendix A) could allow decision makers or experts to supply monocriteria or global intensities of preferences easily. The GRIP decision support process is composed of five main levels: (1) input data and multicriteria problem statement; (2) collection of preference information from the DM; (3) LP formulation of ordinal regression analysis; (4) identification of a set of compatible value functions and application on the set of actions; and (5) construction of recommendations in terms of necessary and possible conclusions. In their paper the authors state: “Indeed, in case of using only the information on the intensities of preferences, and checking if there exists at least one compatible additive value function, we obtain similar results to MACBETH. We do not need, however, to determine the weights as MACBETH does”. Very recently, Kadzinski et al. (2013) proposed a new UTA-based DSS, named RUTA, which allows DMs to additionally exteriorize new type of preference information in terms of rank related statements (e.g. action a should be ranked in top 3, action b should be placed in bottom 5, etc.).The proposed methodology uses a wider variety of methodological tools: first to assess the criteria value functions, then to assess the substitution rates or trade-offs. This is made in a structured way as shown in Fig. 1. In practice, assessing the value functions is much easier than assessing trade-offs. Of course in a standard UTA disaggregation procedure (see Siskos et al., 2005) the DM has the possibility to come back by changing some marginal values if s(he) judges that these changes will justify her(his) ranking. Therefore the synergy employs a set of robustness analysis tools (Section 4) as broadly defined by Roy (2010).As already mentioned, robustness uses linear programming, which is the main mechanism to infer decision models. In particular robustness refers to the post/near-optimality analysis.It should be noted that the robustness of one function ui(gi) depends on the post-optimality analysis results of MACBETH’s linear program (MC1), and especially on the form and the extent of the polyhedron of multiple/near optimal value functions, after the identification and removal of inconsistencies between the DM’s preferences and the MACBETH results (see Appendix A). The (MC1) linear program is solved 2αitimes by repeatedly maximising and minimising the unknown variables corresponding touigij,j=1,2,…,αi. The observed variation of these 2αivaluesuigijindicate the degree of instability or robustness of these values. Two representative value functions are suggested as a basis for discussion between the DM and the analyst: (1) the barycentre of the 2αiextreme functions, and (2) the value function obtained by solving the MACBETH (MC2) linear program (see Appendix A). The results of this procedure applied to the numerical example in Section 5 are shown in Fig. 2and Appendix C. Note that other representative solutions in the multicriteria context are proposed by Bous, Fortemps, Glineur, and Pirlot (2010), Greco et al. (2010), and Kadzinski, Greco, and Slowiński (2012b).Siskos and Grigoroudis (2010) suggest the Average Stability Index (ASI) as a cardinal robustness measure which is the mean value of the normalised standard deviation of the estimated valuesui(gij). Alternatively, they recommend visualisation1Not appropriate to say visualisation robustness measures.1of the observed value variations as a basis for choice of the DM’s own model (see next section for illustration).As stated above, the estimation of inter-criteria parameters piis done by either MACBETH or MAUT techniques on the basis of their definition as constant substitution ratessirgbetween criteria giand a reference criterion gr, this independently of criteria vectorg. If the DM is refusing such reasoning then the UTA II method should be applied in order to infer pifrom global preference data. Finally, if the DM cannot (or refuses to) accept the role of model-constructor then a more general UTA model like UTASTAR, UTAGMS or RUTA should be applied to construct bothuigijand pi.The robustness measure ASI for criteria weights assessed by UTA II method (see Appendix B) is computed as follows:(12)ASI=1-1n∑i=1nm∑j=1mpij2-∑j=1mpij2mnm-1where m is the number of weighting instances of the system, n is the number of criteria, and pijis the weight of ith criterion for the jth instance. The weights are considered as robust when the ASI index is closed to 1.An important rule in robustness analysis of aggregation–disaggregation approaches is that preference relations are assessed using the results of linear programming post-optimality analysis. In this context, Siskos (1982) proposes the assessment of fuzzy outranking relations based on the results of the UTA models. In particular, these fuzzy relations analyse the global preference structure and they are based on a system of additive value functions estimated by a UTA model. It should be mentioned that a fuzzy outranking relation is a fuzzy subset of the cartesian product A×A, characterised by a membership function d(A×A) called the degree of credibility of the outranking.As already noted, post-optimality analysis offers different possibilities to infer additive value functions. Thus, Siskos (1982) proposes a heuristic approach, introducing the notion of the additive value system, represented by a set of indexed value functionsU={u1,u2,…,ui,…}and satisfying the following rules:–uimust give a complete or satisfactory degree of consistency between the model and the DM’s global preference structure.The value functions of the system must be as characteristic as possible of the polyhedron of multiple solutions.Using this heuristic approach to explore the multiple/near optimal solutions space, the convex set of value functions defined by a polyhedron becomes a discrete and finite set. The problem is now to obtain results on the set of actions A, taking into account the system of additive value functionsUin order to obtain a general rule of decision. This may be done in a simple way, considering the majority or concordance rule on the value functions of the system.In fact, the degree of credibility, which is actually the membership function of the fuzzy outranking relation in A×A, is defined by the following formula:(13)d(a,b)=|u|ui[g(a)]-ui[g(b)]⩾0||U|where|u|ui[g(a)]-ui[g(b)]⩾0|is the number of value functions for which a is preferred or indifferent to b, and|U|is the number of value functions of the systemU.Obviously 0⩽d(a, b)⩽1. It should be mentioned that the previous fuzzy relation enables measurement of the outranking degree of one action by another, using only the ordinal structure determined over A by the additive value functions of the systemU. This fuzzy relation could become a crisp one, by the definition of a threshold, say 0.7 or 0.8, beyond which an action outranks another. It should be also noted that the same index corresponds to the “pairwise outranking index” based on stochastic analysis, recently proposed by Kadzinski and Tervonen (2013b). Moreover, a more detailed discussion and practical illustration of the interdependencies between the robustness and stochastic analysis is provided by these authors in the context of both the preference relations and ranks that alternatives can attain.The method UTAGMS requires a set of pairwise comparisons on ARas the main input preference information. Using LP techniques, the method extrapolates the inferred value system on A by assessing two relations:–The necessary weak preference relation, which holds for any two alternatives a, b∈A, if and only if all compatible value functions give to a a value greater or equal than the value given to b.The possible weak preference relation, which holds for this pair a, b∈A, if and only if at least one compatible value function gives to a a value greater or equal than the value given to b.These preference relations follow the main principles of the above-mentioned fuzzy outranking relations. In fact, when the system U is the whole set of compatible value functions they may be considered as two special cases of this fuzzy preference relation, with d(a, b)=1 for the necessary relation and 0<d(a, b)⩽1 for the possible relation. As noted by Greco et al. (2008) the necessary ranking can be considered as robust with respect to the preference information: any pair of solutions is compared in the same way whatever the additive value function compatible with the preference information is. The addition of new pairwise comparisons on ARis able to enrich the necessary ranking and impoverish the possible ranking, so that they converge with the incorporation of this preference information. Thus, the method is intended to be used interactively, with an increasing reference set ARand a progressive statement of pairwise comparisons.Fuzzy preference relations, their properties, and the conditions under which they can be applied in decision-making processes, have been extensively studied in the literature. Taking into account the above-mentioned definitions and assumptions, the following fuzzy preference relations may be introduced (Orlovsky, 1978):1.Fuzzy indifference relation(14)μe(a,b)=min{d(a,b),d(b,a)}Fuzzy strict preference relation(15)μs(a,b)=d(a,b)-d(b,a)ifd(a,b)⩾d(b,a)0otherwiseUsing the definition of μs, the fuzzy non domination degree of an action is given by:(16)μND(a)=minb∈A{1-μs(b,a)}=1-maxb∈A{μs(b,a)}=1-maxb∈A{d(b,a)-d(a,b)}The value μND(a) represents the degree to which the action a is dominated by no one of the other actions in A (Orlovsky, 1978). So, under the choice problematic, the best action a∗ may be selected by maximising μND(a) on A. If μND(a∗)=1, then a full robustness is achieved, otherwise the robustness of a∗ is characterised by a value between 0 and 1. Similarly, under the ranking problematic, the ranking of actions can be made via different operational tools, like the barycentral value function (average value function) when the robustness index ASI is high, the μND(a) indicator, or any other ranking algorithm based on a crisp or fuzzy outranking relation on Alike ELECTRE II-III or PROMETHEE I-II (see for instance Figueira, Greco, & Ehrgott, 2005).The study presented in this section is a hypothetical decision support implementation of the above methodology for the prioritisation of six extensions to the Athens metro network. The evaluation criteria are those used in a similar real world study made for Paris metro by Hugonnard and Roy (1983), i.e. two social criteria (g1, g2), two economic criteria (g3, g4), and two organisational criteria (g5, g6), as follows:g1: Number of inhabitants and workers served per kilometer of line (scale: 0–1 million).g2: Number of travellers per kilometer of line per day (scale: 0–75 thousand).g3: Construction cost per kilometer of line (scale: 0–125 million €).g4: Return on investment (scale: 0–20 %).g5: Network organisation index (scale: 0–1).g6: Urban efficiency index (scale: 0–1).The evaluations of the six extensions are presented in Table 1. Suppose the decision analyst chooses MACBETH to assess the marginal value functions on all of the six criteria.In order to apply the revised MACBETH technique to the first criterion g1 the following discretisation of the corresponding evaluation scale is proposed:g1∗,g1∗=[0,0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8,1]Then the DM should judge the difference of attractiveness between every pair of values of the scale, by assigning it to one of the MACBETH categories (see Table 2). A typical dialogue about this kind of judgments could be as follows:Analyst: In which category would you rate the difference of attractiveness between the fictitious extension lines C and H in Table 2?Decision maker: Extreme (code 6).The results obtained by MACBETH’s robustness analysis and (MC2) procedure for criterion g1 are summarised in Fig. 2. From the graphed piecewise linear value function the DM may fix the values s(he) prefers within the authorised ranges or accept the values suggested by one of the procedures MEAN or MC2. Suppose in this example that the DM selects the value function of MEAN procedure for all criteria (Fig. 2 and Appendix C). Then the attractiveness values of the six extension lines are easily obtained using linear interpolation formulae (Table 3).In order to obtain the inter-criteria parameters (weights) of the model (1)–(3), the analyst initially decides to apply MACBETH again. The method requires an importance hierarchy of the criteria as well as the same mode of questioning to compare the criteria. Suppose the DM considers that g1 is more important than g2, g2 is more important than g3, g3 is more important than g4, g4 is more important than g5, and g5 is more important than g6. In this case the inferred values of attractiveness are interpreted as the relative importance weights (see Appendix A). These comparisons are given in Table 4(g0 is a fictitious criterion of null weight).MACBETH procedure provides the following optimal weights of criteria (results without any robustness analysis):(17)p1=0.26,p2=0.25,p3=0.19,p4=0.16,p5=0.08,p6=0.06Then the decision model may be the following additive function:(18)u(g)=0.26u1(g1)+0.25u2(g2)+0.19u3(g3)+0.16u4(g4)+0.08u5(g5)+0.06u6(g6)which is equivalent to the following (all terms divided by 0.26):(19)u(g)=u1(g1)+0.96u2(g2)+0.73u3(g3)+0.62u4(g4)+0.29u5(g5)+0.23u6(g6)Further dialogue between DM and analyst should test if these weighting factors are constant substitution rates between the criteria attractiveness. Taking g1 as a reference criterion, a dialogue to test the legitimacy condition of the additive value model could run as follows:Analyst: Do you agree that 0.96 point of attractiveness of g1 criterion could compensate one point of attractiveness for g2? Please give an answer in terms of {yes, no, I don’t know}.Decision maker: Yes.Analyst: Do you think this trade-off between these two criteria (g1, g2) does not depend on the attractiveness values you already obtained on the rest of criteria?Decision maker: Yes, it seems to me that this trade-off is independent.Analyst: Do you agree that the same trade-off remains unchanged for all attractiveness values taken by the couple of criteria (g1, g2)?Decision maker: I don’t know.The analyst is now seeking an indirect way to infer the substitution rates between the attractiveness values. S(he) proposes a set of reference fictitious extension lines on which the decision maker should express global preferences. The dialogue could be continued in the following way:Analyst: OK. Suppose now you have the fictitious extension lines that appear in Table 5. They differ a little on the criteria. Could you please compare line a3 to line a8, then a1 to a4, a1 to a7 that differs only on two criteria, and also a1 to a3, a5 to a6?Decision maker: OK no problem; I prefer a8 to a3, a4 to a1, a1 to a7 and I am indifferent between a1 and a3, and between a5 and a6.Analyst: OK. So you state the following pre-order:1st:a82nd:a43rd–4th:a1, a35th:a7and you are indifferent between a5 and a6. Could you give now a complete ranking of the eight extension lines?Decision maker: Yes, my order is the following, but I am not sure of it:1st:a82nd:a43rd–4th:a1, a35th:a76th–7th:a5, a68th:a2Now, the UTA II method (see Appendix B) could be applied in order to infer the weights that are compatible with the above ra nking. It solves the linear program (20)–(29):(20)Minimisez=σ1++σ1-+σ2++σ2-+σ3++σ3-+σ4++σ4-+σ5++σ5-+σ6++σ6-+σ7++σ7-+σ8++σ8-(21)Subject to:7p2+11.5p5-19p6-σ8++σ8-+σ4+-σ4-⩾1(22)-9p4-11.5p5+19p6-σ4++σ4-+σ3+-σ3-⩾1(23)9p4-7.5p5-7.5p6-σ3++σ3-+σ1+-σ1-=0(24)-11.67p2+7.2p3-σ1++σ1-+σ7+-σ7-⩾1(25)11.67p2-3.6p3-7.5p5-7.5p6-σ7++σ7-+σ5+-σ5-⩾1(26)-13.5p1+9.33p2-σ5++σ5-+σ6+-σ6-=0(27)2.5p1-16.33p2+3.6p3+7.5p5+7.5p6-σ6++σ6-+σ2+-σ2-⩾1(28)p1+p2+p3+p4+p5+p6=1(29)pj⩾0,j=1,…,6;σi+⩾0,σi-⩾0,i=1,…,8where the preference threshold δ is initially set equal to 1.The optimal solution of this program gives rise to some inconsistency errors, all the other errors being zero:σ1+=0.3947,σ2+=2.1607,σ5+=0.6761,σ8-=0.3013Now the global values inferred with UTA II suggest a slightly different ranking than the DM’s ranking (see Table 5, UTA II 1st ranking). Suppose that the new ranking is accepted by the DM. Then UTA II runs again on the new ranking and suggests a new more rational ranking (see Table 5, UTA II 2nd ranking), which is also accepted as is by the DM. In this case UTA II leads to a zero error which implies that the system of constraints (30)–(38) is free of errors:(30)-7p2-11.5p5+19p6⩾1(31)7p2-7.5p5-7.5p6=0(32)-9p4+7.5p5+7.5p6⩾1(33)3.6p3+9p4-15p5-15p6⩾1(34)-11.67p2+3.6p3+7.5p5+7.5p6=0(35)-11p1+4.67p2⩾1(36)-2.5p1+16.33p2-3.6p3-7.5p5-7.5p6⩾1(37)p1+p2+p3+p4+p5+p6=1(38)pi⩾0,i=1,…,6In order to “technically” reduce the polyhedron (30)–(38) of all feasible weighting vectors the distance between consecutive classes of the ranking may now be maximised, by solving the following LP (39)–(48):(39)Maximiseε(40)Subject to:-7p2-11.5p5+19p6-ε⩾0(41)7p2-7.5p5-7.5p6=0(42)-9p4+7.5p5+7.5p6-ε⩾0(43)3.6p3+9p4-15p5-15p6-ε⩾0(44)-11.67p2+3.6p3+7.5p5+7.5p6=0(45)-11p1+4.67p2-ε⩾0(46)-2.5p1+16.33p2-3.6p3-7.5p5-7.5p6-ε⩾0(47)p1+p2+p3+p4+p5+p6=1(48)pi⩾0,i=1,…,6.Thus the maximal discriminating threshold is found to be ε∗=1.44. From the above multiple solutions of the polyhedron (40)–(48), after substituting the optimal value ε∗, a system of twelve weighting vectors is obtained together with the ranges of variation of each weight pi, i=1,…,6. According to formula (12) above, the average stability index is surprisingly very close to 1 (ASI=0.9979) and the weighting solution is unique:(49)p1=0,p2=0.31,p3=0.40,p4=0.00,p5=0.00,p6=0.29Another surprising result from the point of view of the DM’s preference system is the zero weight assigned to three evaluation criteria. This means that the evaluation of the metro extension policy should be based only on the expected number of travellers per kilometer of line, the construction cost, and the urban efficiency. Nevertheless, based on this robust additive value model a ranking of the six real extension lines may be obtained (Table 6). The analyst should suggest that extension project B is the first priority for the DM to finance.More generally, in UTA-based DSSs like MINORA/MIIDAS system (see Siskos et al., 1999, 2005) the underlying process offers the DM the possibility of inserting lower bounds for some model parameters, e.g. p1⩾0.10, p4⩾0.05, p5⩾0.10, but these corrections lead to other inconsistencies in the DM’s ranking which in turn must be analysed, and so on.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a synergy of three complementary multicriteria techniques, i.e. MACBETH, MAUT and UTA, which allows decision analysts to make an easy and legitimate assessment of a value focused evaluation model. The whole methodology uses a set of robustness measures and rules associated to MACBETH and UTA in order to manage multiple linear programming solutions and to extract robust conclusions from them. Several combinations of techniques are proposed which can facilitate the construction of the additive representation of DM’s preferences. So, according to the properties of the DM’s preferences and to the precise technical aspects of the decision making problem, the analyst can choose the adequate combination of methods. Very recently Roy and Slowiński (2013) presented a general framework to guide analysts and DMs in choosing the «right method».Two main avenues for further research are (1) carry out a series of laboratory experiments and practical studies to test the applicability and user friendliness of the proposed system and (2) develop powerful DSSs to implement the synergy of methods for real world problem solving.In this spirit, the following real world synergy applications have been done:1.Hurson, Mastorakis, and Siskos (2012) presented a case study concerning investor portfolio selection and the evaluation of stocks in the Athens stock exchange and the portfolio selection of an investor. The assessment of the additive value model was done by combining MACBETH on a single criterion level and MAUT for the determination of inter-criteria parameters.Androulaki, Psarras, and Angelopoulos (2013) used a decision support methodology to evaluate long term potential natural gas supply alternatives for Greece, by combining direct assessment techniques for the assessment of marginal value functions, UTA II for the set of admissible weighting factors, and extreme ranking analysis for the determination of extreme ranking positions taken by each alternative. In this study a set of 28 alternatives was produced and evaluated, each representing a potential natural gas supply country together with the corridor to be followed.Siskos, Askounis, and Psarras (2014), Siskos, Malafekas, Askounis, and Psarras (2013) outlined a multicriteria methodology to benchmark e-government in Europe, proposing a system with eight evaluation criteria built on four points of view: (1) infrastructures, (2) investments, (3) e-processes, and (4) user experience. Twenty-one European countries were evaluated in this way, through an additive value model. The whole assessment procedure was supported by the MIIDAS DSS to visually determine the marginal value functions and to elicit the set of admissible weights using UTA II. Finally, a set of complementary robustness analysis techniques were utilised to handle both the robustness of the evaluation model and the extreme ranking positions of the countries.Demesouka, Anagnostopoulos, and Siskos (2013) presented spatial UTASTAR (S-UTASTAR), a robust ordinal regression DSS for land-use suitability analyses. The S-UTASTAR is applied in a raster-based case study to identify appropriate municipal solid waste landfill sites in Northeast Greece. Moreover, the Stochastic Multiobjective Acceptability Analysis (SMAA) is implemented, based on a probability distribution of the additive model parameters, to indicate the frequency that an alternative get the best ranks, aiding this way the decision making process.Mastorakis and Siskos (2013) outlined a multicriteria methodology for the ranking of 192 therapeutic categories for investment purposes in the Hellenic pharmaceutical market. The ranking of these categories is obtained through the utilisation of an additive value model which is assessed by the ordinal regression method UTASTAR, implemented in three phases. In the first phase, the DM is asked to rank a sample of these alternatives, to infer an additive value system which should be as close as possible to the DM’s ranking and as robust as possible. In a second phase, all the alternatives are evaluated and a complete ranking is obtained. Finally, in order to analyse the robustness of the model, given the incomplete determination of inter-criteria model parameters, a random weighting sampling technique (SMAA) is utilised, to obtain the probability that an alternative maintains its initial position in the ranking.Let A={a,b,c,…} be a finite set of actions. The aim of the MACBETH method (Measuring Attractiveness by a Categorical Based Evaluation Technique) proposed by Bana e Costa and Vansnick (1994, 1997) is the construction of a numerical scale of attractiveness:(50)ν:A→R:a→ν(a)with the following two properties:–The value ν(a) represents the attractiveness the DM attaches to the action a in such a way that ∀a, b∈A, ν(a)>ν (b) means that a is more attractive than b, denoted aPb.A positive difference ν(a)−ν(b) represents the difference of attractiveness between the actions a and b in such a way that: ∀a, b, c, d∈A with aPb and cPd, ν(a)−ν (b)>ν(c)−ν(d) means that the difference of attractiveness between a and b is more important than the difference of attractiveness between c and d.The man–machine dialogue required by the method uses the notion of difference of attractiveness between pairs of actions. In fact, ∀a, b∈A with aPb, the DM should assign it to one of the following categories to express her(his) judgement on the difference of attractiveness between a and b, by:•C0→no difference.C1→very weak difference.C2→weak difference.C3→medium difference.C4→strong difference.C5→very strong difference.C6→extreme difference.So for each criterion six thresholds si(i=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) are to be estimated in order to separate the seven categories above. These thresholds are not fixed a priori but must be optimally determined at the same time with the unknown value function v. In fact once DM has assigned one pair of actions (a, b)∈P to one of the categories, the aim of MACBETH is to determine:1.A value or attractiveness function ν: A→R giving a real number ν(a) for every element a of Aν(51)Sixrealnumberss1,s2,s3,s4,s5,s6,suchthat0=s1<s2<s3<s4<s5<s6(52)∀a,b∈A:∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5}:sk<ν(a)-ν(b)<sk+1<=>(a,b)∈Cks6<ν(a)-ν(b)<=>(a,b)∈C6For practical reasons the set of actions A={a1,a2,…,am−1,am} is rearranged by increasing attractiveness. Now the following holds:∀i≠j∈{1,2,…,m},i>j⇔aiPaj,(53)and soamPam-1P…Pa2Pa1The input table data are as follows:(54)∀i>j∈{1,2,…,m}and∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5,6},aij=k⇔((ai,aj)∈CkThen the method solves the linear program (MC1) below involving the unknown variables ν(a), a∈A, s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6 and c, in order to detect the consistency between DM’s answers and the model’s assumptions:(MC1)mincs.t.:r0)allvariables⩾0r1)s1=0r2)ν(a1)=0r3)∀k∈{2,3,4,5,6}:sk-sk-1⩾1r4)∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5,6},∀(a,b)∈Ck:ν(a)-ν(b)⩾sk+1-cr5)∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5},∀(a,b)∈Ck:ν(a)-ν(b)⩽sκ+1-1+cThe authors of the method have shown that a value function ν: A→R satisfying the conditions (51) and (52) exists if the solution of (MC1) gives cmin=0. Two cases can be distinguished.First case: cmin=0; there is at least one compatible value function. Then a new linear program named (MC2) should be solved which comprises a new set of variables: ν(a), a∈A, s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6 and α(a, b), δ(a, b)∀(a, b)∈C6, ε(a, b), η(a, b)∀(a, b)∈Cj, j=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, with ν(a1)=0 and ν(am)=100. Note that (MC2) could be run even with cmin≠0 i.e. when no compatible value function exists:(MC2)min∑(α,b)∈Ckk∈{1,2,3,4,5}[ε(a,b)+η(a,b)]+∑(α,b)∈C6α(a,b)s.t.:r0)all variables⩾0r1)s1=0r2)ν(a1)=0r3)∀k∈{2,3,4,5,6}:sk-sk-1⩾1r4)∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5,6},∀(a,b)∈Ck:ν(a)-ν(b)⩾sk+1-cminr5)∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5},∀(a,b)∈Ck:ν(a)-ν(b)⩽sk+1-1+cminr8)∀(a,b)∈C6:ν(a)-ν(b)=s6+1-α(a,b)+δ(a,b)r9)∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5},∀(a,b)∈Ck:ν(a)-ν(b)=(sk+sk+1)/2+ε(a,b)-η(a,b)r10)ν(am)=100Second case: cmin>0; there is no compatible value function, and the disagreements between the DM’s judgements and the value function have to be detected. The method is going to solve two other linear programs (MC3) and (MC4), in which some new variables are introduced beyond those ν∈n (MC1).These variables, α(a, b), δ(a, b)∀(a, b)∈Cj, j=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and β(a, b), γ(a, b)∀(a, b)∈Cj, j=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, are defined through the following constraints:(55)r6)∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5,6}and∀(a,b)∈Ck:ν(a)-ν(b)=sk+1-α(a,b)+δ(a,b)(56)r7)∀k∈{1,2,3,4,5}and∀(a,b)∈Ck:ν(a)-ν(b)=sk+1-1+β(a,b)-γ(a,b)The objective function is the same in both (MC3) and (MC4):(57)min∑(α,b)∈Ckk∈{1,2,3,4,5}[α(a,b)+β(a,b)]+∑(α,b)∈C6α(a,b)subject to the constraints:(58)(MC3):r0,r1,r2,r3,r4andr5(cinsteadofcmin),r6andr7(59)(MC4):r0,r1,r2,r3,r6andr7The aim of (MC3) is to discover all sources of inconsistency while (MC4) suggests a minimum number of category changes to the DM, in order to eliminate all possible inconsistencies.In many UTA-based approaches, the additive value function is built in a one-step process by formulating a LP that requires only the DM’s global preferences. In some cases, however, it is more appropriate to build such a function from a two-step questioning process, dissociating the construction of the marginal value functions and the assessment of their respective scaling constants.In the first step, the various marginal value functions are built outside the UTA algorithm. These functions may be facilitated, for instance, by proposing specific parametrical marginal value functions to the DM and asking her(him) to choose the one that matches her(his) preferences on that specific criterion.In the second step, the DM is asked to give a global ranking of reference actions in a similar way as in the basic UTA method. From this information, the problem may be formulated via a LP, in order to assess only the weighting factors piof the criteria (scaling constants of criteria). Through this approach, initially named UTA II method (Siskos et al., 2005), the basic LP is formulated as follows:Suppose a ranking (weak order) is given by the DM on a set of reference actions, where the actions are rearranged in such a way that is the head and the tail of the ranking and for every pair of consecutive actions (am, am+1) holds, either amPam+1 (preference) or amIam+1 (indifference). UTA II solves the following linear program (60)–(64) that has k constraints because of the transitivity of the (P, I) preference system (see the linear program (20)–(29) above, for illustrative purposes). Special post-optimality analysis techniques are also applied to test the stability or robustness of the estimated weights (see Jacquet- Lagrèze and Siskos, 1982, 1980).(60)[min]F,F=∑i=1k(σ+(αι)+σ-(αι))Subject to:For m=1,2,…,k−1(61)∑i=1npiui[gi(am)]-σ+(αm)+σ-(αm)-∑i=1npiui[gi(am+1)]-σ+(am+1)+σ-(am+1)⩾δ,ifamPam+1or(62)∑i=1npiui[gi(am)]-σ+(αm)+σ-(αm)-∑i=1npiuigi(am+1)-σ+(am+1)+σ-(am+1)=0ifamIam+1(63)∑ι=1npi=1(64)pi⩾0,fori=1,2,…,n;σ+(aj)⩾0,σ-(aj)⩾0,forj=2,…,kwhere δ is a small positive number so as to discriminate significantly two successive equivalence classes of the ranking; gi(am) is the evaluation of the reference action amon the ith criterion and ui[gi(am)] its corresponding marginal value; are the over-estimation and the under-estimation errors concerning the jth reference action, respectively.See Figs. 3–7.