@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing and validating the multidimensional proactive decision-making scale

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a psychometric sound scale of proactive decision-making (PDM).PDM scale is validated for decision-makers, decision analysts, both, and none of both.PDM scale is validated for low, medium, and high experienced individuals.PDM can be used to explain decision satisfaction.Teams applying OR could be constituted effectively using the PDM scale.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioural OR,Decision analysis,Problem structuring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
On the basis of an extensive interdisciplinary literature review proactive decision-making (PDM) is conceptualised as a multidimensional concept. We conduct five studies with over 4000 participants from various countries for developing and validating a theoretically consistent and psychometrically sound scale of PDM. The PDM concept is developed and appropriate items are derived from literature. Six dimensions are conceptualised: the four proactive cognitive skills ‘systematic identification of objectives’, ‘systematic search for information’, ‘systematic identification of alternatives’, and ‘using a decision radar’, and the two proactive personality traits ‘showing initiative’ and ‘striving for improvement’. Using principal component factor analysis and subsequent item analysis as well as confirmatory factor analysis, six conceptually distinct dimensional factors are identified and tested acceptably reliable and valid. Our results are remarkably similar for individuals who are decision-makers, decision analysts, both or none of both with different levels of experience. There is strong evidence that individuals with high scores in a PDM factor, e.g. proactive cognitive skills or personality traits, show a significantly higher decision satisfaction. Thus, the PDM scale can be used in future research to analyse other concepts. Furthermore, the scale can be applied, e.g. by staff teams to work on OR problems effectively or to inform a decision analyst about the decision behaviour in an organisation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“If I were given one hour to save the planet, I would spend 55 minutes defining the problem and five minutes resolving it.” Albert EinsteinIn the last decades, the methods in Operational Research (OR) made substantial progress. Researchers developed methods, which can be used to “solve problems” about which earlier generations had dreamt. These OR methods have a great positive impact on the quality of individual and organisational decisions. In line with the famous quote from Albert Einstein it is important to spend effort in defining a problem. The more appropriate the problem is defined and structured, the greater the potential for positive impact of OR methods. This paper contributes to skilful problem structuring by providing a new concept concerning proactive decision-making and an empirically validated scale that measures proactive cognitive skills and personality traits to support making better decisions.Woolley and Pidd (1981, p. 197) described problem structuring as “the process by which the initially presented set of conditions is translated into a set of problems, issues and questions sufficiently well defined to allow specific research action.” In theory and practice, problem structuring methods have gained more and more attention (Franco & Montibeller, 2010; Mingers & Rosenhead, 2001; Tavella & Papadopoulos, 2014). Problem structuring methods (PSM) are described by Rosenhead (2013, p. 1162) as a “broad group of model-based problem handling approaches whose purpose is to assist in the structuring of problems rather than directly to derive a solution.” These methods are most frequently applied by groups and are characterised by participation and interactivity (Rosenhead, 2013).Franco and Meadows (2007) indicated that McGrath's (1984) circumplex is the most accepted framework for group decision support, theory, and research. McGrath identifies four basic actions that need to be performed in a decision related meeting: generating, choosing, negotiating, and executing decisions. The main tasks of a group contain generating alternatives (i.e. ideas, plans, strategies, etc.) and negotiating conflicting preferences. “Within the context of a PSM-supported process, groups will engage in information gathering and the designing of strategic options (generate). They will also structure and evaluate the relative advantages and disadvantages of different strategic options before selecting a problem focus and/or a course of action (negotiate)” (Franco & Meadows, 2007, p. 1624). Both generating as well as negotiating are crucial for success. However, we argue that a reasonable result in a generation phase is prerequisite for an effective negotiation phase. Therefore, we are convinced that a focus on the generating tasks is crucial to success.Many studies recommend that cognitive styles and decision-making styles do have an impact on individual decision-making (e.g.Epstein, Pacini, Denes-Raj, & Heier, 1996; Novak & Hoffman, 2009; Scott & Bruce, 1995), and on group decision-making processes (e.g. Hough & Ogilvie, 2005; Schwenk, 1995). This applies also for the design, use and acceptance of group decision support systems (e.g. Benbasat & Dexter, 1982; Lu, Yu, & Lu, 2001; Taylor, 2004).As a support for group decision-making Franco and Meadows (2007) emphasise the importance of cognitive style in PSM research and application. They pioneered in systematically analysing the impact of Jung's (1971) theory of psychological types in context of PSM and derive logically from literature eight hypotheses, e.g. that “sensing and intuitive individuals will play a lead role during option designing tasks, in comparison to thinking and feeling individuals” (p. 1626). Garfield, Taylor, Dennis, and Satzinger (2001) identified empirically that innovative, radical alternatives are created by intuitive and feeling individuals more often than by sensing and thinking individuals.To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing psychological tests and scales are suited for explaining the process of “generating” comprehensively. In particular, it is of interest which skills individuals have in the generating phase and how much and why they take initiative. Research on decision-making lacks a psychometrically reliable scale for measuring proactive decision-making. In this paper, we develop a scale that distinguishes four cognitive skills and two personality traits relevant to the generation phase in PSM. Our scale measures proactive cognitive skills derived from value-focused thinking and proactive traits derived from proactive behaviour.Bateman and Crant (1993) define proactive behaviour as the relatively stable tendency to effect environmental change. The essential characteristic of proactive behaviour is that “people can intentionally and directly change their current circumstances, social or nonsocial, including their physical environment” (Bateman & Crant, 1993, p. 104, referring to Buss, 1987). The prototypical proactive personality is relatively unaffected by situational forces and interacts with its environment actively. Individuals classified as reactive, by contrast, are relatively passive and are rather shaped by their environment than shaping it themselves (Parker, Bindl, & Strauss, 2010). Proactive individuals actively search for opportunities, take initiative, and proceed with their actions until they achieve their objectives (Bateman & Crant, 1993). Schwarzer (1999) develops a scale to measure the personality trait proactive attitude, which can affect motivations and imply actions. Proactive individuals have a vision and are driven by their values. They follow goals that they think are worth reaching for (Parker et al., 2010; Schwarzer, 1999). Bateman and Crant's proactive behaviour and Schwarzer's proactive attitude have in common that individuals show initiative and strive for improvements in their lives. Individuals cannot change their personality traits related to decision-making easily (VandenBos, 2007). However, Kirby, Kirby, and Lewis (2002, p. 1542) find empirical evidence that proactivity can be trained by the “development of context specific knowledge and skills”.Making decisions, personal or work-related, is an essential part of everyone's life. However, not everyone and every organisation make good decisions. As it has been postulated and verified empirically, proactive personality traits (e.g.Seibert, Crant, & Kraimer, 1999; Thompson, 2005) as well as proactive cognitive skills (Keeney, 1992) can have positive impacts on an individual in decision situations. It can be presumed that PDM enables people to make better decisions with results they are more satisfied with. Thus, we consider PDM to be a relevant concept that is worth being looked at in more detail.Research in OR focuses on best practices or on developing and improving highly sophisticated methods (e.g.Corbett, Overmeer, & Van Wassenhove, 1995). Hämäläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013, p. 623) indicate the importance of behavioural operational research (BOR) as “the study of behavioural aspects related to the use of […] OR methods in modelling, problem solving and decision support”. Lu et al. (2001) state that in OR applications, the personality as well as the communication style of the decision analyst and the decision-maker may have a huge impact. Appropriate tools and methods for eliciting information about the decision analyst and the decision-maker are still needed, in particular in problem structuring, since hardly any behavioural research has been done “on the process itself and on the role of the analyst and problem owner” (Hämäläinen et al., 2013, p. 623). These tools and methods have to be selected “on the basis of the skills, knowledge, personal style and experience of the analyst” (Hämäläinen et al., 2013, p. 624, referring to Ormerod, 2008). We develop a scale to measure an individual's behaviour in decision situations. Measurements on this scale can be used to select effective procedures using OR techniques in consideration of behavioural aspects and to analyse behavioural facets in problem structuring.In this interdisciplinary paper we explicate PDM as a multidimensional concept that combines aspects of proactive personality traits and proactive cognitive skills in decision situations. We develop a new PDM scale and test it empirically in order to identify reliable and valid measures. In particular, we pursue four objectives: firstly, PDM is conceptualised, i.e. the concept is defined, clarified by its dimensions, and differentiated from other constructs; secondly, the dimensions of PDM are operationalised; thirdly, the multidimensional PDM scale is empirically tested and validated in several studies; fourthly, decision satisfaction is explained by PDM.The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we summarise the theoretical foundation of proactive behaviour, decision-making, value-focused thinking, and basic psychological concepts. In Section 3, we conceptualise PDM and derive suitable dimensions from literature. In Sections 4 and 5, we describe the operationalisation of constructs and the methodology. In Sections 6 and 7, we summarise and discuss the results of our empirical studies. In Section 8, we discuss implications for OR, limitations, and further research. In Section 9, we draw our conclusions.PDM is based on different disciplines such as psychology, decision theory, and behavioural OR. The term ‘proactive’ refers to personality traits and cognitive skills. Therefore, PDM is framed by insights into proactive personality traits and decision theories in general, value-focused thinking as well as thinking and decision-making styles in particular.Grant and Ashford (2008) point out that proactive behaviour involves acting in advance of future situations. Individuals consider future events in their current decisions with foresight, i.e. before they occur. Researchers describe this characteristic using the adjectives ‘future-focused’, ‘anticipatory’, and ‘forward-looking’ (Frese, 2006; Frese & Fay, 2001; Frese, Kring, Soose, & Zempel, 1996; Greenglass, 2002). Proactive behaviour is characterised by the intention of having a “discernible effect on the self and/or the environment” (Grant & Ashford, 2008, p. 9). Proactive individuals are change-oriented and interested in creating a meaningful impact on their environment (Buss, 1987; Diener, Larsen, & Emmons, 1984). Reactive individuals, by contrast, are passive and react to, adapt to, and are constrained by their environment instead of shaping it themselves (Bateman & Crant, 1993). Proactive individuals have a vision and are guided by their values. On the basis of a clear perception of what they want to achieve they derive goals that comply with their vision. Schwarzer (1999), who developed a scale to measure proactive attitudes, points out that individuals’ purpose in life is defined by striving for ambitious goals. Parker et al. (2010) emphasise the generation of goals as well as the endeavours to achieve them. Proactive individuals take the initiative in pursuing personal and organisational goals (Frese & Fay, 2001; Roberson, 1990). Proactive individuals “scan for opportunities, show initiative, take action, and persevere until they reach closure by bringing about change” (Bateman & Crant, 1993, p. 105). Proactive behaviour is considered to be relatively stable and cannot be changed easily (Bateman & Crant, 1993). The same is true for proactive attitudes. Habitual behaviour and attitudes are actualised in many different situations and therefore, are called personality traits or personal characteristics. The VandenBos (2007, p. 950) defines a personality trait as “a relatively stable, consistent, and enduring internal characteristic that is inferred from a pattern of behaviours, attitudes, feelings, and habits in the individual”. For our research we use the more general term ‘personality traits’ to cover all of its subsumed aspects. However, Kirby et al. (2002, p. 1542) find empirical evidence that proactivity can be trained by the “development of context-specific knowledge and skills”. Therefore, we consider personality traits as well as cognitive skills to be relevant dimensions of PDM.Referring to proactive behaviour, Seibert et al. (1999) analyse the association with endogenous constructs. They find out that the indicators of career success, i.e. the self-reported objective indicator (salary and promotion) as well as a subjective indicator (career satisfaction), correlate positively with proactive behaviour. Crant and Bateman (2000) discover that employees who show proactive behaviour are recognised as charismatic leaders. Furthermore, Thompson (2005) links proactive personality to job performance conceived by superiors. Thus, there is empirical evidence that proactive behaviour may have positive impacts on individuals in different contexts.Decision-making is the process of making a choice between competing courses of action (von Winterfeldt & Edwards, 1986). It is “a dynamic process: a complex search for information, full of detours, enriched by feedback from casting about in all directions, gathering and discarding information, fuelled by fluctuating uncertainty, indistinct and conflicting concepts – some sharp, some hazy” (Zeleny, 1982, p. 3). Furthermore, decision-making is regarded as a cognitive process of choosing an alternative. Individuals and organisations have only through decisions an impact on their situation (Keeney, 1992). On the basis of normative models of the decision theory, processes can be derived as to how individuals should proceed in order to achieve a maximum of their values, objectives, and well-being (Bell, Raiffa, & Tversky, 1988; Howard, 1988). Furby and Beyth-Marom (1992) summarise five steps of decision-making. First, possible alternatives have to be identified. Second, possible consequences of the alternatives have to be identified. Third, the desirability of these consequences has to be evaluated in terms of achieving one's objectives. Fourth, the likelihood of these consequences has to be assessed. Fifth, the best alternative has to be identified among the generated set of alternatives by combining preferences and uncertainty using certain decision rules.Howard (1988) emphasises the need to distinguish between decision and outcome. “A good outcome is a future state of the world that we prize relative to other possibilities. A good decision is an action we take that is logically consistent with the alternatives we perceive, the information we have, and the preferences we feel” (Howard, 1988, p. 682). However, because one never perceives all possible alternatives and because uncertainty is associated with our knowledge derived of generally incomplete information, a bad decision can result in a good outcome and vice versa. von Winterfeldt and Edwards (1986) conclude that a decision cannot be judged by its outcome. Usually, the outcome is determined by several factors that cannot be controlled by the decision-maker. Thus, the quality of a decision can only be evaluated by the process in the course of which it was made and it has to be evaluated by looking at the stages of the decision process before the outcome occurs (von Winterfeldt & Edwards, 1986). However, across the life span, decision-making skills are related to obtaining good decision outcomes (Bruine de Bruin, Parker, & Fischhoff, 2012).Furthermore, Howard (1988) introduces seven elements of decision quality. ‘Decision framing’ deals with the question whether the real problem is addressed and whether it is framed appropriately. ‘Informational excellence’ refers to the cost-effectiveness of information sources and the gathering of meaningful and reliable information. ‘Creativity – significantly different alternatives’ implies appropriateness of the effort put into the search for and identification of creative and doable alternatives. ‘Clear values’ refers to the process of gaining clarity about values and trade-offs. ‘Integration and evaluation with logic’ requires the use of logically correct reasoning. ‘Balance of basis’ makes the optimal balance of efforts a subject of discussion, e.g. the efforts put into clarifying values, creating and evaluating alternatives. ‘Commitment to action’ deals with the clarity and straightforwardness that is necessary to communicate and execute a decision.Keeney (1992) introduces a normative approach to PDM. The paradigm of this way of thinking is that values provide the basis of interest in a decision problem. In this context, values refer to what someone hopes to achieve by decision-making, given a certain (set of) alternative(s). Therefore, values should guide the effort made to solve the problem. Values are explicated through an individual's goals and objectives, which serve as a starting point for the decision-making process. Instead of following the traditional process of identifying a problem, generating alternatives, and defining criteria for the evaluation of outcomes before making a choice, Keeney (1992) suggests that decision-makers seek out decision opportunities proactively. Such decision opportunities could be created either by broadening an existing decision context or by recognising individual objectives that might be improved.Value-focused thinking provides numerous guidelines using values to support the search for more and better alternatives. The principle is to create alternatives taking account of at least one of the values specified for the decision situation. In other words, people think first of what they desire (themselves) and then of possible alternatives that are useful for reaching the desired objective (Keeney, 1992). Siebert and Keeney (forthcoming) identify that decision-makers are able to list only one third of their potentially relevant alternatives, but significantly more and better when being stimulated with objectives.Other relevant approaches to PDM are thinking and decision-making styles. Scott and Bruce (1995, p. 820, based on Driver, 1979; Driver, Brousseau, & Hunsaker, 1990; Harren, 1979) speak of “a habit based propensity to react in a certain way in a specific decision context.” Thus, styles are neither of habitual behaviour nor of attitude. The decision-making style here is, on the one hand, influenced by the specific situation and, on the other hand, by a more general term in form of a habitual reaction. Apart from this understanding, we find many other constructs; however, they are not fully compatible with each other. Some deal with observable behaviour, while others refer to internal processes. Some are derived from personality traits (e.g. Epstein, 1973), while others are derived from situational aspects (e.g.Novak & Hoffman, 2009).Epstein (1973, 1983, 1985, 1994, 2003) introduce the concept of thinking styles, providing also implications for decision-making. They find out that people use in general two different thinking styles: experiential and rational thinking. Experiential thinking is associative, emotional, of little effort, rapidly implemented but slowly changed, parallel, immediate, outcome-oriented, holistic, preconscious, and passively experienced with the process being opaque to the individual. Rational thinking, by contrast, is logical, based on the cause-and-effect rule, hierarchical, sequential, process-oriented, slowly implemented but quickly changed, of much effort, oriented towards delayed action, conscious, and actively experienced with the individual being aware of and in control of the process (Epstein, 1994, 2003; Kahnemann & Frederick, 2002; Sloman, 1996; Smith & DeCoster, 2000). The Rational–Experiential Inventory (REI) developed by Epstein et al. (1996) has been used to measure individual differences in dispositional tendencies to adopt rational and experiential thinking styles.In contrast to these dispositional thinking styles, Novak and Hoffman (2009) define a situation specific thinking style as the particular thinking style or momentary thinking orientation adopted by a consumer in a specific (decision) situation. As Scott and Bruce (1995) do, they emphasise the situational factors. In recent studies, Novak and Hoffman (2009) have considered situations in order to incorporate the different tasks or activities that consumers may undertake as well as different motivations or orientations that consumers may reveal when they undertake a specific task or activity. The situation specific thinking style may be influenced by the task itself or by the consumer's underlying motive for performing a given task, independently of the task itself (Novak & Hoffman, 2009).An individual with a rational thinking style will probably use cognitive skills for gaining and processing information. This can be done without being noticed by others; it is also possible that this cognitive approach precipitates observable behaviour. The use of cognitive skills characterises how an individual approaches decision situations. These cognitive skills can be acquired through training and practice (VandenBos, 2007). In this paper, we concretise aspects of rational thinking in decision situations, in particular problem structuring, using four cognitive skills derived from the proactive paradigm of decision-making in general and value-focused thinking in particular.Proactivity can be manifested in decision-making by proactive personality traits and a proactive way of thinking. While proactive personality traits are regarded as a stable disposition in decision situations, the proactive way of thinking can be changed more easily by training the related cognitive skills (VandenBos, 2007). The distinction between personality traits and cognitive skills can help explain the results of Kirby et al. (2002)), who have found empirical evidence that proactivity is trainable since cognitive skills can be trained.It has been verified empirically that proactive personality traits can have positive impacts on an individual in decision situations (Seibert et al., 1999). Although Keeney (1992) postulates positive impacts of a proactive way of thinking, these have not been verified empirically yet. Furthermore, we assume that proactive personality traits and proactive cognitive skills complement each other, for example, reactive individuals who neither take initiative nor strive for improvement will not be motivated to apply their cognitive skills effectively. Similarly, proactive individuals who take initiative and strive for improvement but have low proactive cognitive skills will not be effective in decision-making either. Proactive decision-makers who are characterised by proactive personality traits and high proactive cognitive skills should be most effective in their decision-making. To analyse such hypotheses it is necessary to conceptualise PDM and to create a scale that covers proactive personality traits as well as proactive cognitive skills.At first, the meaning of PDM is specified. Our working definition evolved over time on the basis of an extensive and thorough literature review and several group discussions with experts from different academic disciplines, and it is to be seen as a consensus. We generally speak of decision-making as being proactive if it is value-/objective-oriented and self-initiated by a foresighted individual who strives for improvement. Alternatives are created systematically. Information on opportunities and threats are gathered systematically, and potential outcomes of an individual's actions are anticipated. In our context, PDM can be characterised by (proactive) personality traits and the use of (proactive) cognitive skills in decision situations (see Fig. 1).In this section, we derive the four dimensions ‘systematic identification of objectives’, ‘systematic search for information’, ‘systematic identification of alternatives’, and “using a ‘decision radar’” – which represent proactive cognitive skills in decision situations – from decision-making, in particular from the first four of the elements of decision quality (Howard, 1988), and the value-focused thinking framework (Keeney, 1992). Other aspects of cognitive skills, such as the evaluation of alternatives, the final decision, or the implementation of a decision, are not postulated as dimensions since there are no fundamental differences between reactive and proactive decision-making. Individuals can acquire proactive cognitive skills intuitively or by learning methods taught in courses, books, and papers on decision-making. However, even if individuals are experts at using these skills, they still have to apply them. The dimensions ‘taking initiative’ and ‘striving for improvement’ are related to proactive personality traits. Individuals who do not strive for improvement will have no reason to apply their skills. In addition, even if there is a reason to apply these skills, this person needs to take initiative.According to Schwarzer (1999) and Keeney (1992), proactive individuals have a vision and are guided by values. On the basis of a clear perception of what they want to achieve they derive goals that are in line with their vision. Their purpose in life is generated by striving for ambitious goals (Schwarzer, 1999). The anticipation and imagination of objectives encourage individuals to pursue these objectives (Locke & Latham, 2002). Objectives are crucial for PDM. They are the basis for systematically creating alternatives, guiding the methodical search for information, and planning decisions (Siebert & Keeney, forthcoming). If individuals are not aware of their objectives in a specific decision situation, they generally cannot be proactive in their decision-making. Therefore, the proactive cognitive skill of ‘systematic identification of objectives’ (Objectives) is assumed to be a dimension of PDM.Reactive and passive individuals do not strive for more ambitious goals or values, but they simply accept the alternatives given in a specific decision situation, even if they are not content with them. Proactive individuals, by contrast, try to create more and better alternatives (Keeney, 1992). As previous research has shown, using objectives for the systematic identification of alternatives results in more and better alternatives (Butler & Scherer, 1997; Gettys, Pliske, Manning, & Casey, 1987; Jungermann, Ulardt, & Hausmann, 1983; Pitz, Sachs, & Heerboth, 1980; Siebert & Keeney, forthcoming). Furthermore, using objectives for the identification of alternatives increases the likelihood that individuals will actually achieve their objectives (Grant & Ashford, 2008, referring to Gollwitzer, 1999; Gollwitzer & Brandstätter, 1997; Gollwitzer & Oettingen, 1998). Training in the use of objectives for the creation of alternatives enhances proactive cognitive skills in creating alternatives. If individuals are not aware of their alternatives in a specific decision situation, they cannot be proactive in decision-making. Therefore, the proactive cognitive skill ‘systematic identification of alternatives’ (Alternatives) that takes objectives into account is considered to be a dimension of PDM.The relevant values guide the collection of information in a decision situation (Keeney, 1992). A proactive individual searches actively and purposefully for such information that helps to evaluate alternatives in terms of achieving the relevant values. Reactive individuals only use information that is available or easily accessible and do not gather information systematically (Keeney, 1992). If individuals do not systematically search for relevant information in a specific decision situation, they cannot be proactive in decision-making. Therefore, the proactive cognitive skill ‘systematic search for relevant information’ (Information) is regarded as a dimension of PDM.Proactive individuals are characterised as future-oriented (Frese et al., 1996; Frese & Fay, 2001, 2006; Greenglass, 2002). They act in advance of future situations. This includes not only the anticipation of future events but also the prevention of future problems and active creation of decision opportunities (Frese & Fay, 2001; Weick & Roberts, 1993; Weick, Sutcliffe, & Obstfeld, 1999). The use of objectives for creating decision opportunities oneself may help to generate different and better decision situations. Furthermore, decisions can be planned in a broader context and it can be ensured that the right problems are dealt with (Howard, 1988). The planning of decisions implies continuous involvement with decisions. Individuals have influence on their decisions when they thoroughly consider which decisions are to be made at what time. Instead of dealing with any challenge in life operatively, isolated from other decisions, reactively, and with limited sight from a worm's-eye view, individuals can frame their decisions strategically, taking account of other decisions, proactively, and in a future-oriented manner the bird's-eye view. If individuals are not continuously involved in current and future decisions, they cannot be proactive in their decision-making. Therefore, the proactive cognitive skill ‘using a ‘decision radar’’ (Decision Radar) is considered to be dimension of PDM.Proactive individuals take initiative in decision situations (Bateman & Crant, 1993; Greenglass, 2002). They want to shape their environment actively (Ashford & Black, 1996; Kim, Cable, & Kim, 2005; Saks & Ashford, 1996). If individuals do not take initiative in decision situations, they cannot be proactive in their decision-making. Therefore, the personality trait of ‘taking initiative’ (Initiative) is assumed to be a dimension of PDM.Proactive individuals strive for a “discernible effect on the self and/or the environment” (Grant & Ashford, 2008). They are interested in creating a meaningful impact (Buss, 1987; Diener et al., 1984; Grant & Ashford, 2008). Proactive individuals strive for improvement in decision situations (Iyengar, Wells, & Schwartz, 2006; Parker et al., 2010). If an individual does not strive for improvement in decision situations, they cannot be proactive in their decision-making. Therefore, another dimension of PDM deals with the personality trait of ‘striving for improvement’ (Improvement). The personality traits Initiative and Improvement can be regarded as different facets of the commitment to proactive action in decision processes and they result in different degrees of effectiveness of decision processes. As long as individuals do not take initiative, even if they strive for improvement intensely, this will not lead to proactive action in decision processes. Individuals who take high initiative without striving for improvement will not be effective in decision processes either.On the basis of the working definition indicated above, the concept is concretised by its six dimensions. In this section, these six dimensions relevant to PDM are differentiated from related concepts. Firstly, proactive cognitive skills are contrasted with vigilance (Mann, Burnett, Radford, & Ford, 1997), rational decision-making (Scott & Bruce, 1995), and rational thinking (Novak & Hoffman, 2009). Secondly, proactive traits are differentiated from buck-passing and procrastination (Mann et al., 1997) and maximisation (Schwartz et al., 2002).Using a conflict model, Mann et al. (1997) have found empirical evidence for four basic patterns of coping with stress generated by difficult, potentially threatening decisions: vigilance, buck-passing, procrastination, and hyper-vigilance. Vigilance “posits a decision maker who clarifies objectives, considers alternatives, evaluates consequences, and thinks through how to implement chosen options” (Mann et al., 1997, p. 5). On the basis of this definition, the concept seems closely related to PDM. To illustrate the concept of vigilance in the context of decisions in more detail, we discuss the six items Mann et al. (1997) used to measure vigilance. Some of these items are relatively similar to our proactive cognitive skills. The item “I try to be clear about my objectives before choosing” corresponds to Objectives and the item “I consider how best to carry out a decision” corresponds to aspects of Decision Radar. Since these two vigilance items may represent two different dimensions of PDM, they appear suitable for our studies. However, regarding the other vigilance items, there are huge differences in orientation and extent. The items “I try to find out the disadvantages of all alternatives” and “When making decisions I like to collect a lot of information” correspond to Alternatives and Information. But, by using the terms “all” or “a lot of”, they put emphasis on the quantity of the information sought instead of its quality, i.e. whether the information is decision-relevant. A fifth item “I like to consider all of the alternatives” implies that also bad alternatives shall be considered in a decision situation. According to Keeney (1992), this cannot be effective. It is important to systematically create a broad set of good alternatives. The last item “I take a lot of care before choosing” seems quite general. In our study, taking intensive care before making a decision is implied by systematically searching for information (Information), identifying objectives (Objectives), and creating alternatives (Alternatives). In summary, it can be concluded that vigilance addresses all of the four proactive cognitive skills. However, the cognitive skills in PDM are rather characterised by purposefulness than the amount of implementation.Scott and Bruce (1995) identify four decision-making styles that represent the way how individuals usually react in decision situations: a rational decision-making style, an intuitive decision-making style, a dependent decision-making style and an avoidant decision-making style. Rational decision-making basically refers to cognitive skills. It is measured by four items. The first two items “I make decisions in a logical and systematic way” and “My decision making requires careful thought” generally describe the approach to decision-making. The other two items describe the specific actions that have to be taken to be rational. The item “I double check my information sources to be sure I have the right facts before making decisions” corresponds to our dimension Information and the item “When making a decision, I consider various options in terms of a specific goal” corresponds to our dimension Alternatives. Even though the rational decision-making style covers aspects of proactive cognitive skills, it remains at a level that is too general to be applicable to our purpose of measuring PDM.Novak and Hoffman (2009) develop a scale for rational and experimental thinking. Rational thinking is characterised by a thorough search for and logical evaluation of alternatives. This style is measured by items such as “I reasoned things out carefully”, “I tackled this task systematically”, “I figured things out logically”, and “I was very aware of my thinking process”. These items show that the concept remains abstract and general. The items of the four cognitive skills of PDM, by contrast, provide insight into the specific actions, which have to be taken so that decision-making is considered to be proactive.Mann et al. (1997) find empirical evidence for procrastination and buck-passing as two aspects of defensive avoidance. The decision-makers try to reduce stress by avoiding conflict through procrastination or transferring responsibility to others. Scott and Bruce (1995) describe the same phenomenon regarding the avoidant and dependent decision-making styles. Frost and Shows (1993) develop a scale to measure compulsive indecisiveness. These constructs provide different explanations as to the question why an individual takes initiative in decision situations. Concerning the concept of PDM, by contrast, it is of importance whether, not why, individuals show initiative in decision-making. Thus, these constructs are exogenous to PDM, especially to the Initiative dimension, and may serve as an explanation for the endogenous construct.Schwartz et al. (2002) distinguish between maximiser and satisficer referring to the degree to which people select ideal alternatives instead of acceptable alternatives. While maximisers try to find the best alternative and never settle for second best, satisficers tend to choose the first acceptable alternative. The Maximisation Scale focuses on the behaviour in a decision situation. The PDM dimension Improvement, by contrast, refers to striving for improvement in both, a specific and general decision situation. It deals with the question whether individuals are motivated to put effort into decision-making in order to improve their entire current situation.As mentioned above, proactive personality traits may have positive impacts on individuals in different contexts. Burnett, Mann, and Beswick (1989) identify a modest but significant correlation between dimensions of Flinder's Decision-Making Questionnaire (Mann, 1982), which uses, for example, vigilance, and course satisfaction of students. Since PDM is either based on these constructs or at least related to them, we assume a positive impact of PDM for the user. This assumption is supported by Keeney (1992) who postulates that using value-focused thinking, what implies the use of proactive cognitive skills, improves an individual's quality of life. For proving this assumption, we analyse a consequence construct of PDM and have decided to use the adapted Decision Satisfaction Scale (Fitzsimons, 2000).PDM is theoretically presumed to be a (multidimensional) construct, which is not directly observable (DeVellis, 1991). The purpose of this paper was to develop a valid scale being able to measure PDM. Therefore, using the definition of the concept and its dimensions as a basis, indicators had to be found and examined in order to enable indirect self-report measurements.Since PDM was an innovative construct, operationalisation had to consider the adaption of reliable and valid items from previous (related) concepts that had already been tested in other studies, which were as closely related as possible, however in different contexts; furthermore, it had to consider the creation of completely new items that represent the content of the presumed dimensions (Netemeyer, Bearden, & Sharma, 2003; Hair, Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 2010). Original items that did not fit perfectly were adapted to our context. Concerning dimensions for which we did not find an item in literature, we derived new items from theory. Those items were the result of several revisions by individual members of our research team and group discussions that reflect the agreement of the researchers and experts involved. Each item was translated by native speakers from English into German and vice versa to ensure content validity. The original, adapted, and newly created items are listed in Table A1 (Electronic Appendix). All derivations are documented.To ensure consistency, reflective specified multiple-item-measures were operationalised for each construct dimension (Bollen, 1989). In terms of wording, although some similarity among items was intended to tap the domain, items were phrased simple, straightforward, and non-redundant, i.e. with a certain degree of variety to express the amplitude of each construct dimension (Netemeyer et al., 2003, p. 57). However, this might interfere with some reliability and validity criteria, since part of the variation is due to the wider formulation of the items. After analysing the data of the pre-study, some items had to be eliminated for reliability reasons and new items were added.Since we were interested in the relationship between PDM and other constructs, Decision Satisfaction was operationalised by choosing appropriate items from a short version of the Decision Satisfaction Scale (Fitzsimons, 2000) that we adapted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
