@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Asymmetric product distribution between symmetric manufacturers using dual-channel supply chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate optimal product distribution strategy for a manufacturer.We assume that two symmetric manufacturers can use retail and direct channels.Asymmetric distribution policy always arises in subgame perfect equilibrium.Namely, one manufacturer uses the direct channel while the other uses both channels.Symmetric dual-channel distribution policy is not optimal for a manufacturer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Economics,Supply chain management,Distribution channels,Direct channel,Game theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates the optimal product distribution strategy for a manufacturer that uses dual-channel supply chains. We assume that two symmetric manufacturers facing price competition distribute products through (1) a retail channel only, (2) a direct channel only, or (3) both retail and direct channels. Our most notable result is that even though the two manufacturers are symmetric, a subgame perfect equilibrium always arises, including an asymmetric distribution policy, where one manufacturer distributes products only through the direct channel, while the other manufacturer distributes through both the direct channel and the retail channel. A practical implication of this result is that a symmetric distribution policy is not necessarily optimal for a manufacturer encountering price competition. In particular, when another competing manufacturer distributes products through its dual channels, a manufacturer should not similarly adopt a dual-channel distribution strategy just to counter the rival's dual-channel strategy. Such a symmetric dual-channel distribution strategy would trigger the most intense inter-brand competition, eroding not only the rival's profit, but also its own profit.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid growth of the Internet has made it attractive and much easier for manufacturers that traditionally sold their products indirectly through retailers to engage in direct sales. Thanks to the development of e-commerce technologies and third-party logistics enterprises such as Federal Express and UPS, an increasing number of manufacturers in a variety of industries have established sales channels to sell to customers directly. In fact, many prominent manufacturers, such as Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Cisco System, Pioneer Electronics, Eastman Kodak, Nike, Sony, Panasonic, Mattel, Estee Lauder, Lenovo, and Apple, among others, have begun to use online channels to sell their products directly to consumers (Tsay & Agrawal, 2004a, 2004b). Online direct selling is beneficial to the manufacturer to save costs, increase sales revenues, and attract different customer segments to create manufacturer loyalty.Because direct channels compete against, substitute, or complement conventional retail channels, finding the best way to utilize them in conjunction with the retail channel continues to be a challenge for many manufacturers. Nowadays, manufacturers often face a distribution policy problem regarding whether to add a new distribution channel in addition to their existing channels. When a manufacturer sells through a traditional retailer, and also has a direct channel to consumers, such a distribution system is usually called a “dual-channel” distribution system. Because a manufacturer and its retailer sell essentially the same products in a dual-channel distribution system, the retailer may feel excluded, giving rise to “channel conflict”. In general, channel conflict can undermine attempts to develop cooperative relationships in the intermediated channel, which may have an effect of lowering the profits for all parties.To cope with the channel management problem, different manufacturers adopt a variety of channel strategies. For example, Dell, which is arguably the most successful Internet marketer in the personal computer market, continuously explores desirable distribution channels for the company. Dell has opened kiosk locations in shopping malls across the US since 2002 and full-scale manufacturer-owned stores since the second half of 2006; Dell opened a retail store in Dallas and another one in New York in 2006. More recently, Dell expanded into retail stores such as Wal-Mart and Best Buy while it has shut down all its kiosks in the US in 2008.In contrast to manufacturers supplying industrial products such as electric appliances, a large portion of leading manufacturers remain adamant about selling through retail channels although they are apparently capable of operating their own direct channels. For example, manufacturers of daily necessities or processed foods appear to distribute products through direct channels less frequently. Given the present channel environments that manufacturers encounter, this paper investigates the optimal product distribution strategy for a manufacturer that uses dual-channel supply chains: a traditional retail channel and a direct channel. We assume that two symmetric manufacturers facing price competition determine their product distribution strategy from three choices: the manufacturer distributes products through (1) the retail channel only, (2) the direct channel only, or (3) both the retail and direct channels. Moreover, another particularly important assumption underlying our model is that the two manufacturers are perfectly symmetric in that they both have dual distribution channels and an identical cost structure. Our most notable result based on these settings is that even though the two manufacturers are symmetric, there always arises a subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) that includes an asymmetric distribution policy, where one manufacturer distributes products only through the direct channel, while the other manufacturer distributes through both the direct channel and the retail channel. This is a unique implication of our results, because even when the manufacturers are symmetric, the product distribution policies that always arise in equilibrium are asymmetric between them. In addition to this main result, we point to the possibility that this asymmetric product distribution strategy may not be Pareto optimal for the two manufacturers, because the asymmetric strategy earns both manufacturers lower profits than other symmetric distribution strategies.The mechanisms that drive the equilibrium asymmetric distribution strategies are described as follows. One merit of using a direct channel, instead of a retail channel, for a manufacturer is to avoid the “double marginalization” problem, which means that both the manufacturer and the retailer extract a margin from the product. Double marginalization causes the retail price to exceed the optimal level for the whole supply chain and the transaction quantity to be below the optimal level for the manufacturer in the supply chain.11Note that the optimal level of price and quantity discussed here represents that for a firm, but not for consumers or for society. See Spengler (1950) for details on how double marginalization adversely affects optimality for the firm.As we will show later, if the distribution policy of two manufacturers is asymmetric, the timing for them to gain margin is not simultaneous but sequential. The game-theoretic literature has demonstrated that if price competition arises, the firm that sets its price at a later period earns higher profit than the firm that sets its price in an earlier move (e.g., Gal-Or, 1985). This advantage of a later move has been called the “second-mover advantage”. To obtain the second-mover advantage, each manufacturer wishes to set the price at a later period. This behavior leads to sequential price setting by the manufacturers, but not simultaneous setting, because each manufacturer delays their pricing decision, and simultaneous price setting thus becomes infeasible. Moreover, the literature has further demonstrated that both firms have higher profits under duopolistic price competition when choosing price sequentially rather than simultaneously.22See van Damme and Hurkens (2004, p. 405) who prove this fact.As a result, there is an incentive for manufacturers to choose the asymmetric distribution strategy to gain margins at different timings. This is the rationale for why the asymmetric distribution strategy, not the symmetric one, always constitutes the equilibrium.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a review of the literature relating to dual-channel supply-chain management from a game-theoretic perspective. Section 3 delineates the basic settings of the model and formulates our model to derive the SPE that identifies the optimal distribution strategy for the manufacturers. In Section 4, we generalize the model so that it describes more realistic business environments. The final section provides concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
