@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust portfolios that do not tilt factor exposure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce the robustness measure and its properties.We propose new robust formulations that allow investors to control the factor exposure of portfolios.The optimal portfolio of our model is not only robust but also has a desired factor exposure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Investment analysis,Robust portfolio model,Robustness analysis,Fundamental factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Robust portfolios reduce the uncertainty in portfolio performance. In particular, the worst-case optimization approach is based on the Markowitz model and form portfolios that are more robust compared to mean–variance portfolios. However, since the robust formulation finds a different portfolio from the optimal mean–variance portfolio, the two portfolios may have dissimilar levels of factor exposure. In most cases, investors need a portfolio that is not only robust but also has a desired level of dependency on factor movement for managing the total portfolio risk. Therefore, we introduce new robust formulations that allow investors to control the factor exposure of portfolios. Empirical analysis shows that the robust portfolios from the proposed formulations are more robust than the classical mean–variance approach with comparable levels of exposure on fundamental factors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Robust optimization was developed to solve problems where there is uncertainty in the decision environment, and therefore is sometimes referred to as uncertain optimization (Ben-Tal & Nemirovski, 1998). Robust models were adapted in portfolio optimization to resolve the sensitivity issue of the mean–variance model (Markowitz, 1952) to its inputs. Even though the Markowitz model is still the basis for portfolio optimization and one of the most significant contributions to portfolio selection, its drawbacks are well documented. For example, Best and Grauer (1991) show that mean–variance portfolio weights are extremely sensitive to changes in asset means when no constraints are imposed. Broadie (1993) points out errors in computing efficient frontiers and stresses that estimates of mean returns using historical data should be used with caution. Chopra and Ziemba (1993) go one step further to analyze the relative impact of estimation errors in means, variances, and covariances.These studies naturally led to the advancement of robust portfolio optimization. Costa and Paiva (2002) optimize robust tracking-error optimization when the expected returns and covariance matrix are not exactly known. Similarly under uncertain situations, El Ghaoui, Oks, and Oustry (2003) solve the worst-case value-at-risk problem when only bounds on the inputs are known. In addition, Goldfarb and Iyengar (2003) introduce a way to formulate robust optimization problems as second-order cone programs using ellipsoidal uncertainty sets, and similar approaches are investigated by Tütüncü and Koenig (2004). As summarized, much effort has been put into defining uncertainty in input parameters and formulating the problems using worst-case optimization methods.1For further contributions on robust portfolio optimization, refer to Fabozzi, Kolm, Pachamanova, and Focardi (2007a, 2007b), Fabozzi, Huang, and Zhou (2010), and Kim et al. (accepted for publication-b).1On the same topic but on a different track, there have been recent developments looking into the behavior of robust portfolios formed from worst-case optimization (Kim et al., accepted for publication-a; Kim et al., 2012; Kim, Kim, & Fabozzi, 2013). They look for unexpected properties of robust formulations in order to not only expand our understanding on robust portfolios but also to increase its practical use. Focusing on the worst-case formulation with ellipsoidal uncertainty sets, Kim et al. (2012) mathematically show how robustness leads to higher correlation with fundamental factors. Kim et al. (accepted for publication-a) further investigate this behavior using worst-case formulations with ellipsoidal and box uncertainty sets under various settings to confirm the relationship between robustness and increased correlation with factors. Even though some worst-case formulations may result in portfolios with unintended factor loadings, robust portfolios are still required to protect portfolio returns from unexpected market movements. Kim et al. (2013) find that under the existence of market regimes, a portfolio that focuses on asset returns during the worst regime of the stock market results in a portfolio that is not only robust but has an improved performance based on measures such as Sharpe ratio, drawdown, and value-at-risk.Based on these research findings, we know that investors can achieve robustness through robust optimization techniques but at the same time lose control of the factor dependency of the optimal portfolio. Factors explain the underlying movement of the market and widely studied factors include the market index, size (market capitalization), and book-to-market ratio factors (Fama & French, 1993). In addition to these three fundamental factors, portfolio managers look for macroeconomic factors and also identify statistical factors through principal component analysis. Investors and portfolio managers need to control the factor exposure for managing the portion of total risk generated from each factor because it allows them to better understand the overall risk of their portfolios.2The importance of managing systematic risk through factors is illustrated, for example, by Fung and Hsieh (1997), Clark, de Silva, and Wander (2002), Alexander and Dimitriu (2004), Zhu, Cui, Sun, and Li (2011).2Therefore, in this paper, we introduce formulations that form robust portfolios which are not tilted towards factors. Investors may consider robust counterparts of mean–variance portfolios for achieving robust performance. However, if the factor exposure of the robust counterparts is affected by the robust formulations, investors need to compare not only the performance between the classical mean–variance and robust portfolios but also their factor exposures. By forming portfolios from our proposed optimization problems, investors will be able to control the risk associated with each factor of robust portfolios. In other words, investors can hold portfolios that are robust and at the same time have a better understanding of how the portfolio will be affected by movements in market factors.Before we introduce and analyze the revised robust formulations, we need a measure to compare the robustness of portfolios. This robustness measure allows us to compare the optimal portfolio from the new formulations with the existing mean–variance and robust portfolios. Therefore, we begin our analysis by defining a robustness measure and exploring its properties. Next, we derive new robust formulations to form optimal portfolios that match a target factor exposure by adding constraints to the original robust formulation. Since the additional constraints are developed based on factor exposure measures of portfolios, the new formulations will not only add robustness but also keep the factor dependency to a specified level. Furthermore, we perform empirical tests to confirm the factor exposures of the new robust portfolios and find that the new approach forms portfolios that are more robust than Markowitz portfolios without affecting the factor exposure.The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 defines the robustness measure and its properties, and the new robust formulations that do not affect factor exposure are introduced in Section 3. Section 4 includes empirical tests using industry-level returns to confirm our development, and Section 5 concludes.In this section, we define a robustness measure prior to developing new robust formulations. By defining a measure for portfolio robustness, investors can compare the robustness among portfolios and also use this measure to set the desired robustness level when choosing an optimal portfolio. Once we define a robustness measure, we analyze its properties for the case when the geometry of the uncertainty set for the expected asset returns is an ellipsoid.We begin defining a robustness measure by identifying the meaning of robustness. In general, X(ε), which is a function of an uncertain parameter ε, being robust means that the value of X(ε) is relatively stable even when the uncertain parameter ε fluctuates. Therefore, we can measure the robustness of X(ε) by the movement of X(ε) with respect to ε.The robustness in portfolio management can be defined in similar fashion. We first determine a suitable uncertain function X(ε) for measuring portfolio robustness. Since the optimal portfolio weights are a function of uncertain parameters μ and Σ, expected return and covariance of returns, respectively, the weights of the optimal portfolio are one possible choice for the function X(ε). However, this measure does not reflect the portfolio robustness desired by investors because investors want robust portfolio performance but not necessarily robust portfolio weights. In other words, the stability of the portfolio performance is more important to investors than the stability of the optimal weights. Thus, it is more reasonable to use the portfolio performance for X(ε) when we define portfolio robustness. Consequently, we can say that the optimal portfolio ω∗ is robust if the performance of the portfolio ω∗ is stable with respect to μ and Σ.Based on the above definition of robustness in portfolio optimization, we derive the robustness measure for portfolios. The stability level of portfolio performance determines the degree of robustness. Therefore, the robustness measure can be defined by the performance fluctuation from the change in uncertain parameters. Portfolios that are robust will have small performance fluctuations and therefore low levels for the robustness measure. For simplicity, we assume that the only uncertain parameter is the mean of asset returns μ and the uncertainty is revealed at time T. Since the portfolio performance depends on the mean of asset returns μ and the portfolio weight ω∗, it can be represented as f(ω∗, μ). The expected value of μ at time 0 is μ0 and the realized value at time T is μT. Hence, investors make investment decisions based on μ0 at time 0 but they evaluate the portfolio performance using μTat time T. Thus, performance fluctuation is the difference between the expectation and the realization of portfolio performance,d(ω∗)=|f(ω∗,μ0)-f(ω∗,μT)|.However, we cannot evaluate d(ω∗) at time 0 because μTis unknown until time T. So, instead of d(ω∗), the maximum of d(ω∗) on the uncertainty set U of μTshould be the robustness measure,D(ω∗)=maxμT∈Ud(ω∗)=maxμT∈U|f(ω∗,μ0)-f(ω∗,μT)|.When the realization μTof the uncertain parameter μ varies in a given set U, the fluctuation of the portfolio performance cannot exceed the robustness measure D(ω∗). It follows that portfolios with smaller values of D(ω∗) will have less fluctuation in portfolio performance and can be considered to be more robust.The generalized form of the robustness measure isRobustnessmeasure=maxθ∈Ξ0|f(ω∗,θ¯)-f(ω∗,θ)|,–f(ω, θ): portfolio performance,ω∗: an optimal portfolio,θ: uncertain parameters,θ¯: the expected value of uncertain parameters,Ξ0: an unit uncertainty set for θ.For the robustness measure of portfolio performance, we assume the uncertain parameter μ to be in an uncertainty set U. Since ellipsoidal uncertainty sets are often used in robust optimization, we also assume that the uncertainty set of μ to be in an ellipsoid. The robust portfolio formulation with an ellipsoidal uncertainty set is,(Rδ)minω∈Ωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ω=minω∈Ω12ω′Σω-λμ¯′ω+λδω′Σμω,whereΩ={ω|ω′ι=1},Uδ(μ¯)=μ|(μ-μ¯)′Σμ-1(μ-μ¯)⩽δ2, where Σ is the covariance of expected returns, ι is a vector of ones, λ is the risk coefficient, and Σμis the covariance matrix of estimation errors for the expected returns. Among many possibilities for representing portfolio performance, we focus on the objective function of the robust formulation. Even though the objective function of the robust formulation is not always a conventional measure of performance, measuring the stability of the objective function is applicable when investors use portfolio optimization models for constructing portfolios because the objective function reflects what investors seek to optimize. In other words, investors will consider the portfolio robust if the objective value is stable with respect to changes in input values. Accordingly, from the objective function of the above formulation, we definef(ω,μ)=12ω′Σω-λμ′ωas the measure for portfolio performance. In addition, since δ determines the confidence level of the uncertainty set, higher values of δ form portfolios that are more robust. Therefore, an important property which the robustness measure should satisfy is the decreasing pattern with respect to δ. We show this property of the robustness measure in the following two claims.Claim 1Letωδ∗be the optimal solution to the optimization problem (Rδ). Ifωδ∗converges to ω∗as δ goes to infinity, then ω∗is the portfolio that minimizes the robust measure. That is,argminω∈Ωmaxμ∈Uδ0(μ¯)|f(ω,μ¯)-f(ω,μ)|=limδ→∞argminω∈Ωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ω,wheref(ω,μ)=12ω′Σω-λμ′ω,Ω={ω|ω′ι=1},Uδ0(μ¯)=μ|(μ-μ¯)′Σμ-1(μ-μ¯)⩽δ02,Uδ(μ¯)=μ|(μ-μ¯)′Σμ-1(μ-μ¯)⩽δ2.From the definition of the robustness measure,3The proof is based on the study by Kanniappan and Sastry (1983).3maxμ∈Uδ0(μ¯)|f(ω,μ¯)-f(ω,μ)|=maxμ∈Uδ0(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ¯′ω-12ω′Σω+λμ′ω=maxμ∈Uδ0(μ¯)λ|(μ-μ¯)′ω|=δ0λω′Σμω.Therefore,argminω∈Ωmaxμ∈Uδ0(μ¯)|f(ω,μ¯)-f(ω,μ)|=argminω∈Ωδ0λω′Σμω.On the other hand, the robust formulation can be derived as,argminω∈Ωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ω=argminω∈Ω12ω′Σω-λμ¯′ω+λδω′Σμω=argminω∈Ω1δ12ω′Σω-λμ¯′ω+λω′Σμω.So proving the following equation will suffice our proof for Claim 1.argminω∈Ωδ0λω′Σμω=limδ→∞argminω∈Ω1δ12ω′Σω-λμ¯′ω+λω′Σμω.In order to show the above, we prove①and②.①limδ→∞minω∈Ω1δ12ω′Σω-λμ¯′ω+λω′Σμω=minω∈Ωλω′Σμω.Proof of①. Let,fδ(ω)=1δ12ω′Σω-λμ¯′ω+λω′Σμω,f∞(ω)=λω′Σμωωδ∗=argminω∈Ωfδ(ω),ω∞∗=argminω∈Ωf∞(ω).Then①can be written as,limδ→∞fδωδ∗=f∞ω∞∗.From our assumption thatωδ∗converges to ω∗ as δ→∞, it follows thatωδ∗is a bounded sequence. Furthermore,ωδ∗⊂Ω,ω∗∈Ω,ω∞∗∈Ω, so there is a closed bounded subset D of Ω which containsωδ∗,ω∗, andω∞∗. Since fδ(ω) uniformly converges to f∞(ω) on the set D as δ→∞, there exists n∈N satisfying the following for all ε>0.δ⩾n⇒|fδ(ω)-f∞(ω)|⩽ε,∀ω∈D.By the uniform convergence of fδ(ω), the following inequalities are satisfied for all δ⩾n,fδωδ∗-f∞ωδ∗⩽ε,fδω∞∗-f∞ω∞∗⩽ε.Thus,-ε⩽fδωδ∗-f∞ωδ∗⩽fδωδ∗-f∞ω∞∗⩽fδω∞∗-f∞ω∞∗⩽εand for all δ⩾n,fδωδ∗-f∞ω∞∗⩽ε.Therefore, it follows that①holdslimδ→∞fδωδ∗=f∞ω∞∗.②Ifωδ∗converges to ω∗ as δ→∞, then ω∗ is equal toω∞∗. Proof of②. Letωδ∗be the sequence of the optimal solutions of minω∈Ωfδ(ω). Since f∞(ω) is continuous in ω andωδ∗converges to ω∗ asδ→∞,f∞ωδ∗converges to f∞ (ω∗). Therefore, for all ε>0, there exists n1∈N such that(i)δ⩾n1⇒f∞ωδ∗-f∞(ω∗)⩽13ε.Becauselimδ→∞fδωδ∗=f∞ω∞∗by①, for all ε>0 there exists n2∈N such that(ii)δ⩾n2⇒fδωδ∗-f∞ω∞∗⩽13ε.In addition, fδ(ω) uniformly converges to f∞ (ω) on the set D as δ→∞, and therefore there exists n3∈N for all ε>0 such that(iii)δ⩾n3⇒fδ(ω)-f∞(ω)⩽13ε,∀ω∈D.By defining n0=max (n1, n2, n3), the inequalities (i), (ii), and (iii) can be expressed byωn0∗as,(iv)f∞ωn0∗-f∞(ω∗)⩽13ε,(v)fn0ωn0∗-f∞ω∞∗⩽13ε,(vi)fn0ωn0∗-f∞ωn0∗⩽13ε.Now, adding the three inequalities (iv), (v), and (vi) gives us,f∞ω∞∗-f∞(ω∗)⩽ε.Thus,f∞ω∞∗=f∞(ω∗)and because f∞(ω) is a convex function, ω∗ is equal toω∞∗. In conclusion, ifωδ∗converges to ω∗, ω∗ is the optimal solution of minω∈Ωf∞(ω). By verifying②, we show thatargminω∈Ωmaxμ∈Uδ0(μ¯)|f(ω,μ¯)-f(ω,μ)|=limδ→∞argminω∈Ωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ω.Hence, we prove Claim 1. □Claim 2The robustness measure is a decreasing function of δ. That is, the optimal portfolio becomes more robust as δ increases and the robustness measuremaxθ∈Ξ0fωδ∗,θ¯-fωδ∗,θdecreases.We provide a proof under the stylized assumption used in Kim et al. (2012) due to analytical limitations for analyzing the general case. They show that (Rδ) and the below optimization problem (QPa) have the same optimal portfolio under the proper choice of a.(QPa)minω12ω′(Σ+aΣμ)ω-λμ¯′ωs.t.ω′ι=1.The analytic solution for (QPa) can be found under the below stylized assumptions.•Let Σ have the same value for all diagonal terms (σ2) and also the same value for all off-diagonal terms (ρσ2)Σ=σ2ρσ2⋱ρσ2σ2.Then, since the inverse of Σ will have identical diagonal terms and identical off-diagonal terms, it can be expressed asΣ-1=αβ⋱βα.Let Σμbe a diagonal matrix with the same diagonal termsσμ2,Σμ=σμ20⋱0σμ2.Let Σa=Σ+aΣμ, therefore, Σafor a>0 represents a covariance matrix with extra penalization on the diagonal terms imposed on the Markowitz problemLet the inverse of Σa=Σ+aΣμbeΣa-1=αaβa⋱βaαa.We already showed that the robustness measure is a decreasing function of δ under the stylized assumption. The remaining proof for Claim 2 is to show its validity for the general case and we do so using a simulation. We focus on the robust optimization problem (Rδ) with an ellipsoidal uncertainty set and perform the following steps for the simulation.Step 1:Generateμ¯and a positive definite matrix ΣLet Σμbe a diagonal matrix whose diagonal is the same as Σ4We use this simplified assumption because the scaled covariance matrix of returns provides the estimation error covariance in a stationary return process and the diagonals of the covariance matrix of estimation errors are known to contain enough information for forming robust portfolios. For detailed approaches employed in practice, see Stubbs and Vance (2005).4Solve Rδand calculate the robustness measure for the optimal portfolioWe repeat the above three steps for various values of δ to observe any pattern. Fig. 1presents results when n=10, λ=0.5, and δ from 0 to 3 with 0.1 increments. Results for 10 simulations are shown and all cases clearly show that the robustness measure decreases as δ increases from 0 to 3. Therefore, we can conclude that Claim 2 is also satisfied even without the stylized assumptions.In the previous section, we introduced the robustness measure and its properties. The main purpose for presenting the robustness measure is to compare the robustness of portfolios from the original robust formulation with the robust portfolios from the new formulations. Therefore, we return to our focus of this paper and derive robust formulations that do not influence the factor exposure of portfolios.Kim et al. (accepted for publication-a) and Kim et al. (2012) observe that robust formulations may indirectly affect the factor loading of portfolios. Therefore, although mean–variance investors can protect the uncertainty risk by using the robust formulations based on the mean–variance model, they will not be able to sustain the expected factor exposure of the mean–variance portfolios. Consequently, we introduce new robust formulations that control the dependency on fundamental factors by having the same factor exposure relative to a target portfolio. We again base our model on the robust formulation with an ellipsoidal uncertainty set since it is one of the first and most researched formulations.For simplicity, we assume the following case,n risky securitiesr: (random) return vector of risky securitiesE[r]=μVar (r)=Σ is strictly positive-definiter=Bf+ε wheref∈Rmis the returns of m(<n) factors,B∈Rn×mis stock betas andε∈Rnis the idiosyncratic riskω0: a portfolio that satisfies the target factor exposure (we set it to the Markowitz portfolio).The portfolio return of ω can be expressed as r=Bf+ε by the factor model, where B is the matrix of stock betas and f is the factor returns. Therefore, the expected portfolio return and the variance of returns become,E[ω′r]=E[ω′Bf+ω′ε]=ω′BμfVar(ω′r)=Var(ω′Bf+ω′ε)=ω′BΣfB′ω+ω′Σεωwhere μf=E[f] and Σf=Var (f).The exposure to factors can be measured by how much the mean and variance of portfolio returns are affected by factors, respectively. In other words, we can use the amount of return invested on factors, ω′B, or the proportion of variance depended on factors,Var(ω′Bf)Var(ω′r)=ω′BΣfB′ωω′Σω. Therefore, by controlling the factor exposure with constraints that incorporate these values, we can construct portfolios that possess the same level of factor dependency as the target portfolio ω0.Consider the worst-case robust optimization of the form,(R)minωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ωs.t.ω′ι=1,whereUδ(μ¯)=μ|(μ-μ¯)′Σμ-1(μ-μ¯)⩽δ2. Based on (R), we introduce new robust portfolio formulations that include additional constraints on factor exposure.We consider a constraint that matches the factor loading with the target portfolio ω0. The expected return of the target portfolio ω0 isω0′Bμf, whereω0′Bis the part of the return that depends on the factors. Thus, an arbitrary portfolio ω will have the same factor exposure as portfolio ω0 if ω satisfies the following constraint,ω′B=ω0′B.Notice that the above constraint has a convex feasible set because of linearity. By including this constraint into the original robust optimization problem (R), the new robust formulation (R1) can be derived,(R1)minωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ωs.t.ω′ι=1ω0′B=ω′B.However, since the equality constraint of (R1) could restrict the feasible region too much at times, a variation using an inequality constraint can be used,(R1′)minωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ωs.t.ω′ι=1ω0′B-ε⩽ω′B⩽ω0′B+ε,where ε is a vector that sets the bound, which may be represented as a desired percentage ofω0′B. The new robust formulation maintains not only the factor exposure but also the robustness of the original formulation. Furthermore, even though (R1) and (R1′) have additional constraints, the optimal solution can be found efficiently since the extra constraints are linear in both cases.Next, we look at the variance of portfolio returns, which can be represented using the factor model as ω′BΣfB′ω+ω′Σεω for a portfolio ω. If the portfolio return is heavily affected by the factor returns, it means that the value of ω′BΣfB′ω is relatively greater than ω′Σεω. Likewise, a greater value of ω′Σεω relative to ω′BΣfB′ω shows that the portfolio return depends more on the idiosyncratic risk of individual asset movements. Therefore, the proportion of variance explained by the variance of factors,ω′BΣfB′ωω′Σω, can also be used to match the factor exposure of portfolios. Thus, portfolio ω will have the same factor exposure as portfolio ω0 if the following constraint is satisfied,ω′BΣfB′ωω′Σω=ω0′BΣfB′ω0ω0′Σω0⋯(∗)The new robust formulation with this constraint becomes,(R2)minωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ωs.t.ω′ι=1ω′BΣfB′ωω′Σω=ω0′BΣfB′ω0ω0′Σω0Although the above robust formulation fulfills our goal, the non-convexity from the new constraint makes it difficult to find the optimal solution even when using optimization solvers. Therefore, we look for a relaxed modification that can still achieve similar outcomes.We first define g(ω) to be the proportion of the portfolio variance that depends on factor movement,g(ω)=ω′BΣfB′ωω′ΣωThen, the portfolio whose variance depends the most and the least on factors can be expressed respectively as,ωmax=argmaxg(ω)suchthatω′ι=1ωmin=argming(ω)suchthatω′ι=1.Using the Rayleigh’s principle (Strang, 1988), the two values, ωmaxand ωmin, can be easily found by calculating the maximum and minimum eigenvalues. Then the following inequality is satisfied for the given portfolio ω0,g(ωmin)⩽g(ω0)⩽g(ωmax)and this can be used to find a constraint that relaxes constraint (∗). Even if the problem (R2) cannot be solved directly, the alternative approach should at least find an optimal portfolio that is not too close to either ωmaxor ωmin. In other words, the factor exposure of portfolio ω should not be maximized or minimized unless that is the case for portfolio ω0. As shown in Fig. 2, portfolio ω will not be close to either ωmaxor ωminif (ωmax−ωmin) and (ω−ω0) are orthogonal. This approach gives the third robust formulation that does not have extreme factor exposures,(R3)minωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ωs.t.ω′ι=1(ωmax-ωmin)′(ω-ω0)=0.Since (R3) has only linear constraints, it can be solved efficiently. Although it will not control factor exposure as well as (R2), it will be more effective than the original robust formulation.We can modify (R3) based on the findings by Kim et al. (accepted for publication-a) and Kim et al. (2012) that robust formulations tend to increase the dependency on factors. Hence, it is more important for the optimal portfolio to not move towards ωmaxthan ωmin. In this context, the orthogonality of (ωmax−ω0) and (ω−ω0) restricts the convergence of the optimal portfolio to ωmaxas shown in Fig. 3.Therefore, the final robust formulation that only focuses on ωmaxis written as,(R4)minωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ωs.t.ω′ι=1(ωmax-ω0)′(ω-ω0)=0.Furthermore, as we have shown in (R1), the additional constraint of (R4) to control factor exposure may be overly restrictive for finding optimal portfolios. Therefore, the feasible region can be expanded using the modification of the constraint as shown in Fig. 4and the resulting robust formulation becomes,(R4′)minωmaxμ∈Uδ(μ¯)12ω′Σω-λμ′ωs.t.ω′ι=1(ωmax-ωα)′(ω-ωα)⩽0,where ωα=αωmax+(1−α)ω0 for α∈[0, 1] and larger values of α result in optimal portfolios closer to ωmax.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
