@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal resource distribution between protection and redundancy considering the time and uncertainties of attacks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the optimal resource allocation strategy considering intentional attacks.We model attacks with truncated normal distribution.We propose a dynamic strategy where construction pace is geometric.The influence of most probable attack time and uncertainties on strategy is studied.The proposed strategy is more effective in reducing destruction probability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vulnerability,Intentional attacks,Truncated normal distribution,Destruction probability,Resource allocation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a study of the problem of resource allocation between increasing protection of components and constructing redundant components in parallel systems subject to intentional threats. The defender aims at minimizing the entire system destruction probability during certain time horizon by using the best resource allocation strategy which is determined by redundant components construction pace. Different from previous works which focus on the static resource allocation strategy, we propose a dynamic resource distribution strategy with geometric construction pace model and show its advantage over constant construction pace. The vulnerability model considering a most probable attack time and uncertainties of attack time estimates is provided and a destruction probability is evaluated to quantitatively define the ability of the system to survive an intentional attack. The random time of intentional attack is represented by truncated normal distribution. Through the modeling of the most probable attack time and quantifying the uncertainty of the knowledge of defender about this time, the influence of these factors on the optimal resource allocation strategy is investigated. Proper decision regarding the resource allocation is crucial in protecting safety-critical systems, i.e. nuclear power plant, communication base station, power network. Case studies are presented to illustrate the influence and strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Classical reliability theory has developed advanced strategies for analyzing internal threats (e.g., failures originating from components and performance degradation) and provided novel techniques for improving system reliability (e.g., maintenance, redundancy and protection), see Lu and Meeker (1993), Ye, Shen, and Xie (2012), Xing and Levitin (2013), Wang (2002) and Tillman, Hwang, and Kuo (1977). After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack and Fukushima nuclear accident, the survivability of system exposed to external threats has attracted increasing concern. Furthermore, the 2006 undersea cable network interruption caused by earthquake in Taiwan, the 2003 America Northeast Blackout and 2010 telecommunication disruption of Visa, PayPal by malicious destruction provide strong evidence that external threats can have transnational influence on society and economy (Bier & Hausken, 2013; Shan & Zhuang, 2013).The external threats include intentional impacts (Perea & Puerto, 2013) (e.g., terrorist, warfare, intrusion, and human disruption) and unintentional impacts (natural disasters, e.g., earthquakes, tsunami, floods and hurricane and technological impact, e.g., power outage, structural collapse, and network cut-off). Compared to unintentional impacts, analysis of intentional attacks is not a trivial task and the main concern is to propose a framework for investigating the vulnerability of the system under intentional attacks since the behavior model of the intentional attacks has more uncertainty and is still under open discussions (Bricha & Nourelfath, 2013; Ouyang, Zhao, Pan, & Hong, 2014). Finding the most cost-effective risk reduction strategies has always been the essential problem in reliability engineering and risk analysis (Levitin, Xing, & Dai, 2014a). To achieve the optimal risk averting strategy, the defender must strike a balance among different defense measures. Deploying separated redundant components and enhancing protection of existing components is two of such measures (see, for example, Bier, Haphuriwat, Menoyo, Zimmerman, & Culpen, 2008; Levitin, Xing, & Dai, 2014b; Apostolakis & Lemon, 2005; and Levitin & Hausken, 2009).The techniques for developing defense strategies usually include two sequential steps: evaluation of system vulnerability and determination of risk reduction measures. The system vulnerability model is commonly regarded as a contest between a defender and an attacker over system or its parts, expressed by a contest success function (Bricha & Nourelfath, 2013; Hausken, 2010; Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013). Analyzing the risk reduction strategies, most of the researches are focused on forming the mathematical frameworks for static cases.Azaiez and Bier (2007), and Bier, Nagaraj, and Abhichandani (2005) applied game theory to address optimal defenses against intentional impacts. They yield the best trade-off between defensive investments and the success probability or expected damage caused by an attack for series or parallel systems. They assumed that defender had full information about the contest and that both defender and attacker are strategic. Hausken (2007, 2008, 2013) considered strategic attack and defense for series–parallel system, and concluded that defender/attacker benefits from the parallel/series system. It is more realistic and practical to presume that defender and attacker do not have full information about each other. Examples are imperfect information, false targets and imperfect false targets (Hausken & Levitin, 2009b; Lins, Rego, Moura, & Droguett, 2013; Ma et al., 2013; Peng, Levitin, Xie, & Ng, 2010; Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013).A large portion of the current studies consider the contest between defender and attacker, as a static battle. These works are based on the conventional assumption that both contestants can accomplish their entire resource in one-shot effort. Zhuang, Bier, and Alagoz (2010), and Fu and Lu (2012) pointed out that in reality, many contests last for several stages and require contestants to endure a long time, dynamically distributing their resource during time horizon. Taking the time-dependent scenario into consideration, Zhuang et al. (2010), Levitin and Hausken (2010), and Golalikhani and Zhuang (2011) expanded vulnerability analysis and optimal resource allocation into time sequential model. Also, Zio, Sansavini, Maja, and Marchionni (2008), Ramirez-Marquez and Rocco (2012), and Rocco, Ramirez-Marquez, Salazar, and Yajure (2011) introduced dynamic resource allocation in various applications, such as transportation, network system and power system. They considered the optimization problems for an exogenously given resource.Many aforementioned works assume that the defender and the attacker all have pre-determined total resource budget and derive the optimal resource allocation strategy based on such assumption (Bier et al., 2005; Bricha & Nourelfath, 2013; Wang, Ren, Korel, Kwiat, & Salerno, 2014). However, in reality, even though they have total resource budget, the resource available does not always equal to total resource budget at the beginning of the contest and increases over time. Examples can be found in supply chain transportation, power distribution grid and communication networks where the defender needs time to gather resource to build critical infrastructures or accomplish protection strategy and the attacker also has to gather resource to carry out an attack (Levitin & Hausken, 2011; Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013).Thus, it is more reasonable to assume that the defender and the attacker obtain their resources in a stockpiling manner with certain rate over a certain time period. The model of optimal defense with stockpiling resources was first suggested in Levitin and Hausken (2011). It was assumed that the resource stockpiling pace starts at the same time and is constant for both the defender and the attacker. A parallel system where the attacker should succeed in attacking all components to destroy the entire system was considered. The attack time was assumed to be uniformly distributed along a given finite time horizon, which means that the defender has absolutely no information about the attack time.The models above are all based on the assumption that the attacker does not have any preference in attack time. However, in many situations this is not the case. For example, service systems with multiple servers, power supply grids with multiple power generations, transportation networks, wind farms with multiple wind turbines are characterized by critical events, such as maximal website traffic, peak power demand and largest production capacity (Cedeno and Arora, 2013; Lau and Mcsharry, 2010). Since both agents have full information about each other and causing the greatest damage is the main drive for the attacker, it is reasonable for the attacker to attack the system during the critical event. The attack time is thus believed to be associated with the time distribution of the critical event. Therefore, the attacker can have preferred attack time and the defender can have some information about the most probable attack time, though this information may be uncertain.The truncated normal distribution is widely used to model the time distribution of the critical event with uncertainties in many models (Cedeno & Arora, 2013; Lau & Mcsharry, 2010; Ramirez-Marquez & Rocco, 2012; Torres, Brumbelow, & Guikema, 2009; Wei, Jin, & Shen, 2012; Yuan, Zhao, & Zeng, 2014). The attack time is usually restricted by lower and upper bounds (for example, by a system mission time or by a time of conflict situation). The truncated normal distribution fits the situations when the uncertain attack time is bounded and ensures that the attack during the time horizon happens with probability 1.Other distributions have been studied in the previous works. The uniform distribution (Levitin & Hausken, 2011) does not allow taking into account the defender's partial knowledge about the possible attack time. Considering the normal distribution (Cedeno & Arora, 2013) makes the analysis more complicated as it does not consider the time boundary (horizon) and assume unrealistic attack times (though with low probability).Consider, for example, a service network system that can offer more reliable service by increasing the protection of the existing servers or deploying more servers. The time of the maximal website traffic is modeled by a truncated normal distribution. In order to inflict the maximal damage, the hackers choose an attack time close to the maximal network traffic. This attack time can be modeled by the truncated normal distribution.Though, complex system can have multiple operational states (Faghih-Roohi, Xie, Ng, & Yam, 2014; Hausken & Levitin, 2009a; Zhang & Ramirez-Marquez, 2013), we assume that an attack is successful only if all system components are destroyed. We focus on studying the influence of uncertain attack time on the system destruction probability, which is determined by the system vulnerability and corresponding attack probability. The system destruction probability over certain time horizon is studied as the measure of current and potential danger under an intentional attack. The defender aims at minimizing the entire system destruction probability over the finite time horizon.We consider parallel systems such as service network system with several servers, power supply system with transmission lines (Ramirez-Marquez, Rocco, & Levitin, 2011; Yuan et al., 2014). In such systems both agents distribute resource among components evenly if they have full information about each other. This has been shown by Hausken (2007), and Levitin and Hausken (2011). Indeed if, for example, one of components is less protected and the attacker knows this, the attacker can destroy it with less resource, and then concentrates more resources on other targets. Thus, we assume that the attack and protection resources are evenly distributed among system components.We study the influence of the most probable attack time and the uncertainty of its estimate on determining the constant and geometric construction pace strategies. A comparison between the two strategies is provided, considering the defense costs associated with these strategies.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the component vulnerability and redundant components construction models. Section 3 studies the influence of the most probable time of the attack on the vulnerability and destruction probability of entire system. Section 4 describes the approach used for evaluating the vulnerability and the destruction probability of the entire system and presents the optimal resource allocation strategies under different truncated normal distributions of the attack time. Section 5 concludes.Aattacker's resource stockpiling pacecost of constructing single redundant componentconstruction pace fraction of j-th redundant componentdefense resource stockpiling pacepdf of attack time after the truncationdeployment time of j-th redundant componentintensity of the contesttotal number of constructed redundant components by time tratio D/Centire system destruction probabilityper component allocated resource of the attacker and the defenderfraction of resource used in constructing new components at time tcontest time horizoncomponent vulnerability (destruction probability)vulnerability of the entire systemallowed level of system vulnerabilityratio D/Athe greatest integer which does not exceed xthe most probable attack timestandard deviation of the regular normal distributionpdf and cdf of the standard normal distribution respectivelyThe contest success function models the conflict between defender and the attacker from an axiomatic perspective (Skaperdas, 1996). Supposing the attacker attacks a component with resource Q and the defender protects this component with resource q, the component vulnerability is determined as follows:(1)v(q,Q)=Qmqm+Qm=(1+(qQ)m)−1where m ≥ 0 is a parameter that stands for the intensity of the contest. The above model is widely used in the conflict studies, and applied to extended applications, such as rent seeking research and network congestion. Wasser (2013) explains its flexibility in the rent seeking contests with incomplete information, when dealing with the Tullock lottery contest. Bier and Hausken (2013) illustrate its practicability in the research of intentional attacks on traffic network, considering joint behaviors of government, terrorist and driver. The discussion of the application of Eq. (1) in stockpiling resource contests can be found in Levitin and Hausken (2011).The essential assumptions made in this paper are summarized as follows.(1)Both the defender and the attacker have complete information regarding each other's resources.The defender has no restrictions on resource distribution between the protection and redundancy.The attacker's and defender's resource stockpiling paces are fixed.Cost of constructing single redundant component does not change during the contest time.The attack succeeds only when the all system components are destroyed.The attack time is assumed to follow the truncated normal distribution over a fixed time horizon, which reflects the defender's uncertainty about the attack time.The contest intensity does not change during the contest time.The attack and protection resources are evenly distributed among system components.At the beginning of the contest, the system contains only one component. We assume that the defense resource stockpiling pace is a constant value D. When the system operates timet, the defender gathers resource Dt, which should be distributed between protecting all of the existing components and constructing new identical redundant components. The attacker gathers resource At at time t, with a constant resource stockpiling pace A. We assume that the construction cost of a new redundant component is fixed and equal to C.In realistic applications, the distribution of defense resource between protection and construction cannot be accomplished immediately. Since any new redundant component is built/installed over time, the construction is carried out during the contest time horizon T. We model such process by assuming that the construction consumes part of the accumulated defense resource. The defense resource is dynamically distributed between protection and construction, which is a time dependent process.In this study, the pace of resource used in constructing new components can be defined as a dynamic fraction of the entire defense resource stockpiling pace D, that is r(t)D, where r(t) indicates the proportion of resource used in constructing new components at time t, and r(t) ≤ 1. When∫0t′r(τ)DCdτ=∫0t′r(τ)pdτ(where p = D/C) is integer, the construction of a new redundant component is completed at time t' and the total number of system components at this time becomes∫0t′r(τ)×pdτ+1. At any time t, the system contains⌊∫0tr(τ)pdτ⌋+1components and spends resource∫0t(1−r(τ))Ddτon protecting these components.When the protection resource is evenly distributed among the components and the protection resource q per each component is:(2)q=∫0t(1−r(τ))Ddτ⌊∫0tr(τ)prt⌋+1By time t, the attacker has resource At and distributes it evenly among all components to destroy the entire system. The per component attack resource Q is:(3)Q=At⌊∫0tr(τ)pdτ⌋+1Thus, the vulnerability of the entire system at time is(4)V(t,r(t))=(1+(∫0t(1−r(τ))xdτt)m)−⌊∫0tr(τ)pdτ⌋−1where x = D/A.As discussed in the introduction, the behavior of the attacker is assumed to follow the time distribution of the system critical event, which can be derived from historical data. In this paper, the time distribution of the attack is represented by a truncated normal distribution because the attack cannot happen beyond specified time limits. Thus, the most probable attack time and uncertainty of defender's knowledge about this time are represented by the most probable attack time μ and the standard deviation σ of the original normal distribution.A truncated normal distribution is a normal distribution X ∼ N(μ, σ2) that is restricted within a finite interval (a, b), where a and b are the lower and upper truncation points respectively. It can be expressed as follows:(5)f(t,a,b,μ,σ)=ϕ(t−μσ)σ[Φ(b−μσ)−Φ(a−μσ)],a≤t≤b.where μ and σ are the most probable attack time and standard deviation of the standard normal distribution. ϕ and Φ are the pdf and cdf of the standard normal distribution respectively. We denote a as 0 and b as the time horizon T in our study. Thus∫0Tf(t,0,T,μ,σ)dt=1for any μ and σ. Examples can be found in Robert (1995), Cedeno and Arora (2013), and Barr and Sherrill (1999).The entire system destruction probability during the time horizon T given the attack time is truncated normally distributed is(6)P=∫0TV(t,r(t))f(t,0,T,μ,σ)dt=∫0T(1+(∫0t(1−r(τ))xdτt)m)−⌊∫0tr(τ)pdτ⌋−1f(t,0,T,μ,σ)dtThe optimal defense resource allocation strategy lies in finding r(t) ≤ 1 providing minimal system destruction probability under some constraints.In this case when the construction pace fraction is constant and r(t) ≤ 1, Eq. (4) has the form(7)V(t,r(t))=(1+((1−r)x)m)−⌊rpt⌋−1Fig. 1 presents the system vulnerability as a function of time t for different variable parameters m, p, x and r. It can be seen that spending part of resource on constructing redundant components always results in high system vulnerability at the early stage of the contest. The resource spent on constructing new components cannot take effect immediately until the construction of new component is finished. The additions of redundant component correspond to sudden drops of V(t, r) in Fig. 1. Spending more resource on construction means that the defender leaves less resource for enhancing protection. Therefore, higher r always leads to higher vulnerability at the beginning of the contest. Also, when the contest intensity m is high, it is not wise to allocate much resource into construction because the importance of the protection increases.When the cost of constructing a new component is high (small p), the defender has to endure a relatively high vulnerability for a long time, until the construction of new component is finished (see Fig. 2).From Eq. (4), onecan see that the system vulnerability does not change within time intervals (pr)−1 during which the number of system components remains constant. The calculation of the system destruction probability requires obtaining the value of subsection integrals for k = ⌊prT⌋ + 1 subsections. The integration interval for subsection which terminates before time T is [(j − 1)(pr)−1, j(pr)−1], which corresponds to deployment of redundant components. For the last subsection, integral interval is [⌊prT⌋(pr)−1, T]. Thus, we can obtain the destruction probability of the entire system as:P(r)=((1+(x(1−r))m)−1∫0Tf(t,0,T,μ,σ)dtfor prT < 1 and(8)P(r)=∑j=1⌊prT⌋((1+(x(1−r))m)−j∫j−1prjprf(t,0,T,μ,σ)dt+((1+(x(1−r))m)−⌊prT⌋−1∫⌊prT⌋prTf(t,0,T,μ,σ)dtfor prT > 1.To investigate the influence of the most probable attack time on the system destruction probability, we obtained the value of P(r) as a function of the most probable attack time μ for time horizon T = 8, σ = 1, x = 0.5, 2, p = 0.5, 2, m = 0.2, 2 and r = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.7. The results obtained according to Eq. (8) are presented in Fig. 3.It can be seen that when r is constant, the attacker can never benefit from increase of μ. With the growth of μ the defender has more time to collect the defensive resource and distributes it between protecting existing components and constructing redundant components. It can be seen from Eq. (8) that P is decreasing function of μ for any x. Thus, larger μ contributes to the system destruction probability decrease by minimizing the chance of attack in early stage of the contest horizon when the system is mostly vulnerable. For the case when the cost of constructing a new component is high (small p), a variation of μ does not change the destruction probability. Indeed, when prT < 1, the system contains only one component at the end of the contest. In this case, P always equals to ((1 + (x(1 − r))m)−1. If a system has a large construction pace r and low cost of constructing a new component, the system destruction probability decreases with the increase of most probable attack time μ.In the previous discussion, we have studied the influence of the most probable attack time on the system destruction probability. When the defender has partial knowledge about the attack time, the defender can optimize the redundant components construction pace fraction to minimize the system destruction probability.In this sub-section, we study the optimal resource allocation strategy under the assumption that the redundant component construction pace fraction is constant. The defender seeks for a resource allocation strategy which strikes a balance between decreasing the initial system vulnerability by increasing investment into protections and decreasing system vulnerability along with time by deploying more redundant components.Having explicit Eq. (8), one can find the optimal constant construction pace fraction that minimizes the destruction probability P(r) for different parameters. Fig. 4 shows that P(r) can have a minimum for certain combination of T, x, m, p, μ and σ. In general the considered optimization problem is not only a non-linear programming problem but also a non-convex problem, and thus proving its all properties analytically is not a trivial task.Fig. 5presents the optimal value of r as a function of m for the contest horizon T = 8, x = 2, p = 0.5, 3, μ = 2, 4 and σ = 0.5, 2. The optimal value of r decreases with m for any values of x, p, μ and σ. The essential reason is that the increasing intensity makes system vulnerability more sensitive to the effort spent on protecting existing components. Thus with the growth of m, the optimal resource allocation strategy must increase protection effort and decrease the construction pace.The results also show that increase of p and most probable attack time μ as well as the decrease of uncertainty σ cause the increase of the optimal construction pace fraction r*. The increase of p means that the cost of constructing a redundant component decreases and the defender can deploy more components without violating the budget. This benefits the defender at the later stage of the contest with decreasing vulnerability, as shown in Fig. 2.The increase of the most probable attack time μ, the increase of the cost p, and the decrease of uncertainty σ mean that the defender is more confident that the early attack is unlikely (see Proposition 1 in Appendix A). Based on this conclusion, the defender does not need to spend many resources on protection even though the protection is important at early stage. As the attack is more likely to happen at later stage, it is more wise to increase the construction pace fraction to provide more redundancy. The increase of m (m > 1) benefits the contest actor having the resource superiority. Thus, for intensive contests the construction of redundant components becomes more effective with decrease of the construction cost, increase of the most probable attack time and decrease of the attack time uncertainty.Based on Proposition 2 in Appendix A, the destruction probability at interval [T0, T] is very small for arbitrary construction pace fraction r and the contest at interval [T0, T] can be ignored. Widening the contest time T does have significant influence on the optimal resource allocation strategy when T > T0. For T > T0, the optimal resource allocation strategy r* equals tor0*corresponding to the contest time T0 and the corresponding system destruction probability equals toP(r0*,T0). This conclusion has also been shown by the numerical simulation, as presented in Fig. 6.Fig. 7presents r* and P(r*) as functions of the most probable attack time. For the case when the defender is superior in resources and can allow many redundant components, the construction pace increases and the destruction probability decreases when the most probable attack time increases. However, the construction pace should be low when the attack is expected in the early stage of the contest (low μ). The essential reason is that early attack makes it very difficult to have more than one component in the system. Thus, the limited resource will play a greater role in protection than in construction. This consideration works for the case when the construction cost is very high. In this case the construction pace always remains zero until the most probable attack time reaches some threshold level.Fig. 8presents r* and P(r*) as functions of the attack time uncertainty σ. The construction pace always equals zero when the construction cost and the contest intensity are high. Indeed, in highly intensive contest the protection is more important and a high construction cost makes it difficult to allow more components. Thus, it is wise to spend no resource in protection. For the case when the defender is superior in resources and can allow deploying many components, the construction pace has a decreasing trend and the destruction probability has an increasing trend. The increasing attack time uncertainty σ makes the defender more inclined to enhance the protection by the price of reducing the construction activity.The abrupt variations of r* are determined simultaneously by the x, p and m. For case x = 0.5, p = 1.5 and m = 2, when the uncertainty σ is low, the defender is confident about the exact time range of the attack happening, and it is wise to decrease the construction pace as a larger m means that the protection is more important when x is small. However, as the uncertainty σ increases, the defender cannot have a confident range about the time of attack happening, and thus constructing redundant components has the advantage over increasing protection, considering the construction cost is rather low. But for the case x = 4, p = 1.5 and m = 2, the value of uncertainty corresponding to the abrupt value is at the early stage of the contest.When the defender is superior in the resource, the system destruction probability is always low and the protection is not as critical as the redundancy in decreasing the system destruction probability. Thus, the defender only needs to keep the construction pace to a relatively low level at smaller value of uncertainty and then increase the construction pace to offer more redundancy when the uncertainty increases.In reality the constant construction pace studied in the above sub-section may not represent the optimal strategy. For high contest intensity and low cost of constructing redundant components, the protection is important in the beginning of the time horizon whereas redundancy is more important in the later stages as shown in Fig. 1. Thus, it is wise to have a low construction pace fraction in the contest beginning and increase it afterwards. However for low contest intensity and high cost of constructing redundant components, the protection is less important and the redundant components consume many resources. As the redundant component has no effect until it is deployed, the construction pace should be high at the contest beginning and then may decrease.In this subsection, we assume that the dynamic construction pace fraction r(t) obeys a geometric progression law. This law is chosen because it allows adjusting the defense strategy flexibly providing increasing or decreasing construction pace. The construction pace remains constant during constructing any particular component i.e. the construction pace fraction of the first redundant component is r and for j-th redundant component it is(9)cpj={rzj−1,ifrzj−1<11,otherwisewhere 0 ≤ r ≤ 1 and z ≥ 0.Based on the above assumption, the construction of j-th redundant component is finished at time(10)Fj=∑k=1j1(p×cpk)where F0 = 0 by definition.By time t, the total number of constructed redundant components Ntshould be such that:(11)∑k=0NtFk<t<∑k=0Nt+1Fkwhich corresponds to the total of Nt+ 1 components already deployed in the system.To compare the constant construction pace strategy and the geometric construction pace strategy we have to take into account the overhead associated with these strategies. To model such overhead we introduce the penalty cost, which is a function of the number of construction pace changes. At time t, the number of construction pace changes Mtis as follows(12)Mt={0,ifNt=0Nt,ifrzNt−1≠rzNtandNt>0M−1,otherwisewhere M is the smallest integer which guarantees the inequality rzM − 1 ≥ 1 when z > 1. The construction pace change is taken into account started from the second redundant component.In this paper, the penalty cost function for geometric construction pace strategy at time t is defined as follows(13)Costt=l×Mt2×C,where l is a coefficient and C is the cost of constructing a new redundant component.The penalty cost function is reasonable here since the case with z = 1 corresponds to the constant construction pace with no penalty. The penalty cost function is convex and increasing with the number of construction pace changes.Since adopting the geometric construction pace strategy consumes part of the resource, the total resources used in protection and redundancy decreases with time. Therefore, the defense and attack resources available at time t can be represented as(14){q=Dt−∑j=1Ntcpj×(Fj−Fj−1)×D−cpNt+1×D×(t−FNt)−l×Mt2×CNt+1Q=AtNt+1and the vulnerability of the entire system at time t takes the form(15)V(r,z,t)=(1+(x(t−Nt+l×Mt2p−cpNt+1×(t−FNt)t))m)−(Nt+1)In a defined contest time period T, the inequality(16)FN<T<FN+1for FN(N ∈ {1, 2, …, ⌊pT⌋ − 1, ⌊pT⌋}) means that N redundant components are deployed by the end of the contest. Thus, we can obtain the destruction probability of the system with N + 1 components for contest time T as followsIf N < 1(17)P(r,z)=((1+(x(1−cp1))m)−1∫0Tf(t,0,T,μ,σ)dtIf N ≥ 1P(r,z)=∑j=1N∫Fj−1Fj(1+(x(t−j−1+l×Mt2p−cpj×(t−Fj−1)t))m)−j×f(t,0,T,μ,σ)dt+∫FNT(1+(x(t−N+l×Mt2p−cpN+1×(t−FN)t))m)−(N+1)×f(t,0,T,μ,σ)dtThe optimal resource allocation strategy with geometric construction pace fraction is determined by parameters r* and z* such that: (r*, z*) = argmin P(r, z). Finding r* and z* is a non-convex non-linear programming problem, which can be solved using heuristic algorithms (such as Genetic Algorithm or Particle Swarm Optimization).Fig. 9presents the optimal parameters r*, z* and P(r*, z*) as a function of the most probable attack time μ for the combination of l = 0.2, m = 0.2, x = 0.5, p = 0.5, T = 8 and σ = 1. It can be seen that for the given parameters the geometric construction pace strategy outperforms the constant construction pace strategy in achieving minimum system destruction probability, even when the pace changes are penalized. When the construction cost of redundant components is high (p = 0.5), l = 0.2 the cost of keeping a geometric pace is also high. The penalty cost affects the system vulnerability only when the construction of the second redundant component begins, as shown in Eq. (12), Eq. (13) and Eq. (17). Thus, the geometric construction pace strategy presumes consuming part of the resource without affecting the system vulnerability in the initial part of the contest.For geometric construction pace strategy, the destruction probability can still decrease with the increase of the most probable attack time. When the most probable attack time is small, the chance of finishing the first redundant component before the attack is very low and then it is wise for the defender to spend the resources on protection with r* = 0 and z* = 0.When μ exceeds a certain value, r* can jump abruptly, whereas z* remains zero. The essential reason is that the construction cost is rather high and the attack has little probability to happen at late stage. Thus the chance of finishing the second redundant component before the attack is low. In this case the defender should avoid spending any resource on constructing the second component and concentrate on protection with z* = 0. In this case, protection is more beneficial than redundancy as the redundancy has no effect until the component construction is completed. Even though part of the resource is used on overheads associated with the geometric pace strategy, this strategy causes the decrease of the system vulnerability.In the situation when the attack is expected at the late stage of the contest, it is better to keep the construction pace constant and avoid implementing the geometric pace strategy to decrease the system vulnerability (see Fig. 9). This way the defender can reduce the probability of the attack when the system is highly vulnerable. When the penalty associated with the geometric construction pace strategy is negligible, the defender can frequently change the construction pace and avoid the system vulnerability increase. Thus, the destruction probability in such situation decreases.Fig. 10 presents the optimal values of r* and z* and corresponding P(r*, z*) as a function of the attack time uncertainty σ for the combination of l = 0.4, m = 2, x = 0.5, p = 1.5, T = 8 and μ = 4.It can be seen that in the case of geometric construction pace strategy, the destruction probability is much lower than in the case of the constant construction pace strategy, even considering penalty associated with the geometric construction pace strategy. The difference in the destruction probability for the cases with and without penalties is mainly caused by the fact that part of the resource has been consumed by overheads associated with the geometric construction pace strategy, which causes the increase of the system vulnerability. For high contest intensity, the protection is more important than redundancy. Therefore, the geometric pace strategy uses high construction pace at the contest beginning and then reduces it to 0 to concentrate the resources on protection.The abrupt change in the destruction probability is caused by the small uncertainty about the attack time. The destruction probability is determined by the system vulnerability at that time and there is a little space to optimize the resource allocation strategy. The system destruction probability increases with the defender's uncertainty about the attack time. The essential reason is that the defender is unsure about the attack time and cannot develop a specific, optimal strategy to decrease the destruction probability.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper extends the earlier research on optimal resource allocation strategy by considering the protection and redundancy in systems exposed to intentional threats. It provides an approach to deal with the trade-off between allocating limited resources to protect components and to construct redundant components, in order to decrease system destruction probability over a fixed time horizon. It presents a framework to incorporate the intentional attack time distribution with the system vulnerability model. The influence of the most probable attack time and the defender's uncertainty about this time on the optimal defense strategy is studied under some realistic assumptions. It analyses different patterns of static and dynamic resource distribution between protecting the existing components and constructing new redundant ones. It also analytically proves that the system destruction probability cannot increase with the contest time under static case. The results show that the geometric progression construction pace strategy may have advantage over the constant construction pace strategy even considering an associated penalty (overheads).Future research could consider more general resource allocation dynamics models, with construction delay and maximal system vulnerability constraint, and uncertainty of the defender's knowledge about the attacker's resource stockpiling pace. We will also consider the stockpiling model in which the defense resource is distributed among protection of the working component and deployment of false targets (extending the model suggested in Levitin & Hausken, 2013).The presented framework allows using any attack time distribution. In the future we will study the optimal resource distribution model with different types of this distribution.