@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Managing new and remanufactured products to mitigate environmental damage under emissions regulation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Win-win and triple win conditions for remanufacturing under taxes are provided.Cannibalization and low-emission advantage of remanufacturing are key components.Collection rate and cost to the environment are decisive for triple win benefits.Firm’s total environmental impact with remanufacturing can be larger than without.Increased consumer concern prompts heavy taxes but undermines remanufacturing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in marketing,Emissions taxes,Remanufacturing,Cannibalization,Production planning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Emissions of greenhouse gases are not as free as they used to be. Under stringent regulations, manufacturers increasingly find that their emissions have a steep monetary, environmental and social price. In manufacturing industry, remanufacturing has an important role to play with its inherent economic, environmental and social opportunities which warrant regulatory action. In this paper, we characterize the optimal emissions taxation policy in order for remanufacturing to deliver those benefits. In particular, using a leader-follower Stackelberg game model, we investigate the impact of emissions taxes on the optimal production and pricing decisions of a manufacturer who could remanufacture its own product. We characterize whether/under what conditions the manufacturer’s decision to remanufacture under emissions regulation reduces its environmental impact (as measured by total greenhouse emissions), whilst increasing its profits (a win-win situation). On the policy side, we delineate how emissions taxes can be instituted to realize the inherent economic, environmental and social benefits of remanufacturing (the triple win of remanufacturing). Two critical components of this analysis are the issue of demand cannibalization from the remanufactured product and the low-emission advantage of remanufacturing. We further investigate the impact of remanufacturing- and society-related factors on the balance among firm-level profits, environmental impact and social welfare, where the collection rate of end-of-use products and the cost to the environment turn out to be decisive in deriving the triple win benefits from remanufacturing. Last, we extend our analyses to an emissions trading setting where emissions are regulated using tradeable permits, and investigate the economic implications of remanufacturing under emissions trading vis-á-vis emissions taxation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Business corporations are at the center of public discourse on sustainability. They devour non-renewable resources and produce disproportionate amounts of negative externalities; hence degrade the environment. They also undertake a host of discrete initiatives to conserve and recycle water, reduce raw material/resource use, decrease energy consumption and control pollution; hence offer solutions to environmental degradation. Among numerous activities to strengthen their commitment to social and environmental sustainability, the abatement of emissions plays an important role for businesses. With mounting pressures from stakeholders and under more stringent regulations/legislations, emissions abatement has become an indispensable piece of manufacturers’ production operations which involve production planning and investment in pollution abatement equipment/systems.There are a number of market-based mechanisms designed and instituted to curb corporate emissions. These include taxes on emissions, tradable emission allowances and deposit-refund schemes for harmful products. The long-term regulatory trend is toward making those who pollute pay for the damage they cause (Esty & Winston, 2006). The push for companies to “internalize” environmental costs, as economists would argue for, by imposing a charge on emissions would create a financial “incentive” for companies to minimize their emissions costs and be more effective in emissions abatement than subsidies and emissions trading schedules.11For various drawbacks of subsidies, see http://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=31311 (accessed date October 2, 2014), and http://hbr.org/2012/03/green-rules-to-drive-innovation/ar/1 (accessed date October 2, 2014). For the shortcomings of emissions trading regulation, see http://www.economist.com/node/9337630 (accessed date October 2, 2014). For the advantages of emissions taxes over preceding schemes, see http://thomsonreuters.com/our-thinking-content/pdf/carbon-taxes.pdf (accessed date October 2, 2014).To comply with these regulatory schemes, firms experience additional challenges to adjust their existing production planning strategies so as to cut their emissions whilst avoiding potential negative economic consequences. Remanufacturing, recognized by various governments, can play an important role in realizing these aims22http://www.reman.org/pdf/IUbusinessHorizonsRemanufacturing.pdf (accessed date October 2, 2014).and has already made major inroads into corporate agendas (Atasu, Sarvary, & Wassenhove, 2008). In 2011, production of remanufactured goods in the U.S. totaled $43 billion and accounted for 2 percent of all sales of manufactured goods.33http://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4356.pdf (accessed date May 30, 2015).State governments continue to act on increasing the remanufacturing activity and maximizing the remanufacturing sector in the U.S. Remanufactured products are of particular interest, since remanufacturing process returns an end-of-life product to as-new condition with warranty to match, but consumes less materials, reduces the reliance on resources, uses less energy and generates fewer negative by-products/emissions. In the UK, remanufacturing is estimated to contribute to 10 million tonnes of carbon dioxide reduction every year.44http://makewealthhistory.org/2014/12/11/what-is-remanufacturing (accessed date May 30, 2015).Governments have a direct stake in curbing emissions generated by consumer products and have the power to tax products/processes based on their external cost to the environment. The firms in the U.S. (the undisputed leader in the world in terms of producing and consuming remanufactured products) receive no subsidies or tax credits to remanufacture yet pay emissions tax, which makes remanufacturing a practical and/or profitable solution to some manufacturers.55http://www.reman.org/Papers/ICRM%20APRA%20version.pdf (accessed date May 30, 2015).When the right measures are set in place, remanufacturing in itself has potential to deliver extensive economic, environmental and social benefits (referred to as the triple win for remanufacturing). Production planning activities are inherently more complex for remanufacturing due to such factors as quality perception and supply constraints (Akcali & Cetinkaya, 2011). Adding to this complexity, manufacturers firmly believe that remanufacturing would cannibalize the market for their new products. As a low-priced counterpart, the purchase of a remanufactured version of a product has the potential to displace the sales of a new product and negatively affect profits, hindering the uptake of remanufacturing. For a manufacturer that is subject to legislation on its emissions, to offer a remanufactured product, it should not only contribute to reducing emissions, but be also profitable (since producing nothing is even more environmentally friendly). It is important to recognize that remanufacturing is not a one-size-fits-all approach and may not always be the best option, either economically or environmentally.66http://www.policyconnect.org.uk/apsrg/sites/site_apsrg/files/apsrg_-_remanufacturing_report.pdf (accessed date May 31, 2015).Then, our first main goal is to examine whether/when the decision to remanufacture reduces the total environmental impact of a firm under an emissions-charge legislation, whilst increasing its overall profits.On the regulation side, the regulator should institute emissions taxes to induce manufacturers to offer remanufactured products, only if remanufacturing enhances the social welfare in the community. Even well-intentioned economic initiatives harnessed to decrease a product’s external cost to the environment and promote efficiency can have negative effects if not carefully structured and managed (Ottman, 2011). In the UK, for instance, the government risks missing out on remanufacturing triple win.77http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/2385384/uk-missing-remanufacturing-triple-win-spelman-warns (accessed date June 2, 2015).Then, our second main goal is to delineate how emissions taxes can be instituted to realize the social, economic and environmental benefits of remanufacturing. We also investigate the impact of certain features of a remanufactured product (which make production planning decisions more difficult with remanufacturing) such as relative emissions intensity, collection rate of end-of-use products, and collection and processing cost of used-products, and the society-related factors such as market’s perception of environmental hazard on balancing the economic, environmental and social benefits of remanufacturing under an emissions tax regulation scheme.Our aforesaid goals translate into the following research questions: How effective is an emissions tax regulation for the choice of remanufacturing to deliver both economic and environmental benefits to the manufacturing firm? What are the impacts of remanufacturing-related factors on the economics of remanufacturing (i.e., production quantities and prices of new and remanufactured products) at different emissions tax prices? Under an emissions tax regulation, are the economic and/or environmental savings from remanufacturing linked to low-emission advantage of a remanufactured product or the degree of cannibalization? What is the optimal tax policy to uncover the triple win potential remanufacturing offers in economic, environmental and social terms? How should the regulator coordinate the different strands of the economy and society to encourage remanufacturing so that it can deliver economic, environmental and social benefits?To answer those questions, we consider a leader-follower Stackelberg game between a profit-maximizing firm (the follower) and a welfare-maximizing regulator (the leader) in a market, where consumers are heterogeneous in their willingness-to-pay and value remanufactured products less than new products. Using a two-period model, we examine two distinct cases: (1) Remanufacturing case; and (2) No remanufacturing case. For the former, the manufacturing firm offers a product made up of so-called virgin materials (i.e., the new product) in period 1, and does introduce the remanufactured version of this product into the market in period 2. That is, in period 2, it starts offering a mixed product line in which new and remanufactured products coexist. For the latter, the firm does not invest in remanufacturing and offers just all-new products in both periods. To understand the economic and environmental impacts of remanufacturing, we compare the optimal profits (our measure for the economic performance) obtained under those two cases, and the resulting total emissions from productions (our metric for the environmental impact), respectively. To evaluate the social impact of remanufacturing, we compare the optimal welfare values obtained in those two cases, where our welfare function includes consumer willingness-to-pay for remanufactured and new products, amount of emissions generated in producing those products, and the total firm-level profits obtained from their sales. We also extend the analysis to a setting where emissions are regulated using tradeable permits, and investigate the economic and environmental impact of remanufacturing under emissions trading.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 includes a review of the related literature. Section 3 describes the model, and Section 4 studies the structural properties of the optimal profit and environmental impact functions under emissions tax regulation. Section 5 specifies our definition of social welfare, solves the welfare maximization problem and explores policy implications. Section 6 extends the analysis to an emissions trading setting. Section 7 summarizes our discussion and concludes the paper. Proofs are provided in the appendix (available as an online supplement at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.08.020).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
