@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bounded growth of the bullwhip effect under a class of nonlinear ordering policies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The growth of the bullwhip effect under nonlinear ordering policies is analyzed.Closed-form formulas are derived based on a describing-function approach.Nonlinearity in ordering policies is proven to cause bounded bullwhip effect growth.Impacts of mean demand, ordering periodicity, and forecasting method are derived.Various managerial insights hold the promise to help develop counteracting strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bullwhip effect,Frequency domain analysis,Nonlinear,Order-up-to,Describing function,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper analyzes the bullwhip effect in multi-echelon supply chains under a general class of nonlinear ordering policies. A describing-function approach from control theory is used to derive closed-form formulas to predict amplification of order fluctuations along the supply chain. It is proven that with consideration of nonlinearity in the ordering policy, the magnitude of the bullwhip effect will eventually become bounded after growing through the first few stages of the supply chain. It is also proven that the average customer demand as well as the demand fluctuation frequency would directly affect the bounded magnitude, while the suppliers’ demand forecasting method has no effect at all. For illustration, analytical results for a class of order-up-to policies are derived and verified by numerical simulations. The proposed modeling framework holds the promise to not only explain empirical observations, but also serve as the basis for developing counteracting strategies against the bullwhip effect.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The bullwhip effect is a well-known phenomenon in supply chains where the amplitude of order fluctuations increases along the chain from downstream to upstream suppliers. In other words, small perturbations in a stable customer demand may cause huge fluctuations in order sequences of the upstream suppliers. First discovered by Forrester (1958), the bullwhip effect has been observed in several areas such as industry operations (Baganha & Cohen, 1998), macroeconomics (Blinder, 1986), and business simulations (Goodwin & Franklin, 1994). A main negative consequence of the bullwhip effect is the significant increase of supply chain operation costs, since the supplier needs to adjust capacity and production plan to meet highly fluctuating orders that he/she receives (Chen, Ryan, & Simchi-Levi, 2000b; Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997, 2004; Ouyang & Daganzo, 2006a). Extensive studies have been conducted to explore the mechanism of the bullwhip effect. Most of the literature models order sequences in the time domain as stochastic processes and analyze their statistical properties. Managerial insights on the bullwhip effect are drawn by relating the amplification of order sequence variations (e.g., variance) to various operational causes (Baganha & Cohen, 1998; Chen, Ryan, & Simchi-Levi, 2000a; 2000b; Gaur, Giloni, & Seshadri, 2005; Gilbert, 2005; Graves, 1999; Lee et al., 1997; 2004;Zhang, 2004). The bullwhip effect is quantified first for simple two-stage supply chain (Chen et al., 2000b) and then extended for multi-echelon supply chain based on Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) time-series models (Gilbert, 2005).When investigating the bullwhip effect in practices, people may face the challenge of lacking accurate customer demand information. To this end, frequency domain based robust supply chain analysis is introduced to quantitatively estimate the bullwhip effect as a function of inventory management policies, regardless of the customer demand. A group of literature establishes the theoretical foundation of robust analysis on the bullwhip effect. Daganzo (2003, 2004) presents robust analytical results for multi-echelon supply chain systems with general demand inputs. To identify and maintain the system stability, Ouyang (2007) develops robust stability metric for analyzing supply chains with information sharing. To provide quantitative methods to predict the propagation of order fluctuations, variance formulas under linear time-invariant inventory management policies are proposed. For example, Ouyang and Daganzo (2006a, 2008) provide an exact formula to characterize the bullwhip effect for multi-stage supply chains with ergodic customer demand. Later, Ouyang and Li (2010) generalize the formula into a supply chain network including multiple customers, with or without sharing information among suppliers. Also, Dejonckheere, Disney, Lambrecht, and Towill (2003, 2004) propose demand-dependent variance formulas for the situation where customer demand are forecasted. Based on the theoretical achievement, Li, Disney, and Gaalman (2014) propose a dampened trend forecasting method and study the stability under the order-up-to policy. Furthermore, Ivanov and Sokolov (2013) and Fu, Aghezzaf, and Keyser (2014) conduct dynamic control analysis to avoid the bullwhip effect.Although the aforementioned studies provide valuable insights, their results highly depend on pre-assumed customer demand processes and linearized ordering policies, which limit their applicability to general supply chains. Unfortunately, in reality, most known optimal ordering policies are actually nonlinear. For example, the (S, s) and order-up-to policies are respectively proven to be optimal in certain supply chain contexts and widely used in practical operations (Clark & Scarf, 1960; Karlin, 1958). Under these policies, the optimal ordering quantity follows a piecewise linear function of the inventory position, and negative orders (i.e., returning of items) are not allowed. The linearized models, on the other hand, may allow negative orders, and as a result, lead to unrealistic or even meaningless bullwhip effect estimates. For example, linearized systems control theory generally conclude that the fluctuations of the order sequences under linearized ordering policies would always increase exponentially as we move along the supply chain (Li & Ouyang, 2011; Ouyang & Daganzo, 2006a; Ouyang & Li, 2010). This has been found to contradict with empirical observations, e.g., Cachon, Randall, & Schmidt (2007) found that real-world order fluctuations for upstream suppliers tend to stabilize to bounded values.It is conjectured that nonlinearity in the ordering policies is key to the bounded amplification in the observed bullwhip effect. Nevertheless, analysis of nonlinear dynamic systems imposes significant difficulties. Among a number of mathematical tools for nonlinear systems, describing function is widely implemented in nonlinear control community and of great advantages when the fluctuation is the focus in system analysis (Kochenburger, 1950). The fundamental idea of the describing function method is quasi-linear approximation, i.e., approximating the output of a nonlinear system as sinusoids when the linear component of the system could serve as a low-pass filter (Blaquiere, 2012; Davis, 1962). Describing-function-based method has also been applied in many contexts such as wireless communication (Jalaleddini & Aghdam, 2010), traffic flow oscillation (Li & Ouyang, 2011; Li, Peng, & Ouyang, 2010; Li, Wang, & Ouyang, 2012), and others. It has been found that the propagation of vehicle speed fluctuations in freeway traffic streams is quite similar to the bullwhip effect in supply chains (Edie, 1961; Ouyang, Lago, & Daganzo, 2006) and further evidences show that traffic flow can be unified with supply chain system in terms of stability analysis (Helbing, 2005; Ouyang et al., 2006). We are inspired to develop a describing-function-based approach (DFA) to study the bullwhip effect under nonlinear ordering policies. This not only fills the gaps between theoretical predictions and empirical observations, but also advances methodologies that can be used to overcome the difficulties associated with nonlinear systems analysis. To the authors’ best knowledge, no research has been conducted to achieve these goals in the context of supply chain management.This paper applies the describing function technique to analyze the bullwhip effect under nonlinear ordering policies. We propose system adjustment treatments to the nonlinear supply chain so that the describing function technique is suitable for the analysis. Mathematical closed-form results are derived to predict the propagation of order fluctuations, and the formulas are found to precisely reproduce the empirical observation in multi-echelon supply chains. A refinement method is also proposed to improve the accuracy of the prediction in practical applications. We illustrate the proposed mathematical framework with a class of nonlinear order-up-to policies, derive system properties, and verify the accuracy of the analytical predictions with numerical simulations. The proposed analytical modeling framework is found to not only enhance our understanding of the bounded growth of the bullwhip effect, but also provide insights for developing strategies that can mitigate or even avoid the bullwhip effect.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the modeling framework for generalized bullwhip effect analysis under general ordering policies. Section 3 presents an application of the framework to a specific case of order-up-to policy, and demonstrates its accuracy using numerical experiments. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper and discusses future extensions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
