@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Autonomous and advertising-dependent ‘word of mouth’ under costly dynamic pricing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study dynamic pricing and advertising policies in a sales model for a monopolist firm.Both autonomous and advertising-dependent word of mouth are considered.Optimal limit cycles alternating building and leveraging of the price advantage are found.Multiple equilibria separated by Skiba curves are numerically ascertained.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic pricing,Advertising effort,Word of mouth,Marketing strategy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Autonomous ‘word of mouth’, as a channel of social influence that is out of firms’ direct control, has acquired particular importance with the development of the Internet. Depending on whether a given product or service is a good or a bad deal, this can significantly contribute to commercial success or failure. Yet the existing dynamic models of sales in marketing still assume that the influence of word of mouth on sales is at best advertising-dependent. This omission can produce ineffective management and therefore misleading marketing policies. This paper seeks to bridge the gap by introducing a contagion sales model of a monopolist firm's product where sales are affected by advertising-dependent as well as autonomous word of mouth. We assume that the firm's attraction rate of new customers is determined by the degree at which the current sales price is advantageous or not compared with the current customers’ reservation price. A primary goal of the paper is to determine the optimal sales price and advertising effort. We show that, despite costly price adjustments, the interactions between sales price, advertising-dependent and autonomous word of mouth can result in complex dynamic pricing policies involving history-dependence or limit cycling consisting of alternating attraction of new customers and attrition of current customers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Word of mouth is an essential medium of marketing influence for products and services (Rosen, 2000). With the development of the Internet, autonomous word of mouth, which is beyond firms’ direct control, has become much more salient (e.g., Moe & Trusov, 2011; Shrihari & Srinivasan, 2012; Yadav & Pavlou, 2014). By portraying a given product or service as either a good or a bad deal, autonomous word of mouth (WOM) can make the difference between commercial success and failure. This is why firms should be aware of the strength of interactions between their products’ market value and autonomous WOM when designing pricing and communication strategies.Nonetheless, the existing dynamic models of sales in marketing assume that the influence of WOM on sales is at best mediated by advertising effort (see Feichtinger, Hartl, & Sethi, 1994; Huang, Leng, & Liang, 2012). As a result, they disregard the role of autonomous WOM and how it can be shaped over time by a product's market value. These omissions can produce ineffective WOM management and therefore misleading pricing and communication policies.This paper seeks to bridge the gap by introducing a dynamic sales model of a monopolistic firm's product where, as in Gould (1970), advertising-dependent WOM and advertising allow the firm to attract new customers. We extend Gould (1970) by introducing autonomous WOM that does not depend on advertising effort. We further assume that the firm's attraction rate of new customers is determined not by the number of remaining potential customers, as in most marketing models, but by the degree at which the current sales price is advantageous or not, i.e., the price advantage. Price advantage is measured by the difference between the current sales price and a reservation price based on the current customers’ maximum willingness to pay to repurchase the product.The notion of price advantage is closely related to price fairness. Bolton, Warlop, and Alba (2003) found that U.S. consumers assess comparatively higher prices as less fair and comparatively lower prices as more fair. Ferguson, Ellen, and Bearden (2014) showed that price fairness is highest when a price is advantageous and lowest when it is disadvantageous. In addition, greater price unfairness leads to greater intention to spread negative word-of-mouth (see also, for instance, Campbell, 1999; Zeelenberg & Pieters, 2004). In this context, “spreading negative word of mouth is a low-cost action that helps buyers cope with their negative feelings of disappointment or regret and prevents other customers in their social network from being exploited” (Xia, Monroe, & Cox, 2004). An illustration of extreme reaction to perceptions of price unfairness is the public relations nightmare endured by Amazon.com when a customer discovered that he was charged a higher price for the same same-title DVDs on the basis of his purchasing history (Adamy, 2000).Conversely, when the price is advantageous, suspicion of the seller does not come into play and the price is accepted as fair (Ferguson et al., 2014). This latter result is consistent with Grewal, Monroe, and Krishnan (1998) according to which greater perceived transaction value brings about greater perceived acquisition value. Furthermore, “consumers are more likely to experience satisfaction with a shopping experience involving a rebate and, subsequently, are more likely to express intentions to engage word-of-mouth communication about the product” (Hunt, Keaveney, & Lee, 1995).Through the latter mechanism, a price decrease generates positive WOM, as suggested in Dean (1976) and Nagle, Hogan, and Zale (2011, p. 127) and conjectured in Ajorlou, Jadbabaie, and Kakhbod (2014). An empirical evidence of a link between price reduction and WOM is provided byGodinho de Matos, Ferreira, and Belo (2015). Based on a randomized experiment using movies over Video-on-Demand (VoD) system of a large European telecommunications provider offering triple-play to more than half a million households, the authors show a positive effect of word-of-mouth on the sales of movies in this VoD system, which is particularly large for the movies offered at discounted prices. In fact, 50 percent of the sales attributed to WOM in this VoD system are associated to movies offered at discounted prices. The authors conclude that firms that use social network information to shape promotion campaigns and determine target consumers are likely to perform better.Overall, the above-mentioned literature suggests two important assumptions, that is, (i) as price disadvantage decreases, the intention to spread negative WOM decreases, and (ii) positive WOM increases with price advantage. Our model makes use of these two assumptions to characterize the optimal pattern of price-induced WOM in a context of costly price adjustments.A primary goal of the paper is to analyze the optimal tradeoff by a monopolistic firm between sales price and advertising effort for a given product, and its implications for dynamic pricing and WOM effectiveness. To address this issue, an optimal control problem is formulated where the attraction of new customers depends both on autonomous and advertising-dependent WOM. Depending on the magnitude of price advantage, the attraction of new customers is reversible and may turn into attrition of current customers, and vice versa. Due to adjustment efforts in production capacity, sales price variations are costly. In this context, the firm has to determine the optimal intertemporal tradeoff between investing in WOM effectiveness and incurring sales price adjustment costs.The contribution of our paper is twofold. First, we extend the contagion sales models by introducing two important levers that might affect the typical pattern of advertising policies, namely autonomous WOM and price advantage. Second, we show that, despite price rigidity, the interactions between sales price, advertising-dependent and autonomous WOM can result in complex dynamic pricing policies involving history-dependence or limit cycling consisting of alternating attraction of new customers and attrition of current customers.The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we review the relevant literature. In Section 3, an optimal control model is formulated where a monopolistic firm seeks to determine the dynamic optimal strategy in terms of advertising and sales price adjustment efforts. In Section 4, we characterize the solution of the problem by qualitative means. Section 5 investigates the model with numerical means, and Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper considers dynamic pricing and advertising policies in a sales model where WOM is prevalent in two forms: advertising-dependent WOM that depends on a firm's advertising effort, and autonomous WOM that develops beyond the firm's control. Both autonomous and advertising-dependent WOM affect the sales process proportionately with the price advantage, which is the difference between the sales price and a reservation price based on the current customer's willingness to pay to repurchase the product.Two situations are possible. First, the current sales price may be low compared with the reservation price. Through autonomous and advertising-dependent WOM, potential customers become aware of the advantageous sales price with the implication that a number of them get attracted to the product and sales increase. Second, the current sales price may be high compared with the current customers’ reservation price. In such a case, some current customers get dissatisfied because of the disadvantageous price and stop purchasing the product, causing sales to decline. Customers react slowly to changes in price in the sense that sales and price gradually converge to a level where they correspond to each other.The main qualitative results point to a negative relationship between price advantage and advertising-dependent WOM in the sense that the firm should always (never) advertise when the sales price is advantageous (disadvantageous). There is also a negative relationship between advertising-dependent WOM and autonomous WOM because large enough autonomous WOM can gradually take over the sales increase process from the advertising effort. Finally, the solution patterns include limit cycles.Using WOM effectiveness and current customers’ abandon rate as bifurcation parameters, an extensive numerical analysis led to the conclusion that for different scenarios very different solution patterns can occur.First, when WOM effectiveness is very low and current customers’ abandon rate is very high, we obtain history dependent (Skiba) trajectories that converge to a steady state when initial sales are high enough while the initial price level is low enough. Otherwise, the firm ceases to exist in finite time. Skiba threshold with two equilibria implies that the firm can only stay in business if the reservation price lies sufficiently above the actual price. Otherwise, bankruptcy is unavoidable, which explains the existence of the two equilibria.Second, if the abandon rate is much lower, a range of qualitatively different solutions is possible, all having in common that the firm remains active on this market. Depending on WOM effectiveness, history-dependent trajectories can result where the steady state is reached either straightforwardly or by an overshooting trajectory. When WOM is very effective, it is optimal for the firm to approach a unique equilibrium in a relatively straightforward way. WOM being effective implies that it is relatively easy for the firm to approach and then stay in a long term ideal situation where price and sales stay at their optimal level. This solution entails linear pricing policies for initial configurations with high (low) price and low (high) sales, and non-linear pricing policies for initial configurations with both high (low) price and sales. The case with both high price and sales shows that the commonly criticized practice of artificially inflating the current customers’ reservation price to take advantage of price advantage improvement is part of an optimal pricing policy.With less efficient WOM it is more difficult to reach such an ideal situation with optimal price and sales level. In one scenario, it can still be reached in a straightforward way provided the initial reservation price is a little larger than the actual price. Otherwise an overshooting pattern occurs where sales first exceed its equilibrium level, but then folds back to converge to this equilibrium.Finally, if WOM effectiveness is very low and current customers’ abandon rate is sufficiently low, the ideal situation is never reached, where instead sales and price level keep on cycling around the steady state. That is, an optimal trajectory can be a limit cycle, where an intertemporal price discrimination (or differential pricing) policy is applied continuously despite costly adjustment efforts. This differential pricing policy involves various phases, the most profitable of which is characterized by attrition of current customers due to price advantage decrease.This paper is new in that it combines in a common framework autonomous WOM, advertising-dependent WOM, and optimal price setting with adjustment costs. Our results are relevant from the viewpoint of communication strategy because we show that WOM management needs to account for the sign and magnitude of a price advantage. Our results are also important from the perspective of revenue management, because we suggest how a dynamic pricing policy with costly adjustments can be shaped by WOM effectiveness. In spite of costly price adjustments, our framework allows for the emergence of complex pricing policies involving either Skiba thresholds, which is a novelty in regard of the existing literature, or limit cycles. In other words, kinked demand and cyclical pricing are both compatible with price stickiness. While cyclical pricing policies are usually treated as a consequence of the counter-intuitive behavioral asymmetry involved by loss seeking consumers (Kopalle et al., 1996; Popescu & Wu, 2007), we show that they simply result in our model from a plausible combination of very low WOM effectiveness and sufficiently low current customers’ abandon rate. More generally, our results suggest that cyclical pricing cannot be driven by the asymmetric influence of WOM on the sales process alone.Examples of monopolistic competition markets to which our framework applies are characterized by repeat-purchase consumption behaviors, e.g., hospitality industry, airline industry, car rental industry, etc. Different pricing contexts, such as fines for traffic offenses and telephone charges, fall outside the scope of our model.We would expect our results to be modified by changes in product quality and competition. Such factors would notably affect the patterns of building and leveraging price advantage via the reservation price. Their inclusion would both extend the scope of our model and allow for a thorough characterization of building and leveraging brand attitudes (Hanssens et al., 2014). Important extensions therefore include investment in product quality and considering frameworks with competition like duopolistic and oligopolistic markets. The latter extension would require the application of differential games. These items are high on our research agenda.