@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Location–allocation approaches for hospital network planning under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study proposes two location–allocation models for handling uncertainty in the strategic design of a hospital network.The two models hold different assumptions regarding the decisions to be taken under incomplete information.The models address the tradeoffs between improved access and cost minimization.Hospitals are taken as multiservice providers operating within a hierarchical structure and in a dynamic context.Applying the models to Portuguese data shows that one model is more flexible to handle the planning problem at hand.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Uncertainty modelling,Stochastic planning,Location,Public facility planning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study proposes two location–allocation models for handling uncertainty in the strategic planning of hospital networks. The models aim to inform how the hospital networking system may be (re)organized when the decision maker seeks to improve geographical access while minimizing costs. Key features relevant in the design of hospital networks, such as hospitals being multiservice providers operating within a hierarchical structure, are modelled throughout a planning horizon in which network changes may occur. The models hold different assumptions regarding decisions that have to be taken without full information on uncertain parameters and on the recourse decisions which will be made once uncertainty is disclosed. While the first model is in line with previous literature and considers location as first-stage decisions, the second model considers location and allocation as first-stage decisions. Uncertainty associated with demand is modelled through a set of discrete scenarios that illustrate future possible realizations. Both models are applied to a case study based on the Portuguese National Health Service. The results illustrate the information that can be obtained with each model, how models can assist health care planners, and what are the consequences of different choices on the decisions to be taken without complete information. The second model has shown to be advantageous on grounds that location–allocation decisions are not scenario dependent, and it appears to be more flexible to handle the planning problem at hand.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Strategic planning of a hospital network involves long term decisions like facility location and capacity relocation, with these decisions needing to be robust so as to face future changes in demand and supply patterns. In particular, decisions related to the location of new hospitals are especially sensitive since they are hardly reversible (due to the high investments involved) and commonly have political impacts. Furthermore, long term decisions need to consider an evolving environment where uncertainty increases as the planning horizon moves forward. On the one hand, the most important decisions are made in the near future, and these decisions need to be made without completely foreseeing the future conditions of the system. On the other hand, decisions made in the distant future can be postponed and revaluated when more information is available (Daskin, Hopp, & Medina, 1992). Therefore, the use of a planning horizon is a model feature not only relevant to assist hospital planning, but also to ensure that decisions account for future prospects and do not restrict upcoming choices.Additionally, when planning health systems, decision makers need to take into account different policy objectives that typically include improving access and minimizing costs. These objectives can often be conflicting since improved geographical access may require smaller hospital facilities closer to the populations, which can lead to higher inefficiencies and costs. Thus, alternative solutions which balance these two, often conflicting, objectives are relevant in hospital network planning, especially in the context of systems based on a National Health Service (NHS) structure.Location–allocation models have been used to assist hospital planning, as they allow the simultaneous analysis of decisions as the opening, closing or resizing of facilities, considering the pursuit of multiple objectives. With these models it is also possible to account for the current state of the system and to analyse the impact of future changes in demand and supply patterns, which are deemed as uncertain given that they depend on several external factors (Royston, 2009). In this article, we focus on uncertainty related to the demand and supply of services, more specifically, with the impacts of demand changes from populations that are aging and experiencing increases in life expectancy (typical in developed countries). The work also accounts for the consequences of future changes in hospital supply, given that technological advances are expected to influence the delivery of services and ultimately the projected demand for services.This article presents two comprehensive stochastic location–allocation models that aim to assist the planning of hospital networks under uncertainty, addressing questions that arise in many real-world applications. The models adopt a stochastic approach and share a general framework, but hold different assumptions regarding the decisions that have to be taken without full information on the uncertain parameters, thus capturing different relevant aspects of hospital network planning. Both models aim to assist the (re)organization of the hospital network, accounting simultaneously for key features in hospital strategic planning, namely: (1) a two-tier hierarchical structure with district and central hospitals, and ascendant and descendant flows between those hierarchical levels; (2) hospitals as multiservice suppliers, providing inpatient, outpatient and emergency services; (3) flows of patients within hospital services; (4) thresholds in hospital capacity; (5) a planning horizon for scheduling decisions throughout time; and (6) a bi-objective approach that deals with tradeoffs between access and cost. Regarding uncertainty, the first model follows the most common assumption in location models where allocation decisions are taken once uncertainty is disclosed. The second model considers that allocation decisions need to be taken before uncertainty is disclosed and consequently unsatisfied demand and extra capacity need to be modelled.Both models are applied to a case study based in the South Region of Portugal to illustrate how they can assist hospital planning under uncertain conditions. The comparison of the models’ results show the impact of different assumptions regarding allocation decisions, illustrate the effect of demand uncertainty in the (re)organization of the hospital network and indicate the best performing location–allocation decisions for the designed scenarios. Changes in the supply pattern, namely in the average length of stay (ALOS) are analysed through a parameter sensitivity analysis in order to understand the consequences that different parameters have in the hospital network configuration.This article contributes to health location literature by addressing the hospital network planning under uncertain conditions through two location models that consider several features of many real-world applications. Moreover, the different assumptions regarding the decisions to be taken under uncertainty in the two models are analysed and the nature of the obtained results is compared. The second model, where location–allocation decisions are taken in the first-stage, has shown to be advantageous on grounds of flexibility and by setting the critical decisions for planning not as scenario dependent.The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a literature review centred on published general location–allocation models for handling uncertainty and on applications in the health care context; in Section 3, the models’ major assumptions are described and the mathematical formulations presented; Section 4 discusses the models application to the case study; and Section 5 presents some concluding remarks and reflects upon future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
