@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spatial dependencies of wind power and interrelations with spot price dynamics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Simulation model for wind power and spot prices including their interrelations.Spatial dependence structures of wind power are captured by copulas.The market value of wind turbines is strongly influenced by the dependence structure.Many locations face upper tail dependencies that adversely impact their market value.The effect amplifies for increasing levels of wind power penetration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in energy,Wind power,Market value,Copula,Stochastic spot price model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Wind power has seen strong growth over the last decade and increasingly affects electricity spot prices. In particular, prices are more volatile due to the stochastic nature of wind, such that more generation of wind energy yields lower prices. Therefore, it is important to assess the value of wind power at different locations not only for an investor but for the electricity system as a whole. In this paper, we develop a stochastic simulation model that captures the full spatial dependence structure of wind power by using copulas, incorporated into a supply and demand based model for the electricity spot price. This model is calibrated with German data. We find that the specific location of a turbine – i.e., its spatial dependence with respect to the aggregated wind power in the system – is of high relevance for its value. Many of the locations analyzed show an upper tail dependence that adversely impacts the market value. Therefore, a model that assumes a linear dependence structure would systematically overestimate the market value of wind power in many cases. This effect becomes more important for increasing levels of wind power penetration and may render the large-scale integration into markets more difficult.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The amount of electricity generated by wind power plants has increased significantly during recent years. Due to the fact that wind power is stochastic, its introduction into power systems caused changes in electricity spot price dynamics: Prices have become more volatile and exhibit a correlated behavior with wind power fed into the system. In times of high wind, spot prices are observed to be generally lower than in times with low production of wind power plants. Empirical evidence of this effect has been demonstrated for different markets characterized by high wind power penetration, e.g., by Jónsson, Pinson, and Madsen (2010) for Denmark, Gelabert, Labandeira, and Linares (2011) for Spain, Woo, Horowitz, Moore, and Pacheco (2011) for Texas or Cutler, Boerema, MacGill, and Outhred (2011) for the Australian market. Due to the cost-free availability of wind energy, wind power plants are characterized by marginal costs of generation that are close to zero and therefore lower than those for other types of power plants such as coal or gas. Hence – if the wind blows – wind power replaces other types of generation and thus leads to lower spot market prices in such hours. As a consequence, power plants are faced with increasingly difficult conditions and an additional source of price risk when participating in the market. Until now, fluctuating renewable energy technologies (including wind power itself) have often been exempted from this price risk by support mechanisms (e.g., by fixed feed-in-tariff systems) in order to incentivize investments. However, their price risk draws more and more attention as they make up an increasing share of the generation mix and may at some point be fully integrated in the liberalized power market. Therefore, for an individual investor as well as for a social planner it becomes increasingly important to understand the value of wind generation and how it depends on the location of the wind turbine.The purpose of this paper is to derive revenue distributions and the market value of wind power, i.e., the weighted average spot price wind power is able to achieve when selling its electricity on the spot market, at specific locations. It is clear that the value of a wind turbine at a specific location depends on whether it tends to produce when many other wind turbines at other locations can also produce, or whether it is one out of few producers at a given time. To capture the full stochastic dependence structure of wind power, we use copulas and incorporate the stochastic wind generation in a supply and demand based model for electricity prices. More precisely, we take the following two steps. At first, we develop a stochastic simulation model for electricity spot prices that incorporates the market’s aggregated wind power as one of the determinants. We use the residual demand, given by the difference of total demand and aggregated wind power, to establish the relationship between wind power and spot prices. Secondly, we link the market’s aggregated wind power to the wind power of single turbines in order to quantify their market value and the revenues depending on their specific location. We use copulas to model this interrelation. The model is calibrated with German data, since Germany already has a high share of wind power.We find that taking into account the entire spatial dependence structure is indeed necessary, and that considering only correlations between a specific turbine and the aggregate wind power would be misleading. Even if the correlation of a specific turbine is lower compared to another, the resulting market value may be lower due to a non-linear, asymmetric dependence structure. In fact, we find a pronounced upper tail dependence that adversely impacts the market value for many of the locations analyzed. Therefore, a model solely based on linear dependence measures would systematically overestimate the market value of wind power in many cases. Moreover, it is shown that this effect becomes increasingly important for higher levels of wind power penetration.Our paper contributes to three lines of literature. First, we complement the literature on supply and demand based models. Within this class of models, Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) were among the first to study the importance of demand and production costs for electricity prices. The model developed by Burger, Klar, Müller, and Schindlmayr (2006) follows a similar conceptual approach by including a non-linear functional dependence of the electricity spot price on a stochastic demand process as well as a long-term non-stationarity. Howison and Coulon (2009) further extend the number of state variables explaining the electricity spot price by including fuel prices. With our paper, we contribute to this line of literature by including stochastic production quantities of wind power that may impact the supply side and hence electricity prices.Secondly, we extend the literature employing copulas, especially in the context of wind power applications. Copulas have first been identified by Papaefthymiou (2006) to be a suitable tool for modeling multivariate dependencies of wind speeds. Subsequently, copulas have been employed in different studies to model spatial and temporal dependencies of wind speeds or wind power. Spatial dependencies have been modeled with the help of copulas by Haghi, Bina, Golkar, and Moghaddas-Tafreshi (2010) for PV and wind power as well as system load in an Iranian case study, by Grothe and Schnieders (2011) for wind speeds in an optimization problem minimizing aggregated wind power fluctuations in Germany, by Hagspiel, Papaemannouil, Schmid, and Andersson (2012) for wind speeds in a European probabilistic load flow analysis, and by Louie (2014) for power generation from a multitude of pairs of wind turbines in order to identify the best-suited bivariate copula models. In contrast, copulas are used for temporal dependence structures in Pinson and Girard (2012) to model the multivariate stochastic process of short-term wind power trajectories (based on a methodology developed in Pinson, Madsen, Nielsen, Papaefthymiou, & Klöckl (2009)) and in Zhou et al. (2013) to investigate wind power forecasting based on probabilistic kernel densities. We contribute to this second line of literature by applying conditional copulas to model the dependence structure between specific turbines and the aggregated wind power. This approach allows us to specify and investigate interrelations between the physical characteristics of a wind turbine and electricity spot prices, and hence to value wind power assets more appropriately.In fact, the valuation of power generation assets is the third line of literature our paper complements. So far, research on the valuation of power generation assets has mainly focused on conventional power (e.g., Thompson, Davison, & Rasmussen (2004), Porchet, Touzi, & Warin (2009) or Falbo, Felletti, & Stefani (2010)) and the optimization of hydro power schedules (e.g., Garcfa-González, Parrilla, & Mateo (2007) or Densing (2013)). The relatively few papers that deal with the valuation of wind power is primarily based on historical data of wind power and day-ahead market prices (e.g., Green & Vasilakos (2012)). In a recent study presented by Girard, Laquaine, and Kariniotakis (2013), wind power predictability is assessed as a decision factor during the planning phase of a wind power project, showing that the financial loss due to imbalance costs induced by imperfect predictions only represents a low share of revenue in the day-ahead market. Even though they find that the aggregation of wind farms over large distances has an impact on the market value, they do not further elaborate on spatial dependencies. Our paper concentrates on this particular issue and shows that spatial dependencies are indeed crucial for the market value of wind power projects, especially for increasing penetration levels.The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a short introduction to copula modeling with a particular focus on conditional copula sampling which we apply in our model. The model itself is presented in Section 3. Section 4 reports the results of the methodology applied to the case of wind power in Germany, namely the revenues and the market value of specific wind turbines. Section 5 concludes.In this section, we briefly discuss the modeling of stochastic dependencies with the help of copulas. A more detailed introduction is provided e.g., in Joe (1997), Nelsen (2006) or Alexander (2008). For a comprehensive literature review of the current status and applications of copula models, the interested reader is referred to Genest, Gendron, and Bourdeau-Brien (2009), Durante and Sempi (2010) and Patton (2012).A copula is a cumulative distribution function with uniformly distributed marginals on[0,1]. Sklar’s theorem is the main theorem for most applications of copulas, stating that any joint distribution of some random variables is determined by their marginal distributions and the copula (Sklar, 1959). The bivariate form of Sklar’s theorem is as follows: For the cumulative distribution functionF:R2→[0,1]of any random variablesX,W, with marginal distribution functionsFX,FW, there exists a copulaC:[0,1]2→[0,1]such that(1)F(x,w)=CFX(x),FW(w).Sklar’s theorem also holds for the multivariate case ofn>2dimensions. The copula function is unique if the marginals are continuous. Conversely, if C is a copula andFXandFWare continuous distribution functions of the random variablesX,W, then (1) defines the bivariate joint distribution function. From Sklar’s theorem, it follows that copulas can be applied with any marginal distributions. Particularly, marginal distributions may differ for each of the random variables considered.In our application we are interested in the dependence structure of the market’s aggregated wind power W and a single turbine wind power X. The copula captures the complete dependence structure of X and W. The selection of an appropriate copula model can be made independent from the choice of the marginal distribution functions. Taking advantage of this, the joint distribution of W and X is determined in a two stage process: First, the marginal distribution functionsFWandFXare determined, followed by the selection of the most appropriate copula model.Copula functions are mostly determined in a parametric way. There are different types of parametric copula models that can be used to capture the pairwise dependence. In many applications – such as ours – it is particularly important to differentiate between symmetric or asymmetric, tail or no tail, and upper or lower tail dependence structures. Therefore, one can test several parametric copula models that are able to capture these characteristics: The Gaussian copula is symmetric and has zero or weak tail dependence (unless the correlation is 1). In contrast, the symmetric Student-t copula has a relatively strong symmetric tail dependence. Whereas the Frank copula is another symmetric copula with particularly low tail dependence, Clayton and Gumbel copulas incorporate an asymmetric tail dependence. Lower tail dependence is captured by the Clayton copula, while the Gumbel copula incorporates an upper tail dependence.1Gaussian and Student-t copulas belong to the group of Elliptical copulas, whereas Frank, Gumbel and Clayton copulas belong to the group of Archimedian copulas. For a more extensive discussion of different copula families, see, e.g., Nelsen (2006).1These copulas are listed in Table 1.The copula parameters can be estimated based on observed data by optimizing the log-likelihood function:(2)θˆ=maxθ∑tlncFXxt,FWwt;θwhere θ denotes the parameter vector and c the copula density. The selection of the most appropriate copula model can then be determined based on the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC).Like any ordinary joint distribution function, copulas have conditional distribution functions. The conditional copula can be calculated by taking first derivatives with respect to each variable, i.e., foru=FX(x)andv=FW(w)we have(3)C(u|v)=∂C(u,v)∂vandC(v|u)=∂C(u,v)∂u.For the application presented in this paper, there is one inherent advantage of using conditional copulas rather than sampling directly from the bivariate copula distribution: Samples can be conditioned on time series that may serve as inputs to the simulation procedure. The time series characteristics can thus be preserved during the simulation process. We use time series of the market’s aggregated wind power as an input variable for the spot price model.We consider the stochastic processesXtt∈NandWtt∈N.FXt(Xt),FWt(Wt)are uniformly distributed random variables on[0,1]. For random variablesUt,Vt∼U0,1,FXt-1UtandFWt-1Vtthus follow the distributions ofXtandWt, respectively. It is important to notice that by applying the inverse distribution functions, the dependence structure is not influenced, i.e.,UtandVtas well asFXt(Xt)andFWt(Wt)have the same copula C.The conditional sampling procedure can be summarized as follows:1.Apply the marginal distribution functionFWtto the time series of the market’s aggregated wind powerw1,w2,w3,…in order to getv1∗,v2∗,v3∗,….Simulateu1,u2,u3,…from independent uniformly distributed random variables.For each observationFWtwt=vt∗, apply the inverse conditional copulaCFWtWt,FXtXt-1·|vt∗to translateutintout∗by:(4)ut∗=CFWtWt,FXtXt-1ut|vt∗Apply the inverse marginal distribution functions tou1∗,u2∗,u3∗,…in order to obtain the corresponding simulations of the random variableXt:FX1-1u1∗,FX2-1u2∗,FX3-1u3∗,….We develop a stochastic simulation model for the single turbine wind power and electricity spot prices, including a precise representation of their interrelations. The interrelation is established by the aggregated wind power that is related to both the electricity spot prices as well as the single turbine wind power. Hence, we set up a model that represents these two relationships: First, a supply and demand based model that takes, among others, the aggregated wind power as an input. Second, a stochastic dependence model that links the single turbine wind power to the aggregated wind power. These two parts of the model can be summarized by the following two equations:(5)St=htDt-Wt+Zt(6)Xt=FXt-1CFXtXt,FWtWt-1Ut|FWtWtwhereStis the hourly stochastic spot price andXtthe hourly single turbine wind power, fort∈N. The spot priceStis determined by two components: First, the functionhtdescribes the dependence of the spot price on the residual demand that is determined by the difference of the electricity demand levelDtand the stochastic aggregated wind powerWt. Second, a short term stochastic component adds to the spot price that is denoted byZt. As operators of wind power plants are able to curtail their power output in case of negative spot prices, their price is non-negative, i.e.,StW=max0,St.The second part of the model links the hourly single turbine wind powerXtto the aggregated wind powerWt.FXtandFWtdenote the corresponding marginal distribution functions. The joint distribution function of these two random variables is determined by the corresponding copula, i.e.,FXt,Wtxt,wt=CFXtxt,FWtwt. Due to the copula’s ability to separate marginal distribution functions and the dependence structure, the joint distribution function can be modeled in a two-step process: First, the marginal distribution functionsFX,tandFW,tare determined. Second, the appropriate copulaCFXtXt,FWtWtis selected and estimated. We deploy the conditional copula in order to keep the time series properties of the stochastic processWtt∈N. For the simulation procedure, independent[0,1]-uniformly distributed random variablesUtare needed. Note that the marginal distribution functions are the same within a month m, i.e.,FXi=FXjifi,j∈m. The same holds forFWt,htandCFXtXt,FWtWt.Based on Eqs. (5) and (6), the amount of hourly wind power produced by a single turbine and the spot prices can be simulated. We sample from these model equations using a Monte Carlo simulation (n=10,000) in order to investigate the market value and revenue distributions as well as the relevance of the dependence structure with the aggregated wind power for single turbines at different locations.While the revenue is simply the sum of the products of electricity generation and prices, the market value of a wind turbine is the average spot price weighted with the electricity generation of the respective wind turbine:(7)MV=∑tXtSt∑tXt.In the following subsections, we explain the input parameters and the different parts of the model in more detail.Different data sets are deployed in order to calibrate and estimate the different parts of the model. In the following, we explain the content and origin of these sets, as well as the way in which the data are preprocessed.For the supply and demand based model (represented byhtin Eq. (5)), data is needed on the effectively delivered day-ahead prognosis of the German aggregated wind power in 2011. Note that the day-ahead prognosis – and not the actual aggregated wind power – is used, since this is the relevant information for the day-ahead market (Jónsson et al., 2010). In contrast, for the estimation of the appropriate copula (C) the realized generation of 2011 is used in order to determine its dependence structure with the realized single turbine wind power at different locations. Expected as well as realized generation data are provided by the transmission system operators and published on the EEX Transparency Platform (EEX Transparency Platform, 2012).Hourly mean wind speeds for various stations in Germany are provided via the national climate monitoring of the German Weather Service for the years 1990–2011 (Deutscher Wetterdienst (DWD), 2012). The measurement data for 19 locations are used in this project to determine the corresponding power output series of wind turbines.2Missing data are interpolated based on the previous and next available value if the missing gap is not exceeding 12h. If the gap is longer, the values are replaced by data of the same station and same hours of the previous year.2Wind speeds are scaled to the hub height of currently installed wind turbines (100meters) assuming a power law:vh1=vh0(h1/h0)α, whereh0is the measurement height,h1the height of interest and α the shear exponent. According to Firtin, Güler, and Akdag (2011), α is assumed to be 0.14.The development of currently installed wind power capacities per federal state between 1995 and 2011 is available from the German Wind Energy Association (German Wind Energy Association (BWE), 2012). In 2011, installed wind power capacities in Germany amounted to 27.1GW.Hourly electricity demand levels for the German market in 2011 – used as one of the explaining variables for spot prices and denoted byDtin Eq. (5) – are provided by ENTSO-E (2012).EPEX day-ahead prices from 2011 are deployed for the calibration of the spot price model (Eq. (5)). The EPEX day-ahead market is organized by an auctioning process that matches supply and demand curves once a day, thus determining prices at which electricity is exchanged in each respective hour.As an important input for the model, curves are needed that describe the wind power that the currently installed wind power capacities would have produced during the last decades (i.e., the long-term stochastic behavior of aggregated wind power in the power system). In the model, the curve is needed for the estimation of the marginal distributionFW,tof the aggregated wind powerWt. It is important to notice that this curve has to be derived synthetically, as wind power capacities changed significantly during the last years.Based on wind speeds and wind power capacities, the synthetic German aggregated wind power is generated as follows: By applying a power curve capturing the characteristics of the transformation process from wind energy to electrical power, wind turbine power generation profiles can be derived. In this study, the power curve is assumed to be one of a GE 2.5MW turbine (General Electric, 2010). Alternatively, one could use an average taken from multiple turbines. The transformation is based on a look-up table derived from the power curve and linear interpolation. Furthermore, electrical output is determined as a ratio of installed wind power capacity (i.e., scaled to[0,1]). Multiplying this ratio with the wind power capacity installed in the corresponding federal state yields the wind power. The above steps are repeated for 16 locations (one for each federal state) and all available years (1990–2011), resulting in a time series for what would have been produced during the last 22years with current wind power capacities. In order to check the plausibility of this approach, historical wind energy time series and volumes can be compared to the model estimates. The comparison for the 2011 time series yields high conformity with anR2of 0.84. Another check of consistency is done by calculating the accumulated aggregated wind power production volumes for the past 10years from the synthetically generated curves, and comparing them to the overall wind power production as reported in Eurostat Database (2012). We find the deviations to be less than 12%.We develop a supply and demand based model to derive electricity spot prices dependent on the level of wind power. A similar approach has been applied in Burger et al. (2006). The main difference between our and their approach is that we use the residual demand instead of total demand. We are therefore able to integrate the effect of wind power on spot prices.We describe the non-linear relation between residual demand and spot prices (i.e.,htin Eq. (5)) by an empirical function estimated from historical hourly spot prices, demand and wind power data. To derive a functional form forhtwe use spline fits which are suitable to capture the non-linearities in the demand-price dependence. The parameters ofhtare estimated from historical data for the reference year 2011 on a monthly basis in order to capture seasonal differences and variations on the supply side that occur, e.g., because of planned outages or variations in fuel costs.Note that if demand were totally price-inelastic, the functionhtwould approximate the supply curve that represents all available sources of electricity generation ranked in ascending order of their marginal generation costs (excluding wind energy) that is often referred to as the merit order. Even though the electricity is generally very inelastic in the short term, there may be some price-response of demand. Hence, our functionhtshould not be seen as an unbiased estimator of the merit order.The data and the corresponding spline fit are shown in Fig. 1for the month of February 2011. All other months of 2011 are presented in Fig. B.10 in the Appendix B. As can be observed, the dependence between residual demand levels and prices is characterized by steep ends and a comparatively flat part in between (i.e., for the residual demand ranging between 40 and 70GW). The steeper part in the lower tail is generally more pronounced than the price increase for higher residual demand levels. Rather moderate price increases in the upper tail may be interpreted by prevailing excess capacity in the German power market, leading to very few instances at which scarcity prices occur.Besides the functional dependence on (residual) demand, additional stochastic factors influence spot market prices such as speculation, unplanned power plant outages or scarcity prices or demand side management. These effects are lumped together and captured by the residual price processZtin Eq. (5). In the following, we aim at finding a model forZtthat is capable of capturing the characteristics observed in the data. We can derive the observed residual price component based onht, the observations of residual demand and spot prices fromzt=st-ht, and use the result for the calibration of the residual price processZtt∈N. The time seriesztis visually observed to be stationary within the considered time frame, which is confirmed by an augmented Dickey–Fuller test that indicates that the null hypothesis of a unit root can be rejected at the 95% level.The empirical auto-correlation function ofztdecays slowly, however, with an apparent dependence at a lag of 24hours. We therefore choose to modelZtas a seasonal ARIMA (SARIMA) model with a 24hours seasonality. In order to do so, the ARIMA model needs to be extended to include non-zero coefficients at lag s, where s is the identified seasonality period. SARIMA models can be specified in a multiplicative form, resulting in a more parsimonious model than simply extending ARIMA to s lags.As the Engle’s ARCH test indicates that there is conditional heteroscedasticity in the data, we extend the SARIMA by a GARCH component. GARCH-type models are able to capture conditional heteroscedasticity by splitting the error term∊tinto a stochastic componentηtand a time-dependent standard deviationσt. The latter can then be expressed dependent on lagged elements of ∊ andσt(Bollerslev, 1986; Engle, 1982).Various specifications of SARIMA–GARCH models are estimated and evaluated. Based on the AIC, a GARCH(1,1)-SARIMA(2,0,2)×(1,0,1)24 model is found to perform best. The inclusion of additional parameters hardly improves the fit. Note that no constant needs to be added to the model ofZtdue to the fact that the process has been already centered by applying a spline fit.Comparing the residual’s distribution to the normal distribution yields unsatisfactory results (Fig. 2, left hand side). Thus, alternatively, the error term can be specified as a t-distribution which leads to an improved match of the distributional shapes (Fig. 2, right hand side). Instead ofηt∼N(μ,σ2)we therefore useηt∼t(ν), with ν being the t-distribution’s degrees of freedom that are estimated from the data.Written explicitly, the model forZtnow takes the following form:(8)Zt=ϕ1Zt-1+ϕ2Zt-2+Φ1Zt-24+Φ1(ϕ1Zt-25-ϕ2Zt-26)+∊t+θ1∊t-1+θ2∊t-2+Θ1∊t-24+Θ1(θ1∊t-25-θ2∊t-26)(9)∊t=σtηt(10)σt2=α+β1∊t-12+γ1σt-12(11)ηt∼t(ν)The parameters for the above model are estimated from the time seriesztby optimizing the log-likelihood function. The estimates are presented in Table 2.In this section, we select and estimate models for the joint distribution of a single turbine wind power and the German aggregated wind power for 19 wind power stations in Germany.3We determine the models for the joint distribution functions between the German aggregated wind power and the following stations: Aachen, Angermünde, Augsburg, Bremen, Dresden, Emden, Erfurt-Weimar, Idar-Oberstein, Kahler Asten, Kleiner Feldberg, Konstanz, Leipzig-Halle, Magdeburg, Münster-Osnabrück, Oldenburg, Potsdam, Rostock, Saarbrücken and Schleswig.3We apply the two-stage process introduced in Section 2: First, the marginal distributions are determined, followed by the selection and estimation of the copula model that best describes the dependence structure.In order to determine the marginal distributions, we consider the hourly synthetic wind power data for the years 1990–2011 for the different stations as well as for the German aggregated wind power. The yearly data is split into monthly intervals in order to capture seasonal differences. We thus obtain 22×12 subsamples from which we get 22×12 empirical distribution functions. With 22years, the data covers a wide range of weather uncertainties that largely determine the quantity risk of wind power. Furthermore, the extensive database allows us to use the empirical distribution functions as marginal distribution functions (FWt,FXt) of the two variables of interest, namely the single turbine wind power and the aggregated wind power.4Note that instead of using the empirical distribution function, a parametric distribution, e.g., a beta distribution (which is supported on a bounded interval), could be assumed or estimated. This would become particularly attractive when there is a lack of data.4The copula modelCFXtXt,FWtWtis estimated from the data of the realized German aggregated wind power in 2011 and the corresponding hourly single turbine wind power. We hereby avoid a possible source of imprecision in the dependence structure by relying on observed rather than synthetically generated data. Moreover, with subsamples consisting of approximately 700 observations, the database is sufficiently large for a reliable estimation of the copula parameters. Just as the empirical distribution functions, the copula models are selected and estimated on a monthly basis.To find the most appropriate copula model, various types are fitted to the data based on the procedure introduced in Section 2.1.5The following copula models are tested: Gaussian copulas, Frank copulas, Clayton copulas, Gumbel copulas and Student-t copulas for ν=1,2,3,4,5,10,20,30,40,50.5Table A.6 in Appendix A report the copulas that provide the best fit to the data in terms of AIC for all stations that are considered in this paper. Note that the data we use may comprise ties, especially for the upper and lower bounds of the single turbine wind power when zero and nominal power output is observed multiple times. As ties can affect the copula estimation quality, we apply the approach described in Kojadinovic and Yan (2010) and construct pseudo-observations by randomly breaking the ties.In the following, we will first concentrate on particular stations (namely Bremen, Kleiner Feldberg and Augsburg) in order to point out the most important aspects with respect to the dependence structure and the effect on the results. Bremen is located in northern Germany where most of the current wind capacity is installed due to generally high average wind speeds. Kleiner Feldberg is a mountain in central Germany, also characterized by comparatively favorable wind speeds but less surrounded by other wind turbines. Finally, we analyze Augsburg, which is located in southern Germany and far away from most wind power capacities. Augsburg has the fewest full load hours among the three stations considered. Table 3lists the copulas providing the best fit to the data (in terms of AIC) for these three locations in every month. The table reporting the AIC values for all months and all copulas fitted to the data of the three stations considered is provided in Appendix A. For Bremen and Augsburg, the copula that provides the best fit in almost every month is the Gumbel copula. For these locations, there is a distinctive asymmetric upper tail dependence in the dependence structure of the single turbine wind power and the aggregated wind power. In contrast, there is hardly any tail dependence for the turbine located at Kleiner Feldberg. Here, most of the copulas that best fit the data are symmetric (Gaussian, Student-t and Frank copula).Once the marginal distributions and copulas are estimated, the conditional copula model can be used to simulate the single turbine wind power conditional on the German aggregated wind power, based on the sampling procedure that was introduced in Section 2.2. We loop through the 22years and the 12months of data and drawn=10,000samples of the single turbine wind power for each point of the aggregated wind power curve, while applying the corresponding single turbine marginal distribution out of the 22×12 available.As an example, Fig. 3shows the dependence structure of the original data as well as simulations from three different types of copula models for a wind turbine in Bremen. Visually, the Gumbel copula provides the best fit to the data, which is confirmed by the comparison of the AIC. It can be observed that there is a distinctive upper tail dependence between the single turbine wind power and the German aggregated wind power. It should be noted that this type of dependence is generally undesirable for wind turbines selling their power on the spot market, as there is a high probability that spot prices are low in case of high power generation.Fig. 4shows the original data together with simulations from the Gumbel copula for the single turbine wind power located in Bremen and the aggregated wind power, transformed back to their marginal distributions. The turbine is assumed to be a single GE 2.5MW turbine. As can be seen, simulations match the original data very well.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The purpose of this paper has been to derive the value of wind power at different locations. In particular, the impact of the dependence structure of wind power on its value has been analyzed. This analysis becomes increasingly important as shares of wind power in electricity markets rise. We therefore developed a model for the simulation of single turbine wind power and electricity spot prices, including a precise representation of their interrelations. Copula theory has been applied to model single turbine wind power and aggregated wind power, thus allowing to decouple their dependence structure from their marginal distributions. The formation of prices has been formulated as a function of the aggregated wind power in a supply and demand based model. As such, the model extends formerly known modeling approaches through the ability to simulate and quantify the price effect of wind power, and hence to determine market values.We find that the market value highly depends on the specific location and the corresponding dependence structure between the wind power of a single turbine at this location and the aggregated wind power. Whereas most locations are found to be characterized by rather adverse asymmetric dependence structures, some of the locations analyzed are identified as being related to the aggregated wind power such that their realizable selling prices are comparatively high. For the nineteen locations in Germany that we have analyzed in detail, we have shown that the expected market value is reduced by up to 8Euro/MWh (i.e., 15%) compared to average spot price levels and varies by up to 6Euro/MWh for the different locations.Moreover, our results indicate that, in case of increasing wind power capacities, the adverse upper tail dependence structure of many locations has a negative impact on the market value, which makes market integration of wind power even more difficult. Nevertheless, integrating wind power into the market would allow market prices to reveal their key function by indicating the actual value of electricity and thus triggering investments in wind power projects characterized by high realizable spot prices. These projects would deploy balancing potentials much better and reduce the volatility in the electricity spot market as well as in the physical system.Although a powerful tool to analyze the market value of wind power in a predefined setting, the model reveals its limitations in not being able to determine the dynamic reaction of the power system development in response to changing levels of wind power penetration. Further research could be done by extending the model in order to use it as a forecasting and derivative pricing tool. Moreover, the impact of spatial dependencies on short-term balancing capabilities of wind power could be analyzed (e.g., by extending the work presented by Girard et al. (2013)). This could become particularly relevant as balancing needs in a system depend on the aggregated wind power, while the balancing potential of a single turbine depends on its current output. By combining financial rewards from different markets, future analyses could address a comprehensive valuation and optimization of wind power projects. Besides the relevance for other markets, the methodology may also be applied to other forms of fluctuating renewable energies, such as solar power.