@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Share-a-Ride Problem: People and parcels sharing taxis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider a taxi-based people-freight sharing system.Two MILP formulations are given to find a tradeoff between flexibility and complexity.Addressed the experimenting in static and dynamic environments.An extensive numerical study is done.Among different scenarios, the one mimicking a typical city provides the best results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transportation,Share-a-Ride Problem,Freight insertion problem,Multi-commodity,Taxi,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
New city logistics approaches are needed to ensure efficient urban mobility for both people and goods. Usually, these are handled independently in dedicated networks. This paper considers conceptual and mathematical models in which people and parcels are handled in an integrated way by the same taxi network. From a city perspective, this system has a potential to alleviate urban congestion and environmental pollution. From the perspective of a taxi company, new benefits from the parcel delivery service can be obtained. We propose two multi-commodity sharing models. The Share-a-Ride Problem (SARP) is discussed and defined in detail. A reduced problem based on the SARP is proposed: the Freight Insertion Problem (FIP) starts from a given route for handling people requests and inserts parcel requests into this route. We present MILP formulations and perform a numerical study of both static and dynamic scenarios. The obtained numerical results provide valuable insights into successfully implementing a taxi sharing service.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many real-life situations, especially in urban areas, people and freight transportation operations are handled separately. Little research is available on the efficiency gains that can be obtained by combining individual freight and passenger transportation streams. A lack of real-time information and the increased planning complexity due to such a combination are among the main reasons. Our research fills in this gap and explores People and Freight Integrated Transportation problems (PFIT problems) with a particular focus on taxis. As such, this paper focuses on the integration of these two distinct networks. Combining people and freight flows creates attractive business opportunities because the same transportation needs can be met with fewer vehicles and drivers. In order to facilitate effective people-freight flows, efficient planning models are needed to deal with these challenging environments.The goal of this paper is to study the potential benefits and drawbacks of combining people and parcel flows using taxis. To achieve this goal, we propose two models for scheduling such a combined system and perform a numerical study using real taxi trail data (SF, 2008), as shown in Fig. 1. Note that this figure reflects the trails of 528 taxis in San Francisco, based on historical data of one month.The developed models are based on the well-known Dial-a-Ride Problem (Cordeau & Laporte, 2003). Dial-a-Ride Problem (DARP) consists of designing vehicle routes and schedules for a number of users who specify delivery requests as defined by pickup and drop-off points. The aim is to plan a set of minimum cost vehicle routes capable of accommodating as many users as possible, under a set of constraints. DARP arises in many practical application areas, for instance, taxi and courier services, transportation of elderly and disabled persons, etc. The key difference in this paper as compared to the original DARP formulation is the possibility of combining people and parcels together in the same taxi: people have different requirements and objectives (lead time, allowed delay, travel time, etc.) than parcels when being transported.A key contribution of this paper is to establish models that introduce these different requirements and objectives into the DARP. Similar to the DARP, we denote this new class of models as Share-a-Ride Problem (SARP), referring to the fact that people and parcels share the same taxis. We present MILP formulations for the SARP, solved exactly using GUROBI. Due to the complexity of the problem, we can solve only small SARP instances. To attend a higher level of realism, we provide numerical results for the SARP under a dynamic environment.A reduced problem based on the SARP, denoted as the Freight Insertion Problem (FIP), starts from a given route for handling the people requests and inserts the parcel requests into this route. As such, the FIP, based on the SARP, has a reduced complexity (the routing is given, only the scheduling/timing needs to be done) that can be solved reasonably fast for realistic instances.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a literature review. The descriptions of the SARP and FIP are presented in Section 3. We discuss the static SARP model formulations and dynamic framework in Section 4. Then, in Section 5, we develop the model formulation for the FIP. Section 6 summaries experimental settings. The numerical results are presented in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the paper with a summary and directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
