@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust option pricing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a non-probabilistic approach to model the stock price dynamics.We model heavy tails, and autocorrelation, etc. using these uncertainty sets.We use robust optimization to solve high-dimensional option pricing problems.Unlike DP, our approach scales polynomially with the dimension of the option.We model the “implied volatility smile” observed in market.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Option pricing,Robust optimization,American option,Volatility smile,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we combine robust optimization and the idea of∊-arbitrage to propose a tractable approach to price a wide variety of options. Rather than assuming a probabilistic model for the stock price dynamics, we assume that the conclusions of probability theory, such as the central limit theorem, hold deterministically on the underlying returns. This gives rise to an uncertainty set that the underlying asset returns satisfy. We then formulate the option pricing problem as a robust optimization problem that identifies the portfolio which minimizes the worst case replication error for a given uncertainty set defined on the underlying asset returns. The most significant benefits of our approach are (a) computational tractability illustrated by our ability to price multi-asset, American and Asian options using linear optimization; and thus the computational complexity of our approach scales polynomially with the number of assets and with time to expiry and (b) modeling flexibility illustrated by our ability to model different kinds of options, various levels of risk aversion among investors, transaction costs, shorting constraints and replication via option portfolios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of pricing and hedging derivative securities has been one of the most well studied problems in Financial Economics. The Nobel prize winning contribution was made by Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973) when they used the principle of dynamic replication to obtain a closed form formula for the price of a European option under the assumption that stock returns follow a log-normal distribution with known volatility. The key idea developed in this work is that of dynamic replication where one looks for a portfolio of simpler securities which is self-financing and whose value at the end of the time horizon matches the payoff of the option. Such a portfolio of simpler securities is known as a replicating portfolio, and the value of this portfolio at the beginning of the time horizon, is the no-arbitrage price of the option.The Black–Scholes model, in spite of its popularity, has some well-known deficiencies. Firstly, a closed form formula is not known for many liquid option classes such as American and Barrier options. This forces one to use computationally expensive simulation based methods to price these options, which do not scale well when the payoff of the option depends on the dynamics of multiple securities, that is when the option is high dimensional. Secondly, there is ample empirical evidence suggesting that the strong assumption of the underlying asset price following a stationary geometric Brownian motion does not hold. Attempts have been made to model the volatility of the underlying asset as a stochastic quantity. The notable models include Merton’s Mixed Jump Diffusion model (Merton, 1976), Cox and Ross’ constant elasticity of variance (Cox & Ross, 1976), Hull and White’s model (Hull & White, 1987), and Madan, Carr and Chang’s variance-gamma model (Madan, Carr, & Chang, 1998). Apart from the problems with the price-dynamics, there are other factors that arise mostly due to institutional rigidities such as transaction costs and liquidity issues, that rule out even the existence of exact replication when markets are incomplete. And even if an exact replication exists, it is not clear how one may compute it in a computationally efficient way.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we make a case for the need of an alternate approach to model the uncertainty in the asset returns and propose an uncertainty set based model for the same. This approach combined with the∊-arbitrage approach allows us to price a variety of options using linear optimization, even under the presence of transaction costs and multiple assets. The main advantage of our model is that unlike dynamic programming, our approach scales polynomially (as opposed to exponentially) with the dimension of the original pricing problem. We illustrate our method and report results for a variety of options (European, Asian, Lookback, American, Index). The results show that our approach produces prices that are close to those observed in the options market.