@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impacts of supplier knowledge sharing competences and production capacities on radical innovative product sourcing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Knowledge sharing, buyer–supplier relationships and production capacities are considered.Knowledge sharing competencies might outweigh traditional sourcing considerations.Multiple sourcing is preferred and optimal profit increases when demand becomes more certain.Production capacities cause multiple sourcing and relationship investments lose importance.It can be optimal to buy from a costly supplier with large capacities and relational effectiveness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nonlinear programming,Radical innovation,Product sourcing,Knowledge sharing,Particle swarm optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An effective sourcing strategy leads to cost savings and value added collaborations. For radical innovative product sourcing (RIPS), the exact nature and demand of products are highly uncertain. As such, knowledge sharing competences and production capacities of potential suppliers are prerequisite capabilities. The main aim is to investigate the impacts of these considerations on sourcing strategies through the development of two optimization models. Under the assumptions of single product sourcing, single period time window, uncertain demand and stochastic supply, KKT conditions are used to solve a simplified nonlinear optimization model analytically. The model is then expanded and particle swarm optimization is used to solve numerically the number of suppliers, order quantities and the level of relationship investments that maximize the value of sourcing. Through extensive scenario and sensitivity analyses, we provide some key insights.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Radical innovation product sourcing (RIPS), the practice in which firms outsource manufacturing of radical innovative products to third party suppliers, has proliferated in recent years. With the growing importance of RIPS, it is important for firms to determine and adopt the most profitable sourcing strategy. This paper adopts a supplier management optimization approach to address this issue. We first review the theoretical underpinnings of RIPS’ rise in importance. This will be followed by a review of the advantages and disadvantages of reducing the size of supplier base. Lastly, relevant supplier management models would be discussed.The proliferation of RIPS can be explained using the three views of the firm namely “Resource-based”, “Knowledge-based”, and “Relational”. The resource-based view states that a firm’s competitive advantage depends on how well it utilizes the resources that it has at its disposal (Penrose, 1959; Rumelt, 1984; Wernerfelt, 1984). Key resources should be valuable, rare, in-imitable and non-substitutable. The knowledge-based view further claims that knowledge, being an in-imitable resource that is generated from complex social and cultural firm structures, is the most strategically important resource of the firm (Conner, 1991; Conner & Prahalad, 1996; Demsetz, 1988; Grant, 1996; Kogut & Zander, 1992; Madhok, 1996; Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998). The relational view on the other hand argues that idiosyncratic inter-firm interactions are sources of relational rents which are defined as “supernormal profits jointly generated in an exchange relationship that cannot be generated by either firm in isolation and can only be created through the joint idiosyncratic contributions of the specific alliance partners” (Dyer & Singh, 1998). Knowledge sharing is identified as one of the main generators of this relational rent.Both the resource-based and knowledge-based views provide understanding into the behavior of innovative firms as they focus on developing and utilizing their knowledge-based resources to develop innovative products. In so doing, some firms will lack the necessary manufacturing capabilities. The relational view then explains the proliferation of inter-firm collaborations between the innovative firm and third party manufacturers and suppliers (RIPS). For RIPS to be successful, effective knowledge sharing, where there is transparent communication of information and continuous sharing of explicit and tacit knowledge between the buying firm and the supplier, is necessary to enhance product reliability and conformance to product specifications (Nooteboom, 1999; Song, Berends, Van der Bij, & Weggeman, 2007). This is again in line with both the knowledge-based and relational views of the firm. Effective and unequivocal knowledge sharing requires firstly, suppliers to be competent in knowledge sharing practices; secondly, the establishment of a high level of trust between the buying firm and the suppliers; and lastly, a high absorptive capacity of suppliers to assimilate knowledge and information to produce high quality products (Song et al., 2007). In addition, the supplier must have adequate production capacities that can respond to high demand fluctuations associated with radical innovative products. In addition to these RIPS specific supplier selection criteria, many other qualitative studies on traditional product sourcing have identified several supplier selection considerations. These considerations are classified into seven groups as stated in Appendix A.The advantages and disadvantages of supplier base reduction are well studied. Elmaghraby (2000) provides a review regarding sourcing strategies. Benefits of supplier base reduction are derived from the fact that companies can concentrate on building fewer suppliers. Cousins (1999) and Agrawal and Nahmias (1997) also argue that a smaller supplier base facilitates the development of a lasting buyer–supplier relationship. Cousins (1999) and Burke, Carrillo, and Vakharia (2007) further mention that deeper relationships lead to better knowledge sharing, cost reductions, shared benefits and enhanced flexibility in business strategies. However Burke et al. (2007) and Wilson (1995) concede that the level of trust and relationship required to have a successful collaboration and to obtain significant relationship-based benefits is difficult to attain as it requires much investments in relationship management. On the other hand, the disadvantages of supplier base reduction include increases in supplier default risks, overdependence on supplier and limitations in supplier capacities (Agrawal & Nahmias, 1997; Burke et al., 2007).Several quantitative studies have been conducted regarding supplier management optimization. De Boer, Labro, and Morlacchi (2001) review methods of supplier selection by extending previous reviews in literature. Setak, Sharifi, and Alimohammadian (2012) review supplier selection and order allocation models in literature from 2000 to 2010. Dotoli and Falagario (2012) use a hierarchical extension of the data envelopment analysis (DEA) to perform optimal supplier selection in multiple sourcing environments. Costantino and Pellegrino (2010) use a real options approach to compare single and multiple sourcing strategies under supplier default risk. Xia and Wu (2007) integrate the analytical hierarchy process, rough sets theory and multi-objective mixed integer programming to determine the number of suppliers and order quantities under multiple products, multiple criteria, supplier capacity constraints and volume discount environments. Mirahmadi, Saberi, and Teimoury (2012) utilize a decision tree approach to determine the number of suppliers chosen for collaboration considering supply risk, costs of supplier development and management, costs of missing discount due to multiple sourcing and lost costs due to supply postponement. Sarkar and Mohapatra (2009) determine the optimal supplier base size under risks of supply disruptions which are due to super, semi-super and unique events.Ramasesh, Ord, Hayya, and Pan (1991) compare the differences in single and dual sourcing under constant demand and stochastic lead times. Uniform and exponential distributions are used to model the lead times. Parlar and Wang (1993) investigate the tradeoff between diversification and single sourcing under yield randomness for both the EOQ and the newsboy models. Analytical results are obtained for the EOQ model while approximate solution techniques are used for the newsboy model. Dada, Petruzzi, and Schwarz (2007) analyze the problem of a newsvendor served by multiple suppliers which can be either perfectly reliable or unreliable. Perfectly reliable suppliers are not always chosen in the optimal set of suppliers and the most important criterion for supplier selection is the price charged by the suppliers. In addition, supplier reliability only affects the supplier’s order quantity. Agrawal and Nahmias (1997) analyze the optimal sourcing decision under deterministic demand and stochastic supply. Their main assumptions are that fixed costs are zero and quality risks drop as number of suppliers increases. Burke et al. (2007) investigate the differences between single and multiple sourcing strategies; and integrate product prices, supplier costs, supplier capacities, historical supplier reliabilities and inventory costs into the mathematical model. They add a diversification function to account for diversification benefits when the size of supplier base increases. The results show that sole sourcing is the optimal strategy when there is no capacity constraints and if there were no diversification benefits. In other cases, multiple sourcing would be the optimal strategy.Burke, Carrillo, and Vakharia (2009) created a mathematical model to find the optimal sourcing decision under stochastic demand and stochastic supply. Uncertain demand is modeled with a uniform distribution while stochastic supply is modeled with a probabilistic reliability multiplier. The main objective is to determine the optimal supplier set and the order quantities for each supplier. The assumptions and objectives of this paper are similar to ours. The missing elements relevant to RIPS are buyer–supplier knowledge sharing; additional costs of poor quality; buyer–supplier relationship elements; and supplier capacities.To the best of our knowledge, there is no supplier management optimization model that incorporates all of the above elements. As such, this paper serves to bridge these gaps in literature through the extension of the Burke’s model (2009) to incorporate these additional elements that are integral for RIPS. Two supplier management models, Burke’s Model with Knowledge Sharing (BMKS) which incorporates knowledge sharing elements and additional costs of poor quality; and Innovative Sourcing Integrated Model (ISIM) which further introduces buyer–supplier interactions and supplier capacity constraints are proposed. These models enable us to investigate the impacts of these considerations on the optimal sourcing strategy which includes the order quantities for each supplier and also the set of suppliers that should be engaged. In addition, for the ISIM, the optimal level of relationship investments that the buying firm should undertake for each supplier is determined.The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the modeling framework, the model assumptions and explains both the BMKS and ISIM. It also discusses some interesting analytical closed form solutions from the BMKS. The rationale behind the usage of certain mathematical functions to model the various sourcing considerations in the ISIM is also discussed. Section 3 then explains the numerical experiments in which particle swarm optimization is used to solve the ISIM. Subsequently, one factor sensitivity analysis is performed to observe trends and key insights. Section 4 then summarizes the above sections, provides several key managerial insights and provides suggestions for future research directions.We discuss the BMKS which incorporates knowledge sharing elements and additional costs of poor quality through the introduction of an additional quality multiplier to the model from Burke et al. (2009). This model makes use and extends certain properties of the Burke’s model like global concavity which allows us to obtain global optimal solutions. We develop the ISIM by incorporating elements like buyer–supplier relationships which affects inter-firm knowledge sharing, and suppliers’ production capacities into the BMKS. With the introduction of these considerations, the model becomes analytically intractable and particle swarm optimization (PSO) is used to numerically obtain the optimal solutions. The numerical experiments and results are discussed in section 3.Burke’s Model (2009) considers supplier management elements like uncertain supply due to quality considerations, uncertain market demand, fixed unit revenue, costs of lost sales and variable unit costs which apply directly to RIPS. The BMKS extends the Burke’s model through the incorporation of knowledge sharing competence of suppliers and costs of poor quality which as discussed earlier, are essential elements of RIPS.The problem is modeled as a single period, single product with N potential suppliers(i=1,2⋯N)and a sole buying firm. The objective of the BMKS is to maximize the expected profit of the buying company in a single sourcing period for a single product. The decision variables are the order quantities of supplieri′s, denoted byxi’s. The optimal set of suppliers engaged by the buying firm which comprises suppliers that have positive order quantities would then be obtained. The size of the set of suppliers engaged,N,∗would be the optimal number of suppliers.The uncertain supply is affected by quality of goods which is influenced by supplier’s manufacturing competence – the ability to produce products that follow the supplier’s own perceptions of the buyer’s specifications; and supplier’s knowledge sharing competence – the ability to share knowledge with the buyer to achieve understanding of the product specification. Two reliability multipliersriandβiare introduced to capture both aspects respectively.riis the proportion of non-defective products delivered based on supplier i’s inherent manufacturing and logistical capabilities to produce products that conform to specifications under perfect knowledge sharing between the buying company and the supplier. This reliability multiplier is assumed to follow a probabilistic distributiongi(ri)which is twice differentiable. The mean and variance of the quality yield are denoted asr¯iandσi2, whereσi<r¯i.βiis the proportion of non-defective products delivered based on supplieri′sknowledge sharing competences. It is assumed to be an exogenous deterministic factor, affected only by the supplier’s capabilities to engage the buying firm and share knowledge1It is acknowledged that knowledge sharing competence of suppliers is also affected by other considerations such as the buyer–supplier relationship and the amount of products sourced. However, this would introduce nonlinearities that would make the model intractable. These considerations would be omitted from this model and reintroduced in the ISIM in section 2.2 where numerical methods would be used to solve the model.1.The uncertain market demand is modeled as a uniform distribution with lower limit(a)and upper limit(b). We also assume that the upper limit of market demand(b)is much larger than the total number of products sourced (i.e.b>∑ixi). These assumptions are reasonable for radical innovative products which have high demand uncertainty. A uniform distribution is a suitable demand distribution given that it is a maximum entropy probabilistic distribution. Moreover, a large upper limit, b implies large demand range and variability which suits our problem context.The amount of revenue obtained per unit product(S)and the costs of lost sales per unit product(P)are constants. For the cost of sourcing, the supplier utilizes a uniform cost structure,(Ci)per unit product. In this model, non-negative order quantities and zero fixed costs incurred are also assumed. Additionally, the buying firm only pays for and sells good quality products. ParameterCPQis introduced to model additional costs of poor quality for each poor quality product supplied. These costs of poor quality can exist as reputation costs; additional delivery costs; testing costs; or rework costs. In addition, there are no salvage value or inventory costs because radical innovative products develop rapidly and unsold products go obsolete quickly.NotationsVariablesDProbabilistic customer demand,D∼U(a,b),b>∑ixiSBuyer revenue per unit productPCosts of lost sales per unit productNNumber of potential suppliersCiCosts charged by supplieriper unit productCPQAdditional costs of poor quality per unit of poor quality productriProbabilistic intrinsic reliability multiplier of supplierigi(ri)Probability distribution function ofrir¯ıMean ofriσi2Variance ofriβiKnowledge sharing competence reliability multiplier for supplieri∂iComposite cost function (high knowledge sharing competence and manufacturing reliability result in lower composite supplier costs)Ci+CPQ1βir¯i-1Decision variablesxiOrder quantity for supplieriN∗Optimal number of suppliersObjective Function: Maximize expected profit(1)E(π)=S·E(D)-(P+S)·ED,ri[D-∑iβirixi]+-∑i∂iβir¯ixiConstraints: Non-negativity constraints of order quantities(2)∀i:xi⩾0In the objective function (1), the first term denotes the expected profits based on the expected demand; the second term denotes the expected lost costs due to the amount of good quality products being unable to meet demand; the third term denotes the combination of expected product costs charged by the suppliers and the expected additional costs of poor quality. Objective function (1) is nonlinear and requires nonlinear optimization techniques. Similar to the Burke’s model, the function is globally concave even with the incorporation of deterministic knowledge sharing competence and costs of poor quality.Lemma 1The objective function(1)is globally concave given the assumptions in 2.1.1.The Hessian Matrix is negative definite, assumingb>∑ixi(See Appendix B).□The strict concavity of the objective function allows us to use the sufficiency of Karush–Kuhn Tucker (KKT) conditions for optimality and conclude that a KKT point would be a global maximum. In addition, constraint (2) is linear and this satisfies the constraint qualifications required for KKT conditions to be necessary for optimality. Section 2.1.3 states the KKT conditions and discusses the closed form results and insights.The KKT conditions for the BMKS problem are:Gradient Equations:(3)∀i:∂[E(π)]∂xi=λiPrimal Constraints:(4)∀i:xi⩾0Complementary Slackness:(5)∀i:λixi=0Sign Restrictions of Lagrangian Multipliers:(6)∀i:λi⩽0Lemma 2The optimal order quantitiesxifor each supplier i are given asxi=(M-∂i)r¯iLβiσi2+-δi∑j=1,j≠iNr¯j2σj2+1+∑j=1,j≠iNr¯j2δjσj2Lβiσi2r¯i∑j=1Nr¯j2σj2+1=Lb+∑j=1Nr¯j2(∂j-∂i)σj2+∑j=1,j≠iNr¯j2(δj-δi)σj2-∂i-δir¯iLβiσi2∑j=1Nr¯j2σj2+1where(7)M=Lb+∑j=1Nr¯j2(∂j)σj2∑j=1Nr¯j2σj2+1andδi=λiβir¯iandL=P+Sb-aProof for Lemma 2: Refer to Appendix B for the steps to obtain the optimalxi’sThe closed form solutions forxicontain lagrangian multipliers which make it difficult to obtain the optimal order quantities. As such, a supplier elimination iterative algorithm is used to remove the lagrangian multipliers and elicit the optimal order quantities. The rationale behind the supplier elimination algorithm is to iteratively eliminate nonfeasible suppliers from the optimal supplier set, and eventually obtain the optimal supplier set which should comprise only suppliers with positive order quantities based on (7). The following observations are important in designing an efficient algorithm that confirms optimality.1.From complementary slackness constraints (5), for suppliers to have positive order quantities (i.e. all suppliers in the optimal supplier set), their respective lagrangian multipliersλimust be zero.From (7), the positivity or negativity of the order quantities depend only on∂iwhen all lagrangian multipliers,λi’s for suppliers in the current feasible set are zero.If the supplier with the largest∂ifor the current supplier set has positive order quantities, this implies all other suppliers in the set will have positive order quantities. This will satisfy KKT/optimality conditions (3)–(6) which further imply that the current solution is globally optimal based on the necessity and sufficiency of KKT conditions.Conversely, if a supplier is found to have negative order quantities, any supplier that has a larger∂ivalue would also have a negative order quantity. All suppliers with negative order quantities will then be removed at this particular iterative step. The justification for a wholesale elimination rather than a one by one iterative elimination is explained in Lemma 3 below.Suppliers with order quantities that are found to be negative based on(7)where∀i∈V:λi=0at any stage of the algorithm would not be part of the optimal set.Proof for Lemma 3: Let K be the set of suppliers i wherexi=(M-∂i)r¯iLβiσi2<0,∀i:λi=0at a particular stage of the algorithm. Assume two suppliersa,b∈K,xa⩽xb. Based on one by one iterative elimination, we assume arbitrarily that supplier a is eliminated at this stage of the algorithm. This elimination implies settingxato zero by decreasingλafrom zero to a particular negative value based on (7). The change inλawould lead to a further decrease inxbbased on (7). As a result, without loss of generality, once an order quantityxiis negative at any stage of the iterative algorithm, it will become more negative as other negative order quantities are set to zero. Therefore, the non-negativity constraints would be binding for this particular supplier and it is justified to remove all suppliers with negativexivalues from the supplier set V at any stage of the iteration.Fig. 1below illustrates the algorithm.The optimal order quantities for the chosen suppliers are stated below:(8)xi=(M-∂i)r¯iLβiσi2=Lb-∂i+∑j=1N∗r¯j2σj2(∂j-∂i)r¯iLβiσi2∑j=1N∗r¯j2σj2+1whereN∗is the size of the optimal set of suppliers V.Given that∂iis the sole determinant for choice of suppliers; some key insights are obtained.(i)Variability of supplier reliability,σi2does not impact the optimal supplier set. This is because∂idoes not depend on the variability of supplier reliability,σi2. If the size of the supplier set is positive, the supplier with smallest∂i,∂iswould be hired even if its reliability is highly uncertain. From (8), we observe that the order quantityxisof the supplier with∂isis positive only under the condition stated in (9) below.(9)xis=Lb-∂is+∑j=1N∗r¯j2σj2∂j-∂isr¯iLβiσi2∑j=1N∗r¯j2σj2+1>0,iffLb-∂is+∑j=1N∗r¯j2σj2∂j-∂is>0From (9), high supplier reliability variability reduces order quantity.If supplier i with∂ishas a large reliability variability, the size of the optimal supplier set would tend to increase. This is because the supplier with∂isbut a hugeσi2will be in the optimal supplier set, and the high variability would result in a large M. The proof of this relationship is stated in (10) below.(10)d[M]dσi2=ri2σi4Lb-∂is+∑j=1N∗r¯j2σj2∂j-∂is>0due to(9)A larger M favors a larger supplier set as more suppliers can satisfy the ordering condition,∂i<M. As such, a hugeσi2has an indirect impact of favoring expansion of the optimal supplier set. With a larger optimal supplier set, there will be benefits of risk pooling which would in turn reduce the uncertainty of the order quantity received. At the same time, the disbenefits brought about by the high reliability uncertainty of the lowest cost supplier are reduced due to the small order quantity, and these disbenefits will be outweighed by the benefits obtained from the risk pooling effect of multiple sourcing.The influence of knowledge sharing competence on the optimal supplier set depends on the magnitude of additional costs of poor quality. If costs of poor quality are low, knowledge sharing competence becomes much less important as compared to price charged by the suppliers and vice versa.The BMKS assumes that knowledge sharing competence collapses into a single deterministic parameter. However, knowledge sharing competence is also affected by other elements such as supplier’s share of products and buyer–supplier relationships. Moreover, in RIPS, suppliers’ production capacities are also important considerations. In order to examine the impacts of these additional considerations on the optimal sourcing strategy, the ISIM is created to incorporate the necessary additional functional dynamics. Section 2.2 discusses the ISIM.This section discusses the ISIM which incorporates effects of buyer–seller relationships on knowledge sharing and suppliers’ production capacities. ISIM provides a more mental construct of the various essential dynamics involved in the decision making process of sourcing professionals involved in RIPS. The section would start with the auxiliary functions used in the modeling of the behavior of various qualitative elements. This would be followed by the ISIM, with the objective function and all the relevant constraints.For the ISIM, the assumptions from the BMKS (stated in section 2.1.1) follow except for the modeling of knowledge sharing competence parameterβi. In this model, we model theβicomponent with an increasing S-shaped function of the supplier’s share of the products,Fi. The rationale for this general relationship is based on two implicit practical assumptions. First, buying firms with limited human and capital resources will most likely prioritize on building strong knowledge ties with bigger and more significant suppliers as compared to smaller suppliers. This is to enhance quality of a larger lot of goods, which at the same time enhances short term profitability and reputation of the purchasing firm. Second, suppliers tend to focus more on larger customers. This is intuitive given that larger customers play a much larger role in the overall generation of profits. Like the buying firm, more resources and efforts would be delegated to manage the requirements of the buying firms and this will also in turn enhance knowledge sharing effectiveness.As a result, when the share of ordered goods is small, an increment in the share would result in a small increment in knowledge sharing effectiveness as the supplier is still of insignificant status. As such, the rate of increase of effectiveness would increase as the share becomes larger. This signifies a shift of importance from a minor to a major supplier. When the share of ordered goods is large, the supplier is already of significant status to the buyer and a further increment in the share of sourced goods will not lead to any significant increase in knowledge sharing effectiveness. Eqs. (11) and (12) below show the functions for the supplier’s share,Fiand knowledge sharing competence parameterβiwhich is an increasing S-shaped function with supplier’s share. In addition, Fig. 2below shows a family of curves forβi.(11)∀i:Fi=xi∑j=1N∗xj(12)∀i:βi=β0+1-β0π2+tan-1u·[tan-1(γi·Fi-u)+tan-1u]Additionally, it is known from literature that effective knowledge sharing comes with the building and maintenance of a deep buyer–supplier relationship. The larger the relationship investment, the stronger the relationship and trust developed. This would in turn lead to more effective and unequivocal knowledge sharing practices (Wilson, 1995). Increasing effective relationship investments however yields diminishing returns in augmenting efficiency of exchange of ideas between buyer and supplier and there is a limit to the extent in which relationship investments would lead to buyer–supplier communication improvements. The effectiveness of relationship investments in building trust also differs for different suppliers. This effectivenessEffiis modeled to be the level of strategic fit between buyer and supplier i based on several conventional supplier selection criteria stated in Appendix A.Efficould be quantified by various methods like the Analytical Hierarchy Process to an equivalent utility value ranging from (Saaty, 1990). To model the above effects, we modeled the slope factor of knowledge sharing competence parameter,γias a concave increasing function with the product of relationship costs and relational effectiveness denoted as effective relationship costs. Eq. (13) below shows the function ofγiwhile Figs. 3 and 4below show the graphs ofγiandβiagainst effective relationship investments and relationship investments respectively.(13)∀i:γi=γmax-e[-RCi·Effim+ln(γmax)]The increasing nature of function (13) means that the larger the effective relationship investments, the larger theγivalue and the larger the supplier’s knowledge sharing competence and effectiveness,βi. In addition, when there is no relationship investment, there would be no positive impact on knowledge sharing(γi=0,βi=β0). When relationship investments tend to infinity,γitends to a particular limit valueγmax.Besides knowledge sharing improvements, effective relationship investments can also increase the chances of achieving complementarities, which in turn generates mutual relational benefits. Relational benefits include improved product design and innovation, improved delivery services, enhancement of reputation, reduction inventory holding costs, etc. The amount of relational benefits obtained depends heavily on the level of commitment from both supplier and buyer. The level of supplier’s reciprocation and involvement is assumed to be directly related to the proportion of products that the buying firm sources from the supplier. As a result, the amount of relational benefitsRBiobtained from collaboration is modeled to follow an S-shaped relationship with the level of mutualism,Miwhich combines both the amount of effective relationship investments and the proportion of the overall order quantity sourced from the supplier. This relationship is intuitive due to the following reasons. The increment in relational benefits would be small when level of mutualism is small as there is organizational inertia and other difficulties in obtaining complementarities and strategic cost savings when the buyer–supplier affiliation is not established enough. However it is logical that the rate of increment of relational benefits increases when the collaboration becomes more mature and understanding between both parties deepens. On the other hand, there is going to be an upper bound to the amount of relational benefits the buying firm can obtain due to the inherent limit in the amount of complementarities that could be obtained. The functional forms ofMiandRBiare stated in Eqs. (14) and (15) below. Fig. 5below shows the graph ofRBiagainstMi.(14)∀i:Mi=γi·Fi(15)∀i:RBi=E(D)·RBunitπ2+tan-1h[tan-1(Mi-h)+tan-1h]In addition to the knowledge sharing and buyer–supplier relationship considerations, we also assume that every supplier has an inherent production capacity and this is delineated in the optimization problem stated in Section 2.2.2.NotationAdditional variablesβ0Quality multiplier for discrete exchange of informationuTranslational factor of the knowledge sharing quality multiplierβiγmaxMaximal slope factorγiEffiRelational effectiveness multipliermFunctional slope parameter ofγiRBunitRelationship benefits obtained per unit producthTranslational parameter of relational benefits function,RBiCAPiSupplier capacity of supplier iDecision variables:RCi: Relationship costs.Objective function: The main objective is to maximize expected profit.(16)E(π)=S·E(D)-(P+S)·ED-∑iβirixi+-∑i∂iβir¯ixi+∑i(RBi-RCi)Constraints:1.Non-negativity of relationship costs(17)∀i:RCi⩾0Capacity and non-negativity constraint of supplier(18)i∀i:0⩽xi⩽CAPiIn the objective function (16), the first three terms are similar to that of the objective function of the BMKS. The additional fourth term is the sum of the differences between the relationship benefits and relationship investments for all the suppliers. Constraint (18) enforces a limit to the supply quantity of every supplier. Constraints (17) and (18) serve as the non-negative constraints of relationship investments and supplier order quantities respectively. By solving this nonlinear optimization problem, we would obtain the optimal number of suppliers, order quantities for each supplier and relationship costs that should be invested in each supplier. With the introduction of S-shaped auxiliary functions in ISIM, the objective function is no longer global concave and the KKT method cannot guarantee global optimal solutions. Instead, PSO methodology is used to obtain global optimal solutions. In order to validate the usage of PSO, we use the PSO to solve the BMKS which has a closed form global optimal solution and compare the accuracy and reliability of the results. The results of the PSO validation and the numerical experiments would be discussed further in section 3.As mentioned in section 2.2.2, with the introduction of complex and nonlinear auxiliary functions in the ISIM, the objective function loses its global concavity feature and PSO is used to run numerical computations to obtain global optimal results. A review of the PSO technique is included in Appendix C. The accuracy of PSO in this context and its run parameters are further discussed in section 3.1. Following that, Section 3.2 introduces the experimental design and Section 3.3 elaborates on the key insights obtained.As mentioned in section 2.2.2, in order to assess the suitability of PSO, the PSO is used to solve the BMKS which has a closed form global optimal solution to test the reliability of this methodology. We use two indicators for comparison: average percentage deviation from optimal profit for 50 iterations; and number of times it achieves optimality out of 50 iterations. The experiments are run for 100 and 500 particles. We use acceleration constants of 2.1 and initial and final inertia weights of 0.9 and 0.6 respectively as the PSO running parameters for this validation process. We find that the accuracy of the results suffers when demand variability is low. The results are summarized and shown in Table 1below.The percentage deviations from optimality for both cases are extremely small. In addition, in the worst performing case (100 particles in low demand variability case), we find that PSO gives optimal results around 50% of the time. In actuality, we just need to get the optimal solution once out of 50 times as we will take the maximum result of the 50 iterations. As such, the probability of not achieving at least one global optimal result in 50 iterations is extremely small. Therefore, we have experimentally assessed the consistency of the PSO in yielding global optimal results based on the BMKS results. Consequently, for the PSO running parameters used in the subsequent numerical experiments, we will use 100 initialized particles, best of 50 iterations, acceleration constants of 2.1 and initial and final inertia weights of 0.9 and 0.6 respectively. The sensitivity of results is examined via changes in input parameters one at a time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
