@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient inventory control for imperfect quality items

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A general Economic Order Quantity model for imperfect quality items is presented.The solution to the inventory system, if it exists, is a unique and global optimal.The replication of previously developed generalised models yields identical results.RFID temperature tags are shown to have major impact on modelling shelf lifetime.Financial implications, managerial insights and decision strategies are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory,Imperfect quality,Deterioration,Perishable items,Periodic review,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present a general EOQ model for items that are subject to inspection for imperfect quality. Each lot that is delivered to the sorting facility undertakes a 100 per cent screening and the percentage of defective items per lot reduces according to a learning curve. The generality of the model is viewed as important both from an academic and practitioner perspective. The mathematical formulation considers arbitrary functions of time that allow the decision maker to assess the consequences of a diverse range of strategies by employing a single inventory model. A rigorous methodology is utilised to show that the solution is a unique and global optimal and a general step-by-step solution procedure is presented for continuous intra-cycle periodic review applications. The value of the temperature history and flow time through the supply chain is also used to determine an efficient policy. Furthermore, coordination mechanisms that may affect the supplier and the retailer are explored to improve inventory control at both echelons. The paper provides illustrative examples that demonstrate the application of the theoretical model in different settings and lead to the generation of interesting managerial insights.Since the introduction of the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) model by Harris (1913), frequent contributions have been made in the literature towards the development of alternative models that overcome the unrealistic assumptions embedded in the EOQ formulation. For example, the assumption related to the perfect quality items is technologically unattainable in most supply chain applications (Cheng, 1991). In contrast, products can be categorised as ‘good quality’, ‘good quality after reworking’, ‘imperfect quality’ and ‘scrap’ (Chan, Ibrahim, & Lochert, 2003; Pal, Sana, & Chaudhuri, 2013). In practice, the presence of defective items in raw material or finished products inventories may deeply affect supply chain coordination and, consequently, the product flows among supply chain levels may become unreliable (Roy, Sana, & Chaudhuri, 2013). In response to this concern, the enhancement of currently available production and inventory order quantity models, that accounts for imperfect items in their mathematical formulation, has become an operational priority in supply chain management (Khan, Jaber, Guiffrida, & Zolfaghari, 2011). This enhancement may also include the knowledge transfer between supply chain entities in order to reduce the percentage of defective items.EOQ models are associated with another implicit assumption that stored items may retain the same utility indefinitely, i.e. they do not lose their value as time goes on. This assumption may be valid for certain items. However, real-life systems analysis suggests that goods are subject to ‘obsolescence’, ‘perishability’ and ‘deterioration’ that have a direct impact on the flow of an item as it moves through the supply chain (Bakker, Riezebos, & Teunter, 2012; Goyal & Giri, 2001; Pahl & Voß, 2014). In relation to the perishable items, Amorim, Meyr, Almeder, and Almada-Lobo (2013) presented a classification of perishable models for items that have explicit characteristics related to their physical status (e.g. by spoilage, decay or depletion) and/or changes in their value as perceived by the customer and/or a risk of future reduced functionality according to specialist's opinion.The complexity and drivers associated with product waste and loss have been increasingly discussed in the academic literature and include such issues as imperfect quality items (that necessitate an inspection to take place at various supply chain stages to ensure the quality of the product is adequate) (Gunders, 2012). For example, in the food and drink industry, different proportions of food waste are attributed to different stages in the supply chain, from production to handling and storage, processing and packaging, distribution and retail and finally at the household consumption stage. In particular, the fresh meat sector has been identified as the largest producer of waste and accounts overall for 25 per cent of the waste, ahead of fruit and vegetables at 13 per cent (WRAP, 2012a). The waste and spoilage related to inventory decisions represent a large proportion, and it is estimated that around 10 per cent of all perishable goods are spoiled before they reach consumers (Boyer, 2006; Roberti, 2005; Tortola, 2005). WRAP (2012b) published that “5–25 per cent of fruit and vegetable crop might not get through the supply chain to retail customers”. For example, in the onion supply chain, losses related to grading account for 9–20 per cent; storage 3–10 per cent and in the packing process they equate to 2–3 per cent loss. The main causes of waste in these examples relate to product specification, product deterioration and reliance on (excessive) storage to cope with fluctuations in (forecasted) demand. The product shelf lifetime also depends on various environmental factors such as the product's temperature history, humidity, transportation and handling (Ketzenberg, Bloemhof, & Gaukler, 2015). Further, increases in the time products are being stored as well as changes in the environment of the storage facilities (e.g. temperature storage and controlled atmosphere storage) may result in an increase (or a decrease) of the deterioration rate of certain commodities. This means that the identification of an appropriate ordering policy is an essential but challenging task.Appropriate management of perishable inventories, in conjunction with modern technologies, play an important role in monitoring the condition of those goods in different stages of the supply chain. Ketzenberg et al. (2015) emphasised the importance of the value of information generated from using different systems in the decision making process in the grocery industry (that is associated with low net margins). For example, continuous automated inventory control systems are capable of tracking, recording and transmitting relevant information regarding an item as it moves through the network. The deployment of radio-frequency identification (RFID) systems, data loggers and time–temperature integrators and sensors lead to a reduction of product spoilage and economic benefits (Ketzenberg et al., 2015). The potential benefits of RFID for logistics, transportation and warehousing relate to increased supply chain visibility, which in turn increases efficiency, lowers safety stocks, and provides the same or even better customer service level (Gaukler, Seifert, & Hausman, 2007). For further details related to this technology, see Jedermann, Emond, and Lang (2008) and Wessel (2007).This paper aims to address the quality related issues discussed above when modelling inventories for items that require 100 per cent screening. In particular, a general EOQ model for items with imperfect quality is presented; the solution to the underlying inventory system, if it exists, is shown to be a unique and global optimal. The mathematical formulation considers arbitrary functions of time that allow the decision maker to assess the consequences of a diverse range of strategies by employing a single inventory model. Previously published models in this area are shown to be special cases of our model. The behaviour of different conditions (such as using functions for varying demand, screening, defective and deterioration rates, value of information (VOI) and perishable items that are subject to deterioration while in storage) is studied using illustrative examples, and interesting insights are offered to practitioners. This paper intersects the areas of fixed and random items’ lifetimes since the assumption that each lot is subjected to a 100 per cent screening will render the (potential) random lifetime of a product deterministic. The focus of this study is on the value and use of technologies such as RFID to capture the time and temperature history (TTH) to model shelf lifetime and not the technologies themselves.The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 discusses the literature related to perishable inventories, value of information (VOI) and models that consider imperfect quality items. Our EOQ model for items with imperfect quality, the assumptions and notations of the inventory system are presented in Section 3. The solution procedures are presented in Section 4, followed, in Section 5, by illustrative examples and special cases that demonstrate the application of the theoretical results in practice. Managerial insights and concluding remarks are provided in Sections 6 and 7, respectively. Finally, Supplementary material presented in an electronic companion to this paper offers a proof of the optimality and uniqueness of our solution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
