@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mean-variance analysis of sourcing decision under disruption risk

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identification of situations with medium-probability and moderate-impact disruptive event.Application of mean-variance (MV) approach to manage such disruptive events under newsvendor setting.Studying the structural property of the problem and identifying existence of global maxima, even if the MV function is complex.Perform comparative statics analysis to study the behavior of objective functions with respect to few parameters.Develop an algorithm for MV objective that can handle higher dimensional problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk management,Disruption risk,Demand uncertainty,Multi-sourcing,Mean-variance analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study considers a mean-variance (MV) framework for managing disruption risk in a two-echelon supply chain with a risk-averse buyer and multiple unreliable suppliers under newsvendor (NV) setting. An MV objective function is designed to maximize the buyer's expected profit while minimizing its variance. Study of the structural property of the problem proves the existence of a global maxima and a set of efficient portfolios consisting of dominating mean-variance pairs. We demonstrate the effect of model parameters through comparative statics analysis. An algorithm is developed to overcome the computational complexity of the higher dimensional problem. Numerical studies on model behavior show that the proposed algorithm gives the exact optimal solution while being tractable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Managing and mitigating disruption risk has become an important research issue in the recent past (Christopher & Lee, 2004; Kleindorfer & Saad, 2005; Schmitt, Snyder, & Shen, 2010; Silbermayr & Minner, 2014; Tang & Tomlin, 2008; Yu, Zeng, & Zhao, 2009). Supply disruption may occur in the form of natural disasters such as earthquakes, floods, and hurricanes; or man-made havocs such as terrorist attacks, and strikes. Examples include the earthquakes in China and Japan that caused major disruption to many global and local supply chains, and the fire in Ericsson supplier's semiconductor plant that resulted in a loss of 400 million Euros (Norrman & Jansson, 2004). Oke and Gopalkrishnan (2009) classify such events into three categories: high likelihood-low impact, low likelihood-high impact, and medium likelihood-moderate impact. One of the most common strategies to hedge against supply disruption is multi-sourcing. Traditionally, academic literature considers the buyer to be risk-neutral, and the decision-making involves either maximizing the profit or minimizing the cost. In reality, however, this decision depends on the risk-taking behavior of the buyer who wishes to make a trade-off between maximizing the profit while minimizing the risk. Markowitz’s (1952) mean-variance (MV) theory is increasingly used for conducting risk analysis in stochastic supply chain models (Chiu & Choi, 2013), where MV theory maximizes expected return for a given level of risk or minimizes risk for a given expected return. Our model is another effort in this direction considering supply disruption and demand uncertainty to complement multi-sourcing decision.Many techniques originally proposed on investment theory such as MV analysis, MAD, semi-variance, VaR and CVAR used by various researchers for supply chain risk analysis. For example, Tomlin (2006) considers both MV and CVaR approach for managing disruption risk. As suggested by him, CVaR (Conditional Value-at-Risk) approach better handles the risks associated with low probability of high impact events, i.e., very rare but severe disruptions. However, as suggested by Markowitz (2014), MV analysis is a better approach when the deviation is large. Consider disruptions due to cyclones and related floods that are likely to occur during the monsoon period (typically July–October) in Indian subcontinent. Though such disruptive events occur with low probability and have high impact, their occurrences are not as rare as earthquakes. They are expected to occur during a specific period that accommodates medium probability and moderate impact events. Therefore, the mitigation strategies for such events must be different from other disruptive events that do not give clue of their occurrences and MV approach is appropriate in such cases.There are numerous applications of MV analysis under standard newsvendor (NV) setting. For example, Choi, Li, and Yan (2008) use MV approach to investigate the NV problem by considering different risk attitudes with and without stockout cost. Similarly, Wu, Li, Wang, and Cheng (2009) apply MV method to analyze the risk-averse problem with stockout cost and found that a risk-averse buyer orders more than a risk-neutral one under stockout situation. Though, there is some scope for applying MV analysis to manage disruption risk in an NV setting, to our understanding, almost no literature exist in this area. In the earlier work (Ray & Jenamani, 2014) we have developed multi-sourcing decision-making models with disruption risk considering both risk-neutral and risk-averse buying behavior. While in the previous work, we have modeled risk-averse buying behavior by introducing a service level constraint following the work of Xanthopoulos, Vlachos, and Iakovou (2012); in the present work, risk-averseness is represented in the mean-variance framework following Wu et al. (2009).To our understanding, this is the first work in the literature that applies MV analysis to manage disruption risk in NV setting. The case of both risk-neutral and risk-averse buyer is considered; while the former maximizes only the expected profit, the later does so considering both expected profit and its variance. Structural characteristics of the problems are investigated to highlight on two special portfolios: (i) maximizing expected profit and (ii) minimizing profit-variance. In between the two extremes, there exists a set of MV efficient portfolios. Though the problem is complex, existence of global maxima is established. To show the effect of various input parameters, comparative statics analysis is performed. The model is demonstrated through a numerical study, and sensitivity analysis is carried out under different setting of the model parameters. An algorithm for MV objective is proposed to reduce the time complexity, which also gives the optimal solution to the problem. Contrary to the result of Wu et al. (2009), current finding shows that when disruption risk is considered, the risk-neutral decision maker orders more than the risk-averse one. Thus, disruption risk has significant effect on buyer's optimal ordering policy, and stockout cost plays a major role in buyer's expected profit, its variance as well as MV objective.The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains the review of the relevant literature. Section 3 discusses the problem and sets the framework. Section 4 presents formulation of the model and its analysis. Section 5 shows the comparative statics analysis andSection 6 shows the solution approach. Section 7 takes up a numerical study to illustrate the model. Finally, the last section summarizes the work and discusses about future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
