@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel group ranking model for revealing sequence and quantity knowledge

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The aggregation of preferences into a consensus ranking is a group ranking problem.A model for finding consensus sequential patterns with linguistic terms is proposed.Experiments by synthetic and real datasets showed its efficiency and effectiveness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Group ranking,Data mining,Sequential data,Quantitative data,Linguistic terms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aggregation of individuals’ preferences into a consensus ranking is a group ranking problem which has been widely utilized in various applications, such as decision support systems, recommendation systems, and voting systems. Gathering the comparison of preferences and aggregate them to gain consensuses is a conventional issue. For example, b>c⩾d⩾a indicates that b is favorable to c, and c (d) is somewhat favorable but not fully favorable to d (a), where>and⩾are comparators, and a, b, c, and d are items. Recently, a new type of ranking model was proposed to provide temporal orders of items. The order, b&c→a, means that b and c can occur simultaneously and are also before a. Although this model can derive the order ranking of items, the knowledge about quantity-related items is also of importance to approach more real-life circumstances. For example, when enterprises or individuals handle their portfolios in financial management, two considerations, the sequences and the amount of money for investment objects, should be raised initially. In this study, we propose a model for discovering consensus sequential patterns with quantitative linguistic terms. Experiments using synthetic and real datasets showed the model’s computational efficiency, scalability, and effectiveness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the field of social science, there are numerous problems which cannot be directly solved by mathematical models or structured approaches-the issue of group ranking is one of them. As participators in a group are requested to proffer opinions to obtain an outcome, their thoughts are always diverse and in conflict. As a result, the outcome may be appropriate but not optimal. The way in which the group comes to a compromise solution or reaches a consensus, therefore, is significant in group decision making. As a response, researchers have come to pay more attention to the problem of reaching a consensus in a group with divergent participators’ opinions.To manage this kind of decision making in a group, Smith (2009) introduces six steps to success. After options have been developed and tested, fulfilling the former five steps, the final step is to choose a best solution by a consensus approach. Consensus indicates that all members can honestly say about two thoughts. First, we should be as fair and open as possible when collecting various opinions (Smith, 2009). Nowadays, the assistance of information technologies (IT) can help us to meet this requirement. We can gather opinions from the Internet or a communication system in a company. Everyone can receive information openly and provide their opinions fairly. Second, when collecting a myriad of opinions, a group must consolidate and aggregate them to reach a consensus or the best result for the group at the time (Smith, 2009). This thought is not easy to reach because the process of generating a consensus from a great diversity of opinions leads to problems of conflict. Therefore, finding a way to resolve conflicts to gain a consensus in a group is the core of the group ranking problem.The group ranking problem has been investigated for more than two centuries (Cook, 2006) and has been applied to many fields, such as recommendation systems (Chen & Cheng, 2008), decision support systems (Cook, Golany, Kress, Penn, & Raviv, 2005; Huang, Chang, Li, & Lin, 2013), machine learning (Fagin, Kumar, & Sivakumar, 2003), and sport tournaments (Moon, 1968). In recommendation systems, we can consider more recommendations for items, such as books, CDs, and other products, through group rating. For example, in a recommendation system, five users have rated four books, a, b, c, and d, based on their preferences as (1) c>a>d>b, (2) c⩾a⩾d>b, (3) a>c>d>b, (4) c>a⩾d⩾b, and (5) c>a>d⩾b, where>denotes the former is favorable to the latter, and⩾denotes the former is somewhat favorable but not fully favorable to the latter. As a result, we generally realize that the purchasing order of the four books suggested by users is c first, and then a, d, and finally b. As in this example, the goal is to aggregate each user’s ranking and ultimately show an outcome. However, a conflict has occurred in this case, that is, user (3) has a different preference about a>c than the others, and has to be dealt with further.Recently, Chang (2011) proposed a new type of preference ranking model which can provide temporal orders between items. For example, three users have given their orders as (1) b→d&a→c, (2) b→d→a→c, and (3) b→a&d→c, where → denotes that the latter occurs after the former and & denotes that the former and latter can occur together. After consolidating and aggregating them, we have two consensuses, b→d→c and b→a→c, but there is a conflict between a&d and a→d. This conflict is represented by a∼d, where ∼ denotes that the preceding item can occur together with or before the succeeding one (Chang, 2011). The model can be applied to many fields, such as portfolios of investments, the order of treatment for diseases, course plans in colleges, and the reading order of books. Take portfolios of investments for example, when investors choose different kinds of investment objects, they invest in objects by considering different sequences to divert risks. An outcome, 〈(conventional stock)&(Asia fund)→(real estate and property)〉, represents that after investing in conventional stock and an Asia fund, investors are then advised to invest in real estate and property. In this example, we see that researching temporal orders between items is interesting and necessary in real-life circumstances.Although the approach of Chang (2011) can gain the order ranking of items, the knowledge about quantity-related items is also of importance when approaching more real-life circumstances. For instance, when enterprises or individuals handle their portfolios in financial management, two considerations, the sequences and the amount of money for investment objects, should be raised initially. Then, the outcome, 〈(conventional stock, Middle)&(Asia fund, High)→(real estate and property, Low)>, provides more referrals for investors, where Low, Middle, and High are linguistic terms for purchased quantities. This means that having invested in conventional stock in Middle quantities and the Asia fund in High quantities, investors should then invest in real estate and property in Low quantities. This certainly provides investors with more knowledge. No studies, to the best of our knowledge, have ever developed this type of group ranking model for disclosing sequence and quantity knowledge from the preference data and identifying conflicts. In this study, therefore, we propose a model following the idea of mining frequent patterns (MFP) to discover consensus sequential patterns with quantitative linguistic terms (Han & Kamber, 2006).There are two reasons why we adopt the idea of MFP in the data-mining field to aggregate preferences into consensus patterns. The first is that MFP is to find common subsequences within users’ preferences. MFP can discover all possible common subsequences preliminarily. The second is that the support mechanism in MFP is similar to the voting one in democracy. Therefore, when a subsequence is over the threshold, we can say that this subsequence is of consensus from the certain ratio of users’ agreements.There are three advantages to applying linguistic terms in our proposed model. First, the knowledge of users can be represented more naturally and appropriately by linguistic terms. Verbal communication with linguistic terms is preferred for the exchange of soft knowledge. Second, it is widely acknowledged that many real-life situations are intrinsically brief, and the partition of quantity information into linguistic terms is one such situation (Watson & Frolick, 1993). We may not like to confront a lot of statistic data but are willing to read the summary with linguistic terms systematized from these statistic data. Third, using linguistic terms is simple and easy for human beings and is an important tool for solving problems (Herrera, Herrera-Viedma, & Martínez, 2008; Kao & Liu, 1997; Mitra, Pal, & Mitra, 2002).This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related works. Section 3 formally defines the problem. A new algorithm, consensus sequential pattern mining (CSPM), to discover patterns with quantitative linguistic terms and conflicts is developed in Section 4. Section 5 describes experiments that evaluate the efficiency, scalability, and effectiveness of the CSPM algorithm. Finally, conclusions and implications are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The CSPM algorithm is presented for discovering consensus sequential patterns with quantitative linguistic terms. Also, we tackle a conflict situation, i.e. there is a pair of frequent patterns of which some items are identical but time-relation or quantity contradictions also exist. To study the performances of the three algorithms, the GSP, the CCTM, and the CSPM, with varying different minimum support thresholds, an analysis is carried out using synthetic datasets. In a scalability test, the run time of the CSPM algorithm grows somewhat exponentially with increases in the number of users, the number of lt-items, and the number of linguistic terms. The algorithm, however, scales up linearly with increases in the average number of lt-items per itemset and average number of itemset per user, and decreases in the conflict threshold. As a result, the performance of the CSPM algorithm is still serviceable and can be applied to discover patterns and conflicts. An experiment with the real dataset collected in this study showed that the novel model can identify interesting patterns and conflicts, providing more plentiful knowledge about sequences and quantities for users.Compared with Chang (2011) model, our proposed model has two additional contributions. The first is that the proposed model adds a new dimension, the quantity variable, for reference. The second is that the conflict identification for the quantity variable is also provided in the proposed model. Although the study has to deal with the two concerns, spending times to compute the outcomes, the run time of the proposed model is still reasonable and not too worse than that of the Chang (2011) model, showed in the experimental results.There are some implications for academic researchers and business practitioners in this study. For academic researchers, this study addressed the group ranking problem to propose a model for discovering the sequential preferences with quantitative linguistic terms. However, the time relation of this model only includes three forms, &, →, and ∼. More precise information about the time relations could be found by extending the proposed model. Since we are living in a network era, opinions or thoughts can be presented on the Internet conveniently and are collected by businesses easily. Therefore, this study provides an implement to gain them and then analyze their meanings. Managers can also employ the proposed model in a variety of industries to understand the meanings of opinions or thoughts from their customers. In addition, because enterprises can gather timely data and own fast computing capacities, managers can make more quickly responses as the favor of customers is changing.