@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stock vs. mutual insurers: Who should and who does charge more?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We extend the Doherty and Garven (1986) model to mutual insurers and include frictions.Numerical implementation of the model to explain mutual and stock premiums.Comparison with empirical evidence from panel data set (Hausman–Taylor estimator).Empirically observed premiums are not consistent with normative findings.Results suggest considerable wealth transfers between stakeholder groups.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Insurance company,Insurance pricing,Legal form of organization,Contingent claims framework,Hausman–Taylor estimator,,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We contribute to the literature by developing a normative theory of the relationship between stock and mutual insurers based on a contingent claims framework. To consistently price policies provided by firms in these two legal forms of organization, we extend the work of Doherty and Garven (1986) to the mutual case, thus ensuring that the formulae for the stock insurer are nested in our more general model. This set-up allows us to separately consider the ownership and policyholder stakes included in the mutual insurance premium and explicitly takes into account the right to charge additional premiums in times of financial distress, restrictions on the ability of members to realize the value of their equity stake, as well as relevant market frictions. A numerical implementation of our model shows that, for the premiums of stock and mutual insurers to be equal, the latter would need to hold comparatively less equity capital. We then evaluate panel data for the German motor liability insurance sector and demonstrate that observed premiums are not consistent with our normative findings. The combination of theory and empirical evidence suggests that policies offered by stock insurers are overpriced relative to policies of mutuals. Consequently, we suspect considerable wealth transfers between the stakeholder groups.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Private insurance firms in many countries can be organized either as mutuals or corporations (stock insurance companies). Similar to the policyholders of a stock insurer, those of a mutual are obliged to pay the insurance premium, which, in turn, entitles them to an indemnity payment contingent on the occurrence of a loss. Apart from that, however, several important differences between these two legal forms of organization exist. First of all, in contrast to stock insurers, mutuals are in fact owned by their policyholders. By paying the respective premium, the buyer of a mutual policy becomes a so-called member, which is economically equivalent to simultaneously acquiring a policyholder and an equityholder stake in the firm. As a result, those insured by a mutual are usually granted direct or indirect participation in the administrative bodies and should thus be able to exert influence on business decisions. To establish a similar position, policyholders of stock insurance companies would additionally need to acquire ownership rights by purchasing the company’s common stock. Unlike the shareholders of a stock insurer, however, members of a mutual cannot simply sell their equity stake. This is due to the fact that, in practice, it is not explicitly differentiated from the policyholder stake and a secondary market for such ownership claims does not exist. Hence, the only ways to fully realize the value of the equity are liquidation or demutualization of the company, which would need to be enacted collectively by a majority of the members.11In the course of a demutualization, the insurer changes its legal form and is transformed into a stock company.A further difference to stock insurers is the occasional premium refund that mutual members can expect if the company is profitable. Finally, stock insurance companies cannot draw on their policyholders to recover financial deficits, whereas the membership in a mutual insurer might be associated with the obligation to make additional premium payments contingent on the firm being in financial distress, also termed “member assessment”.22According to industry professionals, there are quite a few example cases in which mutuals actually had to draw on this option. In the years 2005 and 2008, the Bermuda-based company Oil Insurance Limited struggled with significant hurricane losses that ultimately resulted in a member assessment to speed up recovery. Furthermore, anecdotal evidence indicates that Mutuelle Assurance des Instituteurs (MAIF) and various other French mutuals needed to make premium calls due to exceptionally high claims costs in the wake of cyclone Lothar in 1999.Since the legal form determines these rights and obligations associated with the purchase of an insurance contract, it should ceteris paribus result in different prices for policies, covering identical claims.In this paper, we contribute to the literature by developing a normative theory of the relationship between stock and mutual insurance premiums based on a contingent claims framework. To consistently price policies provided by these two types of organizations, we extend the work of Doherty and Garven (1986) to the mutual case, thus ensuring that the formulae for the stock insurer are nested in our more general model. This set-up allows us to separately consider the ownership and policyholder stakes included in the mutual insurance premium, taking into account the restricted ability of members to extract the value of their equity stake as well as the mutuals’ right to charge additional premiums, which, in the following, will be called “recovery option”. In addition, we explicitly incorporate relevant market frictions. By means of our model, we are able to derive certain conditions under which the premiums of stock and mutual insurance companies should be equal. In order to examine whether observed market prices are consistent with the normative results, in a last step, we run an analysis of panel data for the German motor liability insurance sector and provide empirical evidence for the impact of the organizational form on premium size. Finally, integrating our theoretical and empirical findings, we discuss selected economic implications for the stakeholders.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of previous literature on issues surrounding stock and mutual insurance companies and point out the gap that we would like to address with our contribution. Our model framework is then developed in Section 3, beginning with the simple and well-established case of the stock insurance company in a perfect market. Subsequently, we introduce frictions and consider a mutual insurer with recovery option and partial participation in future equity payoffs. Furthermore, Section 4 comprises a numerical analysis that illustrates the interaction of the main model components and allows us to derive normative results. Section 5 is the empirical part, in which we apply panel data methodology to a sample from the German motor liability insurance sector. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss selected economic implications of our findings, and in Section 7, we state our conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
