@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A branch and bound based heuristic for makespan minimization of washing operations in hospital sterilization services

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Parallel batch scheduling approach for hospital sterilization services.A branch and bound based heuristic method is developed.Our algorithm,BBH, can solve real-world size instances with short computation time.BBHoutperforms the current state of the art solution methods for most of the problem instances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in health services,Parallel batch scheduling,Makespan,Branch and bound heuristic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we address the problem of parallel batching of jobs on identical machines to minimize makespan. The problem is motivated from the washing step of hospital sterilization services where jobs have different sizes, different release dates and equal processing times. Machines can process more than one job at the same time as long as the total size of jobs in a batch does not exceed the machine capacity. We present a branch and bound based heuristic method and compare it to a linear model and two other heuristics from the literature. Computational experiments show that our method can find high quality solutions within short computation time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sterilization services are hospital departments where medical devices (MDs) are sterilized. There are two types of MDs: single use MDs and reusable MDs. Reusable MDs (RMDs) are used in surgeries, sterilized, and then reused in other surgeries. We consider the sterilization process of RMDs in this study.All RMDs used in a surgery constitute the RMD set of the surgery. After a surgery, all RMDs used are sent to the sterilization service. Due to surgery characteristics and surgeons needs, RMD sets may contain different numbers and types of instruments. Hence, they may have different sizes (or volumes). Moreover, they are sent to the sterilization service at different times within a day since each surgery may have a different starting and ending time.A typical sterilization service is composed of the following steps (Di Mascolo & Gouin, 2013): pre-disinfection, washing, packing and sterilization. Pre-disinfection is a manual step during which RMDs are submerged in a chemical substance. Then, they are washed in an automatic washer. Afterwards, they are packed and sterilized with steam in autoclaves.We are interested in the washing step which is a bottleneck for sterilization services. More than one RMD set can be washed in an automatic washer at the same as long as the machine capacity is not exceeded. All RMD sets washed at the same time constitute a single batch. Depending on the organization between operating theatres and the sterilization service, RMD arrivals can be known in advance. For instance, RMD arrivals can be known accurately for operating theatres where ambulatory surgeries take place. Another example is sterilization services that accept RMD arrivals only at specific times within a day. However, although RMD arrival times and sizes are known in advance, the decision of how to load the machines, i.e., how to batch RMD sets and launch washing cycles is not trivial. We model this problem using a parallel batch scheduling approach. Jobs may have different sizes (or volumes), different release dates and equal processing times. All jobs processed at the same time constitute a single batch which is processed on a single machine. The processing time of batches are the same and equal to the processing time of jobs. Hence, our problem becomes a parallel batching problem where RMD sets are treated as jobs having different sizes, different release dates and equal processing times.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a literature review about batch scheduling problems and summarize the contributions of this paper. In Section 3, we give a formal description of our problem. Section 4 is dedicated to the solution methodology. Section 5 presents computational tests. Finally, we conclude the study and propose some further research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we studied a parallel batch scheduling problem whose origin is hospital sterilization services. Jobs have different sizes, different release dates and equal processing times. Our objective is to minimize the makespan on parallel identical machines. MILP models in the literature require long computation time for real size instances. Heuristic methods are faster but do not guarantee the optimality for makespan. We presented a branch and bound based heuristic method which can solve instances containing up to 40 jobs within very short time. We tested this method on real life instances and compared the solution quality to other methods from the literature. Numerical results show that our method can provide high quality makespan values in reasonable computational time.Many extensions of our problem can be considered for future work. Considering there is imperfect knowledge about job arrivals at the sterilization service, uncertain job release dates may be considered. Some dynamic stochastic approaches (e.g., rolling horizon method) can be applied to this new case instead of deterministic methods. Moreover, some other objective functions (e.g.,∑Cj) can be studied.Table A.8Algorithm 1Lower Bound algorithm: LBTables B.9 and B.10Algorithm 2Branch and Bound Heuristic:B&BHpreprocessingleftBranch()Input:tL,jobListA,jobListUA,dispM,jobListAL,jobListUAL,dispML;tL←release date of first job injobListUA;jobListAL←jobListA∪job(s) j injobListUAsuch thatrj⩽tL;jobListUAL←jobListUA-job(s) j injobListUAsuch thatrj⩽tL;dispML←dispM;preprocessingrightBranch()createBatch()