@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bullwhip effect and supply chain costs with low- and high-quality information on inventory shrinkage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Impact of real-time shrinkage information on bullwhip effect and costs is studied.Bullwhip effect exaggerates when real-time rather than statistical data is obtained.Larger bullwhip effect with real-time information does not result in higher costs.Access to real-time information increases the benefits of information sharing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Bullwhip effect,Inventory inaccuracy,Information quality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Inventory inaccuracy is the mismatch between the recorded inventory and the physical inventory, which is severe and widespread in industry. A few studies have investigated the bullwhip effect with the existence of inventory inaccuracy. The development of information technologies has provided companies with access to accurate inventory information in real time. This will surely affect the bullwhip effect and supply chain costs. The aim of this paper is to build an analytical model to systematically investigate these effects. We consider a retailer–manufacturer supply chain in which the retailer faces inventory shrinkage, which is the main cause of inventory inaccuracy. Both the situations with accurate real-time inventory information, i.e., high-quality information, and the situation with statistical inventory information, i.e., low-quality information are studied. We examine the relationships between the bullwhip effect, information distortion and supply chain costs with different levels of information quality. The results of our analysis enrich the existing literature on the bullwhip effect. First, we show that the bullwhip effect is magnified along the chain when higher-quality information on inventory shrinkage – specifically real-time rather than statistical data – is obtained. Second, we show that the magnification of the bullwhip effect does not necessarily result in higher costs. Third, we demonstrate that higher-quality information increases the benefits of information sharing. Our paper provides new insights into the causes, extent and economic dynamics of order variability in the presence of inventory inaccuracy, and may thus suggest ways of more effectively managing the bullwhip effect and inventory.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Inventory inaccuracy is the mismatch between the recorded inventory and the physical inventory. There are three main causes of inventory inaccuracy: misplacement, shrinkage and transaction error (Atali, Lee, & Özer, 2005). Recent studies have shown that inventory inaccuracy is widespread in the industry, and has significant consequences (Agrawal & Sharda, 2012; Bai et al., 2012; Kök & Shang, 2007). DeHoratius and Raman (2008) quantify the inaccuracy and report that 65% of nearly 370,000 inventory records gathered from multiple stores owned by a leading retail chain are inaccurate, and that the average difference between the recorded inventory and the physical inventory is 35% of the target inventory. IBM Business Consulting Services calculate the loss due to shrinkage as 1.75% of retailers’ US$58-billion revenue, and between 0.22% and 0.73% of manufacturers’ total revenue (Alexander et al., 2002). Compared with misplacement and transaction error, shrinkage is the most significant cause of inventory inaccuracy (Kök & Shang, 2014; ECR Europe, 2003).A common method of addressing inventory inaccuracy is to optimize ordering decisions by integrating the inventory discrepancy into the order-making process. Unsurprisingly, the amount of information available on the error will affect the ordering decision and the corresponding costs. To determine the extent of inventory inaccuracy, two pieces of information are needed: the electronically recorded inventory and the physical inventory in the warehouse. The recorded inventory is relatively easy to obtain, as it is stored in an information-technology (IT) system and can be rapidly retrieved. There are two ways of obtaining the physical inventory, as follows.In a traditional identification (ID) system, such as a barcode-based system, a periodic cycle count can be conducted to obtain the physical inventory. As individual cycle counts are usually associated with high inspection costs, most companies can only afford a couple of cycle counts per year, which thus occur much less frequently than orders. The average inventory error can be estimated from the historical data obtained from cycle counts. In this way, the information available when ordering decisions are made is often inaccurate and imprecise, which corresponds to the low information quality case.The other method of obtaining information on the physical inventory is to track the inventory using advanced ID technologies such as radio-frequency identification (RFID). RFID has two main beneficial advantages: high-frequency monitoring and non-line of sight reading, which yield inventory information that is both accurate and timely (Dai & Tseng, 2012). This method ensures that the recorded inventory is always consistent with the physical inventory, providing the decision maker with accurate real-time information on the inventory, which corresponds to the high information quality case. (Please note that our focus is not changing the physical flow of the products, although the advanced ID technologies may help reduce the inventory error, such as preventing thefts. Instead, we aim to examine the effects on supply chain performance of getting more accurate and real-time information.)For example, consider a retailer facing a shrinkage problem due to random inventory loss. The retailer orders once a week, and conducts a periodic review system. In a barcode-based inventory system, the optimal physical cycle count is once per quarter. Comparing the historical cycle count data with the recorded inventory in the IT system reveals that the average shrinkage is 100 units per week. The manager can address this discrepancy by adjusting the size of the order every week to compensate for the shrinkage (Kang & Gershwin, 2005). As the decision maker is only aware of the average shrinkage, the compensation is a fixed number, which cannot capture the dynamics of the shrinkage. RFID-based systems allow the retailer to monitor their physical inventories in a more timely manner. When each weekly order is made, the exact amount of the shrinkage that has occurred during the week is known. The decision maker can promptly adjust the size of the order to compensate precisely for the week's shrinkage, and thereby more accurately meet the demand of external customers.As technologies continue to improve and their costs to decrease, obtaining accurate real-time inventory information is becoming increasingly cost-effective. As a result, more and more retailers are guided by high-quality information in their daily operations and decision making. The increased accessibility of high-quality inventory information is expected to enhance supply chain management and give rise to various new business models and management mechanisms. Therefore, it is important to investigate the effects of accurate real-time information on operational decisions and supply chain performance.In this paper, we explore the effects of high-quality information in a supply chain with an inventory-inaccuracy problem. Specifically, we investigate the effects of access to accurate real-time inventory information rather than inventory statistics. (Note that we do not consider the following two ‘naïve’ cases, which respectively fail to reflect industry practice and amplify the effects of accurate real-time information: (1) the decision maker is not aware of the inventory error in his own place and (2) the decision maker is aware of the inventory error, but takes no action.) We measure the effects of information quality on supply chain performance in two dimensions: (1) the bullwhip effect and (2) holding and shortage costs. Next, we explain why these two performance indicators were chosen, and outline the differences between our work and the existing literature on the bullwhip effect and inventory inaccuracy, respectively.First, most studies of inventory inaccuracy investigate single-stage systems. Only a few researchers address inventory inaccuracy in a supply chain, and none specifically consider order-variability transfer along a chain, viz., the bullwhip effect (Heese, 2007; Kök & Shang, 2014; Rekik, 2011; Rekik, Sahin, Jemai, & Dallery, 2008). Few researchers working on the bullwhip effect address inventory discrepancy (Fleisch & Tellkamp, 2005). Only a few papers specifically analyze the effects of inventory inaccuracy on the bullwhip effect. Sodhi and Tang (2011) assume that the actual order quantity deviates from the desirable order quantity, and examine the incremental effect of inaccurate order placement on the bullwhip effect. Bruccoleri, Cannella, and Porta (2014) focus on the inventory inaccuracy caused by behavioral aspects of workers, and show that traditional inventory management policies to address bullwhip effect are not effective for this kind of inventory error. Cannella et al. (2015) consider a k-stage collaborative supply chain. They show that the bullwhip effect is monotonously increasing in the level of the inventory error, and even a small amount of such error may notably increase the supply chain costs. All the above-mentioned works have contributed to show the impacts of inventory error on the bullwhip effect, but they do not differentiate between inventories with higher and lower levels of information quality. Therefore, the decision maker's response to information of differing quality remains unclear, along with the effect of such information on his order variability. We must also ask how an ordering decision based on accurate real-time information affects the decision maker's upstream partners, and whether such a decision amplifies or attenuates the bullwhip effect.Second, as inventory error affects inventory level, orders based on inaccurate inventory calculations may result in surplus and/or out-of-stock products, which in turn affect the company's holding and shortage costs. Therefore, holding and shortage costs are widely used as indicators of financial performance by researchers investigating inventory inaccuracy (Kök & Shang, 2014; Sahin & Dallery, 2009; Sahin, Buzacott, & Dallery, 2008). To the best of our knowledge, researchers addressing inventory inaccuracy in relation to cost calculation rarely incorporate accurate real-time information into the optimization process, and compare the effects of information quality on the corresponding costs (see Section 2 below). How does accurate real-time information affect a given party's holding and shortage costs? Is a decision made in the presence of real-time information economically beneficial or harmful to other parties in the supply chain? How does such a decision affect the overall cost incurred by the supply chain? As the answers to these questions remain unclear, further investigation is needed.In summary, few researchers examining the effects of inventory inaccuracy on supply chain performance differentiate between levels of information quality. We aim to fill this gap by specifically investigating the effects of accurate real-time information on the bullwhip effect and supply chain costs.Furthermore, information sharing has been shown to be one of the most effective methods of alleviating the bullwhip effect (Dominguez, Cannella, & Framinan, 2014). Most researchers in this field focus on the effects of demand-information sharing. However, the recent development of RFID and Electronic Product Code networks has increased the visibility of accurate real-time inventory information in supply chains (Bottani, Roberto, & Andrea, 2010). Various new models of operation, such as Vendor Managed Inventory, Collaborative Forecasting and Replenishment and buy-online, pick-up-in-store, require inventory information to be shared (Cannella & Ciancimino, 2010; Cannella, Ashayeri, Miranda, & Bruccoleri, 2014; Gallino & Moreno, 2014). It is thus imperative to investigate the influence of information quality on the effectiveness of inventory-information sharing.To this end, our research questions are as follows.(1)How does accurate real-time information affect the bullwhip effect in a supply chain?How does accurate real-time information affect the costs incurred by a supply chain?How does accurate real-time information affect the benefits of information sharing?In this paper, we consider a decentralized supply chain comprised of a retailer with a shrinkage problem and a manufacturer. We first develop a basic model to capture the effects of different levels of information quality on the bullwhip effect and supply chain costs when no information is shared. Next, we extend the model to show how the effects of information sharing and information quality interact. Both analytical models and numerical examples are used to address the abovementioned research questions. The results of our analysis have implications for practitioners in the following three areas: (1) enriching the understanding of the bullwhip effect; (2) facilitating the formation of coordinated contracts between supply chain partners when decisions are made on information quality and sharing; (3) assisting in investment decisions regarding different types of RFID applications.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the relevant literature is introduced. In Section 3, the basic modeling framework is described. The retailer's and manufacturer's ordering decisions without information sharing are derived in Section 4. The effects of information quality on the bullwhip effect, supply chain costs and information sharing are analyzed in Section 5. The cases are numerically compared in Section 6. The conclusions are drawn in Section 7.As inventory inaccuracy is widespread and has serious consequences, it is imperative both to analytically model the effects of inventory inaccuracy on supply chain performance and to develop strategies to address the problem. Many pilot studies of inventory inaccuracy have been undertaken. We review the literature on inventory inaccuracy with reference to three criteria: source of inventory error, type of inventory error and quality of information on inventory error.First, inventory inaccuracy has the following three main causes (Atali et al., 2005). (1) Shrinkage due to theft or product deterioration. As this incurs permanent inventory loss, the physical inventory is smaller than the electronically recorded inventory. (2) Misplacement, which occurs when products are in the wrong locations in the warehouse. The misplaced products are unavailable for sale, but can be recovered by a physical audit. (3) Transaction errors, which are caused by inaccurate scanning and product misidentification. Most researchers address these types of error separately. For example, Agrawal and Sharda (2012), Dai and Tseng (2012) and Kök and Shang (2014) address shrinkage issues; Rekik et al. (2008) and Camdereli and Swaminathan (2010) address misplacement issues; and DeHoratius and Raman (2008), Sahin et al. (2008) and Mersereau (2013) address transaction errors. Only a few researchers examine all three types of error. Heese (2007) investigates a supply chain with either positive or negative inventory error. He focuses on the role of RFID in reducing the double-marginalization effect, and provides recommendations for managers on the adoption of RFID in a decentralized supply chain and an integrated supply chain, respectively. Kök and Shang (2007) and Bensoussan, Çakanyıldırım, and Sethi (2007) consider a single-location inventory system with a random inventory error that may increase or decrease the physical-inventory level. Kök and Shang (2007) develop a joint inspection and replenishment policy to solve the inventory-inaccuracy problem and minimize the holding, backorder, inspection and purchase costs. Bensoussan et al. (2007) provide an optimal feedback policy with a finite-state representation to minimize the total discounted costs over an infinite horizon. Of the three main causes of inventory inaccuracy, shrinkage has the most direct and significant effect on supply chain performance, as confirmed by many empirical and other studies (Fleisch & Tellkamp, 2005; Kök & Shang, 2014). Therefore, we specifically investigate inventory inaccuracy caused by shrinkage.Second, Khader, Rekik, Botta-Genoulaz, and Campagne (2014) point out that the structure of an inventory error can be classified as additive or multiplicative, according to whether the extent of the error depends on the inventory level. Shrinkage and misplacement are modeled as multiplicative errors, and transaction error is modeled as additive. Most researchers working on inventory inaccuracy consider errors with an additive structure (Agrawal & Sharda, 2012; Dai & Tseng, 2012; de Kok, van Donselaar, & van Woensel, 2008; Nachtmann, Waller, & Rieske, 2010; Sahin et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2012). However, the assumption that error is additive may not be the case when the actual error depends on the stock level. Therefore, a few researchers use stochastically proportional error models to address error with a multiplicative structure (Camdereli & Swaminathan, 2010; Fan, Chang, Gu, Yi, & Deng, 2014; Khader et al., 2014; Rekik, 2011). Rekik (2011) and Khader et al. (2014) consider multiple types of inventory error in an e-retailing/wholesaling context. Rekik (2011) assumes that error is additive. Khader et al. (2014) extend Rekik's (2011) method to consider multiplicative error, and show that managers’ optimal strategies differ with error structure. In this paper, we assume that error has an additive structure. Although shrinkage occurs only when the stock level is positive, modeling the dependence of error on stock level may overcomplicate the model and make it intractable (Kök & Shang, 2014). We thus assume that shrinkage is independent of stock level.Third, some researchers examining the incorporation of inventory inaccuracy into ordering decisions consider a seasonal product in the retailing/wholesaling context and apply a one-period newsvendor framework to address the inventory-inaccuracy problem (Fan et al., 2014; Khader et al., 2014; Rekik et al., 2008; Sahin et al., 2008). Statistical information on inventory inaccuracy, such as its mean and variance, is assumed to be taken into account in the order-making process to optimize costs. Another group of studies investigate multi-period inventory systems in which inventory error may occur in each period. Most researchers assume that errors are not observed, and thus accumulate, until a cycle count is conducted. Their goal is to optimize the cycle-count frequency to minimize the total cost per period. The results may assist decisions on investing in RFID to align the recorded inventory with the physical inventory, as the outcomes of using RFID are equivalent to those of conducting a cycle count in each order period (Agrawal & Sharda, 2012, Kök & Shang, 2014, Nachtmann et al., 2010). However, the researchers do not specifically investigate the effects of accurate real-time information on ordering decisions and the corresponding costs. The aim of this study is to fill this gap by investigating the effects of higher-quality information on supply chain decisions and performance.Our work also pertains to the literature on the bullwhip effect. The term ‘bullwhip effect’ refers to order variability amplification from the downstream to the upstream stages in a supply chain. Industry practitioners have long been aware of this phenomenon and its damaging consequences, such as excess inventory and capacity, inefficient utilization and overtime, poor-quality forecasts and additional transportation and manufacturing expenses (Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 2004). The phenomenon was first documented by Forrester (1958). Lee, Padmanabhan, and Whang (1997),, first used the term ‘bullwhip effect’, raising awareness of the problem among industrial practitioners and academics. Many studies have since been conducted in this area. However, most researchers examining the bullwhip effect assume that the physical and recorded inventories are aligned (Coppini et al., 2010; Kristianto et al., 2012; Le, Huynh, Claudiu, & Achim, 2013; Nepal, Murat, & Chinnam, 2012; Osczelkan & Cakany, 2009; Wangphanich, Kara, & Kayis, 2010; Zhang & Burke, 2011; Zotteri, 2013). As inventory inaccuracy is prevalent in industry contexts, it is imperative to analyze its influence on the bullwhip effect. Only a few studies specifically model and analyze the relationship between inventory inaccuracy and the bullwhip effect, and their authors do not differentiate between levels of information quality (Bruccoleri et al., 2014; Cannella et al., 2015; Sodhi & Tang, 2011). We thus aim to investigate the effects of accurate real-time information on the bullwhip effect.Our work also builds on the literature about information sharing for the bullwhip effect. Most researchers focus solely on the effects of sharing information on external demand (Bottani et al., 2010; Chen, Drezner, Ryan, & Simchi-Levi, 2000; Dominguez et al., 2014, Barlas & Gunduz, 2011; Kim, Harrison, & Hayya, 2006; Ouyang and Li, 2010). Cannella and Ciancimino (2010) build a simulation model to investigate a synchronized supply chain in which information on both demand and inventory is visible to the whole chain. Each party considers her successors part of her own inventory system when making replenishment decisions. Holweg, Disney, Holmstrom, and Smaros (2005) study the situation where both demand and inventory data are shared. To the best of our knowledge, no researchers specifically analyze the effects of differences in the quality of inventory information shared. In this study, we assume that real-time external demand information is not shared, and focus on the effects of exchanging accurate real-time inventory information in a decentralized supply chain.We model a single-product, two-stage decentralized supply chain composed of a retailer and a manufacturer. The retailer experiences inventory inaccuracy caused by shrinkage,ξtR, such as inventory reduction due to theft or obsolescence.ξtRis normally distributed, with a mean ofμeRand a variance of(σeR)2. As the manufacturer does not have an inventory-inaccuracy problem,ξtM=0.Suppose that the external demand in period t, denoted asDt0, follows the auto-correlated AR(1) process which is an assumption made widely in the literature on the bullwhip effect (Lee et al., 1997; Sodhi & Tang, 2011; etc.). As a result,(1)Dt0=d+ρDt−10+ɛtwhere d > 0 and is a constant,−1<ρ<1is the correlated factor andɛtis normally distributed with zero mean and variance(σd)2. The mean and variance ofDt0can be calculated simply asd/(1−ρ)andσd2/(1−ρ2), respectively.We consider a periodic-review inventory system. We assume that the recorded and physical inventories are aligned at the beginning of period 1. Without loss of generality, we specify the ordering process at stage k, k = R, M, in period t, t = 1, 2, 3 …(1)At the beginning of period t, stage k receives the shipment of an order placedlkperiods ago,Qt−lk−1k. (We assume that the lead time,lk, is fixed rather than stochastic.)The demand from the downstream stage is then realized, and shrinkage (if any) occurs.Excess inventory is maintained at the unit-holding cost,hk. An inventory shortfall incurs a penalty cost,pk, which differs for the retailer and the manufacturer. If the retailer cannot fulfill the demand of the end customer, the unsatisfied demand is backlogged. The retailer's penalty cost,pR, represents the cost of losing the end customer's goodwill. If the manufacturer's inventory is insufficient to fulfill the retailer's demand, the manufacturer will purchase the required products from an ‘alternative’ source to meet the shortage. The corresponding additional cost represents the penalty cost,pM, and is borne solely by the manufacturer (Lee, So, & Tang, 2000).Stage k reviews her remaining inventory, forecasts the lead-time demand, places an orderQtkto her upstream stage, and ships the required order downstream.The external demand,Dt0, is assumed to be known only to the retailer; the manufacturer's information is limited to the statistics onDt0, i.e., d, ρ andσd, which are obtained from analysis of the historical demand data and periodic discussion of the demand process with the retailer (Lee et al., 2000). It is further assumed that the retailer does not share her inventory information with the rest of the supply chain, and will not inform the manufacturer for her shrinkage issues. The retailer's order to the manufacturer may include the demand for the external customers and demand for the compensation of the shrinkage. The manufacturer, however, receives the retailer's order as a whole, and cannot differentiate the two components. Therefore, the manufacturer is unaware of the retailer's inventory shrinkage.We assume that each stage adopts an order-up-to policy, minimizing the total discounted holding and shortage costs over an infinite time horizon. We extend the models in Heyman and Sobel (1984), Lee et al. (1997) and Lee et al. (2000) to address shrinkage issues, by transferring the inventory error to one stream of the demand. As a result, the overall demand has two components, (1) paying demand is comprised by an order from downstream, which generates revenue; and (2) non-paying demand entails a shrinkage, if any, that does not generate revenue but consumes stock. The demands of the retailer and the manufacturer are expressed in Eqs. (2) and (3), respectively.(2)DtR=Dt0+ξtR(3)DtM=QtRThe order-up-to levelStkthat minimizes the total expected holding and shortage costs in periodt+lk+1is given in Eq. (4) (Heyman & Sobel, 1984, Lee et al., 1997, Lee et al., 2000).(4)Stk*=Mtk+zkVkwhereMtkandVkare the estimated mean and variance of the overall lead-time demand,∑j=1lk+1Dt+jk.zkis the safety-stock factor, which reflects the information distortion and is later specified for each scenario.Therefore, the order quantity is as follows:(5)Qtk=Dtk+(Stk−St−1k).On the basis of this order policy, we next specify the ordering decisions made by the retailer and the manufacturer with different levels of information quality.Different information systems may provide the retailer with different information on the inventory. For example, a traditional information system such as a barcode-based system will allow the decision maker to estimate the mean and variance of inventory shrinkage by analyzing the historical recorded inventory and cycle-count data. An advanced information system, such as a RFID-based system, provides the decision maker with real-time data on the physical inventory, and thus accurate and timely information on the shrinkage. Accordingly, information quality is defined as high if the retailer has real-time information on the shrinkage; it is defined as low if the retailer possesses only statistical information on the shrinkage.We consider two scenarios with different levels of information quality.Scenario 1: Low-quality information - the retailer knows the mean, and variance of the shrinkage, but the manufacturer is unaware of the shrinkage.Scenario 2: High-quality information - the retailer knows real-time information on the shrinkage, but the manufacturer is unaware of the shrinkage.Note: We add the second superscript (if present) s (=1,2) to denote the scenario under discussion. For example,DtR,sstands for the demand of retailer in period t under scenario s.The demand in period t+i is expressed in Eq. (6), following the recursive relationship described in Eq. (1). For the retailer, the demand during the lead time, lR, is∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,1.(6)Dt+jR,1=Dt+j0+ξt+jR=d1−ρj1−ρ+ρiDt0+∑k=0j−1ρkɛt+j−k+ξt+jRUnder scenario 1, the decision maker knows only the mean and variance ofξtR, and lacks information on their exact numerical values. The mean and variance of∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,1are as follows:(7)MtR,1=d∑j=1lR+11−ρj1−ρ+ρlDt0+(lR+1)μeR(8)VR,1=∑j=1lR+11−ρ2j1−ρ2σd2++(lR+1)(σe2)2whereρl=ρ1−ρlR+11−ρ.StR,1*can then be calculated according to Eqs. (4), (7) and (8). Based on Eq. (5), the retailer's order quantity is as follows:(9)QtR,1=EξtR[Dt0+ρl(Dt0−Dt−10)+ξtR]=EξtR[(1+ρl)d+(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−10+(1+ρl)ɛt+ξtR].In the absence of real-time information onξtRin scenario 1, the retailer approximates the shrinkage as its mean. As a result, the order is as follows:(10)QtR,1=(1+ρl)d+(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−10+(1+ρl)ɛt+μeR.The corresponding order variance is as follows:(11)Var(QtR,1)=(ρ+ρρl−ρl)2Var(Dt−10)+(1+ρl)2Var(ɛt)=(ρ+ρρl−ρl)2σd21−ρ2+(1+ρl)2σd2=σd21−ρ2[(ρ+ρρl−ρl)2+(1+ρl)2(1−ρ2)]=σd21−ρ2+2ρlσd21−ρ2(1−ρlR+2)=Var(Dt0)+2ρl(1−ρlR+2)(1+ρ)(1−ρ)σd2The manufacturer's demand is the order from the retailer withDtM,1=QtR,1.After rewritingQtR,1,DtM,1is as follows:DtM,1=QtR,1=(QtR,1−ρQt−1R,1)+ρQt−1R,1=d+(1+ρl)ɛt−ρlɛt−1+(1−ρ)μeR+ρQt−1R,1=d+ρQt−1R,1+1−ρlR+21−ρɛt−ρ1−ρlR+11−ρɛt−1+(1−ρ)μeRThe repeated use of the above equation yields the following:(12)Dt+jM,1=1−ρj1−ρd+ρjQtR,1+1−ρlR+21−ρɛt+j−ρj1−ρlR+11−ρɛt+∑k=1j−1ρlR+1+kɛt+j−k+(1−ρj)μeR.The total demand of the manufacturer in lead time lMis∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,1. The true mean and variance of∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,1are calculated in Eqs. (13) and (14):(13)M¯tM,1=ρLQtR,1+(d1−ρ+μeR)(lM+1−ρL)(14)V¯M,1=[(1−ρlR+2)2(1−ρ)2+∑i=1lM(1−ρlM+lR+3−i)2(1−ρ)2+ρLρ(1−ρlM+1)(1−ρlR+1)2(1−ρ)3]σd2whereρL=ρ1−ρlM+11−ρ.However, under scenario 1, the manufacturer is unaware of the shrinkage experienced downstream, and is thus unable to incorporateμeRinto her demand forecast process. Therefore, the estimated mean and variance of the lead-time demand,∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,1, are as follows.(15)MtM,1=ρLQtR,1+(d1−ρ)(lM+1−ρL)(16)VM,1=V¯M,1.Under scenario 1, the manufacturer's ordering decision is as expressed in the following equation:(17)QtM,1=QtR,1+ρL(QtR,1−Qt−1R,1).Incorporating Eq. (10) into Eq. (17) allowsQtM,1to be rewritten as follows:QtM,1=(1+ρL)QtR,1−ρLQt−1R,1=(1+ρL)[(1+ρl)d+(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−10+(1+ρl)ɛt+μeR]−ρL[(1+ρl)d+(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−20+(1+ρl)ɛt−1+μeR]=[1+ρL+(ρ+ρρL−ρL)(1+ρl)]d+(ρ+ρρL−ρL)(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−20+(1+ρl)(1+ρL)ɛt+[(1+ρL)(ρ+ρρl−ρl)−ρL(1+ρl)]ɛt−1+μeRwith the following order variance:(18)Var(QtM,1)=(ρ+ρρl−ρl)2(ρ+ρρL−ρL)2Var(Dt−20)+(1+ρl)2(1+ρL)2Var(ɛt)+[(1+ρL)(ρ+ρρl−ρl)−ρL(1+ρl)]2Var(ɛt−1)={(2ρL+2ρL2)[1+(1+ρl)(3ρl−ρρl)]1+ρ+(ρ+ρρl−ρl)21−ρ2+(1+ρl)2}σd2.The results of the retailer's forecasts in scenario 2 are the same as those in scenario 1. As the shrinkageξt+jR,j=1,2,…lR+1in the lead-time demand∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,1occurs after the decision is made at period t, only statistical information on the shrinkage can be taken into consideration in the forecast process, regardless of the type of inventory system in place. However, real-time information makes a difference when calculating the size of the order. In scenario 2, the retailer knows the exact numerical value of the shrinkage,ξtR, at the moment at which the decision is made, and can thus adjust the decision to capture the dynamics of the shrinkage. Therefore, the order quantity specified in Eq. (9) becomes(19)QtR,2=(1+ρl)d+(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−10+(1+ρl)ɛt+ξtRwith the following variance:(20)Var(QtR,2)=Var(QtR,1)+(σeR)2.The demand of the manufacturer differs with the extent of the retailer's knowledge of the inventory error. In scenario 2, the demand received by the manufacturer is as follows:(21)DtM,2=QtR,2=(QtR,2−ρQt−1R,2)+ρQt−1R,2=d+(1+ρl)ɛt−ρlɛt−1−ρξt−1R+ξtR+ρQt−1R,2=d+ρQt−1R,2+1−ρlR+21−ρɛt−ρ1−ρlR+11−ρɛt−1−ρξt−1R+ξtR.The repeated use of Eq. (21) yields the following:(22)Dt+jM,2=1−ρj1−ρd+ρjQtR,2+1−ρlR+21−ρɛt+j−ρi1−ρlR+11−ρɛt+∑k=1j−1ρlR+1+kɛt+j−k+ξt+jR−ρjξtR.The true mean and variance of the lead-time demand,∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,2, are calculated as follows:(23)M¯tM,2=ρLQtR,2+(d1−ρ)(lM+1−ρL)−ξtRρL+μeR(lM+1)(24)V¯M,2=VM,1+(lM+1)(σeR)2.However, under scenario 2, the decision maker is not aware that the shrinkage exists. Therefore, the estimation of∑j=1lM+1(ξt+jR−ρjξtR)in the lead-time demand,∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,2is absent from the forecasting process. Therefore, the estimated mean and variance, respectively, of the lead-time demand,∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,2, are as follows:(25)MtM,2=ρLQtR,2+(d1−ρ)(lM+1−ρL)(26)VM,2=VM,1.Under scenario 2, the manufacturer's ordering decision is based on the following equation:(27)QtM,2=QtR,2+ρL(QtR,2−Qt−1R,2).Incorporating Eq. (19) into Eq. (27) allowsQtM,2to be rewritten as follows:QtM,2=[1+ρL+(ρ+ρρL−ρL)(1+ρl)]d+(ρ+ρρL−ρL)(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−20+(1+ρl)(1+ρL)ɛt+[(1+ρL)(ρ+ρρl−ρl)−ρL(1+ρl)]ɛt−1+(1+ρL)ξtR−ρLξt−1R.The corresponding order variance is as follows:(28)Var(QtM,2)=Var(QtM,1)+[(1+ρL)2+ρL2](σeR)2.Under both scenarios, the variance clearly has two components: the variability arising from external demand uncertainty,σd, which has been extensively discussed in the literature; andσeR, the variability resulting from inventory inaccuracy, which is the focus of this paper.In the previous section, we deduced the ordering decisions of the retailer and the manufacturer in different scenarios. In this section, we first compare scenarios 1 and 2 to determine the effects of information quality on order variability (Theorem 1) and the expected supply chain costs (Theorem 2) when no information is shared. We then analyse the influence of information quality on the effectiveness of information sharing (Theorems 3 and 4).Theorem 1Access to real-time information amplifies the bullwhip effect of both the retailer and the manufacturer.All of the proofs are given in the Appendix.Theorem 1 reveals the effects of information quality on the bullwhip effect. (The bullwhip effect of stage k in scenario s,Bk,s, is defined as the difference between the order variance in stage k and that in the stage immediately downstream.) When real-time information is achieved, the bullwhip effect experienced by the retailer is exaggerated, for the following reasons. First, inventory shrinkage tends to encourage the decision maker to order more to compensate for the inventory loss. Specifically, when only the shrinkage mean is available, the retailer adds the same amount,μeR, to each order, as shown in the last term of Eq. (10). However, access to real-time information on shrinkage enables the decision maker to replenish the inventory to cover the exact error item,ξtR, as in the last term of Eq. (19). Due to these efforts to precisely match the dynamics of the inventory error, the retailer's ordering behavior is more variable when real-time information is available, incurring an additional bullwhip effect,(σeR)2.Although the manufacturer is assumed not to have her own shrinkage problem, it faces greater fluctuation in demand when the downstream party incorporates real-time shrinkage information into the ordering process. The manufacturer's efforts to track the dynamics of the retailer's demand incurs an additional order variability,[(1+ρL)2+ρL2](σeR)2, as shown in Eq. (28). Therefore, the additional bullwhip effect caused by high information quality is amplified from(σeR)2in the first stage of the supply chain to2ρL(1+ρL)(σeR)2in the second stage.An assumption made in the above analysis is that orders are always rational and always serve the interests of the decision makers. However, the bullwhip effect is exaggerated when effort is made to more fully understand inventory inaccuracy and thereby improve the order-making process. Certainly, a larger bullwhip effect usually reflects a greater level of fluctuation, which is not appealing. However, is it always more profitable to ignore the additional uncertainty resulting from inventory error than to expend effort to understand the error? We attempt to answer this question in the next section by calculating supply chain costs under different scenarios.Unlike the classical cost structure of the order-up-to policy, decisions on shrinkage-information quality have two key effects on the expected holding and shortage costs. First, the accuracy of the order-up-to level is reduced by inventory error. When only statistical information on the shrinkage is available, the recorded inventory is not fully aligned with the physical inventory in a given order period. This discrepancy affects the visibility of the inventory and thereby distorts the order-up-to level for decisions. Second, when real-time rather than statistical information is available, the shrinkage variability at stages 1 to i−1 is transferred and amplified to stage i through the order-making process. Therefore, the quality of information on the shrinkage at stages 1 to i−1 affects the variability of the demand at stage i.We now develop expressions for the retailer's and manufacturer's holding and shortage costs with and without real-time information, and analyze the effects on these costs of a distorted order-up-to level and amplified shrinkage variability, as described above.Only the first of the above phenomena affect the expected cost incurred by the retailer, as the retailer does not experience shrinkage in her downstream stage. More specifically, only the mean and variance of the shrinkage are known to the decision maker when a forecast is made at the end of period t in scenario 1. This creates a discrepancy between the decision maker's estimation of the shrinkage and the actual inventory error. This discrepancy accumulates from period 1 onward, giving an inventory discrepancy in period t of∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR). The retailer's order-up-to level in period t is thusStR,1−∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR). Under scenario 1, the expected holding and shortage costs incurred by the retailer in period t,πtR,1, depend on the shrinkage dynamics in all of the past periods, as expressed in Eq. (29). In scenario 2, the actual inventory error,ξtR, is precisely known, as the decision maker is equipped with real-time information. This implies that the recorded and physical inventories are aligned in each order period. Under scenario 2, the retailer's expected holding and shortage costs per period,πtR,2, are the same in each period.(29)πtR,1=EξiR,i=1,2,t−1[hR∫−∞StR,1*−∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR)(StR,1*−∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR)−∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,1)dF¯tR,1(∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,1)+pR∫SiR,1*−∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR)+∞×(∑j=1lk+1Dt+jR,1−(StR,1*−∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR)))dF¯tR,1(∑j=1lk+1Dt+jR,1)](30)πtR,2=hR∫−∞SiR,2*(StR,2*−∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,2)dF¯tM,s(∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,2)+pR∫StM,s*+∞(∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,2−StR,2*)dF¯tR,2(∑j=1lR+1Dt+jR,2).In the above,F¯tR,s, s = 1,2, is the true distribution of∑j=1lk+1Dt+jR,s, with meanM¯tR,s=MtR,sand varianceV¯R,s=VR,s.As the manufacturer does not have her own shrinkage problem, only the second effect of differing information quality – the amplification of shrinkage variability – is relevant. When the quality of information is low in the manufacturer's downstream stage, her lead-time demand,∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,1, comprises only the mean of the accumulated shrinkage of the retailer's inventory,∑j=1lk+1(1−ρi)μeR, according to Eq. (12). When real-time information is incorporated into the retailer's order, the manufacturer experiences greater fluctuation in lead-time demand,∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,2, which is determined by all of the shrinkage dynamics,∑j=1lk+1(ξt+jR−ρjξtR), according to Eq. (22). The manufacturer's expected holding and shortage costs per period,πtM,s,s=1,2are thus as follows:(31)πtM,s=EξtR[hM∫−∞SiM,s*(StM,s*−∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,s)dF¯tM,s(∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,s)+pM∫StM,s*+∞(∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,s−StM,s*)dF¯tM,s(∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,s)]whereF¯tM,sis the true distribution of∑j=1lk+1Dt+jM,s, with meanM¯tM,sand varianceV¯M,s.As the lead-time demand∑j=1lk+1Dt+jk,s, k = R, M, is normally distributed, the expected holding and shortage costs per period for the retailer and the manufacturer can be calculated as follows (Lee et al., 2000):(32)πtR,1=VR,1(hR(ztR,1+L(ztR,1))+pRL(ztR,1))(33)πtR,2=VR,1(hR(zR,2+L(zR,2))+pRL(zR,2))(34)πtM,1=VM,1(hM(zM,1+L(zM,1))+pML(zM,1))(35)πtM,2=EξtR[VM,1+(lM+1)(σeR)2(hM(ztM,2+L(ztM,2))+pML(ztM,2))],whereztR,1=zR+∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR)VR,1,zR,2=zR,zM,1=zMVM,1V¯M,1+MtM,1−M¯tM,1V¯M,1,ztM,2=zMVM,2V¯M,2+MtM,2−M¯tM,2V¯M,2andzk=Φ−1[pkpk+hk],k=R,M, for the standard normal distribution function Φ.y=(∑j=1lk+1Dt+jk,s−M¯tk,s)/V¯k,sandL(x)=∫x∞(y−x)dΦ(y). L(x) is decreasing and convex in x, andhk(zk+L(zk))+pkL(zk)≤hk(x+L(x))+pkL(x)∀x≠zk.Theorem 2The availability of real-time information decreases the costs incurred by the retailer and increases the costs incurred by the manufacturer.According to Theorem 2, the costs incurred by the retailer decrease when real-time inventory information is available. In scenario 1, the retailer only has access to statistical information on the inventory error, and cannot fully capture the demand dynamics in all of the past periods, namely∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR). The lack of alignment between the physical and recorded inventories distorts the information required to balance demand and supply. The distortion caused by low-quality information is reflected in the following equation:ztR,1=zR+∑j=1t−1(ξjR−μeR)VR,1, which deviates from the optimal balancing level, zR. When real-time information is available, as in scenario 2, the physical and recorded inventories are synchronized and the inventory is visible, which benefits the retailer.Interestingly, the expected cost incurred by the manufacturer increases when the retailer obtains real-time information. The retailer's access to high-quality information has two consequences for the manufacturer, relating to safety-stock preparation and information asymmetry. First, as real-time information causes greater fluctuation in the retailer's orders, the manufacturer attempts to capture more demand variability. Eqs. (24) and (35) show that in comparison with scenario 1, the manufacturer's greater coverage of demand variability,(lM+1)(σeR)2, in scenario 2 requires a larger amount of safety stock, leading to higher inventory costs. Second, when the retailer does not share her inventory information with the rest of the supply chain, the manufacturer cannot fully differentiate the components of the demand. As a result, the demand predicted by the manufacturer deviates from the true distribution, which can be expressed as follows: zM≠ zM, 1 andzM≠EξtR[ztM,2]. This information asymmetry is amplified by the retailer's failure to share real-time information in scenario 2, primarily because the manufacturer is unaware of a greater number of shrinkage dynamics, which further distorts her forecast relative to the true demand distribution, as follows:zM−EξtR[ztM,2]≥zM−zM,1.According to Theorem 2, the retailer benefits from the integration of high-quality inventory information into the order-making process, and the manufacturer suffers as a result of the retailer's gain. In other words, whether the whole supply chain benefits from access to real-time information on the retailer's inventory error depends on the magnitude of two outcomes of the availability of real-time information: (1) the increased accuracy of the retailer's forecasts, which reduces the costs incurred by the retailer, and (2) the increased order variability in the upstream stage, which increases the cost incurred by the manufacturer.A common method of reducing the bullwhip effect is to share information in the supply chain. In this section, we analyze the influence of information quality on the effectiveness of information sharing. We thus assume that the retailer shares her information on shrinkage with the manufacturer. We investigate the ordering decisions and costs in the following two scenarios.Scenario 3: Low-quality information with information sharing - both the retailer and the manufacturer know the mean and variance of the shrinkage.Scenario 4: High-quality information with information sharing - both the retailer and the manufacturer have real-time information on the shrinkage.The four scenarios under discussion in this paper are summarized in Table 1. The difference between scenarios 1 and 3 reflects the benefit of sharing rough information, which can be regarded as a benchmark. We investigate the effectiveness of inventory-information sharing when real-time information is available by calculating the difference between scenarios 2 and 4 and comparing it with the benchmark.The retailer's ordering decisions and costs in scenarios 3 and 4 are the same as those in scenarios 1 and 2, respectively. This is because sharing information upstream does not directly affect the retailer's performance. Next, we specify the manufacturer's ordering decisions and expected costs when low- and high-quality information is shared.Under scenario 3, the manufacturer faces the same demand as in scenario 1. However, the information available to the manufacturer differs, and the manufacturer knows the mean and variance ofξt+jR, wherej=0,1,2,…. Based on this information, the mean and variance of∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,3approximates their true values as in Eqs. (36) and (37).(36)MtM,3=M¯tM,1(37)VM,3=V¯M,1According to Eqs. (36) and (37), the manufacturer's order quantity and variance under scenario 3 are equal to those under scenario 1, as follows:(38)QtM,3=QtM,1(39)Var(QtM,3)=Var(QtM,1).Under scenario 4, the demand faced by the manufacturer is the same as that in scenario 2; therefore,DtM,4=DtM,2. However, the manufacturer's decision in scenario 4 is based on greater information than in scenario 2; namely real-time information onξtR. Therefore, the estimated mean and variance of the lead-time demand,∑j=1lM+1Dt+jM,4, approximate their true values as in Eqs. (40) and (41):(40)MtM,4=M¯tM,2(41)VM,4=V¯M,2.Under scenario 4, the manufacturer's ordering decision is as shown in the following equation:(42)QtM,4=QtR,2+ρL(QtR,2−Qt−1R,2)−ρL(ξtR−ξt−1R).Incorporating Eq. (19) into Eq. (42) allowsQtM,4to be rewritten as follows:QtM,4=[1+ρL+(ρ+ρρL−ρL)(1+ρl)]d+(ρ+ρρL−ρL)(ρ+ρρl−ρl)Dt−20+(1+ρl)(1+ρL)ɛt+[(1+ρL)(ρ+ρρl−ρl)−ρL(1+ρl)]ɛt−1+ξtR,and the corresponding order variance is as follows:(43)Var(QtM,4)=Var(QtM,1)+(σeR)2.Similar to the costs in the absence of information sharing (Section 5.2), the expected holding and shortage costs per period incurred by the manufacturer in scenarios 3 and 4 are calculated as follows:(44)πtM,3=VM,1((hM(zM,3+L(zM,3))+pML(zM,3))(45)πtM,4=VM,1+(lM+1)(σeR)2(hM(zM,4+L(zM,4)+pML(zM,4))wherezM,3=zM,4=zM.Theorem 3Information sharing enables the manufacturer to reduce the bullwhip effect only when high-quality information is available.According to Theorem 3, information sharing enables the manufacturer to reduce the bullwhip effect only when high-quality shrinkage information is available downstream. When the retailer shares real-time shrinkage information with the manufacturer in scenario 4, the manufacturer is able to incorporate more shrinkage dynamics−ρL(ξtR−ξt−1R)(obtained by comparing Eqs. (27) and (42)) into her forecasts. As a result, the bullwhip effect on the final ordering decisions is reduced by2ρL(1+ρL)(σeR)2in scenario 4 than in scenario 2. However, when the retailer possesses only statistical information on the shrinkage, as in scenario 3, sharing this information with the manufacturer has the same effect on the manufacturer's order variability as in scenario 1, because the forecast process is the same.Theorem 4When the information quality is higher, the information sharing reduces more costs of the manufacturer.In scenarios 3 and 4, sharing shrinkage information with the manufacturer restores the factors distorted in scenarios 1, zM, 1, and 2,ztM,2, respectively, to their optimal balancing levels, zM. This eliminates information asymmetry. According to Theorem 4, the manufacturer benefits more from shrinkage information sharing when the quality of the information is high, because πM, 2-πM, 4 ≥ πM, 1-πM, 3. First, sharing information does more to correct information asymmetry when real-time information is available, becausezM,4−EξtR[ztM,2]≥zM,3−zM,1. Second, the benefit to the manufacturer of eliminating information asymmetry is scaled up fromVM,1toVM,1+(lM+1)(σeR)2, as the overall demand can be tracked more promptly with the additional supply chain visibility provided by the real-time information. This effect is observable from a comparison of Eqs. (34), (35), (44) and (45).Certain numericalexamples are presented to verify our theoretical results and illustrate the magnitude of the effects of shrinkage-information quality in the presence of information sharing on the bullwhip effect and supply chain costs. It is assumed that the retailer and the manufacturer order every week, and the parameters for the external-demand process are as follows: d = 100, σd= 10, ρ = 0.5, lR= 2, lM= 1.The cost parameters for the retailer and manufacturer, respectively, are as follows: hR= $2 and pR= $50; hM= $1 and pM= $25. When analyzing the effects ofσeR, we assume thatσeR= 8 andμeRvaries from 21 to 52. When analyzing the effects ofμeR, we assume thatμeR= 35 and σeRvaries from 2 to 12. As tax regulations in most countries require companies to physically count their inventories once per year, at the end or beginning of each year, we calculate the costs incurred in a 53-week period. The costs addressed in the sensitivity analysis below comprise the holding and shortage costs per week, given by Eqs. (34), (35), (44) and (45).Three main inferences can be drawn from Figs. 1 and 2 regarding the effects of information quality on supply chain performance. (The blue dotted and red lines in Figs. 1 and 2 stand for the effects on information quality experienced by the retailer and manufacturer, respectively.)First, Fig. 1 shows that the bullwhip effect experienced by both the retailer and the manufacturer increases when real-time information is available. Interestingly, however, the increased bullwhip effect has opposite effects on the costs incurred by the two parties, as suggested by Fig. 2. The increase in the bullwhip effect of the retailer is endogenous; it arises from internal shrinkage. Therefore, the overall variability can be more easily controlled, facilitating cost reduction. In contrast, the increase in the bullwhip effect of the manufacturer is exogenous - it is transferred from the downstream stage - and thus forces the manufacturer to buffer more stock. The manufacturer's lack of knowledge of the inventory in the downstream stage results in higher costs. This suggests that the retailer benefits from investment in real-time shrinkage information, whereas the manufacturer is disadvantaged.Second, Fig. 2 indicates that the financial impacts of real-time information for the retailer and the manufacturer are increasing in the shrinkage StD, and the increase rate is different. The positive impact for the retailer of eliminating information distortion grows faster when the shrinkage uncertainty is lower; while the negative impact for the manufacturer of suffering a more fluctuated order grows faster when the shrinkage uncertainty is larger.The third inference to be drawn from Figs. 1 and 2 is that the average inventory error affects the costs incurred by the supply chain but not the bullwhip effect, as shown in Figs.1(a) and2(a). In addition, the shrinkage mean has a smaller effect on supply chain performance than the variability of the shrinkage. This is because the extent of the shrinkage, unlike its variation, does not affect the fluctuation of demand, and is thus not associated with the bullwhip effect. The effect on cost of real-time shrinkage information is associated with both shrinkage mean and shrinkage variance. Both increased inventory error and increased inventory-error variation amplify the discrepancy between supply and demand, leading to forecast distortion. As shrinkage variability increases further, this distortion is amplified, leading the manufacturer to accrue more safety stock. These findings imply that efforts to reduce inventory-error fluctuation are more worthwhile than efforts to reduce the extent of inventory error.Figs. 3and 4suggest that information sharing has a more significant effect on the manufacturer's performance when real-time information is shared, for the following three reasons. (The red and blue dotted lines in Figs. 3 and 4 stand for the effects of information sharing when information quality is low and high, respectively.) First, sharing real-time information affects more aspects of the manufacturer's performance: it decreases the bullwhip effect experienced by the manufacturer, as well as the costs, whereas sharing inventory statistics only helps to control the manufacturer's costs. Second, the reduction in the manufacturer's costs caused by information sharing is greater when real-time information is shared. This suggests that managers should aim to foster information sharing when real-time information is available to supply chain partners. Third, the difference between the benefits of information sharing when the quality of information is low and high increases with both the mean and the variance of the shrinkage. When the average shrinkage increases, the benefit of information sharing increases more sharply with real-time information, as shown in Fig. 4(a). When the shrinkage is more uncertain, the benefit of information sharing increases when real-time information is available, but decreases slightly when only statistical information is shared, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Therefore, more effort should be made to collaborate with supply chain partners to obtain accurate and timely inventory information when the inventory error is more severe, and especially when it is more variable.These findings may help both retailers and manufacturers to optimize their information sharing decisions based on the quality of information available. The retailer does not benefit directly from sharing information with other members of the supply chain, but knows that information sharing is always favorable to the manufacturer. Therefore, the retailer can leverage this advantage to negotiate other benefits with the manufacturer, such as a shorter lead time (Lee et al., 2000). Access to real-time information gives the retailer more bargaining power; for instance, the retailer can transfer part of the cost of improving her information quality, Δ, to the upstream stage in exchange for sharing the resulting real-time information. The manufacturer may accept this deal or even initiate negotiation to construct an information sharing contract if the benefit of access to the retailer's real-time information is larger than Δ.Access to real-time information in one node of a supply chain fosters information sharing between nodes, and sharing information may help to offset the cost of obtaining real-time information. Information quality and information sharing are thus interrelated and reinforce each other. Close collaboration between supply chain partners fits the trend of increasingly dynamic interactions in today's business environment, enabled by the advanced technologies of the Internet of Things and Big Data.Fig. 5shows that with our model parameters, whether it is beneficial to acquire real-time information to address the inventory error in the supply chain, depends on the magnitude of the shrinkage variability and the applied information sharing mechanism.First, total supply chain cost is composed of the costs of the retailer and the manufacturer. When the shrinkage uncertainty increases, the financial impacts of achieving real-time information are opposite to the retailer and the manufacturer. Whether access to real-time information is of net benefit to the whole chain, depends on the magnitude of the positive and negative impacts of the real-time information to the retailer and the manufacturer, respectively.Second, regardless of whether the information is shared, the benefit of acquiring real-time information is not so significant, when the shrinkage is relatively stable with a small variability. As a result, the corresponding investment may not be justified.Third, when the information is not shared, there is a range of shrinkage uncertainty where the benefit to the retailer of obtaining real-time information is larger than the manufacturer's equivalent financial loss, which makes acquiring real-time information profitable. When the shrinkage variability increases to certain threshold, the increased cost incurred by the manufacturer as a result of greater transferred order variability, may outweigh the benefit to the retailer of the elimination of information distortion. Therefore, the benefit of acquiring real-time information may not be beneficial in term of the whole chain. Under this parameter setting of Fig. 5, when the shrinkage variability is larger than 11, the best strategy for the supply chain as a whole is to continue using only statistical information and to retain this information within the downstream stage in scenario 1.Forth, when the information is shared in the supply chain, the benefit of acquiring real-time information is amplified. Scenario 4 always delivers the lowest supply chain cost and facilitates the corresponding investments.Understanding the effects of different levels of information quality on the costs incurred by the whole supply chain shed light on (1) framing supply chain collaboration with regard to information quality; (2) guiding investment decisions on RFID application.First, although individual parties’ decisions on information quality are independent in a decentralized supply chain, partners in the chain may resist such decisions if they appear too disadvantageous. This leaves some space for supply chain partners to negotiate a balanced outcome. If an improvement to the retailer's quality of information is of net value to the whole chain, the retailer, as primary beneficiary, may decide to share some of her benefits with the manufacturer to compensate for the manufacturer's losses. This strategy may alleviate tension between supply chain partners and facilitate the process of improving information quality. However, if the value to the retailer of improving information quality is smaller than the corresponding increase in the manufacturer's costs, the manufacturer may seek to persuade the retailer to retain merely statistical information on the inventory. As transferring to a real-time information system is still optimal for the retailer, the manufacturer may offer to compensate the retailer for persisting with low-quality information. The use of such interest-alignment mechanisms benefits all parties in the supply chain.Second, RFID has two main applications as a tool for controlling inventory inaccuracy. (1) The use of RFID may increase visibility, which brings the recorded and physical inventories rapidly into alignment. (2) RFID may be used to improve both visibility and prevention. The latter application reduces inventory error further and provides the additional benefit of prevention at the cost of greater investment in certain supporting technologies, such as closed-circuit television systems (Dai & Tseng, 2012). Profitable RFID-investment decisions rely on the successful differentiation of the visibility- and prevention-related benefits of RFID, and the quantification of the visibility-related benefits. The difference between the costs incurred by high- and low-quality information estimated in our models essentially reflects the value of the increased visibility caused by RFID in a chain. Our results also provide the novel insights that one party's decision to increase visibility by investing in RFID may decrease the performance of her chain partner, and that the extent of this deterioration varies with different information sharing mechanisms. We show two interesting results. First, from the overall supply chain's point of view, it is less likely that the RFID investment can be justified when the shrinkage is stable or quite uncertain. Second, real-time information gives the downstream stage a larger bargaining power. She could ask the upstream stage to bear some RFID tag costs even if her upstream partner does not need RFID to address any problems. The findings of the study are expected to assist retailers and manufacturers in choosing the best RFID applications for their respective supply chains, and implementing appropriate information sharing and collaboration mechanisms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
