@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal transition to renewable energy with threshold of irreversible pollution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Determination of the best moment for adopting a renewable energy, and the best rate of adoption.Viability problem in 6 dimensions and continuous-discrete time.Optima are also viable: the associated trajectories remain within sets of constraints.Gradual adoption (never done before), to be compared with instantaneous adoption.Find the role of initial conditions and time horizon in the probability of adoption of renewable energy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-stage optimal control,Threshold effects,Irreversibility,Non-renewable resources,Viability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When cheap fossil energy is polluting and pollutant no longer absorbed beyond a certain concentration, there is a moment when the introduction of a cleaner renewable energy, although onerous, is optimal with respect to inter-temporal utility. The cleaner technology is adopted either instantaneously or gradually at a controlled rate. The problem of optimum under viability constraints is 6-dimensional under a continuous-discrete dynamic controlled by energy consumption and investment into production of renewable energy. Viable optima are obtained either with gradual or with instantaneous adoption. A longer time horizon increases the probability of adoption of renewable energy and the time for starting this adoption. It also increases maximal utility and the probability to cross the threshold of irreversible pollution. Exploiting a renewable energy starts sooner when adoption is gradual rather than instantaneous. The shorter the period remaining after adoption until the time horizon, the higher the investment into renewable energy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nordhaus (1973), Nordhaus (1991), Nordhaus (1992) pioneered equilibrium models of climate and economy. He linked global warming to carbon emissions and called for a transition to clean energy. Chakravorty, Moreaux, and Tidball (2008) and van der Ploeg and Withagen (2012) modelled what such a transition might be, with the characteristic that people would resort to renewable energy only when fossil resources were exhausted. In contrast, taking capital accumulation into account through capacity constraints and adjustment costs, both of which must be factored into the construction of renewable energy plants, Amigues, Ayong Le Kama, Chakravorty, and Moreaux (2013) and Lecuyer and Vogt-Schilb (2014) showed that optimal investment in renewable energy is independent of existing fossil resources. They also showed that it is better to start the transition as early as possible and to distribute investment over time rather than to wait and then be obliged to invest heavily over a short period.We address the question of the best energy transition where a social planner takes the social cost of pollution into account, in contrast to what is done in the above-cited equilibrium models, where technological decisions are made by firms. We shall feature optimal transitions rather than mere equilibria, and tackle the difficulty of optimal timing: when should energy be switched from fossil to renewable? Our perspective resembles that of Tahvonen and Withagen (1996), Tahvonen (1997), Valente (2011), Prieur, Tidball, and Withagen (2013), and Boucekkine, Pommeret, and Prieur (2013a), Boucekkine, Pommeret, and Prieur (2013b).Amigues et al. (2013) identified the various optimal regimes, paying considerable attention to state constraints, but ignoring timing controls. We do consider timing controls and the possibility that adoption of renewable energy is gradual rather than instantaneous. Boucekkine et al. (2013a) used timing controls in multi-stage optimal control; Bonneuil and Saint-Pierre (2008) introduced timing controls in the economic theory of the life cycle. Our original way of involving timing controls in a set-valued dynamic under state and control constraints allows us to avoid the algebraic complexity associated with the consideration of state constraints on capital. The problem of energy transition has also been addressed in operation research, through multi-criteria analysis (Georgopoulou, Sarafidis, Mirasgedis, Zaimi, & Lalas, 2003; Kowalski, Stagl, Madlener, & Omann, 2009). When uncertainty is at stake, Lukas and Welling (2014) took the real option set-up. Our handling of explicit timing controls and optimal regime switching is closer to the impulse control technique, as in Hainaut (2014), who studies pension funds in a regime switching economy. We differ from this author in our use of set-valued analysis, which allows us to deal with uncertainty, state constraints, and impulse controls. We also differ from him by the fact that we develop an econometric part to test the implications and the robustness of the results.With regard to energy, the share of renewable energy in French electricity production, for example, is forecast to grow from 22.9% in 2013 to 35% in 2020.22Source Réseau de transport d’électricité, published by Bertille Bayart in Le Figaro, 10 December 2013.We propose to determine not only when the transition to a renewable energy should start, but also at what rate it should replace existing forms of energy. The proportion of clean but expensive energy can then be adjusted over time.We consider pollution as possibly irreversible, as Tahvonen and Withagen (1996) and Prieur (2009) did. The non-renewable resource, say fossil fuels, is extracted and consumed, causing emissions of pollutant. Beyond a critical concentration, pollutant is no longer absorbed, as it is the case for carbon dioxide by the oceans. The choice is to adopt a renewable but expensive technology, say wind power, or not. Prieur et al. (2013) searched for the optimal management of exhaustible resources under irreversible pollution but ignored the adoption of the new technology. In Boucekkine et al. (2013b), the timing of adoption is endogenous but not the size of the investment in the technology of renewable energy. This assumption follows Valente (2011): when adoption starts, the share of renewable energy is set to a constant, reflecting the maximal level of the renewable energy allowed by the technological capacity of the country. We refer to this type of adoption as “instantaneous adoption.” We relax the view of instantaneous adoption, which is mathematically convenient but restrictive, and suggest to endogenize the investment into the renewable energy, within the possibilities left by the technology. We refer to this type of adoption as “gradual adoption.”Boucekkine et al. (2013b), using Pontryagin, had to check all possible candidates to optimality (inner solutions, corner solutions, solutions with adoption of renewable energy and those without, solutions with reversibility of pollution and those without), computing the associated value functions for each set of parameters and for each set of initial conditions, to finally select the maximal value. In contrast, viability theory yields optima in a necessary and sufficient way, allowing a systematic exploration of the state space. Our method here allows one to solve the problem without the round-about of Pontryagin or Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman, without having to compute each candidate solution to select the best one thereafter. Our econometric analysis, as in Bonneuil and Boucekkine (2014), shall capture the main features of viable optimal decisions and help us interpret them. Varying the production unit cost, the maximal investment into renewable energy, and the threshold of irreversible pollution allows us to test robustness on the parameters setting. Besides, thanks to Bonneuil’s 2006 viability algorithm, the technique is flexible enough to add state dimensions, here gradual versus instantaneous adoption, avoiding to derive first-order conditions each time. The technique works with continuous-discrete time dynamics. The link with optimal solutions, which economists are fond of, was established theoretically (Bonneuil, 2012). It finds here a practical application.Around the plausible parameters values used by Prieur et al. (2013), we shall determine the factors favoring adoption or not. We shall notably find the importance of initial fossil resource and initial level of pollution in the maximal inter-temporal utility. This is consistent with Boucekkine et al. (2013b), who use a different analysis. In addition, we shall also examine the role of the time horizon and the capacity to afford a gradual adoption. We shall also find that a longer time horizon increases the probability of adoption of renewable energy and the time for this adoption. It also increases maximal utility and the probability to cross the threshold of irreversible pollution. We shall find that the time for starting exploiting a renewable energy decreases when adoption is gradual, compared with instantaneous adoption: the shorter the time remaining after adoption until the time horizon, the more quickly renewable energy is adopted. Then the theory of optimal regime switching is completed by the realistic feature of gradual adoption, a key component of energy policies.After posing the problem as a maximization under four differential equations, we shall present viability theory and the procedure to obtain a maximum under viability constraints, with its associated algorithm. The problem becomes a viability problem with six dimensions. An example of trajectories with gradual or with instantaneous adoption will helps us situate the dynamic. Then we shall proceed to the econometric analysis of 600 simulations, so as to highlight the determinants of adoption and its mode.The quantity of fossil resource is x1(t) at time t. People are to solve the trade-off between cheap polluting energy against expensive cleaner energy, through maximizing the discounted stream of utilities from energy consumption and disutilities associated with pollution and the cost of investing into renewable energy:(1)maxv1,v2,ts∫0T(u(v1(t))−D(x2(t))−cx3(t))e−δtdt,where T is the time horizon, the function u represents utility and D is the damage function, c is a parameter reflecting the production unit cost, x2 is the level of pollution, x3 is the amount of exploited renewable energy, ts≥ 0 is the time when this renewable resource begins to be adopted:(2){x3′(t)=0ift<tsx3′(t)=v2(t)∈V2ift≥ts(adoption)x3∈[0,x¯3],where V2 is a closed set, v2 is the investment into or disinvestment from renewable energy,x¯3is the maximal renewable energy, limited by the possibilities of the country. Total energy consumption v1(t) is the sum of the quantity e(t) ≥ 0 of polluting energy and of the quantity x3(t) ≥ 0 of renewable non-polluting energy:(3)v1(t)=e(t)+x3(t).The fossil resource decreases as:(4)x1′(t)=−e(t)=−v1(t)+x3(t).The quantity of pollutant is also taken equal to e(t), such that pollution varies according to:(5)x2′(t)=max(0,v1(t)−x3(t))−α(t)x2(t),where α(t) is the rate of absorption of pollution by the environment, becoming null over a threshold valuex2, above which the milieu becomes unable to absorb any quantity of pollutant:(6){α(t)=αconstantforx2(t)≤x̲2(reversibility)α(t)=0otherwise.(irreversibility).Equation (2) is an impulse equation:(7){x3′(t)=w(t)v2(t)w′(t)=0,w(0)=0w(ts+)=w(ts−)+1=1x3∈[0,x¯3],where w is a Heaviside function.The dynamic (4–7) is a differential inclusion with impulse:(8){x′(t)∈F(x(t))x+=R(x):={x1−,x2−,x3−,1)}with(9)F(x):={(−(v1+x3),max(0,v1−x3)−α1x2≤x̲2x2,v2,0),v1∈[0,x1],v2∈V2}.The state variables are x1, x2, x3, and w, and the controls ts, v1, and v2. The system (4–7) constitutes a differential system in continuous-discrete time, also called hybrid dynamic (Bensoussan & Menaldi, 1997) under constraintsK:={x=(x1,x2,x3,w)∣x1(t)≥0,x2(t)≥0,x3(t)∈[0,x¯3],w(t)∈{0,1}}⊂R+4.Boucekkine et al. (2013b) considered an instantaneous transition to renewable resource, which amounts to replace (7) by:(10){x3′(t)=0x3(0)=0x3(ts+)=x¯3.We shall compare the solutions from (4–7) and from (4–6, 10), starting from the same initial conditions.A statex=(x1(0),x2(0),x3(0),w(0))is said T-viable in K if there exists at least one solution x(.) to (F, R) starting fromx(0)=xand remaining in K until T: ∀t ∈ [0, T], x(t) ∈ K. A set of T-viable states is called a viability domain. There exists a maximal domain containing all others, and called viability kernel. A capture domain is a set of states x from which there exists at least one solution to (F, R) starting from x and reaching a given set Ω, playing the role of a target. By adding time as a state variable, this target may include a fixed time, at which to hit the target. The capture-viability kernel Capt(F, R)(K, Ω) is the largest set of states x from which there exists at least one solution governed by the dynamic (F, R), remaining in K for all t ∈ [0, T], and reaching the target Ω.An impulse differential inclusion (F, R) is described by1.a set-valued map F: X → X, representing the dynamic in continuous time:(11)x′∈F(x)={f(x,u,v),u∈U(x),v∈V(x)}where U(x) and V(x) are closed sets;a reset map R: X → X, describing the discrete part of the run, associating a new initial statexi+1∈R(xi)with some instant ti.For two closed setsΩ⊂K⊂Rm,how can a system governed by (F, R) through u stay in K and reach Ω before leaving K, despite uncertainty v. Starting from an initial state x0 ∈ K, a solution x(.) to the impulse differential inclusion (F, R) is a solution to the differential inclusion x′ ∈ F(x) viable in K until a time t1 ≥ 0 when it reachesR−1(K). At that point, a second initial statex1=x(t1+)∈R(x(t1−))∩K,withx(t1−):=limt→t1−x(t),is taken as a starting state for the continuous-time process, which carries on its course.A state x is said to be viable in a closed subset K with target Ω under (F, R) if there exists at least one solution x(.) starting fromx(0)=xunder the dynamic F such that there exists a T > 0 such that x(T) ∈ Ω and for all t ≥ 0, x(t) ∈ K. A subset K is viable under (F, R) if all states x ∈ K are viable under (F, R). If a closed set K is not viable under (F, R), Aubin (1999) proved that when F is Marchaud (its graph and its domain are not empty, the values F(x) are convex, andsupy∈F(x)∥y∥is bounded by a linear function of ∥y∥), then there exists one largest capture-viable subset of (K, Ω) including all others. This is the hybrid capture-viability kernel, denoted Capt(F, R)(K, Ω).Bonneuil (2012) showed that the solutions of the optimization problem {[1, 2, 4–6]} are located on the boundary in direction of high welfare(12)π(t):=∫0t(u(v1(τ))−D(x2(τ))−cx3(τ))e−δτdτof the capture-viability basin of targetR+2×[0,x¯3]×{T}×{0,1}×{0}within the state spaceR+2×[0,x¯3]×{T}×{0,1}×R+(containing states (x1, x2, x3, x4, w, π)) under the augmented dynamic:(13){π′(t)=−(u(v1(t))−D(x2(t))−cx3(t))e−δx4(t)x1′(t)=−v1(t)+x3(t)(fossilresource)x2′(t)=max(0,v1(t)−x3(t))−α(t)x2(t)(pollution)x3′(t)=w(t)v2(t)(renewableenergy)x4′(t)=1(time),w′(t)=0(Heaviside[ts,T])α(t)=α1x2(t)≤x̲2(absorption);v1(t)∈[0,x1(t)],(energyconsumption)v2(t)∈V2,(variationofrenewableenergy);ts≥0,(switchingtime)π(0)=π0,x1(0)=x10,x2(0)=x20,x3(0)=0,w(0)=0(initialconditions).The capture-viability kernel of the augmented dynamic (13) has six state variables: x1, x2, x3, x4, w, and π, and three controls: v1, v2, and ts. The variable x4 is time, which is now a state variable, in contrast to System (4–7).Bonneuil (2006) addressed the computation of viable states and of the capture-viability kernel in large state dimension, based on stochastic optimization (to handle the large dimension of the discretized control trajectory). The idea is to minimize the distance to the set of constraints of solutions starting from a given state, and to assess the viability status of this state whether or not the minimization of the distance leads to at least one trajectory remaining in the set of constraints. The search for viable states is also achieved by the minimization of a distance to the set of constraints, so that the procedure relies on a double stochastic optimization: one where the initial state under examination is fixed, so as to decide whether it is viable or not, and one where this initial state is varied. We shall use this algorithm later on.The addition of the auxiliary variable π participates in the elegant procedure leading to locate the viable maximum on the boundary in direction of high π of the capture-viability kernel associated with the augmented dynamic (Bonneuil, 2012). A variant of Bonneuil’s 2006 algorithm allows us to compute the boundary of the capture viability basin in the direction of high π without the knowledge of the whole capture-viability kernel, which is very memory-consuming. First, a viable state is found for the auxiliary dynamic; second π is maximized for the same x. For each new attempt (x, π), stochastic optimization allows us to find one trajectory remaining in K and reaching the target at time T. For T infinite, an approximation and extrapolation of “reaching the target” is used, a task here made easy by the discounting termexp(−δt).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
