@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Solving a bi-objective Transportation Location Routing Problem by metaheuristic algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A mathematical formulation for the problem is proposed.A new representation to reduce computational effort is presented.Local search and evolutionary based solution algorithms are implemented.Our implementation of Local Search based algorithms is outperformed by our implementation of Evolutionary based algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple objective programming,Transportation Location Routing Problem,Logistics,Metaheuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work we consider a Transportation Location Routing Problem (TLRP) that can be seen as an extension of the two stage Location Routing Problem, in which the first stage corresponds to a transportation problem with truck capacity. Two objectives are considered in this research, reduction of distribution cost and balance of workloads for drivers in the routing stage. Here, we present a mathematical formulation for the bi-objective TLRP and propose a new representation for the TLRP based on priorities. This representation lets us manage the problem easily and reduces the computational effort, plus, it is suitable to be used with both local search based and evolutionary approaches. In order to demonstrate its efficiency, it was implemented in two metaheuristic solution algorithms based on the Scatter Tabu Search Procedure for Non-Linear Multiobjective Optimization (SSPMO) and on the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) strategies. Computational experiments showed efficient results in solution quality and computing time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Distribution systems in Supply Chain Management comprise all operations related to the transportation of final products from plants to clients, considering all intermediate steps, such as the ones relating to warehouses and distribution centers.The location of distribution facilities and the distribution of products from these facilities to clients are two key components of a distribution system (Tunzun & Burke, 1999). The problem, which combines the facility location and the vehicle routing decisions, is known in operations research context as the Location Routing Problem (LRP). Both, the facility location (FLP) and the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) are in general, NP-Hard (Cornuejols, Fischer, & Nemheuser, 1977; Karp, 1972, as cited in Tunzun & Burke, 1999). Therefore, the integration of both problems (LRP) is even more complex (Garey & Johnson, 1979; Megiddo & Supowit, 1984; Shen, 2007).Efforts to solve FLP and VRP separately have proven to generate sub-optimal results (Prins, Prodhon, & Wolfler Calvo, 2006; Salhi & Rand, 1989). The fact is that the location of facilities in a supply chain, strategic level, and the vehicle routing decisions, tactical level, interact. Both are part of the supply chain system, and different designs of facility location affect the routing arrangement. It is necessary to view the problem holistically. An overall solution for both problems is required.This research focuses on strategic and operational issues of a soft drinks’ distribution industry. There exists several production plants and a group of clients located in cities. These clients (hotels, restaurants, mini-markets, and others) demand a fixed and stable amount of products. Due to traffic regulations, trucks from plants cannot arrive at clients locations in the cities. City Distribution Centers (CDCs) on the city’s outskirts are required. The organization needs to determine the quantity and location of these logistic platforms, the number of trucks from each plant to each City Distribution Center (CDC) and the sequence to visit clients for product delivery. This problem can be seen as an extension of the two stage Location Routing Problem, in which the first stage corresponds to a transportation problem and the second one to a routing stage.Distribution costs have a significant impact on the overall costs of an organization (Toth & Vigo, 2002; Srivastava & Benton, 1990). Therefore, in their strategic and operational decisions, organizations have to take into account the objective of minimizing the overall distribution system’s cost. Because of this, most efforts have focused in dealing with cost minimization.However, in a complex industry system, other stakeholders are required to be taken into account in processes design and decision making. For instance, issues such as work equity and fairness might be considered in order to generate balanced workloads for employees (Kritikos & Ioannou, 2010). In this work, we considered a balance objective in order to even up the work load of the transportation staff in the routing stage.In order to tackle the problem addressed in this work, an extension for the two stage Location Routing Problem is considered, which could be seen as the integration of three sub-problems: the location of the CDC (FLP), the transportation of product from plants to CDCs (transportation problem with truck capacity) and the design of the vehicle routes to visit clients for each CDC (VRP). We call this problem a Transportation–Location-Routing Problem (TLRP). Additionally, two objectives are considered in the problem definition, minimize the total operation cost of the system and maintain balance in vehicle (city freighters) operators’ workload.At least within the reviewed literature, multiple objectives in a TLRP have never been analyzed.This paper is organized as follows, in Section 2 a brief discussion about previous related works is presented, the problem description and its mathematical formulation are comprised in Section 3. The solution approach description is given in Section 4, while the generation of data instances and computational results are presented in Section 5. In Section 6 some concluding remarks are offered.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work a bi-objective TLRP was addressed. A mathematical model for the bi-objective TLRP and a new representation, based on priorities, for solving the model heuristically were proposed. This representation is able to manage both stages of the problem and their connection, while reducing the computational complexity of a standard representation. Every solution generated is treated as feasible, but penalized if CDC capacity is exceeded. This made viable an easy design and implementation of neighborhoods, and gives it suitability for its implementation on local search methods. Moreover, with this representation, all classical VRP and n-opt movements can be performed. Treating each solution as feasible also simplifies the implementation of combination and mutation operators, because every combination of solution is feasible, and information contained in priorities is intuitive and easy to manage. Therefore, this representation is useful when used in evolutionary methods.In order to demonstrate these facts, the new representation of the problem was implemented in two heuristic approaches, a local search based method (SSPMO) and an evolutionary method (NSGA-II). The implementation of the priorities-based representation in SSPMO resulted in a competitive algorithm, as can be seen when comparing SSPMO results with the exact solution and NSGA-II. Comparing with the exact approach, SSPMO achieved high quality results while reducing a lot the computational time. By comparing with NSGA-II, SSPMO was the best solution algorithm for small instances, but when the size of the instances increased, NSGA-II offered a better estimation of the efficient frontier.