@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling the logistics response to a bioterrorist anthrax attack

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A logistics response model to a bioterrorist anthrax attack is proposed.It combines disease progress, medical responses, and logistic deployment choices.It takes into account the main factors which may impact the number of deaths.Crisis managers could estimate the number of individuals in different stages.The model is flexible and can be adapted to various situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in defence,OR in disaster relief,Human logistics,Linear programming,Anthrax,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As a bioterrorist anthrax attack has serious consequences, an emergency management plan that can reduce the number of casualties should be studied. However, the papers studying this area are still few. This paper proposes a model which links the disease progression, the related medical intervention actions and the logistics deployment together to help crisis managers to extract crucial insights on emergency logistics management from a strategic level standpoint. This model is a multi-period one with the consideration of the period when the patients transfer into the different disease stages, the period when the medical intervention begins and the change of the recovery rate because of the time lag between the two aforementioned periods. Our model can support the decision making process in case of a real anthrax attack and evaluate the important factors, which can have a great impact on the number of casualties.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bacillus anthracis, the bacteria causing Anthrax, is classified by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Atlanta, U.S.A.) as one of the most likely agents to be used for biological attack. It may spread across a large area, and needs a great deal of planning for the protection of the people's health. Already known as an efficient biological warfare weapon, anthrax spores become part of terrorists’ arsenals in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 terrorist's attacks, when concentrated anthrax spores were delivered by mailing postal letters containing the spores. As a result, 22 were infected and five died. Since then, the use of weaponized anthrax spores has become a major threat for the civil population (Berman & Gavious, 2007). An effective emergency management plan can obviously reduce the number of casualties and the serious consequences of an anthrax attack. Even though several studies have been made about the response to the anthrax attack from different perspectives, some crucial questions are still unanswered. Questions concerning the suitable dispensing capacity of the antibiotics distribution centers (ADC), the utilization of sensors to improve the anthrax detection ability, and the choice of patients who should get the medical help first need, among others, need to be addressed in the design of the most effective post-attack response.This paper proposes an original modeling approach inspired by Markov decision process. It combines the progress of the anthrax disease, the medical response, and the logistic deployment choices. In particular, the approach allows us to capture dynamically the impact of different medical responses on the infected population. Dynamics are important because the time elapsed since the patient is infected till the moment he/she receives medical treatment has a major impact on the recovery rate, the survival rate and, therefore, on the number of deaths. Crisis managers need to assess how their decisions, in particular these concerning the deployment and operation of an antibiotics’ distribution network, will determine the access of infected people to medical treatment. Our model allows to estimate the number of individuals infected in different periods and the number of patients in each stage of the disease for each period. Based on this information, crisis managers can optimize the resources’ deployment for the best response. The model is flexible and can adapt to specific situations and various resource deployment scenarios. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the related literature. Section 3 describes the background of the problem. The anthrax response model and the mathematical formulation are presented and discussed in Section 4. Section 5 reports numerical experiments assessing the potential of our approach. Conclusion and future research directions are provided in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
