@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Maintenance scheduling of geographically distributed assets with prognostics information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presents a method to schedule maintenance of geographically distributed assets with failure probability predictions.Presented method can handle high number of assets.Presented method can handle work durations for maintenance operators.The applicability of the presented methodology is high with handling high number of assets and work durations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance scheduling,Distributed assets,Prognostics and health management,Remaining useful life,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Maintenance scheduling for high value assets has been studied for decades and is still a crucial area of research with new technological advancements. The main dilemma of maintenance scheduling is to avoid failures while preventing unnecessary maintenance. The technological advancements in real time monitoring and computational science make tracking asset health and forecasting asset failures possible. The usage and maintenance of assets can be planned more efficiently with the forecasted failure probability and remaining useful life (i.e., prognostic information). The prognostic information is time sensitive. Geographically distributed assets such as off-shore wind farms and railway switches add another complexity to the maintenance scheduling problem with the required time of travel to reach these assets. Thus, the travel time between geographically distributed assets should be incorporated in the maintenance scheduling when one technician (or team) is responsible for the maintenance of multiple assets. This paper presents a methodology to schedule the maintenance of geographically distributed assets using their prognostic information. Genetic Algorithm based solution incorporating the daily work duration of the maintenance team is also presented in the paper.total expected failure costtotal maintenance costtotal travel costnumber of distributed assetsmaintenance schedule time periodcumulative failure probability of asset i on day texpected failure probability progression if the system is left as it is without maintenancefailure probability obtained from prognostics at time texpected failure probability progression after a maintenancefailure probability obtained from reliability analysis at (t  LM) time units after a maintenanceexpected downtime when a failure occurs in asset idowntime cost per unit time for asset idirect failure costfixed maintenance cost for asset itravel cost of unit distancecost increase per each time unit in fixed maintenance cost when work duration exceeds Dwcity order (asset number visited in the ith order at time t)distance between assets visitedπi−1tth order andπitth ordertravel time of distancedπn,π0maintenance duration for the asset itime of last maintenancenumber of assets to be visited at time unit tworking duration for maintenance in a time unitupper limit for the work duration in a time unit1 if asset i is scheduled for maintenance at time t; 0 otherwiserandom number for asset i for ranking the visit orderstring of binary numbers with log2(T + 1) binary numbers representing the maintenance times for asset i in the given period(blog2(T+1)…b2b1)

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today's highly competitive environment pressurizes industry for continuous cost reduction. Maintenance research has been attractive to researchers and industry in recent years because asset maintenance and repair significantly contribute to operation and support costs (Camci & Chinnam, 2010). In addition, maintenance is not a stand-alone operation, as it interacts with many other operations, such as production planning, inventory management, and personnel within the business, creating great complexity (Nourelfath & Châtelet, 2012).Predictive maintenance proposes to maintain assets only when necessary in the right time, aiming to reduce unnecessary maintenance by monitoring and forecasting asset health. The term asset represents any system that is monitored for maintenance.In predictive maintenance, the health of the asset is observed in operating time by analyzing signals that have been collected from sensors that are embedded in the assets. The process of detecting an existing incipient failure, called diagnostics, and the process of forecasting the time of the failure and identification of the remaining useful life (RUL) of the asset before failure occurs, called prognostics, are the two major steps in predictive maintenance (Camci & Chinnam, 2006; Eker et al., 2011; Jardine, Lin, & Banjevic, 2006). Maintenance may be scheduled immediately for an asset when an incipient failure is diagnosed. However, the asset with an incipient failure or some level of degradation can still be used until the complete failure. Identification of the time of the complete failure creates an opportunity for effective maintenance planning. The asset is expected to perform according to its typical functionality, but possibly less efficiently, within the identified RUL. Prognosis of a failure identifies the remaining useful life of the asset for effective maintenance planning and preparation.In predictive maintenance research, the RUL may be time (e.g., 3 months to failure) or operational working period (e.g., 3000 miles of driving before failure) and is defined by setting a threshold value to a given parameter such as efficiency decrease or failure probability (Barbera, Schneider, & Kelle, 1996; Berenguer, Grall, Dieulle, & Roussignol, 2003; Marseguerra, Zio, & Podofillini, 2002; Sloan & Shanthikumar, 2002; Yam, Tse, Li, & Tu, 2001). In these cases, maintenance is performed when the parameter reaches the given threshold.Even if the optimization of the threshold for prognostics information may be sufficient for some systems, it is not sufficient for maintenance scheduling of geographically distributed assets. Railway switches and wind turbines in wind farms are two examples of geographically distributed assets. The travelling cost for maintenance and the effects of travelling time on the probability of failure should be incorporated for effective maintenance scheduling of geographically distributed assets. For example, consider an off-shore wind farm with many wind turbines located in the middle of the sea. Assume that one of the wind turbines is scheduled for maintenance next week based on the threshold set for prognostics information. Should the wind turbines located close to the one scheduled for maintenance be maintained before coming back to the shore? If the maintenance operations for two wind turbines are scheduled consecutively, will it be possible for the technicians to be at the assets at their scheduled times considering the travel times?This paper presents a formulation for the maintenance scheduling of geographically distributed assets to answer these types of questions by incorporating failure, maintenance, and travel costs in the same formula and a Genetic Algorithm (GA) based solution. GA is a widely used approach to approximate the global optimum for non-linear problems and especially attractive in scheduling problems with binary representation power (Marseguerra et al., 2002). The contribution of the presented methodology is to increase the applicability of the presented problem to real systems with high numbers of assets and to incorporate work duration for maintenance operators in the formulation.Section 2 gives the literature review, Section 3 presents the problem formulation, and Section 4 presents methodology to solve the problem. Section 5 demonstrates case studies, and Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
