@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Controlling for spatial heterogeneity in nonparametric efficiency models: An empirical proposal

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A nonparametric method to estimate efficiency in presence of spatial dependence.We extend order-m finding peers identified by a measure of spatial dependence.Verified the territorial differences for unconditioned and conditioned estimates.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Productive efficiency,Conditional nonparametric efficiency,Spatial heterogeneity,Industrial districts,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces an original methodology, derived by the robust order-m model, to estimate technical efficiency with spatial autocorrelated data using a nonparametric approach. The methodology is aimed to identify potential competitors on a subset of productive units that are identified through spatial dependence, thus focusing on peers located in close proximity of the productive unit. The proposed method is illustrated in a simulation setting that verifies the territorial differences between the nonparametric unconditioned and the conditioned estimates. A firm-level application to the Italian industrial districts is proposed in order to highlight the ability of the new method to separate the global intangible spatial effect from the efficiency term on real data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since long time, the dynamic process leading firms to concentrate in specific regions and specialize in particular sectors has attracted the attention of many researchers, ranging from the seminal work of Max Weber to the pioneering contributions of Marshall. Overall, there is a wide consensus on the beneficial effects of locating in close proximity to other firms: these benefits, ranging from knowledge spillovers to increased availability of inputs, are commonly defined as agglomeration economies. The locational effect is especially relevant in specific territorial contexts, such as the Marshallian industrial districts, where the role of a number of tangible and intangible factors (summarized by Marshall through the concept of ‘the industrial atmosphere’) has proved to be particularly effective in influencing the performances of the local actors operating in these regions: specifically, the existence of economies external to firms and internal to districts tend to generate a competitive advantage associated with a higher efficiency in the overall production system that provides sustained benefits for the economic actors located in these regions.Given the key role played by location in determining the performance of a firm, a number of recent contributions in the field of productive efficiency have attempted to propose empirical models designed to account for the spatial heterogeneity of the production units.Within the parametric approaches, a number of contributions have proposed different specifications to control for the spatial effect. In this respect, the most commonly used strategy involves the inclusion of contextual variables (usually defined as Z) that are believed to affect efficiency: this methodology is also aimed to limit the influence of multiple and heterogeneous production models that may affect the final estimates. In this respect, the three main alternatives proposed by the recent literature are the following: (i) inclusion of variables related to the territorial context to correct the “average levels” of a baseline model (Hughes, Lawson, Davidson, Jackson, & Sheng, 2011); (ii) use of contextual factors to model the inefficiency part (Lavado & Barrios, 2010); (iii) implementation of the maximum likelihood method proposed by Battese and Coelli (1995) to simultaneously estimate the production function with the inefficiency function (Azzoni, Igliori, & Schettini, 2007). Recently, Areal, Balcombe, *** Tiffin (2012) have proposed an alternative specification to evaluate spatial effects, using a Bayesian approach and including a spatial lag directly into ui: this approach allows the inefficiency term to be splitted into a spatial component and a specific term for each firm. The specification proposed by Areal et al. (2012) has been solved by Fusco and Vidoli (2013) using the maximum likelihood function.On the other hand, the nonparametric literature lacks of specific research regarding spatial dependence. Even in two-stage models, such as that of Vidoli (2011) who proposed to use jointly nonparametric methods for estimating the frontier and additive methods for the specification of the functional form, the spatial dependence should be controlled in the first stage in order to prevent bias in the second stage of the estimation process. Within the non-parametric frameworks, the traditional approach to isolate the effect of contextual variables from the efficiency estimates is based on a two-step procedure (see e.g.Simar & Wilson, 2007, 2011) that (i) estimates the efficiency scores nonparametrically and (ii) regress them on a set of environmental variables. A more general alternative involves the probabilistic formulation of the nonparametric conditional measures (see e.g.Badin, Daraio, & Simar, 2012; Daraio & Simar, 2007; Jeong, Park, & Simar, 2010): even in this case, the heterogeneity between units is essentially intended as dependent from a set of contextual variables Z and not from the specific territorial location. Recently, Florens, Simar, and Van Keilegom (2014), Mastromarco and Simar (2014) proposed an alternative flexible nonparametric two-step approach on conditional efficiencies with the aim of eliminating the dependence of production inputs/outputs on common factors and of avoiding the use of smoothing methods.Both the parametric and the parametric spatial approaches towards technical efficiency share a common limitation, as they only account for the spatial effect through a specific set of variables Z, while overlooking the global spatial trend which is not always identifiable and/or measurable in a direct way: this issue is particularly serious in specific territorial contexts, such as the Marshallian Industrial Districts, where the role of intangible aspects, often statistically and economically difficult to capture, is particularly relevant. The choice of an incomplete or erroneous set of contextual variables Z can be particularly problematic in non-parametric settings, as ex-post modelling validation processes are not available in these contexts.In an attempt to overcome this issue, the present paper proposes a novel framework that aims to incorporate the spatial dependence into a nonparametric efficiency model by accounting for the spatial proximity of peers rather than evaluating the exact relationships between X and Y and a set of contextual factors Z. The idea of limiting the efficiency analysis to a subset of firms rather than to the entire population of production units is drawn upon the intuition of Cazals, Florens, and Simar (2002) and Daraio and Simar (2005), who proposed an order-m model to overcome one of the main limitations of the nonparametric approaches, i.e. the strong sensitivity to outliers. This insight can be effectively adapted in a spatial setting to isolate the role of the surrounding economic environment, thus defining the concept of potential competitors in a more consistent spatial framework. The proposed method is believed to be particularly valuable in contexts where technical efficiency is influenced not only by the firm’s ability to produce an optimal amount of output given a particular set of inputs, but also by the presence of potential competitors whose influence tends to decline with distance. The methodology is based on a three-step approach that involves: (i) the preliminary estimation of the optimal distance in terms of spatial autocorrelation, (ii) the identification of the set of units operating within the area identified using the estimated radius for each unit i and (iii) the subsequent solution of the optimization problem. In particular, the first step is solved by estimating the semivariogram, a spatial statistical tool that is widely used in spatial statistics and can be conveniently adapted in the field of efficiency analysis: contrary to previous work, the estimation is implemented through a flexible GAM approach, which allows to identify spatial dependencies within extremely narrow spatial bounds. This method is particularly convenient to detect spatial autocorrelation in regional contexts, such as the Marshallian Industrial Districts, characterized by strong spatial dependencies that tend to decrease exponentially with increasing distance.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, an overview of the nonparametric methodologies for the efficiency analysis is presented, focusing on the conditional order-m methods that are defined to account for spatial dependence. In Section 3, the novel methodology to control for spatial proximity in a nonparametric framework is introduced and discussed, presenting the main benefits associated with its implementation in specific regional contexts characterized by spatial intangible contextual variables and sharply decreasing spatial autocorrelation. In Section 4, a simulation exercise is proposed to assess the performance of the proposed estimator against the traditional nonparametric models in a local setting characterized by both global and local spatial autocorrelation. In Section 5, the proposed model is applied to a specific context, i.e. the Tuscan industrial districts, characterized by peculiar spatial features that are consistent with those discussed in the preceding sections, showing the benefits associated with the used of the novel framework. Finally, the concluding remarks and some potential endeavours for future research are discussed.The traditional nonparametric framework for efficiency analysis can be effectively described by considering a production technology characterized by a set of inputsx∈R+pthat are used by a Decision Making Unit (DMU) to produce a set of outputsy∈R+q. In this context, the production set Ψcan be defined as the set of technically feasible combinations of (x, y), as follows:(1)Ψ={(x,y)∈Rp+q|xcanproducey}and the DGP (Data Generating Process) can be presented as:(2)H(x,y)=Prob(X≤x,Y≥y).Against this background, Ψ can also be defined as the support of H(x, y).Following the approach originally conceived by Debreu (1951) and Farrell (1957), the efficiency scores for a given production scenario (x, y) ∈ Ψ can be defined in terms of both the maximum amount of output potentially producible (output oriented) or the minimum amount of input potentially usable (input oriented). The choice between these two alternatives is generally driven by the nature of the problem and/or by the underlying constraints.In an input-oriented framework, the optimization problem can be expressed as follows:(3)θ(x,y)=inf{θ|(θx,y)∈Ψ}.Since Ψ is unknown and has to be estimated from a random sample of production unitsχ={(Xi,Yi)|i=1,⋯,n},in a deterministic frontier framework we assume thatProb((Xi,Yi)∈Ψ). In general, the aim is to estimate the support Ψof the random variable (X, Y), where Ψ is assumed to be compact.The most widely used nonparametric estimators in the literature are the Free Disposal Hull (FDH, Deprins, Simar, & Tulkens, 1984) and the Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), both originally based on the Farrell–Debreu envelopment intuition. The two estimators differ in that the former does not require the assumption of convexity, given the benchmarks are limited to the productive combinations belonging to Ψ, while the latter admit that linear combinations of the efficient units should also be part of the frontier. This difference11For the DEA model, the graph shows both the Constant Returns to Scale (CRS) and the Variable Returns to Scale (VRS) assumption.is presented schematically in Fig. 1.The FDH estimator is derived from the free disposal hull of the sample points X:(4)Ψ^FDH={(x,y)∈Rp+q|y<Yi,x≥Xi,i=1,⋯,n}.The FDH efficiency scores are obtained by pluggingΨ^FDHinto Eq. (3) in place of the unknown Ψ.When Ψ is convex, the convex hull ofΨ^FDHcan be extended in order to derive the DEA estimator as follows:Ψ^DEA={(x,y)∈Rp+q|y<∑i=1nγiyifor(γ1,⋯,γn),such that(5)∑i=1nγi=1;γi≥0,i=1,⋯,n.The main advantage of the DEA–FDH formulations is associated with their ability to assess a multi-input and multi-output scenario without any assumption on the functional form, thus allowing to compare the performance of a specific DMU with peers or combination of peers. However, despite the benefits associated with the implementation of these approaches, a number of limitations have been highlighted by the recent literature.One of the main issues of the traditional DEA-FDH specification is the extreme sensitivity to outliers. In an attempt to solve this issue, Cazals et al. (2002) proposed a nonparametric estimator of the frontier that is more robust to extreme and abnormal values. This model, based on the concept of expected minimum input function of order m, has been later extended by Daraio and Simar (2005) to the multivariate case in an attempt to mitigate the impact of outliers on the estimation, introducing a probability distribution for the units in the set Ψ. The rationale behind this choice is effectively explained by the following passage: “in place of looking for the lower boundary of the support of FX(x|y), as was typically the case for the full-frontier (DEAorFDH), the order-m efficiency score can be viewed as the expectation of the minimal input efficiency score of the unit (x, y), when compared to m units randomly drawn from the population of units producing more outputs than the level y. This is certainly a less extreme benchmark for the unit (x, y) than the“absolute”minimal achievable level of inputs: it is compared to a set of m peers (potential competitors) producing more than its level y and we take as a benchmark, the expectation of the minimal achievable input in place of the absolute minimal achievable input” (Daraio & Simar, 2005, pp. 70–71).In the probabilistic framework proposed by Daraio and Simar (2005), given a sample of m random variables with replacementSm={Yi}i=1mdrawn from the density of Y, the random setΨ˜mcan be defined as:(6)Ψ˜m=⋃j=1m{(x,y)∈R+P+Q|X≥x,Yj≥y}.This specification limits the effect of outliers and measurement errors, as the single unit is not compared to the entire domain, but rather to a subset of peers of size m. Indeed, the procedure iteratively selects B different subsets of size m and for each iteration b ∈ B the distance of the unit i from the selected peers is calculated as follows:(7)θ˜mb(x,y)=inf{θ|(θx,y)∈Ψ˜m},∀b=1,⋯,B.It is worth noting that in the above framework the parameter m has a dual nature: (i) it is a trimming parameter used to test the robustness of the estimated efficiencies changing m; (ii) it identifies the potential competitors for each firm.A further issue associated with the traditional DEA/FDH approaches is that the estimated efficiency is often influenced by environmental factors that are not directly related with the production choices made by the firm. In the probabilistic formulation, Cazals et al. (2002) suggested to address this issue through a conditional efficiency approach which includes external environmental factors that might influence the production process but are neither inputs nor outputs under the control of the producer. The idea is to reformulate the production process in a probabilistic setting to allow the production activity to be conditioned to the impact of external factors without ex-ante assuming the direction of their effect. If these factors do not exert any impact, the conditional measure will be equal to the unconditional measure of efficiency. Daraio and Simar (2005) extended these ideas to a more general multivariate framework and proposed an empirical methodology to evaluate the effect of environmental variables in the production process. A further extension to convex nonparametric models has been later proposed by Daraio and Simar (2007), while a significant amount of work has been exerted to prove the consistency and the asymptotic properties of different conditional efficiency estimators (see e.g.Badin et al., 2012; Jeong et al., 2010).In analogy with the traditional Farrell’s input-oriented efficiency score defined in Eq. (3), the conditional input efficiency measure can be defined as:(8)θ^(x,y|z)=inf{θ|(θx0,y0|z)∈Ψ}=inf{θ|H(θx,y|z)>0}.where z is the set of contextual variables that is assumed to affect firm-level efficiency.Although these approaches have the benefit of directly assessing the impact of specific contextual variables in the estimation, they tend to be ineffective in local contexts characterized by a global spatial effect, where the role of intangible aspects, often statistically and economically difficult to capture, is particularly relevant. Indeed, in Eq. (8), the unobserved factors Z are identified ex-ante and modelled as independent from the production process: therefore, this strategy does not allow to account for relevant information that is left out from the model or is simply difficult to estimate.In an attempt to overcome this issue, the novel framework proposed in the following section aims to incorporate the spatial dependence into a nonparametric efficiency model by accounting for the spatial proximity of peers rather than evaluating the exact relationships between X and Y and a set of contextual factors Z: in order to do so, the new specification introduces a readaptation of the robust order-m models by using a spatial criterion to identify the local peers for each unit. This strategy allows to control for the spatial effect in a more general way, without requiring the inclusion of a specific set of Z. Although we agree with Daraio and Simar (2005) claim that the peers m should be chosen according to “the dynamics, the structure and characteristics of the considered market”, in practice we believe that the identification of unequivocal and objective criteria is often difficult to implement. Using a spatial approach, the subset of peers for each productive unit i can be identified with a higher degree of consistency and effectively used to calculate a spatial conditional measure of efficiency.The novel empirical model proposed in this section draws on the concept of partial frontier introduced by Daraio and Simar (2005) and it is based on the intuition that the efficiency of a given productive unit is more effectively estimated when the frontier is built using a subset of peers rather than evaluating the entire set of DMUs. However, contrary to Daraio and Simar (2005), in this specification the peers are identified using a specific criterion, i.e. the spatial proximity: indeed, this methodology aims to identify the potential competitors among the local actors that operate in the neighbourhood of a given productive unit. This specification allows to retain the main benefits of the traditional order-m models (e.g. the reduced sensitivity to outliers or measurement errors), while introducing a consistent method that identifies the potential peers through a spatial approach, thus isolating the global effect associated with the multitude of local tangible and intangible aspects that cannot be always captured by using a specific set of contextual variables.These premises lead to the following two immediate questions: (i) how should the optimal subset of local peers be identified? (ii) which is the correct number of peers m to be selected? In this model, we propose to address the above mentioned issues through the following three-step approach:1.estimation of the optimal distance (radius) in terms of spatial autocorrelation;identification of the number of units falling within the estimated radius from the productive unit i;solution of the optimization problem introducing the additional spatial constraint.The estimation of the optimal distance can be performed using a spatial statistic tool that is becoming increasingly popular in the geostatistical literature, i.e. the semivariogram: this method has proved to be particularly convenient to estimate the semivariance of the observations at given distances. In this specific context, the semivariogram can be used to study the relationship between the sequence of a random variable y(s) and the location s ∈ R2, in order to evaluate how the degree of variability of technical efficiency changes when the distance between productive units increases. The empirical semivariogram is generally plotted with distance (lag h)22The choice of the lag h strongly influences the semivariogram: an excessively large number of lags usually generate too many semivariance averages (one for each lag) with higher probability of incorrect variograms, while too few lags lead to large variance estimates, loss of detail and excessive smoothing of the semivariogram.on the horizontal axis and the semivarianceγ(h)=Var[y(s)−y(s+h)]on the vertical axis (Fig. 2). According to Isaaks and Srivastava (1989), the three main features by which the classical semivariogram can be summarized are (i) the nugget, defined as the discontinuity at the origin associated with measurement errors and/or with spatial sources of variation at distances smaller than the sampling interval; (ii) the range, identified as the distance where the model first flattens out; (iii) the sill, i.e. the value that the model attains at the range (i.e. the value on the y-axis). In the standard specification, the distance after which the correlation between units decreases is identified through the range.The identification of a suitable model to implement the estimation is still the object of a lively debate within the geostatistical literature: in this respect, a number of parametric and nonparametric alternatives have been proposed to tackle this issue. Within the nonparametric literature, one of the most popular methods to estimate the semivariogram involves the implementation of a smoothed version of the traditional parametric variogram estimator (see e.g.Diggle & Ribeiro, 2007; Schabenberger & Gotway, 2005). One of the main issues with these approaches is associated with the correct identification of the optimal lag h, which is generally unknown. In this context, Huang, Hsing, and Cressie (2011) and Kim and Park (2012) have proposed a two-stage approach that involves the preliminary estimation of the lag h in a parametric setting and the subsequent fit of the empirical semivariogram with a nonparametric approach.Despite the relevant benefits associated with the use of the semivariogram for the analysis of spatial autocorrelation, the standard form of this spatial tool may be misleading in regional contexts characterized by local clustering phenomena. In such cases, where spatial dependence is not monotonically decreasing, the analysis of spatial autocorrelation should not be necessarily performed on the entire domain of the empirical semivariogram, but rather implemented through a more flexible and robust model that aims to estimate the first local maximum of the γ(h). Such an approach allows to identify spatial dependencies within extremely narrow spatial bounds, thus proving to be particularly convenient to detect those regional entities, such as the Marshallian Industrial Districts, that tend to be located in narrow localities.In this paper, the aforementioned issue is addressed by introducing an alternative approach based on the Generalized Additive Model (GAM) framework: this flexible specification allows one to fit the semivariance γ(h) through a combination of smooth functions of the distance h, thus providing effective approximations of the regression curve while relaxing the linear structure of the additive effects. The advantages of the GAM approach are clearly visible from the graph presented in Fig. 3, that shows the flexible form of the semivariogram resulting from the modified approach33Note that each value of h in the horizontal axis corresponds to a specific radius in the map.: this structure is particularly convenient for the purpose of the analysis, as it allows to easily identify the first local maximum, which tends to proxy the average dimension of local clustering phenomena that are present in the data.After having estimated the optimal distanceh^through the nonparametric empirical semivariogram, it is possible to implement the second step of the procedure, which involves the estimation of the number of local peersmi(rh^)located in the neighbourhood of unit i: these units are identified as the subset j falling within the circular area defined by radiusr(h^),identified in the previous step as the local maximum of the distanceh^,beyond which spatial autocorrelation for each unit i ceases to be significant. Formally, the estimated number of peers can be identified as:(9)mi(rh^)=∑i≠jI(j),j∈Si(rh^),where I(·) is the indicator function andSi(rh^)is the magnitude of radiusrh^centred on unit i. Eq. (6) can be defined as a special case of the classical order-m framework presented in Section 2 (Eq. (9)): however, in this specific case the estimated number of potential peersmi(rh^)for the unit i is identified through a spatial criterion, focusing on those competitors who locate in close proximity of the productive unit i. It is worth noting that when the estimated distancerh^tends to infinity, the model tends to the standard order-m framework discussed in Section 2.Overall, the modified optimization problem can be formally expressed by introducing in the random setΨ˜m,defined in Eq. (6), an additional constraint associated with spatial proximity, as follows:(10)Ψ˜mirh=⋃j=1m{(x,y)∈R+P+Q|X≥x,Yj≥y,j∈Si(rh^)}.In this modified setting, the choice ofmi(rh^)is statistically founded as it is based on a specific criterion, i.e. the spatial autocorrelation. Moreover, the proposed specification appears to be more suitable to adapt to all those cases when firm-level efficiency is heavily affected by a combination of tangible and intangible local factors that are difficult to intercept and/or to measure correctly. In such cases, the choice of a given set of contextual variables Z is not necessarily sufficient to account for the global spatial effect in the estimation of productive efficiency.In the following section, a simulation exercise is proposed to assess the performance of the proposed estimator against the traditional nonparametric models in a local setting characterized by both global and local spatial autocorrelation.Starting from the DGP construction criteria44This DGP allows for the construction of a continuous, monotonically increasing and concave function over the relevant range of input generated in the simulation.proposed by Banker and Natarajan’s (2008) and later applied by Johnson and Kuosmanen (2011) and Fusco and Vidoli (2013), we add a noise term to the original nonparametric setting to account for spatial dependence between the regional units in a frontier model. In order to do so, we modify the Banker and Natarajan’s (2008) formulation by adding spatial autocorrelation into the inefficiency term through a spatial lag parameter and a contiguity matrix. The analyses proposed in this section have been computed by using simulated data in conjunction with the distance matrix W between the 110 Italian provinces in order to identify a territorial setting that facilitates the interpretation of the results.The true production output frontier can be simulated by a third-order polynomial of a single input variable x ∼ Uniform[1, 4] distribution:(11)yi=(xi3−12xi2+48xi−37),i=1,⋯,n=110.Since the purpose of this simulation is to control the possible presence of spatial heterogeneity in the efficiency estimates, the optimum theoretical output yihas to be perturbed by both a random valuevand an inefficiency term u correlated with that of the spatial neighbours.More formally, the noised output ynican be expressed in terms of yimultiplied by a spatial random termexp(−ui+vi)as follows:(12)yni=(xi3−12xi2+48xi−37)exp(−ui+vi),i=1,⋯,n=110,where the noise termv∼N(0,σv)and uiare defined in the usual way as:(13)ui=(1−ρ∑iwi.)−1u˜i·γi.The specification proposed in Eq. (13) is designed to include spatial autocorrelation, as the inefficiency term is dependent from that of the neighbouring regional units. The main parameters of the equation can be described as follows:•u˜i∼N+(0,σu);wi.is the ith element of the row standardized contiguity matrix W of the 110 Italian provinces;ρ ∈ [0, 1] is a spatial autoregressive parameter that is included to introduce global spatial autocorrelation among inefficiency values;γiis an additional parameter, correlated with the Italian provincial codes and with Italy’s three main geographical areas (North, Centre and South), that is included to account for local differences in inefficiency between northern and southern provinces in a continuous way. This structure ensures lower inefficiency values are assigned to the northern provinces, medium values to the central provinces and higher values to the southern ones.In the first application,u˜i= 0.75, ρ = 0.7 and γivaries for each unit i in the range [0, 5] correlated with the Italian provincial code and the three main Italian geographical areas. These specific values have been chosen so as to highlight the differences between the conditional and unconditional estimates; in Section 4.5, a sensitivity analysis will be conducted to evaluate the robustness of the results to changes in the parameters values.It is worth noting that Eq. (13) allows the inclusion of both a strong local spatial autocorrelation (associated with the presence of γi) and a strong global one (generated by ρ). Specifically, the error termsexp(−ui+vi)have been modelled to be inversely correlated with the provincial code, thus displaying lower values for north-western provinces and higher ones for the regional units located in the south-western areas of the country (see Fig. 4). Overall, the specification proposed in this section is designed to simulate a territorial context characterized by the presence of a general locational effect which cannot be associated with one or more specific contextual variables: as we previously discussed in this paper, this scenario is consistent with a number of local contexts, such as the Marshallian Industrial Districts, where the agglomeration effect is associated with a number of intangible factors that cannot be always measured or captured directly.The simulated data [yn, x] represented in Fig. 5shows that the implementation of a standard frontier model does not allow one to account for the presence of strong spatial autocorrelation. This pattern is evident given the distribution of the inefficiency terms with respect to the frontier is clearly correlated with location: in fact, northern provinces exhibit values close to the optimum, while the regional units belonging to the central and southern areas of Italy systematically lie far from the production frontier.The same pattern is visible in Fig. 6, which shows the territorial distribution of the standard simulated y and the spatially perturbed yn: in the latter case, the presence of a strong spatial autocorrelation in the north–south direction is clearly visible from the territorial distribution of the inefficiency term.In the first part of this simulation analysis, production efficiency is estimated from the simulated data [yn, x] through the standard DEA–VRS approach, without accounting for the correlation induced on yn. As expected, the model does not allow to detect the spatial distribution of the estimated efficiency, which is strongly influenced by local factors (for further evidence on this issue, see the results presented in Section 4.4).These findings are also confirmed by the analysis of the most commonly used measures of global Spatial autocorrelation, i.e. the global Moran I55The value of global Moran I lies between−1 and 1. Values lower than 0 demonstrate negative spatial autocorrelation (which is perfect when I=−1), whereas values higher than 0 indicate positive spatial autocorrelation (which is perfect when I= 1). I= 0 is consistent with a random spatial pattern.and the global Geary C statistic.66The value of Geary C lies between 0 and 2. Values lower than 1 demonstrate increasing positive spatial autocorrelation, whereas values higher than 1 indicate increasing negative spatial autocorrelation. C = 1 is consistent with no spatial autocorrelation in the data.The value of both indexes (I = 0.552; C = 0.291) is consistent with the presence of an increasingly positive spatial autocorrelation, a pattern that is clearly visible also from the Moran plot presented in Fig. 7. The results of the preliminary analysis suggest that not all the regional units can be used as peers for each observation: rather, it seems to be more appropriate to compare the single units with a subset of m units that are similar in terms of spatial proximity.The presence of a strong spatial autocorrelation in the data motivates the use of the novel spatial nonparametric approach proposed in this paper. As discussed in the previous sections, the implementation of this model involves the preliminary use of the semivariogram to detect the local maximum that is subsequently used to identify the local peers. The semivariogram estimation has been implemented using both the traditional method and the innovative GAM approach, in order to evaluate the potential benefits of using such alternative specification: the results of the estimation are reported in Fig. 8.77In this preliminary estimation, the lag distance used for the estimation has been set equal to 83 kilometres.The graph shows that the alternative approach (depicted with the blue line) is more effective in detecting a local maximum in terms of spatial autocorrelation within a relative short distance, while the alternative parametric methods (OLS, black dashed line; robust OLS, Cressie and Hawkins, 1980, red dotted-dashed line) are not equally effective in detecting this particular local discontinuity. It is worth noting that from a theoretical point of view, the GAM approach does not meet all the constraints required for a semivariogram model, given that the estimated curve is not concave in the entire domain (Fig. 8). However, the violation of the theoretical assumptions is not relevant in this context, given the main aim is to estimate the first local maximum and not the standard functional parameters (i.e. nugget, sill and range).The identification of the local maximum has been implemented by running several GAM smoothing estimations with different h values, instead of fixing an a priori lag distance such as in the previous estimation: this approach is motivated by the aim of finding a probabilistic setting of the local maximum, rather than a specific one, and allows to identify a distribution of the estimated maximums and then use them to calculate the expected value of the local maximum with a higher level of robustness. Specifically, this analysis has been performed by letting the lag distance varying within the range [82,85] kilometres, thus generating 30 replications of the empirical semivariogram values. The results of this estimation (Fig. 9) show that the fitted values estimated through the GAM approach are significantly stable and leads to the identification of an estimated local maximum of 247 kilometres (dotted line in Fig. 9, right panel).Once the optimal radius is estimated, it is possible to identify the number of neighbours that are more likely to affect the productive efficiency of the ith regional unit; in this application, the average number of peersm¯(rh^)identified by the procedure is equal to 52.Having calculated in the previous step the number of local peers for each i, the random setΨ˜mirh,already defined in Eq. (10), can be used to solve the optimization problem in Eq. (7), thus allowing the estimation of an efficiency term which is not influenced by spatial effects. The results of this implementation, presented in Fig. 10, clearly show that the preliminary identification of the spatial local peers allows to remove the spatial autocorrelation from the efficiency estimates. These findings are confirmed by the implementation of the Moran I test and the Geary C statistic: the estimated I decreases from 0.552 to 0.119, while C increases from 0.291 to 0.878. In both cases, the new values are significantly closer to the threshold consistent with a random spatial pattern.The benefits of the proposed framework are evident even in terms of removing local spatial autocorrelation: as shown in Fig. 11, this method allows to substantially reduce local spatial autocorrelation with respect to the unconditional estimations.The impact of the modified model can be further evaluated, following Daraio and Simar (2007), by specifying the ratio between the classical DEA estimation and the spatial conditioned one as follows:(14)Qz=ϑ(x,y|r(h^))ϑ(x,y).This measure allows one to verify whether spatial dependence has an impact on the estimated efficiency over the entire domain: when Qzis equal to 1, the unconditioned and conditioned estimates of technical efficiency lead to the same result, thus testifying the lack of spatial autocorrelation in the data.Plotting Qzon the map (Fig. 12, left side) and versus the provincial code (Fig. 12, right side) it can be easily verified that the spatial conditioned model allows to isolate the spatial autocorrelation artificially introduced into y: in fact, the ratio between the spatial conditioned and the unconditioned measure of efficiency is higher for the southern provinces, where the spatial autocorrelation is stronger, whereas the two values are very similar in the northern areas, where the spatial effect is not relevant.The simulation implemented in the previous sections have provided evidence of the ability of the new proposed method to detect and isolate global and local spatial autocorrelation in the data. Against this background, the purpose of this section is to implement a sensitivity test in order to corroborate these findings using alternative settings.The sensitivity analysis has been implemented by proposing three different scenarios associated with different values of the global and local spatial parameters ρ and γ: in all cases, the value of the other parameters in the model is left unchanged. The main results of this analysis (reported in Table 1) can be summarized as follows:•in the first simulation (column (A), Table 1), ρ is set equal to zero and γ is equal to 1 for all units, thus defining a setting where neither local nor global spatial autocorrelation is present in the data. In this case, since the optimum estimated radius is almost equal to the maximum distance between the regional units (828 kilometres), the relative efficiency is calculated by accounting for almost all the existing peers (94): therefore, the efficiency terms estimated through the standard DEA–VRS approach are quite similar to those determined by the spatial local-m method. Moreover, no significant difference is detected between the spatial autocorrelation tests implemented in the two cases;in the second simulation (column (B), Table 1), ρ is set equal to 0.7 and γ is equal to 1 for all units: these values allow to introduce global spatial autocorrelation in the data. The results of the estimation show that the optimal radius decreases (621 kilometres) with respect to the previous scenario, thus identifying a lower average number of local peers (77): therefore, in this specific case the spatial local-m method allows to better control for the global spatial autocorrelation with respect to the standard DEA models;in the third simulation (column (C), Table 1), ρ is set equal to 0 and γ is set in order to vary for each unit i in the range [0, 5]: this scenario is consistent with the presence of strong local spatial dependency in the data. The results show that the spatial local-m method is even more effective compared to simulation (B), given the semivariogram allows to detect a smaller radius (497 kilometres) and therefore to identify a number of territorial clusters that are particularly similar to each other. In this specific setting, the proposed approach allows to perfectly control for the local effects: in fact, both the estimated Moran I and the Geary C are extremely close to the ‘no spatial autocorrelation’ values (i.e. 0 and 1).The application proposed in this section is aimed to provide further validation of the novel empirical framework presented in Section 3, focusing on a specific spatial setting (the Marshallian Industrial Districts) characterized by the presence of spatial effects that cannot be measured directly. Within the relevant literature, consensus has been reached on the fact that industrial districts generate a wide range of advantages for the firms populating these localities. The main benefits are associated with the economic structure of these socio-economic entities, characterized by the presence of a division of labour process over the entire value chain that generates external scale economies and allows the optimal size of the firm to remainsmall (Becattini, 1990). Although the literature has conventionally grouped these benefits into three categories, i.e. labour–market interactions, linkages between intermediate and final goods producers and knowledge spillovers (Duranton & Puga, 2004), consensus has been reached on the fact that the competitive advantage of industrial districts arises from a plurality of tangible and intangible factors, summarized by Marshall (1890) with the concept of “industrial atmosphere”: The mysteries of the trade become no mysteries; but are as it were in the air, and children learn many of them unconsciously (Marshall, 1890, Chap. X). The competitive advantage generated by the district effect is potentially available to all local actors: nonetheless, the majority of local externalities tend to spread out within the industrial specialization boundaries rather than dispersing between different industries, such as in urban contexts (Jacobs, 1969). In the early contributions, the most commonly used approach to assess the presence of a ‘district effect’ in an empirical model was the inclusion of a district dummy and the evaluation of its impact on firms’ performance (see e.g.Fabiani, Pellegrini, Romagnano, and Signorini, 2000). However, the recent contributions have highlighted the benefits associated with the implementation of a more formal approach, given the increased availability of novel techniques in spatial analysis for investigating such phenomena (Sangalli & Lamieri, 2015). Against this background, the new empirical specification appears to be particularly convenient to isolate and evaluate the presence of a district effect empirically.The focus of this section is on Tuscany, i.e. an Italian region where the relevance of the industrial district model is particularly widespread. The analysis has been implemented on balance-sheet data extracted from AIDA, a database built by Bureau van Dijk and containing comprehensive financial and structural information for a large subset of Italian companies: the firm-level information used for this analysis refers to 2117 observations for year 2012. To limit the potential distortions associated with the use of firms operating with heterogeneous productive technologies, the analysis has been focused on those firms operating in the following manufacturing sectors: Textile-Clothing (ATECO 2007 codes 13 and 14) and Footware, Tanning and Leather Products (ATECO 2007 code 15). The use of these sectors is particularly convenient as most of the Tuscan industrial districts are specialized in productive activities associable with these two manufacturing industries. Although the spatial nonparametric estimation method proposed in Section 3 allows to evaluate a multiple-input, multiple-output framework, the productive model proposed here is substantially simplified by using a single output (proxied by sales revenue) and only two inputs, i.e. labour (number of employees) and capital (total value of tangible assets).As discussed in Section 3, the first step of the empirical analysis involves the estimation of the semivariogram using the modified GAM approach, in order to analyse how spatial dependency among firms varies when the distance increases. The results of the estimation are presented in Fig. 13: as expected, the flexible functional form proposed in the modified setting allows to easily identify the first local maximum, i.e. the radiush^delimiting the area in which the spatial dependence among firms is highest. In this specific case,h^is equal to 0.435, which approximately corresponds to 35.3 kilometres.88The Coordinate Reference Systems used in this application is the WGS84, EPSG Projection 4326.The estimated value of the first local maximum can be used in the second step of the empirical analysis to calculate the optimal number of spatial peersmi(rh^)for each productive unit i: in this application, the average number of estimated peers is equal to 154.Once the spatial conditioned efficiency term has been estimated for all the firms in the sample, this measure can be compared with the unconditioned efficiency value: the ex-post comparison between these two measures allows one to assess the role of the spatial effect associated with the intangible factors of each locality. This exercise has been performed separately for the subset of firms operating inside and outside industrial districts, in an attempt to assess the effectiveness of the procedure in identifying and isolating the district effect. A firm is assumed to be part of an industrial district if it is located in a Local Labour Market Area identified as industrial district by the procedure proposed by Canello and Pavone (2015) and operates in a manufacturing activity that is included in the productive specialization of the district.The results of this analysis are visually represented in Fig. 14: in both maps, each dot represents the average value of the unconditioned and spatial conditioned efficiency for each municipality. Efficiency levels have been divided into three classes, with class 1 representing the least efficient firms and class 3 identifying the most efficient ones. The comparison between the two maps shows that, once the spatial effect is removed from the model, the estimated efficiency terms change significantly, especially as far as district firms are concerned: the efficiency gap existing between this subset of firms and the rest of the sample appears to be motivated by the presence of a ‘spatial effect’ that provides a competitive advantage to district firms, positively influencing their performance. Interestingly, without this effect associated with the ‘industrial atmosphere’ the performance of these firms would have been even worse than that of the firms locating outside the district.These findings are confirmed by the formal test implemented on the Local Geary c distributions for the conditioned and the unconditioned efficiency measures of firms locating inside and outside industrial districts: Fig. 15 clearly shows99In the graph, the points have been jittered to reduce overplotting.that the conditioned measure controls for the spatial heterogeneity, thus depurating the estimates from the ID effect.This paper presents a novel order-m framework to incorporate spatial dependence into a nonparametric efficiency setting: this new specification allows to estimate technical efficiency in presence of spatial autocorrelation by identifying the potential competitors not on the entire domain, but on a local subset identified through an indicator of spatial dependence.The aim of this paper is to provide an operative solution for the main potential issue associated with the traditional strategy to control for spatial effects in previous parametric and parametric literature on technical efficiency: in fact, most of these contributions aim to account for the spatial effect through a specific set of contextual variables Z. Although these approaches have the benefit of directly assessing the impact of specific contextual variables in the estimation, they tend to be ineffective in local contexts characterized by strong spatial effects, where the role of intangible aspects, often statistically and economically difficult to capture, is particularly relevant. The choice of an erroneous or incomplete set of contextual variables Z can be particularly problematic in nonparametric settings, as ex post modelling validation is not available for these specific approaches.In order to address this issue, the new specification draws on the concept of partial frontier introduced by Daraio and Simar (2005), which is based on the intuition that the efficiency of a given productive unit is more effectively estimated when the frontier is built using a subset of peers rather than evaluating the entire set of DMUs. However, contrary to Daraio and Simar (2005), in this specification the peers are identified using a specific criterion, i.e. the spatial proximity: in fact, this methodology aims to identify the potential competitors among the local actors that operate in the neighbourhood of a given productive unit. This specification allows to retain the main benefits of the traditional order-m models (e.g. the reduced sensitivity to outliers or measurement errors), while introducing a consistent method that identifies the potential peers through a spatial approach, thus isolating the global effect associated with the multitude of tangible and intangible aspects of each locality that cannot be always captured by using a specific set of contextual variables.The methodology is tested in a simulated environment characterized by strong local and global spatial dependence: the results support the claims of the theoretical section, showing that the proposed model succeeds in substantially reducing local spatial autocorrelation with respect to the unconditional estimates. Further validation is provided by the application proposed in Section 5, which is focused on a specific spatial setting (the Marshallian Industrial Districts), characterized by the presence of a global intangible spatial effect which is difficult to measure directly: in this context, the new empirical specification appears to be particularly convenient to isolate and evaluate the presence of a district effect empirically.Finally, the empirical model proposed in this paper can be further extended by incorporating a set of contextual variables Z into the conditional order-m method: this would allow one to account for both the intangible factors associated with proximity through the estimated spatial peers and to capture the impact of measurable environmental effects through the set of Z, as proposed by Daraio and Simar (2007). In this respect, the implementation of a mixed approach appears to be a very promising endeavour for future research on this topic.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
