@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An analysis of managerialism and performance in English and Welsh male prisons

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the managerial performance of male prisons in England and Wales.We use a nonparametric directional distance specification to include bad outputs.We show the usefulness of a best practice frontier for the different functions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,OR in government,UK penology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper fills a noticeable gap in the current economic and penology literature by proposing new performance-enhancing policies based on an efficiency analysis of a sample of male prisons in England and Wales over the period 2009/10. In addition, we advance the empirical literature by integrating the managerialism of four strategic functions of prisons, employment and accommodation, capacity utilization, quality of life in prison and the rehabilitation and re-offending of prisoners. We find that by estimating multiple models focussing on these different areas some prisons are more efficient than other establishments. In terms of policy, it is therefore necessary to consider not just an overall performance metric for individual prisons, as currently undertaken annually by the UK Ministry of Justice, but to look into the administration and managerialism of their main functions in both a business and public policy perspective. Indeed, it is further necessary to view prisons together and not as single entities, so as to obtain a best practice frontier for the different operations that management undertakes in English and Welsh prisons.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
After being elected in 2010, the new coalition government of the United Kingdom set about reducing the deficit by cutting spending across departments with the aim of initially saving £6.2 billion in Total Managed Expenditure.1Total Managed Expenditure includes both ‘Departmental Expenditure Limits’ (DEL), covering both resource spending (staff, rents and other annual costs) and capital spending on assets, and ‘Annually Managed Expenditure’ (AME), covering capital and resource spending in areas where costs are difficult to predict more than a year in advance and are influenced by factors outside the departments’ control (National Audit Office, 2012a).1With respect to central government departments, this saw a real terms reduction of 2.3% in 2010 with an aim of securing further reductions totalling 19% over 2011–2015 (National Audit Office, 2012a). In terms of the National Offender Management Service (NOMS), which covers both the prison and probation systems in England and Wales, the cost reduction targets were set at a cumulative total of £2 billion from 2010–11 to 2014–15 or a 24% overall real resource saving, from a yearly budget of nearly £4 billion (National Audit Office, 2012b).2The National Offender Management Service (NOMS) is an executive agency of the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) which directly manages 117 public prisons, manages the contracts of 14 private prisons, and is responsible for a prisoner population of around 86,000 (Committee of Public Accounts, 2013). In England and Wales, prisons are split into differing categories based on the severity of crime committed by inmates and by sex. These range across category A (the most heinous), B, C, local, dispersal and open prisons. Due to the differing nature of the inmates across certain prison categories, our sample only includes category B, C and local establishments and excludes female prisons.2The aim of reducing the costs to the UK government within NOMS is based both on improving efficiency within the service and also the contracting out of prison services where the private sector can show they can provide the service at lower costs (a recent case was when HMP Birmingham became the first public prison to transfer its operations to a private firm, G4S, in 2011).3One could say that the UK government is lagging behind accepted privatization practices in prison management, for example in the US. However, the UK leads Europe in terms of the most prisoners behind bars run by private firms (11% of the UK prison population). Kish and Lipton (2013) also note that, in the US, the modern private prison began in the late 1970s but services to prisons from private organizations can be found to date back to the 1870s!3Indeed, this can also be referred to as a process of managerialism of the Criminal Justice Service (CJS), “in which the government and the courts are recast as managers of a service and citizens are transformed into ‘clients’ and consumers of that service” (Brownlee, 1998, page 342). In the case of prisons, however, the process of managerialism has been introduced through the transfer of management services from the public to the private sector (beginning in 1992 with HMP Wolds and the contractor Group 4 (G4S)) and through public finance initiatives which involved private financing to build and then manage prisons (beginning with HMP Altcourse and the contractor G4S). This policy of importing private sector managerialism directly through tendering is different from those seen elsewhere in the CJS. For example, English and Welsh police forces had managerialism foist upon them through the introduction of national efficiency targets and the pressure put upon them to contract out non-police jobs (such as car maintenance and cleaning) to private firms; see Drake and Simper (2004).With respect to prisons, the UK government in 2012 announced that it intended to reduce the public cost of supplying prison places by introducing more competition into the English and Welsh prison system. This increased competition for Her Majesty’s Prisons (HMPs) would come, first of all, from privatizing eight prisons and asking for tenders of prisons already out in the private sector to be re-tendered. The initial tender list of prisons included HMPs Northumberland (to come from a merger of HMPs Castington and Acklington), Moorland, Hatfield, Lindholme, Coldingley, Durham and Onley, where tenders were sought from private sector organizations. The intended aim of introducing competition into the prison system was to reduce overall costs by at least £450 million.4Indeed, the Secretary of State for Justice, Chris Grayling, said: “The cost of running our prisons is too high and must be reduced. We can do this by being more innovative and efficient, and without compromising public safety. That is why I have decided to take a new approach to how we compete prison services and reduce unit costs across the prison estate that will lead to better value for the tax-payer, linked to more effective services to reduce reoffending. This is a challenge the public sector must rise to. The approach I have announced does not rule out further prison-by-prison competitions in the future” (Home Office Press Release, 9th November 2012).4However, the UK government has also taken prisons back into public control when the public sector was found to offer a more cost effective service than the private sector. For example, HMP Wold returned into public hands in July 2013, after 21years in the private sector (managed by G4S) due to being less efficient than their closest comparator institution, HMP Everthorpe. A reason given was that the contractor, G4S, was found to be lacking after a critical report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Prisons highlighted ‘high levels of illegal drugs and significant prisoner idleness’ (HMIP, 2012).The second cost-reduction strategy announced by the UK government in 2012 was that they intended to obtain at least £450 million of savings over the following six years by contracting out to tender resettlement, maintenance and other ancillary services. The prisons that were still in public hands would therefore be only responsible for the core custodial functions in the majority of jails.In line with the UK government strategy of performance measurement, this paper offers a timely insight into the efficiency of male prisons, both private and public, analyzed on the premise that prison efficiency is based on their ‘core custodial functions’. This then allows an insight into whether privately-managed prisons are more efficient than public prisons, the accepted conclusion found in US studies; see Kish and Lipton (2013). However, these authors note that even though there are cost savings attributable to reduced labor costs and also better procurement ability in the US, “measurement and comparability issues plague research in this field. Matching prison facilities and populations is challenging. Reporting requirements vary from state to state and for public versus private operators, and the FOB does not collect the same data from private operators as it does from states” (Kish & Lipton, 2013, p. 103). In our study, we overcome all these problems inherent in the US reporting models by firstly choosing only ‘like’ prisons (that is, category B, C and local), and using reported ‘standardised’ data, including private and public prisons, collected by the Ministry of Justice (MoJ).This paper, therefore, presents an original and unique modelling strategy for prisons by estimating four directional distance functions that focus on different aspects of performance: (1) a measure of efficiency in preparing prisoners to go back outside by ensuring employment and/or accommodation; (2) a capacity utilization efficiency measure; (3) an efficiency measure that evaluates the quality of life in prison; and (4) a re-offending and rehabilitation efficiency measure. Indeed, our methodology adds to the relatively-small empirical literature on penology by using a data set covering many different variables that denote the ability of prisons to educate, rehabilitate and reduce recidivism. This is different, not only to the overall score issued yearly on the operational efficiency of prisons by the MoJ (for a critique of the problems inherent in prisons targets see a recent study by Mennicken, 2013), but also to previous empirical research covering CJS divisions where only single models were advanced. Examples of the latter include an analysis of the efficiency of Young Offender Institutions in England and Wales (Hall, Liu, Simper, & Zhou, 2013), where it was found that there were scale inefficiencies at the largest institutions and also that male establishments were on average slightly more efficient than their female counterparts. Another study analyzed the efficiency of the English and Welsh Probation Service (Hall, Kenjegalieva, & Simper, 2011), where it was found that some probation boards were nearly 30% less efficient than the frontier boards and that the government’s use of a weighted scorecard to determine efficiency gave widely different results from those obtained through econometric programming, especially when taking into account ‘resource costs’ – hence questioning the use of targets set by the government (Mennicken, 2013). Finally, other UK studies have focussed on the Police Service (Drake & Simper, 2004, 2005; Simper & Weyman-Jones, 2008), where it was found that there were divergences in force efficiencies and also scale economies where potential mergers could have reduced costs. This paper therefore adds to the ‘top down’ approach seen in the literature whereby a complete analysis covering all aspects of the CJS in England and Wales has been undertaken. By mixing both administrative and managerial variables we can obtain an overall picture of a sample of male prisons, to the authors’ knowledge the first such study.The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we present a review of the methodology used to estimate the four directional distance function models. We next discuss the data and variables used in the four models. The results are then presented in Sections 4 and 5 and we then conclude.We measure the different types of efficiency for the male prisons using a directional distance function approach. This approach has been introduced in the efficiency measurement literature by, amongst others, Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1996, 1998), Färe and Grosskopf (2000, 2004b) and Färe, Grosskopf, and Margaritis (2008). It adopts a more general version of the traditional distance function approach than Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). More specifically, in a typical DEA formulation, the Shephard distance function scales the observations either in the input direction or in the output direction to the technology frontier (thereby providing, respectively, the Shephard input and output distance functions). In particular, given the production technology setT={(x,y)∈R+p×R+q|xcan produce y}(that is, the set of feasible input–output combinations), withx∈R+pandy∈R+qthe vectors of inputs and outputs, and the corresponding efficiency frontier T∂={(x,y)∊T|(γ−1x,γy)∉T for all γ>1}, the input and output oriented versions of the Shephard distance functions for the evaluated observation k=1,…,n are defined as follows:(2.1)Dki→(yk,xk)=sup{λk>0:(xk/λk,yk)∈T}.(2.2)Dko→(xk,yk)=inf{θk>0:(xk,yk/θk)∈T}.This yields, respectively, the input and output-oriented versions of the reciprocals of the Farrell–Debreu efficiency measures. In the input orientation, this measure indicates the maximum feasible proportional reduction in all inputs given the actual levels of the outputs. In contrast, the output orientation of Farrell–Debreu efficiency measures indicate the maximum feasible equi-proportionate increase in all outputs given the current level of inputs.The directional distance functions differ from the traditional Shephard distance functions in that they allow for measuring the distance to the efficiency frontier along all the points of that efficiency frontier that dominate the observation under assessment (Färe et al., 2008, chap. 5). Stated differently, the directional distance functions look for changes in the inputs and outputs simultaneously in order to improve the efficiency of inefficient observations. By doing so, one can avoid the sometimes ambiguous choice between the input or output orientation in the efficiency measurement. In this sense, one could argue that the directional distance models are a generalization of the input- and output-oriented distance function approach typically used to estimate productivity. However, the flexibility of directional distance functions does not mean that there are no restrictions on the movements toward the frontier. The directional distance function projects the input–output vector onto the efficiency frontier in a direction given by a direction vector g=(−gx,gy). In essence, this vector indicates the direction in which the efficiency is evaluated. To put it another way, the directional vector identifies the path of projection of the inefficient observations to the efficiency frontier.In a general setting, suppose that there are n prisons that use p inputs to produce q outputs. The directional technology distance function for the evaluated observation k=1,…,n then equals:(2.3)Dk→(xk,yk;gx,gy)=sup{βk:(xk-βkgx,yk+βkgy)∈T},whereβk∈Rand the a priori specified directional vector g=(−gx,gy) is some nonzero vector inR-p×R+q. The directional vector can then take different values and formats. The specification of the directional vector is typically done by the researcher. This presents both opportunities as well as potential disadvantages. On the one hand this presents opportunities to the researcher as he/she can have a say on the direction in which the observations should be projected onto the efficiency frontier. Obviously, this flexibility in the specification of the direction vector turns the directional distance function into a powerful model.5Among others, Simar and Vanhems (2012) argue that the directional distance function approach has also other interesting properties (e.g., the translation property, the representation property and the independence of the units of measurement of the inputs and outputs). For more details on the aforementioned properties, we refer the interested reader to their paper, but also to, among others, Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1998) and Färe and Grosskopf (2004a, 2004b).5On the other hand, this also entails a disadvantage as some subjectivity is involved in the choice of g. Färe et al. (2008, chap. 5) list a number of possible candidates for the direction vector. One possible form is g=(−1,1) which assumes all observations face the same input and output weights/prices in the efficiency evaluation. In other words, the input and outputs weights are assumed to be uniform across the observations. Another candidate for the direction vector isg=(-x¯,y¯)(the means of the input and output variables x and y respectively), which implies that inputs, xk, may be decreased byDk→(xk,yk;x¯,y¯)x¯, whereas outputs, yk, may be increased byDk→(xk,yk;x¯,y¯)y¯. In the evaluation of the different aspects of UK prisons (see below), the direction vectors are defined according to this format.6Remark that other choices of direction vectors are equally defendable.6The directional distance function approach encompasses both the input and output-oriented radial distance measures (that is, the traditional distance measures used to measure efficiency) as special cases. Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1996) show that the directional distance function defined in (2.3) with direction vector respectively (−x,0) or (0,y) reduces to(2.4)Dk→(xk,yk;gx,gy)=1-1Dki→(yk,xk)orD→(xk,yk;gx,gy)=1Dko→(xk,yk)-1.Zelenyuk (2014) documents further relationships between the Shephard’s input and output distance functions and the directional distance function when both directions are nonzero.However, it is not necessary that the paths are the same for all inputs and/or outputs. The direction vector can also be different for each observation depending on the input–output mix. For instance, the directional distance function allows also for efficiency measurement in subsets of the inputs or outputs. This is undertaken by setting gxand gyequal to nonzero values and setting the direction values of the other inputs and outputs equal to zero. Note that this latter approach (evaluating efficiency in subsets of the inputs and/or outputs) is tantamount to an efficiency analysis with non-discretionary inputs and/or outputs; see Banker and Morey (1986).In the interpretation of the estimated directional distance functions, observations that are technically efficient are evaluated with an estimated directional distance function equal to a value of zero, that is,Dk→(xk,yk;gx,gy)=0. As these observations are originally positioned on the efficiency frontier they do not require reductions in the inputs and/or undesirable outputs and/or increases in the desirable outputs in order to become efficient. The efficient observations act as their own benchmarks. On the other hand, inefficient observations are evaluated with the directional distance function values higher than zero (that is,Dk→(xk,yk;gx,gy)>0), with higher values indicating more room for efficiency improvements. Having computed the directional technology distance function valueDk→(xk,yk;gx,gy), one can then estimate the target values of the evaluated decision making unit:xk-Dk→(·)gxandyk+Dk→(·)gy. The required changes in the inputs or outputs expressed in percentages of the respective inputs and outputs are estimated byDk→(·)gx/xkandDk→(·)gy/yk.7The ranking of prisons based on the directional distance function and potential change expressed in percentages can differ as we divide the required absolute changes in inputs and outputs by the respective input or output.7The above is nicely illustrated in Fig. 1(based on Färe et al., 2008, chap. 5, p. 532).In Fig. 1, the observation under evaluation, k, is represented by the data point (xk,yk). As this observation is positioned below the efficiency frontier of the production technology set T, it is technically inefficient. To obtain technical efficiency, the directional distance function projects the observation k onto the efficiency frontier in a direction given by a direction vector (−gx,gy). This implies that the inputs are reduced byDk→(xk,yk;gx,gy)gxand the outputs are increased byDk→(xk,yk;gx,gy)gysimultaneously. The direction vector is shown in the left hand section of Fig. 1. The direction vector indicates the simultaneous focus on the input and output space in the efficiency evaluation. It indicates that inefficient observations can be projected onto the efficiency frontier by subtracting portions of gxfrom the inputs and/or adding portions of gyfrom the outputs.As shown by Chung, Färe, and Grosskopf (1997), the directional distance function approach can also be used for modelling undesirable outputs in the measurement of efficiency if combined with a suitable directional vector. In the presence of undesirable outputs, the directional distance function approach is combined with a directional vector which is specified such that, in the search for efficiency improvements, inputs and undesirable outputs are contracted and desirable outputs are expanded. Graphically, the directional technology distance function projects the vector (x,y−,y+) with inputs, undesirable outputs and desirable outputs in the(-gx,-gy-,gy+)direction onto the efficiency frontier. This yields the directional technology distance function valuesDk→(xk,yk-,yk+;gx,gy-,gy+)and the associated target values for the inputs, undesirable outputs, and desirable outputs respectively are equal toxk-Dk→(·)gx,yk--Dk→(·)gy-, andyk++Dk→(·)gy+. The potential improvement or reduction as percentage of the respective inputs and outputs are estimated byDk→(·)gx/xk,Dk→(·)gy-/yk-andDk→(·)gy+/yk+.To estimate the directional distance functions for the observed data(xk,yk):k=1,…,n, we use DEA, allowing for variable returns to scale, as formulated in e.g. Zelenyuk (2013). The DEA estimator of the true, but unobserved production technology set T is given by(2.5)T^VRS=(x,y):x⩾∑j=1nzjxj,y⩽∑j=1nzjyj,∑j=1nzj=1,zj⩾0,j=1,…,n,which is the smallest convex, free disposal hull that envelops the observed data(xk,yk):k=1,…,n. The DEA estimate of the directional distance function for a particular DMU k is operationalized by the following linear program:(2.6)βˆk:=maxβks.t.xk-βkgx⩾∑j=1nzjxj,yk+βkgy⩽∑j=1nzjyj,βk⩾0,∑j=1nzj=1,zj⩾0,j=1,…,n.Overall, there is no consensus on how to include undesirable outputs within DEA estimation (see Cherchye, De Rock, and Walheer (2015) for a recent overview). Undesirable outputs can be included as inputs, by means of transformation or by defining production axioms (mostly weak disposability and null-jointness).Hailu and Veeman (2001) include undesirable outputs in a directional distance framework as inputs. Färe and Grosskopf (2003, 2004a) argue that this procedure is inconsistent with physical laws as it implies that an infinite amount of undesirable outputs can be produced using finite inputs, which is physically impossible. Färe and Grosskopf (2003, 2004a) and Färe, Grosskopf, and Pasurka (2007) show how undesirable outputs can be included in directional distance functions by imposing production axioms. In these models, more undesirable output production, given the level of desirable output, requires more input usage.In this paper, we include undesirable outputs in (2.5) and (2.6) as inputs. This is because higher levels of undesirable outputs “(predicted) number of drug-misusers” and “serious assault number” do not imply more input usage.In the evaluation of the 51 English and Welsh male prison sample over the period 2009/10, we compute four different types of efficiency models.8All program codes have been written in R and are available upon request from the authors.8These each focus on a particular aspect of managerialism within the prison policy performance structure: (1) a measure of efficiency in preparing prisoners to go back outside by ensuring employment and/or accommodation; (2) a capacity utilization efficiency measure; (3) an efficiency measure that evaluates the quality of life in prison; and (4) a re-offending and rehabilitation efficiency measure. The computation of the four efficiency models requires the use of four directional distance function models, each with a format that depends on the mix of inputs and outputs used. In the specification of the direction vectors, we use the same direction vector for all observations (see Färe et al., 2008, chap. 5, p. 534). In particular, we employ the direction vectors with, as direction values, the mean values of respectively the inputs, the undesirable outputs (if present in the input–output mix) and the desirable outputs. The summary statistics for all variables are given in Table 1. Considering the average prison population, our sample includes a wide range of sizes across the prison population, ranging from one of the smallest prisons, Dorchester, with on average 233 inmates, to the 1653 inmates at Wandsworth. We now explain in more detail the composition of the inputs and outputs used in the four models.The first model offers an insight into the efficiency of preparing prisoners to go back outside by ensuring employment and/or accommodation. This is an important function that links prisons with outside organizations, including the voluntary sector, to ensure that the pressures of re-establishment into the community reduce the probability of an offender returning to crime. We measure this efficiency score using one input, x1, which represents the ‘number of discharges’, and two desirable outputs, y1, which represents the ‘number of discharged persons employed when released’ and y2, which represents the ‘number of discharged persons with settled accommodation when released’.To measure this efficiency score, we employ an output-oriented version of the DEA-model. This implies that efficiency improvements should be found in the output dimensions by increasing the two respective outputs. As stated above, this requires a directional distance function model in combination with a direction vectorg=(0,y1‾,y2‾). The directional vector value for the input equals zero as this input is non-discretionary to prisons (this input should thus not be considered in the search for efficiency improvements).In this section we are concerned with the issue of overcrowding in prisons.9The annual figures for overcrowding numbers are based on monthly data on the overcrowding number and prison population.9This needs to take into account the cell occupancy rate in relation to the assigned prison population. As all the prisons except for Erlestoke and Onley have overcrowding rates higher than zero, the real issue is the degree of overcrowding rather than whether or not it occurs. In particular, we address the policy of doubling-up inmates in cells that were primarily built for one inmate. However, it should be noted that doubling-up does not necessarily constitute overcrowding as defined by ‘Certified Normal Accommodation’ (CNA).10The Prison Act 1952, Section 14, state that ‘no cell shall be used for the confinement of a prisoner unless it is certified by an inspector that its size, lighting, heating, ventilation and fittings are adequate for health and that it allows the prisoner to communicate at any time with a prison officer.’ Certified Normal Accommodation is available for immediate use, excludes damaged cells, cells affected by building works and cells taken out of use due to staff shortages’. Furthermore, Prison Rules (1999, rule 26), state that ‘a certificate given under that section or this rule shall specify the maximum number of prisoners who may sleep or be confined at one time in the room or cell to which it relates, and the number so specified shall not be exceeded without the leave of the Secretary of State.’10The directional distance function model that looks at a prison’s efficiency in capacity utilization includes one input, x2, which represents the ‘average prison population’. We next include a desirable output, y3, which represents ‘average number of prisoners not in overcrowded cells’. It is interesting to note that Franklin, Franklin, and Pratt (2006) argue in their meta-analysis study that “prison crowding does not substantially influence facility-level rates of inmate misconduct” (page 407). Furthermore, “in light of this finding, the deprivation model (prison violence and other forms of inmate misbehavior are by-products of a harsh institutional environment) is afforded little empirical support” (page 408). Hence, although overcrowding is undesirable it does not feed through into ‘serious assault’ which is utilized in our model of ‘quality of life in prison’, as discussed below, an important distinction necessary to reduce any potential endogeneity problems.The direction vector is specified asg=(0,y3‾). This implies that efficiency improvements should be sought by increasing the number of prisoners that are not in overcrowded cells. As the input ‘average prison population’ is fixed, we consider this input as non-discretionary and hence this input should not be considered when looking for efficiency improvements. Therefore, we set the directional vector value for the input equal to zero.The model that measures the provision of quality of life in a prison is computed based on one input and four outputs. The input x3, which represents ‘net resource expenditure/1,000,000’, has been used in the so-called ‘expenditure’ methodology for measuring prison efficiency based on a business production model; see Hall et al. (2013), Nyhan (2002) and Marques and Simões (2009). It should be noted that the cost of offenders across the prison system in England and Wales differs according to the prisoner category. That is, the overall average cost per male prisoner for 2011/12 in a category A (high security) prison cost £61,594, in a category B prison, £33,576, in a category C prison, £30,637, and in an open prison, £25,106 (MoJ, 2012, Table 1).Resources are used to both manage the number of prisoners in the system and to try and improve their quality of life. The four outputs include one non-discretionary, two undesirable and one desirable output. The non-discretionary output, y4, represents the ‘average prison population’ (note this output was an input in the capacity utilization model). This variable is included to control for the quantitative output of prisons. The other three outputs proxy the quality of life in prison. The first undesirable output, following Hall et al. (2013), y5, which represents ‘(Predicted) number of drug-misusers’, including male offenders who have or are currently using illicit drugs in prison. The second undesirable output, y6, represents the ‘serious assault number’, which measures prisoner on staff assaults. This constitutes a better variable in determining the behavior of prisoners and the relationship they hold with staff than prisoner-on-prisoner assaults (also used by Hall et al., 2013). As Blitz, Wolff, and Shi (2008) argue, “the threat of retaliation inside prison for “snitching,” a strong subculture norm within the code of conduct among inmates, suppresses the official reporting of inmate-on-inmate assaults, as well as other types of misconduct between inmates” (page 386). In contrast, an assault on an officer is more likely to be reported, hence showing a more accurate representation of the atmosphere and behavior of inmates within the prison. In England and Wales, in all-male establishments, prisoner-on-prisoner assaults equalled 11,252 in 2010 and 11,864 in 2011, with prisoner-on-officer assaults equalling 2352 and 2477 in 2010 and 2011 respectively.The desirable output, y7, represents ‘total number of hours of purposeful activity per week/1000’. With respect to this variable it is an aim of the government under ‘Breaking the Cycle’ that “prisons must become places of hard work and training, where prisoners are expected to work a 40hourweek, with money from their earnings deducted to support victims’ groups” (MoJ, 2011a, page 2). In addition, prisons must ‘focus the daily regime around work’ and ‘ensure prison work is sustainable and self-financing’ (MoJ, 2011a, page 3). Note that this model complements the current UK government aim of ensuring ‘Value-for-Money’ with the inclusion of expenditure costs of prisons explicitly taken into account in the methodology.The directional distance function model is specified such that efficiency is evaluated in the direction of the input, in the direction of the desirable output, and in the direction of the two undesirable outputs. Stated differently, efficiency improvements should be realized by looking for a decrease in the net resource expenditures of the prisons, a decrease in the number of drug-misusers and the serious assault numbers and an increase in the total number of hours that prisoners can spend on purposeful activities. To obtain such efficiency evaluations, we specify the directional vector as follows:g=(-x3‾,0,-y5‾,-y6‾,y7‾). Note that the directional vector value for the non-discretionary output, average prison population, equals zero as this output should not be considered in the efficiency evaluation.Prisons in the UK are characterized by significant heterogeneity in prison population. To obtain insight into this heterogeneity, we make use of data on the predicted probability of re-offending per prison, as calculated by the MoJ’s (2011b), ‘proven re-offending statistics’. A proven re-offence is defined by the MoJ as “any offence committed in a one year follow-up period and receiving court conviction, caution, reprimand or warning in the one year follow up or a further six months waiting period” (MoJ, 2011b, page 4). To estimate the likelihood of re-offending for offenders with a sentence smaller than 12months, offender records are matched with data on prisoner characteristics from the Police National Computer (PNC) on age, gender, offence group and criminal history. This categorical variable indicates whether the released prisoner has re-offended or not, and is related to the individual characteristics based on a logistic regression model with random prison effects. From this model, the predicted probability of re-offending for each prison is calculated if the number of discharged prisoners in the prison is at least 30 in 2008. We can use the predicted rate of re-offending of offenders with a sentence fewer than 12months as a proxy for prison characteristics as results of the MoJ show that this rate is highly influenced by these prisoner characteristics. We limit our sample of prisons to those which have data on the predicted probability of re-offending and have comparable rates of predicted re-offending.In this model, the performance of prisons in reducing re-offending is measured using one input, x4, which represents the ‘number of discharges of offenders with a sentence less than 12months’, and one output, y8, which represents ‘number of offenders who were sentenced to less than 12months that do not re-offend’. The latter variable encompasses the full role of prisons in their aim to rehabilitate prisoners across the complete length of their incarceration. Its aim is to show an overall measure of whether all factors explored above (and variables not available to be included in these models) change the life style of prisoners to end offending. We only consider those sentenced to less than 12months as the National Offender Management System (NOMS), which was introduced in 2005, implemented changes such that those sentenced to less than 12months were not subject to supervision by the probation service. That is, excluding those whose sentences were over 12months allows us to directly measure the efficiency of prisons with respect to this model. Indeed, ‘26,000 of the 56,000 people who left prison in 2011 reoffended, but 18,000 of those 26,000 were not covered by the probation service because they were serving sentences of less than 12months’ (source: Hansard, 13th March 2013, c105WH).11In addition, it has been found that, after taking offender characteristics into account, there was a reduction in the re-offending rate between the 2000 and 2009 cohorts equal to: 10.7% when issued with a court order and probation supervision; 12.4% with a 12months to 24months custodial sentence; 23.0% with a 24 to 48month sentence; 25.6% with a sentence over 48months; but, interestingly, only a 6.5% reduction with a custodial sentence less than 12months (MoJ, 2011b).11The latter is possibly due to the fact that the released offender does not receive any formal help from the probation service to re-integrate back into the community, leaving this aspect being dealt with by the prison – hence a vitally important prison function.We employ a version of the directional distance function approach which only looks for efficiency in the output dimension. The idea is that prisons should aim for a high number of offenders who do not re-offend. The input which measures the ‘discharged offenders with a sentence less than one year’ can be considered as non-discretionary. As stated previously, a directional distance function which only looks at output-oriented maximization requires the use of a distance vector of the formatg=(0,y‾8).The results for all 51 sampled prisons are displayed in Table 2. More precisely, we report efficiency scores for each prison, the value of the directional distance function and the required decrease (increase) in the inputs and undesirable outputs (desirable outputs) in order for the prison to become technically efficient (expressed in percentage changes). In addition the private managed prisons as at 2009/10 have also been labelled; these include HMPs Altcourse, Forest Bank, Parc, Peterborough and Wolds. The managing contractors (G4S, Serco or Sodexo Justice Services (SJS) are also identified in these cases.When a score equals zero, this indicates that those prisons are evaluated technically efficient in supporting job search and settling accommodation on release date. We find that only seven prisons (HMPs Altcourse (G4S), Cardiff, Erlestoke, Guys Marsh, Lancaster, Risley and Wolds (G4S)) are technically efficient. It is interesting to note that most prisoners are typically sent to their nearest prison, but that is based on their capacity. For example, because Cardiff is in Wales, the majority of its prisoners are local Welsh men, and as such, HMCIP (2010a) found “there was an up-to-date resettlement strategy, based on a comprehensive needs analysis, and a focus on reducing reoffending pathways” (page 13). However, as the number of prisoners increase and prisons become full, a problem could develop whereby men are placed in prisons far from home leading to problems of reintegration into their home city. This type of problem and the potential effect on efficiency were identified in Hall et al. (2013), where they found the least efficient female Young Offender Institution, East Wood Park (score equalled 0.7535 in 2008/09 and 0.6610 in 2009/10), “is a prison in which women are first placed after sentencing and at least 1 in 3 young adults are more than 100 miles away from their homes” (page 45). In addition, Cardiff was also noted for its ability to assist local prisoners gain employment; that is, “there had been good progress in improving the employability skills of prisoners as part of the preparation for resettlement. The range of employment opportunities that could lead to employment had been increased” (HMCIP, 2010a, para. 2.207). The report also noted that “all qualification routes included qualifications in literacy and communication” (p. 61).Obviously, the higher the directional distance function value the more room there is for improvements. Examples of prisons with high directional distance function values and thus a lot of room for efficiency improvements are HMPs High Down, Peterborough (SJS), Pentonville and Wandsworth. Each of these prisons have considerable room for increasing the number of discharged persons employed when released and the number of discharged persons with accommodation when released given their current number of discharges. For example, HMP Pentonville is required to increase the number of discharged persons employed when released by 142 (an increase of 33.24%) and the number of discharged persons with accommodation when released by 481 (an increase of 43.63%) to become efficient. The largest increases necessary to assume technical efficiency are required of the privately-run HMP Peterborough (G4S), which needs to increase outputs by 94.42% and 31.44% respectively. Indeed, a HM Chief Inspector of Prisons (HMCIP) (2009a) report found that there were no formal resettlement strategies in 2008/09 but new plans were being introduced in 2009/10 leading to ‘catch-up’ by the prison in respect of its comparator institutions. In terms of the private versus public debate (see Mennicken, 2013 and Kish & Lipton, 2013), three private prisons (that is, HMPs Altcourse, Forest Bank and Parc) were on or close to the frontier, with HMP Peterborough being a clear outlier.The efficiencies of the prisons in the utilization of capacity, as estimated by the directional distance function approach, are listed in Table 3. A quick glance at the directional distance function values shows that 6 prisons are found to be efficient in terms of capacity utilization. Erlestoke and Onley are obvious best practice prisons as they have an overcrowding rate of zero percent. However, in relative terms, Dorchester, Lancaster, Risley and Wormwood Scrubs are also best practice prisons (although they have strictly positive overcrowding rates). Given the average prison population, no other prison has less prisoners in overcrowded cells than these prisons. In terms of those off the frontier, HMP Brixton, for instance, should decrease the number of prisoners in overcrowded cells by 38.01% to become efficient in terms of its capacity utilization. The overcrowding result for HMP Brixton is not a surprise as a HMICP (2010b) report states “HMP Brixton is an overcrowded, Victorian, local prison on a small, inner London site. Its certified normal capacity is just over 500 prisoners but, at the time of this follow-up inspection, the average number of prisoners held was between 725 and 775. Many men doubled up in cells built for one” (page 5). Indeed, how Brixton might expand its prison population without increasing overcrowding is an interesting policy discussion point for future analysis.Intriguingly, the finding for HMP Haverigg, which only requires a 3.47% cut in the number of prisoners in over-crowded cells to become efficient, is inconsistent with the finding by an HMCIP inspection that it should be ‘demolished’ (HMCIP, 2009b). This prison had long been regarded as ‘a problem prison’ because of the diversity in the nature of its buildings compared with other establishments (that is, it includes military-style billets, unlike other establishments). An inspection that covers our sample period noted that “the quality of accommodation, standard of basic amenities and cleanliness varied greatly across the units and were too often poor. Prisoners were negative about the quality of the food, and the standards of cleanliness in the kitchen, dining halls and serveries were poor.” It concluded that “on the basis of this full follow-up inspection, we considered that outcomes for prisoners in this establishment were not sufficiently good against this healthy prison test” (HMCIP, 2011, page 13). We find little evidence to support this judgment.The results for the efficiency scores realized by prisons in the provision of ‘quality of life in prison,’ are reported in Table 4, where negative figures indicate required changes in the input (net resource expenditure) and/or the two undesirable outputs (number of drug-misusers and serious assault number).Based on the reported directional distance function values, 15 out of the 51 prisons are efficient in terms of providing quality of life in prison, with three privately-managed prisons, HMP Altcourse (G4S), Parc (G4S) and Wolds (G4S), being on or very close to the frontier. One of the technically-efficient prisons is the private G4S-run HMP Altcourse, for which a HMCIP (2010c) report noted that “the amount of time out of cell for prisoners was outstanding, and for much of that time prisoners were engaged in purposeful activity. There was some very good and improved vocational training, and a range of educational opportunities, though allocation procedures needed attention. Access to the gym was good, with a range of courses available to prisoners” (page 5). The estimated directional distance function values also indicate that there are considerable differences between the inefficient prisons, with HMP Cardiff and HMP Highpoint being almost efficient (withD→(x,y,-gx,gy)values of 0.0053 and 0.0005 respectively) and HMPs Brixton, Manchester, and Pentonville (with estimated scores of 0.2996, 0.2643, and 0.38 respectively) having considerable room for efficiency improvements. For instance, the directional distance function model computes that the target values for HMP Brixton are equal to £14,360,800, 97.1, 6.7, and 14,587.9hours. In other words, HMP Brixton should decrease its net resource expenditure by approximately £6,226,400 (or 30.24%), its number of drug-misusers by 26 (a decrease of 21.10%), its serious assault number by four (−37.39%) and increase its total number of hours of purposeful activity by 5567hours (or 42.67%) in order to become efficient in terms of providing quality of life in prison compared to the other prisons.The directional distance function values and the associated target values for the output are displayed in Table 5. There are five prisons technically efficient in terms of delivering offenders that do not re-offend after being released, of which one, HMP Wolds (G4S), is a privately-managed establishment. These prisons are evaluated with directional distance function values equal to zero. As before, the directional distance function values of the inefficient indicate considerable differences between prisons in England and Wales, with some of the inefficient prisons only requiring a minor increase in the number of offenders that do not re-offend (HMPs Altcourse, Onley, and Stocken) and others requiring considerable increases in the same output. For example, HMP Gloucester requires a 46.30% increase and HMP Moorland Closed a 44.94% increase in prisoners that do not re-offend in order to become efficient relative to other prisons.As discussed above, the case for rehabilitation to reduce re-offending by released prisoners is now a new UK government priority. In 2012, the Ministry of Justice released details whereby the reforms would include: “greater use of competition to drive value and ensure taxpayers’ money is invested in services that work; a far greater role for the private and voluntary sector to draw out the best of all sectors, bringing innovation to rehabilitation;an essential role for the public sector so they bring their expertise and knowledge to managing our most serious and dangerous offenders and; an intention to legislate so short custodial sentences given by the courts will in future include a period of rehabilitation on release, addressing the gap in the Criminal Justice System where those serving under 12months are released with no supervision or support” (MoJ press release 18 December 2012). As a policy, we could look to those prisons that are on the frontier and introduce their systems into poorly-performing prisons. However, the Kish and Lipton (2013) critique could apply in that, with such differing characteristics of the prison population across the country, many in-place systems might be inapplicable to certain prisons because of differences in numerous socio-economic and geographic variables.In the evaluation of the efficiency of prisons, it is of interest to management and policy-makers to identify ‘good’ and ‘bad’ areas of performance for each prison. Graphical illustrations can help in providing a good overview of the outcomes of the different efficiency evaluations. Notwithstanding that there are possibly several visualization formats for the outcomes of the efficiency evaluations we believe that the radar charts, as shown in Fig. 2, succeed in providing a clear picture of the results for some prisons, for example, HMPs Channingswood, Wormwood Scrubs, Brixton, and Lancaster. In particular, the radar diagram globally combines two types of information into one figure. Firstly, it shows the required proportional changes in the current levels of the inputs, undesirable outputs and desirable inputs (in absolute values) in order to become globally efficient (that is, efficient in terms of preparing for life outside, capacity utilization, providing quality of life in prison, and reducing re-offending and rehabilitating prisoners. As discussed previously, higher required percentage values indicate more need for efficiency improvements (in terms of decreases in inputs and undesirable outputs and increases in desirable outputs) and thus more inefficiency. Secondly, the radar diagram also gives an idea of the global inefficiency of the prisons. More specifically, given that higher percentages indicate more required improvements for the evaluated prison to become efficient, a bigger surface in the radar diagram indicates larger global inefficiency.A comparison of the radar charts of the four prisons, as displayed in Fig. 2, show that HMP Brixton has, overall, the most need for improvement. On the other hand, HMP Lancaster needs only to improve the re-offending and rehabilitation of prisoners. Finally, HMPs Channingswood and Wormwood Scrubs are also evaluated as globally technically inefficient, yet have less need for efficiency improvements compared to HMP Brixton (with HMP Wormwood Scrubs having less need for improvements compared to HMP Channingswood). Based on this analysis, when ranking the four prisons in terms of global efficiency, HMP Lancaster would be ranked first followed by, respectively, HMPs Wormwood Scrubs, Channingswood and Brixton.The radar charts presented in Fig. 2 also indicate the necessary decreases (increases) in the inputs and the undesirable outputs (desirable outputs) for the four prisons. In respect of HMP Lancaster, only a 31.65% increase in the number of discharged offenders with a sentence of less than 12months that do not re-offend is required to render the prison globally efficient. However, HMP Brixton, in order to become globally efficient, is required to increase the number of discharged persons employed when released, the number of discharged persons with accommodation when released, the total number of hours with purposeful activity for the prisoners, and the number of offenders that do not re-offend by, respectively, around 20%, 16%, 43%, and 20% (the exact figures are in Tables 2–5), to decrease net resource expenditure input by approximately 30%, and to decrease the undesirable outputs – the number of prisoners in overcrowded cells, the mandatory drug test positive number and the serious assault number – by around 38%, 21%, and 37% respectively. Being evaluated as inefficient only in preparing prisoners for life outside prison and in respect of re-offending rates, HMP Wormwood Scrubs only requires increases of around 26% and 19% in the number of discharged persons employed when released and the number of discharged persons with accommodation when released, and a decrease in the number discharged who re-offend of 6.8% to obtain global efficiency. Finally, HMP Channingswood is evaluated as inefficient in each of the four performance aspects; however, it typically (apart from the performance in respect of providing discharged prisoners with settled accommodation) requires less considerable decreases/increases in the respective inputs and undesirable outputs/desirable outputs respectively compared to HMP Brixton to become technically globally efficient.For policy-makers concerned with overall prison performance, it is of interest to have an idea of whether or not the performances of the prisons on the different organizational aspects are related. In particular, do prisons that do well in terms of promoting the employment and accommodation for discharged prisoners also do well in the other performance aspects, such as providing quality of life in prison? Do these prisons also outperform prisons that do not do well in other aspects in, for instance, lowering the odds of released prisoners re-offending? In short, is there a relationship between the directional distance function values realized by the evaluated prisons in the four different dimensions of governing a prison? To answer this question, the correlations between the four estimated directional distance function values are computed. The results are shown in Table 6.All correlations are positive. This implies that, in general, prisons that do well in preparing prisoners for life outside are also expected to do well in the other three dimensions. However, the correlations are not that high. Thus, the positive relationships between the directional distance function values are, at best, moderate. For example, the correlation of 0.485 between efficiency in preventing re-offending and enhancing rehabilitation and efficiency in finding employment and settled accommodation for discharged prisoners is supportive of a policy aimed at increasing efforts to reduce re-offending by helping prisoners find employment and accommodation on release. In general, although there seems to be some link between the efficiencies realized by English and Welsh prisons in the four assessed dimensions of prison performance, this link is only limited. There are multiple examples of prisons that are assessed as efficient in one or more performance dimensions while being evaluated as inefficient in the other dimensions. Examples include HMPs Wormwood Scrubs, where it is evaluated as inefficient in the dimensions of employment and accommodation, capacity utilization and re-offending rates but efficient in respect of quality of life. Finally, can we conclude that private prisons are more efficient than public? Our findings show HMP Altcourse (G4S) is efficient (in terms of being at or near the frontier) in three managerial dimensions (that is, in terms of employment and accommodation, quality of life and re-offending and rehabilitation). Meanwhile, HMPs Doncaster (Serco), Forest Bank (SJS), Parc (G4S), Peterborough (SJS) and Wolds (G4S) are efficient in only zero, zero, one, zero and two policy dimensions respectively. This analysis thus still leaves open the question of whether private are better than public prisons, to be determined by analysis of other countries’ Criminal Justice Systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using a distance-based non-parametric specification that allows for the inclusion of desirable and/or undesirable outputs, we model the managerial performance of male prisons in England and Wales over the period 2009/10. This constitutes a new approach to obtaining performance indicators by estimating across four different aspects of managerialism in prisons based on current UK government policy so that best practice can be identified. The results were further analyzed to determine whether private provision of prison services could lead to better performance than public ownership. We find that, in the first performance dimension, employment and accommodation, only seven prisons were deemed efficient (including the privately-run HMPs Altcourse and Wolds) but also that these results were dependent on geographic and socio-economic factors, such as how far prisoners were placed from their home city or town. Placing prisoners in far-away prisons makes the job of prison management with respect to helping released inmates integrate back into the community much harder. In terms of the second performance dimension, capacity utilization, only six prisons were found to be efficient, with all private-run prisons having some room for improvement. In respect of the quality of life in prisons, three (that is, HMPs Altcourse, Park and Wolds) of the 15 prisons found to be efficient were privately-run, with publicly-run HMP Brixton being one of the poorest performers. Finally, in relation to re-offending and rehabilitation, only one (that is, HMP Wolds) of the five prisons found to be technically efficient was a privately run organization. This is not to say, however, that with respect to recent UK government policy to outsource traditional probation services to the private sector to reduce re-offending, the likes of publicly-run HMPs Bristol, Durham, Holme House, Leeds, Pentonville and Wandsworth would not benefit from such a move.We also find that no prisons are deemed to be on the frontier in all dimensions of performance. HMPs that are efficient in three dimensions include HMP Lancaster (publicly-run), with HMP Altcourse (privately-run) been efficient in two dimensions. It is, therefore, still unclear as to whether privately-run prisons or services that are contracted out to privately-run organizations will lead to improved managerial performance in respect of prisons, and hence lower running costs, and ultimately enable a reduction in crime and re-offending in England and Wales.