@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A review of recent research on green road freight transportation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An extensive analysis of factors affecting fuel consumption is provided.Freight transportation vehicle emission models are reviewed.Routing problems with fuel consumption components are investigated.A systematic review of 58 publications on green logistics is carried out.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Road freight transportation,Green logistics,CO,2,e emissions,Operations research,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Road freight transportation is a major contributor to carbon dioxide equivalent emissions. Reducing these emissions in transportation route planning requires an understanding of vehicle emission models and their inclusion into the existing optimization methods. This paper provides a review of recent research on green road freight transportation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Road freight transportation is essential for the economic development, but it is also harmful to the environment and to human health. Until recently, the planning of freight transportation activities has mainly focused on cost minimization (see, e.g., Crainic, 2000; Forkenbrock, 1999, 2001). With an increasing worldwide concern for the environment, logistics providers and freight carriers have started paying more attention to the negative externalities of their operations. These include pollution, accidents, noise, resource consumption, land use deterioration, and climate change risk (Schreyer et al., 2004).At the local and regional levels, a significant portion of freight transportation is carried out by trucks, which emit a large amount of pollutants. While transportation technologies and fuels have improved over the years, most trucks run on diesel engines, which are major sources of emissions of nitrogen oxides (N2O), particulate matter (PM) and carbon dioxide (CO2). Repeated exposure toN2O-based smog and PM has been linked to a wide range of health problems. At the global level, greenhouse gases (GHGs) significantly contribute to global warming. In the transportation sector, GHG emissions are dominated byCO2emissions from burning fossil fuels. These cause atmospheric changes and climate disruptions which are harmful to the natural and built environments and pose health risks. Until recently, GHGs were not classified as a pollutant in the classical sense. However, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has recognized in 2009 that GHGs pose a danger to human health and welfare. GHGs absorb and emit radiations within the thermal infra-red range in the atmosphere and significantly raise the Earth’s temperature. As of October 2013, the level of atmosphericCO2emissions is estimated to be equal to 393.66parts per million and is still increasing (ESRL, 2013).The carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) measures how much global warming a given type and amount of GHG may cause, using the functionally equivalent amount or concentration ofCO2as the reference. The selection of GHGs to include in the carbon footprint is an important issue. Wright, Kemp, and Williams (2011) suggest that a significant proportion of emissions can be captured through the measurement ofCO2andCH4, which are the most prominent anthropogenic GHGs. The emissions ofCO2are directly proportional to the amount of fuel consumed by a vehicle, which is in turn dependent on a variety of vehicle, environment and traffic-related parameters, such as vehicle speed, load and acceleration (Demir, Bektaş, & Laporte, 2011). On the other hand,CH4emissions are a function of many complex aspects of combustion dynamics and of the type of emission control systems used.Freight transportation planning has many facets, particularly when viewed from the multiple levels of decision making. Arguably the most famous problem at this level is the well-known Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP), which consists of determining least cost routes for a fleet of vehicles to satisfy the demands of a set of customers, subject to side constraints. The traditional objective in the standard VRP is to minimize the total distance traveled by all vehicles, but this objective can be enriched through the inclusion of terms related to fuel consumption (Bektaş & Laporte, 2011; Demir, Bektaş, & Laporte, 2012).Recent developments in green road freight transportation have heightened the importance of operations research techniques in this area (see, e.g., Dekker, Bloemhof, & Mallidis, 2012; Dobers et al., 2013; Lin, Choy, Ho, Chung, & Lam, 2013; Salimifard, Shahbandarzadeh, & Raeesi, 2012; Touati & Jost, 2012). In the last decade, the body of knowledge on the reduction ofCO2e emissions from road transportation has grown notably. As of August 2013, we are aware of at least 58 papers on this topic. In this study we focus on the green logistics literature related to total energy consumption.The scientific contribution of this study is threefold: (i) to analyze the factors affecting fuel consumption, (ii) to extensively survey the available vehicle emission models, (iii) to review the scientific literature on green road freight transportation. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the factors affecting fuel consumption. Section 3 lists the available tools to estimateCO2e. In Section 4, we investigate routing problems with regard to fuel consumption. Section 5 presents an extensive body of literature ofCO2e emissions in routing and scheduling. Conclusions and future research directions are stated in Section 6.The factors influencing fuel consumption have been studied by Ardekani, Hauer, and Jamei (1996), Bigazzi and Bertini (2009), Demir et al. (2011) and Alwakiel (2011). A summary of these works is provided in Fig. 1. These factors can be divided into five categories: vehicle, environment, traffic, driver and operations. Most fuel consumption models concentrate on vehicle, traffic, and environmental influences, but do not capture driver related issues which are relatively difficult to measure. Moreover, operations related factors are often seen as an externalities affecting fuel consumption.One important work by Eglese and Black (2010) studies the emissions arising in routing and lists some of the factors affecting fuel consumption. In contrast to the existing literature, the authors argue that speed is more important than distance traveled when estimating emissions. In another study, Demir et al. (2011) have compared several emissions models, and mentioned other relevant factors such as load weight and distribution, engine type and size, vehicle design, and road gradient.Road freight is mostly carried by internal combustion vehicles. In order to move a vehicle, an engine must provide power to overcome the effects of inertia, rolling resistance, wind resistance, road slope, drive train losses and accessories. Other factors which affect engine efficiency, such as air–fuel-ratio, engine speed and compression ratio. Here we focus on the scientific literature related to fuel reduction in road freight transportation by means of operations research techniques. It considers several areas separately.•Speed: Fuel consumption depends on several factors, but speed is the most important one because it affects inertia, rolling resistance, air resistance and road slope. Most studies focus on distance traveled but as Van Woensel, Creten, and Vandaele (2001) have shown, applying an average emission value per kilometer is inaccurate. According to Demir et al. (2011), a rule of thumb for medium-duty vehicle (MDV) is that fuel consumption increases approximately by 0.001liter/kilometer for every kilometer/hour increase above 55kilometer/hour. Decreasing the vehicle speed from 100kilometer/hour to 90kilometer/hour can reduce fuel consumption by approximately 0.02liter per kilometer. Demir et al. (2012) have derived an optimum driving speed and have shown that reductions in emissions could be achieved by varying speed over a network. It should be noted that the optimum driving speed varies to a certain degree between geographical areas due to speed limits and traffic density.Road gradient: On a slope, wheel horsepower demand increases significantly with vehicle weight because of road slope force. In some regions, road gradient plays an important role and can result higherCO2e emissions. The study of Demir et al. (2011) shows that fuel consumption of an MDV on a 1% road slope may increase by up to six liters on a 100 kilometer road segment. The reverse is also true: traveling on a negative slope surface reduces fuel consumption. With the help of an advanced GIS software, one can change speed on a portion of a road segment in order to reduce fuel consumption.Congestion: Driving in congested areas increases fuel consumption because of lower than optimal speeds. This is supported by Van Woensel et al. (2001) who have assessed the differences inCO2emissions between using constant speeds and flow dependent speeds. Based on a survey of cars on a motorway, they have shown that flow-dependent emissions ofCO2are on average 11% higher thanCO2emissions calculated using a constant speed. A peak increase of 40% was also observed during the congested rush hour period. In a manual of truck’s engine (CAT (2006)), traveling 15% of the total kilometers on congested roads results approximately in an 8% increase in fuel consumption. Traveling 25% of the total kilometers on congested roads approximately results in a 15% increase in fuel consumption.Driver: One of the most significant factors affecting fuel consumption is the driver who controls vehicle speed, acceleration rate, brake usage, shifting technique, trailer gap setting, idle time, tire inflation pressure, and more. CAT (2006) shows that the difference in fuel consumption between the best and worst drivers can be as much as 25% (42.2–56.5liters over a 100kilometer road segment). Idling the engine can also be seen as driver-related consumption.Fleet size and mix: Selecting the right type of vehicle has a significant impact on fuel consumption. Small vehicles which have smaller engines consume less fuel than larger vehicles. However, using a large vehicle may lead to less fuel consumption than using two smaller vehicles. According to Demir et al. (2011), for a certain amount of payload, the difference between a medium and heavy-duty vehicle may be up to 14liters of fuel on a 100kilometer road segment.Payload: Increasing the payload increases the engine demand horsepower, which leads to a higher fuel consumption. Vehicle payload affects the inertia force, rolling resistance and road slope force and can be an important part of routing decisions. Kara, Kara, and Yetiş (2007) and Bektaş and Laporte (2011) have studied the effect of payload on fuel consumption. Demir et al. (2011) show that, with an average load of one ton, fuel consumption increases by approximately three liters over a 100kilometer road segment. CAT (2006) shows that a 4500kilogram reduction in payload reduces fuel consumption by about 4.4%. Moreover, a reduction in gross weight from 36,000kilogram to 27,000kilogram generates an 8.8% improvement in fuel savings. In a study of DEFRA (2012), the change inCO2emissions is shown to be up to 25% for an articulated heavy-duty vehicle (HDV) with a gross weight of more than 33,000kilogram.Empty kilometers: Empty kilometers are kilometers driven by empty vehicles and should be avoided as much as possible. Reducing them always results in a lesser fuel consumption. Most of the routing operations start or end at a depot with an empty load. According to EC (2010), in 2010, almost a quarter (23.9%) of all vehicle-kilometer of HDVs in the EU involved an empty vehicle. In inbound transport, the share of empty vehicle-kilometer is usually higher than in outbound transport. Empty kilometers cause environmental pollution and place an unnecessary strain on the transportation infrastructures. Empty kilometer driving is often caused by a lack of information. For example, if a transportation company does not have the information that goods are waiting to be transported close to where a driver has just dropped off a previous load, the driver will simply be asked to return to the depot with an empty truck.Green freight corridors: The concept of green corridors was developed in recent years to minimize the environmental related factors affecting fuel consumption. The use of green corridors enables reductions in fuel consumption andCO2e emissions, and should improve the environmental performance of road freight transport in the future. Green corridors can be structured based on several environmental and traffic-related factors. For example, CAT (2006) shows that the impact of climate is as important as vehicle speed and aerodynamics. Cold air increases the aerodynamic drag on the vehicle. Compared to 21C°, fuel consumption can go up by 5% if the temperature reduces to 10C° and it can go up to 10% at 0C°. Wind and road surface are other factors that must be considered while creating green corridors.This section reviews fuel consumption (vehicle emission) models. A short description of each model is provided, along with a discussion pertaining to its development and applicability. In order to get a full picture of these models, the reader is referred to the classification of Williams, Kemp, Coello, Turner, and Wright (2012) which classifies the models based on their simplicity and parameter uncertainty (Fig. 2). In this study, we focus on the way of estimating fuel consumption more accurately.The average fuel consumption of vehicles is provided by manufacturers, but the information provided does not make it possible to deriveCO2e emissions. For freight trucks, these measurements are based on engine test benches or from a standard test cycle using a chassis dynamometer, rather than on real-life driving cycles. These emission certification tests have been shown to differ significantly from real driving conditions (Pelkmans & Debal, 2006).Rakha, Ahn, and Trani (2003) mention that numerous energy and emission models are available and differ in their modeling approaches, modeling structures, and data requirements. Here, we categorize fuel consumption models into three main groups of increasing levels of complexity: factor models, macroscopic models and microscopic models. Factor models include simple fuel consumption methods. Macroscopic models use average aggregate network parameters to estimate network-wide emission rates. Microscopic models estimate the instantaneous vehicle fuel consumption and emission rates at a more detailed level. Models can also be grouped into the load (power)-based and the regression-based emissions models. These definitions also refer to micro- and macro-emission modeling, respectively.Emissions can be approximated through the use of an emission factor related to one type of vehicle and a specific driving mode (Esteves-Booth, Muneer, Kubie, & Kirby, 2002). Furthermore, the emission factors are derived from the mean values of repeated measurements over a particular driving cycle. This type of model is particularly useful at a macro-scale, when the information on traffic flows and operational modes is insufficient. An example of a distance based factor model can be found in GHG Protocol (2013). Another example of factor calculation can be found in DEFRA (2012), which provides information on how to calculate the GHG emissions. It is concerned with calculating and reporting the direct emissions resulting from burning fuel when driving in freight transport operations.This section reviews 13 macroscopic (average speed) emission models, which are important tools in a wide-area emission assessment. These models can be used to calculate and develop a national or regional emission inventory, especially in green supply chain management studies. Generally, emission rates are measured for a variety of trips, each with a different average speed. Note that the emissions ofCO2e are directly related to fuel consumption and therefore can be easily calculated if the amount of fuel consumption is known. In order to eliminate repetition for the representation of variables, we use similar notation for all macroscopic models. The standardized notations are the following: v is the vehicle speed (kilometer/hour) and D is the total distance (kilometer).A publication of the European Commission by Hickman, Hassel, Joumard, Samaras, and Sorenson (1999) on emission factors for road transportation (INFRAS, 1995) describes a methodology called MEET, used for calculating transportation emissions and energy consumption for heavy goods vehicles. MEET is based on on-road measurements and all its parameters are extracted from real-life experiments. It covers several vehicle technologies for different classes of vehicles, such as vehicles weighing less than 3.5tons, vehicles weighing between 3.5 and 7.5tons, vehicles weighing between 7.5 and 16tons, vehicles weighing between 16 and 32tons and vehicles weighing more than 32tons. For vehicles weighing less than 3.5tons, the rate ofCO2emissions per kilometer is estimated using a speed-dependent regression function of the former(v)=0.0617v2-7.8227v+429.51. For other classes, MEET suggests the use a function the former(v)=K+av+bv2+cv3+d/v+e/v2+f/v3, whereer(v)is the rate ofCO2emissions (gram/kilometer) for an unloaded goods vehicle on a road with a zero gradient. The parameters K and a to f are predefined coefficients whose values are given in Table 1.The emission factors and functions of MEET refer to standard testing conditions (i.e., zero road gradient, empty vehicle, etc.) and are typically calculated as a function of the average vehicle speed. Depending on the vehicle type, a number of corrections may be needed to account for the effects of road gradient and vehicle load on the emissions once a rough estimate has been produced. The following road gradient correction factor is used to take the effect of road gradient into account:GC(v)=A6v6+A5v5+A4v4+A3v3+A2v2+A1v+A0. The coefficientsA0toA6used to computeGC(v)are given in Table 2.The following load correction factor is used to take the load factor into account:LC(v)=k+nv+pv2+qv3+r/v+s/v2+t/v3+u/v,kand n to u are coefficients whose values are presented in Table 3.MEET suggests estimating the totalCO2emissions (gram) as(1)E(v,D)=er(v)·GC(v)·LC(v)·D.It is noted that the parameters of MEET model were calibrated in 1999. The new engine technology and aerodynamics design of vehicles would require updates to these parameters.The NTM is a non-profit Swedish organization created in 1993 (NTM Road, 2010). Its aim is to establish a common way to calculate the environmental performances from different transportation modes. The calculation pertains to the usage of natural resources and other external effects from freight transport. The method was mainly developed for market actors of transport services, making it possible to evaluate their own individual carbon footprint. The NTM considers distance, load factors, type of transport mode, positioning, empty return trips, topography and type of road (urban, rural or motorway). The fuel consumption at the specified load factorf(lf)i(liter/kilometer) for each type of road (motorway, urban, rural) shown by i and can be calculated asf(lf)i=F(empty)+(F(full)-F(empty))·lf,whereF(empty)is the fuel consumption of the empty vehicle (liter/kilometer),F(full)is the fuel consumption of the fully loaded vehicle (liter/kilometer) and lf is the specified load factor. Moreover,F(full)andF(empty)values for different types of vehicles can be found in NTM Road (2010). The total carbon dioxide (kg) can then be calculated as(2)E(lf,D1,D2,D3)=∑i=13(f(lf)i·Di·eCO2e),whereeCO2eis the emission factor (typically 3.13kilogram for one liter diesel fuel) andDiis the total distance traveled for each road type i. The NTM provides a default database if no vehicle-specific data are available.COPERT is an European Economic Area funded emissions model (Kouridis et al., 2010), which estimates vehicle emissions for a range of vehicles by engine classification and vehicle type. It is driven by a database of emissions by vehicle class, engine technology and speed. It estimates emissions for all major air pollutants, as well as GHGs produced by different vehicle categories. Similar to MEET, COPERT uses a number of regression functions to estimate fuel consumption, which are specific to vehicles of different weights. An example of total fuel consumption function (gram) with different load and gradient factor is given by(3)F(v,D)=(e+(aexp(-bv))+(cexp(-dv)))·D,where a to e are the coefficient. The latest emission factor parameters of the COPERT 4 methodology have been updated for HDV on the basis of the latest HBEFA version 3.1 (Hausberger, Rexeis, Zallinger, & Luz, 2009). Table 4shows a set of sample data for a 20–26ton rigid truck running on Euro-5 diesel.ECOTRANSIT was developed in 2003 with a regional scope limited to Europe. The more recent version EcoTransIT World published in 2011 allows the estimation of environmental impacts of worldwide transports (Knörr, Seum, Schmied, Kutzner, & Anthes, 2011), including that of freight transport for any route and any transport mode. It covers energy consumption, GHG emissions and air pollutants. The model can take into account upstream energy consumption. The full calculation can be performed in three steps. The first step is to calculate the final energy consumption per net ton kilometer asECFton kilometer=ECFkilometer/(CP·CU), whereECFkilometeris the final energy consumption per net ton kilometer, CP is the payload capacity (in ton), and CU is the capacity utilization (%). The second step is to calculate the upstream energy consumption per net ton kilometer asECUton kilometer=ECFkilometer·ECUEC, whereECUECis the energy related upstream energy consumption. The third step is to measure total energy consumption (megajoule) as(4)F(D,M)=D·M·(ECFton kilometer+ECUton kilometer),where M is the mass of freight transported (ton). Energy consumption and emissions also depend on road category, gradient, and driving pattern. The influence of the load factor is modeled according to the HBEFA. For example, the fuel consumption of an empty vehicle can be one third below of that of a fully loaded vehicle. This effect can be even higher depending on driving characteristics and road gradient. The gradient takes into account region-specific factors and fuel consumption also depends on the driving pattern.NAEI was developed for a large range of sectors including agriculture, domestic activity, industry and transport (NAEI, 2012). Emissions from road transportation are calculated either from a combination of total fuel consumption data and fuel properties, or from a combination of driving-related emission factors and road traffic data. For each vehicle category, the fuel consumption with average speed functions for hot exhaust in the NAEI can be calculated as (in liter/100kilometer)(5)F(v)=k(a+bv+cv2+dv3+ev4+fv5+gv6)/v,where k and a to g are coefficients. Table 5shows a setting of these coefficients for a 20–26 ton rigid truck. More information can be found in NAEI (2012).In this section, we summarize seven other macroscopic fuel consumption models we have identified. The reason why we separate these seven models from those presented above is that the sources describing them are either similar to those of earlier models, or there does not exist sufficient information on their methodology to provide a detailed description.•MOBILE is a model developed by the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) Office of Transportation and Air Quality and published in 1978. The last version MOBILE 6.2 was developed using recent vehicle-emission testing data collected by the EPA, CARB, and automobile manufacturers, as well as inspection and maintenance tests conducted in various places (EPA, 2003). The descriptive and spreadsheet outputs from MOBILE report emission rates in grams of pollutant per vehicle-mile traveled. In 2010, the MOBILE series of models was replaced by Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator (MOVES) as EPA’s official model for estimating emissions.MOVES was developed by the EPA (EPA, 2012). The purpose of the tool is to provide an accurate estimate of emissions from mobile sources under a wide range of user-defined conditions. The model performs a series of calculations which were carefully developed to accurately reflect vehicle operating processes, such as cold start or extended idling, and provide estimates of bulk emissions or emission rates.HBEFA is an handbook of emission factors for road transport and a database for vehicle emission factors in Europe. It was introduced in 1995 by Hausberger et al. (2009), and the current version HBEFA 3.1 was published in 2009. It provides emission factors for all current vehicle categories of road transport, all EU emission standards and a wide variety of traffic situations. Besides hot emission factors, it also provides cold start and evaporation emission factors.GREET is a greenhouse gases, regulated emissions, and energy use in transportation model that was developed as a full life-cycle model by the Argonne National laboratory (Wang, 1999). It is used to evaluate energy and emission impacts of various vehicle and fuel combinations on a full fuel-cycle/vehicle-cycle basis. The first version of GREET was released in 1996. Since then, GREET has continually been updated and expanded, and is now called GREET2 2012. For a given vehicle and fuel system, GREET2 2012 calculates consumption of total energy andCO2e emissions separately.LEM is a lifecycle emissions model of Delucchi (2003) that estimates energy use, pollutant emissions, andCO2e emissions from a variety of transportation and energy life cycles. It includes a wide range of modes of passenger and freight transport.VERSIT-LD is a model that was developed to predict traffic stream emissions for light-duty vehicles in any particular traffic situation (Smit, Smokers, & Rabé, 2007). It predicts traffic stream emissions by using accurate mean emission factors, expressed in grams per kilometer.IVE is the international vehicle emissions model that was designed to estimate emissions from motor vehicles (ISSRC, 2008). It predicts local air pollutants, toxic pollutants and GHGs emissions. The emission prediction process of the IVE model starts with a base emission rate, and a series of correction factors are then applied to estimate the amount of pollution from a variety of vehicle types. These main factors refer to temperature, humidity, fuel quality and driving behavior.EMFAC is an emission model developed by the California Air Resources Board. The current version of EMFAC is EMFAC2011 (CARB, 2011). EMFAC emission rates are a function of vehicle average travel speed. Basic emission rates are derived from emissions tests conducted under standard conditions such as temperature, fuel, and driving cycle. Adjustments can be applied for different temperatures, gasoline types, and humidity.This section reviews instantaneous emission models (at time t) for the estimation of hot-stabilized vehicle emissions. Instantaneous models are necessary to predict traffic emissions more accurately. These are based on instantaneous vehicle kinematic variables, such as speed and acceleration, or on more aggregated modal variables, such as time spent in each traffic mode, cruise and acceleration.In order to increase the readability and understandability of the models, we describe them with a unified notation: v is the speed of the vehicle (meter/second), T is the total journey duration (second), M is the total weight of the vehicle (kilogram), a is the instantaneous acceleration (meter/second2),ωis the gradient (%), g is the gravitational constant (meter/second2, approximately 9.81),ρis the air density (inkilogram/meter3, typically between 1.1455 and 1.4224), A is the frontal surface area (inmeter2, typically between 3.91 and 5.88),Cdis the coefficient of aerodynamic drag (typically between 0.7 and 0.9), andCris the coefficient of rolling resistance (typically between 0.006 and 0.01).An energy-related emissions estimation model was described by Bowyer, Biggs, and Akçelik (1985). The IFCM uses vehicle characteristics such as mass, energy, efficiency parameters, drag force and fuel consumption components associated with aerodynamic drag and rolling resistance, and approximates the fuel consumption per second. The fuel consumption with an IFCM can be calculated asf(t)=α+β1R(t)v+(β2Ma2v/1000)forRt>0αforRt⩽0,wheref(t)is the fuel consumption per unit time (milliliter/second), R(t)is the total tractive force (kilonewton) required to move the vehicle and calculated as the sum of drag force, inertia force and grade force asR(t)=b1+b2v2+Ma/1000+gMω/100,000. Furthermore,αis the constant idle fuel rate (in milliliter/second, typically between 0.37 and 0.56),β1is the fuel consumption per unit of energy (in milliliter/kilojoules, typically between 0.09 and 0.08),β2is the fuel consumption per unit of energy-acceleration (in milliliter/(kilojoules·meter/second2), typically between 0.03 and 0.02),b1is the rolling drag force (in kilonewton, typically between 0.1 and 0.7), andb2is the rolling aerodynamic force (in kilonewton/(meter/second2), typically between 0.00003 and 0.0015). These values are extracted from Bowyer et al. (1985) and Akçelik and Besley (1996, 2003). Using IFCM, the total amount of fuel consumptionF(T)(milliliter) for a journey of duration T can be calculated as(6)F(T)=∫0Tf(t)dt.IFCM works best at a micro-scale level and is better suited for short trip emission estimations.FMEFCM was introduced by Bowyer et al. (1985). This model includes the same parameters as IFCM but also introduces new parameters, such as initial speed, final speed and energy-related parameters. The model consists of four functions,Fa(ta),Fd(td),Fc(tc)andFi(ti), which correspond to fuel consumption estimations (milliliter) for the following modes of driving, respectively: acceleration, deceleration, cruise, and idle, whereta,td,tcandtiare the times spent for each mode.•Acceleration fuel consumption (Fa(ta)): This function computes the amount of fuel consumption over the acceleration phase of a vehicle from an initial speedvito a final speedvf. It is defined asFa(ta)=max{αta+(Γ+k1B(vi2+vf2)+β1MEk+k2β2MEk2+0.0981β1Mω)xa,αta},whereEkdenotes the change in kinetic energy per unit distance during acceleration and is calculated asEk=0.385810-4(vf2-vi2)/xa. Furthermore, the integration coefficients arek1=0.616+0.000544vf-0.0171viandk2=1.376+0.00205vf-0.00538vi. When the travel distancexaand the travel timetaare not known, they can be estimated asxa=ma(vi+vf)ta/3600, wherema=0.467+0.00200vf-0.00210viandta=(vf-vi)/(2.08+0.127vf-vi-0.0182vi). In addition,Γis the function parameter (in milliliter/kilometer, typically between 21 and 100), and B is the function parameter (in (milliliter/kilometer)/(kilometer/hour)2, typically between 0.0055 and 0.018).Deceleration fuel consumption (Fd(td)): The amount of fuel consumption during the deceleration phase from an initial speedvito a final speedvfis calculated asFd(td)=max{αtd+(kxΓ+kyk1B(vi2+vf2)+kaβ1MEk+kxβ1MEk2+0.0981β1Mω)xd,αtd},wherekx=0.046+100/M+0.00421vi+0.00260vf+0.05444ω,ky=kx0.75,ka=kx3.81(2-kx3.81)andk1=0.621+0.000777vi-0.0189vf. If the travel distancexdand travel timetdare not known, they can be estimated as above, although in this case the coefficients change slightly. In addition,kx,kyandkaare the energy related parameters.Cruise fuel consumption (Fc(tc)): The following function can be used to calculate the total amount of fuel consumption by a vehicle during a cruise phase:Fc(tc)=max{fi/vc+Γ+Bvc2+kE1β1MEk++kE2β2MEk+2+0.0981kGβ1Mω,fi/vc}xc,wherefidenotes the idle fuel rate (in milliliter/hour),vcis the average cruise speed (kilometer/hour), andxcdenotes the travel distance (kilometer). The change in total positive kinetic energy per unit distance during the cruise mode is calculated asEk+=max{0.258-0.0018vc,0.10}and the other parameters are set tokE1=max{12.5/vc+0.000013vc2,0.63},kE2=3.17, andkG=1-2.1Ek+forω<0, and1-0.3Ek+forω>0. Furthermore,kE1,kE2andkGare the calibration parameters.Fuel consumption while idle (Fi(ti)): The following function can be used to calculate the total amount of fuel consumption when the vehicle is idle:Fi(ti)=αti,wheretiis the idle time (s), andαis the idle fuel rate (milliliter/second).RSFCM is an aggregated form of FMEFCM and was also introduced by Bowyer et al. (1985). The model calculates fuel consumption separately during driving modes when a vehicle is running on idle. Acceleration, deceleration and cruise modes are considered together within a single function. The model is as follows:(8)F(ti,ts)=max{αti+(fi/vr+A+Bvr2+kE1β1MEk++kE2β2MEk+2+0.0981kGβ1Mω)xs,αts},whereF(ti,ts)is the total fuel consumption (milliliter),xsis the total distance,vrdenotes the average running speed (kilometer/hour),tsandtithe travel and idle time, respectively. The average speed is calculated asvr=3600xs/(ts-ti). Furthermore,Ek+=max{0.35-0.0025vr,0.15},kE1=max{0.675-1.22/vr,0.5},kE2=2.78+0.0178vr. The model needs fewer data than for FMEFCM but it is less accurate for estimating fuel consumption.This model is an another extension of IFCM and was also proposed by Bowyer et al. (1985). The model relates fuel consumption per unit distance to average speed. In this model, the total fuel consumption (milliliter) can be estimated asFs(D)=f(vs)D, where the fuel consumption per unit distance isf(vs)=fi/vs+cK, andvsdenotes the average travel speed (kilometer/hour), and D is the total distance. Furthermore,K=1-K1(1-M/1200)-K2(1-β1/0.090)-K3(1-β2/0.045)-K4(1-b1/0.000278M)-K5(1-b2/0.00108)is the adjustment factor for different types of vehicles, cis the regression coefficient, andK1-K5are parameters based on the analysis of real on-road data for which a sample set is shown in Table 6. These values are extracted from Bowyer et al. (1985).The VSP model has proven to be very useful as a microscopic model to estimate instantaneous vehicle fuel consumption and emission rates (Jimenez-Palacios, 1998). It is highly correlated with variability in second-by-second emissions of pollutants from diesel vehicles. The VSP is a measure of the load on a vehicle and is defined as the power per unit mass to overcome road grade, rolling and aerodynamic resistance, and inertial acceleration. It can be calculated using an equation given by EPA (kilowatt/ton):VSP(t)=v(a(1+∊m)+gsin(arctan(ω))+gCr)+0.5ρCdAv3/M,where∊mis the mass factor (typically between 0.1 and 0.2) accounting for the rational masses. The fuel consumption (gram) is(9)F(T,M)=∫0T(VSP(t)·M)/ηdt,whereηis the efficiency rate (typically between 0.85 and 0.95). The VSP is also used as a base model to measure power demand in different emission models.EMIT was introduced by Cappiello, Chabini, Nam, and Lue (2002). It is a statistical model with a basis in the physical system for fuel consumption of light duty vehicles. The fuel rate (gram/second) can be calculated asfe(t)=αfr+βfrv+γfrv2+δfrv3+ζfravifPtract(t)>0αfr′ifPtract(t)=0,wherePtract(t)=Afrv+Bfrv2+Cfrv3+Mav+Mgsin(ω(θ))v,Afris the rolling resistance coefficient (kilowatt/(meter/second)2),Bfris the speed correction to rolling resistance coefficient (inkilowatt/(meter/second)2), andCfris the air drag resistance coefficient (inkilowatt/(meter/second)3). More information on coefficientsαfr,αfr′,βfr,γfr,δfrandζfrcan be found in Cappiello et al. (2002). The total fuel consumption (gram) is(10)Fe(T)=∫0Tfe(t)dt.EMIT was calibrated based on the two light-duty vehicle categories. All its parameters can be found in Cappiello et al. (2002). It provides reasonable results compared to actual measurements. We also note that EMIT was developed and calibrated for hot-stabilized conditions with zero road grade, and without accessory usage, and does not correspond to cold-start emissions.This model was developed by Ahn, Rakha, Trani, and Van Aerde (2002) from experimentations with numerous polynomial combinations of speed and acceleration levels using chassis dynamometer data on light duty vehicles.CO2emissions were estimated using the carbon balance equation in conjunction with fuel consumption measurements. The fuel consumption rate for a cruising speed equal to the free-flow speed and on a grade ofωcan be computed asfv(t)=exp∑i=13∑j=13Li,jvfi(gω)j,whereLi,jis the model regression coefficients at speed exponent i and acceleration exponent j. The total fuel consumption (liter) on a link l can be calculated as(11)F(Dl)=3600fv(t)Dl/(vf)l,whereDlis the length of link l (kilometer) andvflis the free-flow speed on link l (kilometer/hour).OFCM was developed by Oguchi et al. (2002). The function consists of five components, namely idle consumption, friction loss, altitude change loss, air drag loss, and acceleration loss. The total fuel consumptionFo(T)(milliliter) using the OFCM can be calculated as(12)Fo(T)=fidleT+E∑j=1JμMg∫tjstjevdt+sinθMg∫tjstjevdt+Cd∫tjstjev3dt+(M+m)(0.5vje2-0.5vjs2),wherefidleis the base consumption, T is the travel time, E is the fuel-energy equivalent,μis the friction coefficient, and J is the number of interval. The parametersjsandjeare the start and end of interval, and m is the internal resistance equivalent. The idle fuel consumption is the fuel used for the inertia resistance of the engine and transmission, air conditioner, and some other electric components. Other components estimate the energy lost by the vehicle’s movement.PERE was designed by Nam and Giannelli (2005) to measure vehicle emissions. It was developed to support the new EPA energy and emissions inventory model, namely MOVES. PERE consists of a series of stand-alone spreadsheets, which can be run and modified by an user. The model performs well: in most cases the predictions are within 10% of observed values. The fuel consumption rate (kilometer/second) can be formulated as(13)fpr(t)=ξ{kNV+(Pb(v)/ηt+Pacc)/η}43.2,whereξis the fuel air equivalence ratio (typically 1), k is the engine friction (typically between 0.15 and 0.25), N is the engine speed (typically between 31 and 55), V is the engine displacement volume (typically between 5 and 7),ηtis a transmission and final drive efficiency (typically between 0.4 and 0.45),Paccis the power draw of accessories (typically 0). The power demand (W) can be calculated asPb(v)=Crv+Bv2+Cdv3+Mv(a+gω)where A, B, C are parameters calculated asA=CR0Mg,B=0.0,C=(CdArρ)/2+CR2Mg, andCR0andCR2are the zero and second order in speed rolling resistance force terms, respectively. The total fuel consumption (kilogram) can be calculated as(14)Fpr(T)=∫0Tfpr(t)dt.More information on the model’s parameters can be found in Nam and Giannelli (2005).Two power-based second-order polynomial models were introduced by Rakha, Ahn, Moran, Saerens, and Van den Bulck (2011). These models were inspired from one of the base models which can be found in the mechanical engineering literature (Wong, 2001). The first model does not require any engine data given that the power used by a vehicle is a function of the vehicle speed and acceleration level. The second model requires engine data in addition to external data and therefore can be used to model eco-drive with gear-shifting strategies. The two models can be formulated as(15)F1(t)=α0+α1P(t)+α2P(t)2,F2(t)=β0ω(t)+β1P(t)+β2P(t)2,whereα0,α1,α2,β0,β1andβ2are vehicle-specific constants given for each type of vehicle. The functionP(t)=((R(t)+1.04ma(t))/3600ηd)v(t)measures the total power exerted by the vehicle driveline (kilowatt) at timet,R(t)is the total resistance force (newton), andηdis the driveline efficiency. In addition, the total resistance force can be calculated asR(t)=(ρ/25.92)CdChAv2(t)+9.8066mCr{c1v(t)+c2}+9.8066mG(t). The detailed calculation of each coefficient is shown in Rakha et al. (2011). The CPFM-1 and CPFM-2 can be easily calibrated using publicly available data, for example using the city and highway fuel economy ratings of EPA.The microscopic emission model PHEM was designed for simulating fuel consumption. As a result of the cooperation between ARTEMIS (Boulter & McCrae, 2009), COST 346 (Rexeis, Hausberger, & Riemersma, 2005) and HBEFA (Hausberger et al., 2009), the measurement program covered different engines and vehicles. PHEM interpolates the fuel consumption from the engine maps according to the course of engine power demand and engine speed in the driving cycles. The actual engine power(P)can be calculated asP=Prr+Par+Pacc+Pgr+Pau+Ptl, wherePrr=Mg(fr0+fr1v+fr2v2+fr3v3+fr4v4)vis the rolling resistance,Par=0.5CdAρv3is the air resistance, andPacc=(M+mrot)avis the acceleration. Moreover,Pgr=Mgω0.01vis the gradient resistance,Pau=P0Pratedis the power demand for auxiliaries andPtl=Pdr/ηt-Pdris the transmission losses, wherefr0tofr4are the rolling resistance coefficients,mrotis the reduced mass for rational accelerated part,P0is the power demand of the auxiliaries as ratio to the rated powerPrated, andPdris the power to overcome the driving resistances. The total emission value can be calculated under the transient conditions(16)Etrans(t)=Eqs+Prated+Ftrans,whereEqsis the quasi-steady-state emission value interpolated from steady-state emission map (in gram/hour),Pratedis the rated engine power (kilowatt) (since emission values are normalized to the rated power),Ftrans(t)is the dynamic correction function ((g/h)/kilowatt rated power). More information can be found in Boulter and McCrae (2009).CMEM was developed and presented by Scora and Barth (2006), Barth, Younglove, and Scora (2005) and Barth and Boriboonsomsin (2008) for heavy-goods vehicles. It is based upon second-by-second tailpipe emissions data collected from 343 light-duty vehicles (LDVs) tested under a variety of laboratory driving cycles. CMEM is similar to IFCM. However, to produce accurate estimations, it requires detailed vehicle specific parameters for the estimations such as the engine friction coefficient, and the vehicle engine speed. CMEM follows, to some extent, the model of Ross (1994) and is composed of three modules, namely engine power, engine speed and fuel rate.•The engine power module: The power demand function for a vehicle is obtained from the total tractive power requirementsPtract(t)(kilowatt) placed on the vehicle at the wheels:(17)Ptract(t)=(Ma+Mgsinω(θ)+0.5CdρAv2+MgCrcosω(θ))v/1000.To translate the tractive requirement into engine power requirement, the following relationship is used:P(t)=Ptract(t)/ηtf+Pacc,whereP(t)is the second-by-second engine power output (kilowatt), andηtfis the vehicle drive train efficiency.The engine speed module: Engine speed is approximated in terms of vehicle speed asN(v)=S(R(L)/R(Lg))v,whereN(v)is the engine speed (in rpm), S is the engine-speed/vehicle-speed ratio in top gearLg, R(L) is the gear ratio in gear L = 1,…,Lg, andηis the efficiency parameter for diesel engines.The fuel rate module: The fuel rate (gram/second) is given by the expression(18)fcm(t)=ξ(kN(v)V+P(t)/η)/43.2,The total fuel consumption (gram) can be calculated as(19)Fcm(T)=∫0Tfcm(t)dt.CMEM can be seen as a state-of-the-art microscopic emission model because of its ease of application.As discussed earlier, fuel consumption depends on a number of factors which can be grouped into five categories: vehicle (V), environment (E), traffic (T), driver (D), and operations (O) related factors. Using these five categories, we present in Table 7a tabulated comparison of the 25 models reviewed so far.Table 7 shows that most of the models consider vehicle load and speed, although the way in which they incorporate these factors into the approximations, in particular for load, varies highly. Microscopic models are similar in that they are able to reflect a certain level of detail so as to consider technical and vehicle-specific parameters such as vehicle shape (frontal area), and road conditions (e.g., gradient, surface resistance). This is not the case for macroscopic models which mostly present mostly simpler ways of regression-based estimations through a predefined set of parameters for a given vehicle class. It is worth mentioning that only a few of the models listed in Table 7 consider driver-related factors and none of the models considers congestion (factorT3), since the inclusion of such detailed factors in the estimation process is rather difficult. Furthermore, none of the models included in Table 7 considers factorsD2andE6.Table 8gives a three-point scale analysis of the models in order to analyze several dimensions which depend on the requirements of the users and on the performance of the models. Robustness is defined as the ability of the model to accommodate various situations. Reliability is defined as the degree of the accuracy by which the model performs its intended functionalities. Applicability in optimization represents model’s practicability in mathematical modeling. Responsiveness to other air pollutants measures the capability of the model to measure other air pollutants beside fuel consumption. The level of awareness corresponds to the popularity of the model in the literature. The level of data requirement shows the complexity of the parameters used to calculate vehicle emissions. The level of support and continuous improvements show the technical support availability and the frequency of revisions in time, respectively.Based on our judgement and on the academic literature, all models are investigated according to these eight dimensions. According to Table 8, microscopic models seem more robust, reliable and more applicable in the area of optimization. Data requirement is also more important for microscopic models as was discussed earlier. On the other hand, macroscopic emissions have more technical support and provide continuous improvement. Macroscopic models are also more capable of estimating other air pollutants.We now review emission models used at different levels of planning for road freight transportation. The planning levels in transportation are usually categorized based on three temporal dimensions: strategic, tactical and operational. Green road transportation studies can also be categorized according to these three dimensions.The factors affecting fuel consumption should be considered within a specific time frame. For example, green freight corridors are long-term planning decisions. Fleet size and driver selection are medium-term planning problems. Other routing decisions are matters of short-term planning. Since strategic planning is not directly related to routing and scheduling operations, it is not covered by this survey. Furthermore, tactical and operational planning will be combined.Freight transportation includes many facets, particularly when viewed from the multiple levels of decision making. Arguably the most important problem at the operational level is routing and scheduling. This section is concerned with vehicle routing studies which include an explicit consideration of environmental concerns, in particularCO2e emissions. There exists an extensive body of research on vehicle routing. In contrast, the literature on the green routing is relatively young (Sbihi & Eglese, 2007), but the interest in environmental issues has grown in recent years. As for freight transportation, most of the published studies on routing are concerned with the minimization of internal (operational) costs. In the following sections, we review several applications with different emission modeling approaches at the operational planning level of planning. In particular, we differentiate the approaches by the use of different emission models covered in the previous section.IFCM (Eq. (6)) was used by Palmer (2007) who consideredCO2emissions models in the context of the vehicle routing with time windows (VRPTW). The objective was to develop an effective method of constructing vehicle routes minimizingCO2emissions. Results indicate that there exists a potential for reducingCO2emissions by around 5% by minimizing this objective instead of travel time.A second application of IFCM was given by Urquhart, Hart, and Scott (2010), who used the IFCM to solve the VRPTW for lowCO2solutions using evolutionary algorithms. The authors looked at the trade-offs betweenCO2savings, distance and the required number of vehicles. Their results indicate that savings of up to 10% can be achieved, depending on the problem instance and the ranking criterion used in the evolutionary algorithm.An eco-friendly routing problem was studied by Bandeira, Carvalho, Khattak, Rouphail, and Coelho (2012) who used a microscopic vehicle scheduling model (Eq. (9)) to assess whether eco-friendly routes change during peak hours, based on three distinct case-studies on two continents. They authors collected more than 13,330kilometer of data using GPS equipped light diesel and gasoline duty vehicles, in the United States and Portugal. They demonstrated empirically that most eco-friendly route during off-peak hours is also the most eco-friendly during peak hours. Regarding intercity routes, tests conducted during both the peak and the off-peak hours have shown that the faster routes can reduceCO2emissions by up to 30%. In a related research, Bandeira, Almeida, Khattak, Rouphail, and Coelho (2013) investigated a way to generate information about emissions for drivers faced with a choice of routes. According to their results, the choice of a route can substantially affect emission rates of the analyzed pollutants and that smoother driving styles can also result in considerable emissions reduction. For example, faster intercity routes are more desirable in terms of fuel use andCO2emissions. However, these same routes yielded more CO andN2O emissions.Using OFCM (Eq. (12)), Kono, Fushiki, Asada, and Nakano (2008) introduced an ecological route search system which minimizes fuel consumption by considering many factors such as traffic information, geographic information, and vehicle parameters. The authors collected an extensive data set in areas with different geographical features and in various traffic conditions. Their results suggest that the fuel consumption of the eco-routes is 9% lower than that of the time priority routes, even though the travel time of the ecological routes is 9% longer. They argue that ecological routes could be different from time-priority routes, contrary to the conclusions of the study by Bandeira et al. (2012).In a similar study, Correia, Amaya, Meyer, Kumagai, and Okude (2010) have analyzed eco-routing in France, with the use of OFCM. The authors proposed an analysis method using geographical features for the needs of eco-route search. According to their results, the fuel savings afforded by eco-routes could be between 1% and 36% as compared to fastest routes.CPFM (Eq. (15)) was used by Minett, Salomons, Daamen, Van Arem, and Kuijpers (2011) who studied eco-routing to reduce fuel consumption considering motorways, local and provincial routes. The authors developed a tool in which historical link speed data were used as a basis for replicating vehicle speed profiles, thus enabling the calculation of fuel costs per link. These fuel costs and speed profiles were validated by field test data. According to the results, based on field tests, provincial route would offer an average time saving of 10.41 (25%) minutes over the local route, and an average fuel saving of 1.25 liter over the motorway route (45%).A first application of the CMEM within the vehicle routing is that of Bektaş and Laporte (2011). The authors have introduced the pollution-routing problem (PRP), an extension of the classical vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW) which consists of routing a number of vehicles to serve a set of customers, and determining their speed on each route segment, so as to minimize a function comprising fuel, emission and driver costs. In estimating pollution, the authors consider factors such as speed, load, and time windows, using the emissions function Eq. (17). They assume that in a vehicle trip all parameters will remain constant on a given arc, but load and speed may change from one arc to another. Their model approximates the total amount of energy consumed on the arc, which directly translates into fuel consumption and further into GHG emissions. Computational results reported by the authors suggest that by using the proposed approach, energy savings can be up to 10% when time windows are in place, and up to 4% when the demand variation is high.The second application of the CMEM to the PRP is due to Demir et al. (2012), who computed the total fuel consumption per second via Eq. (18). The authors proposed a heuristic to solve the PRP. The algorithm iterates between the solution of the VRPTW and of a speed optimization problem. The former problem was solved through adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) (Ropke & Pisinger, 2006) and the latter was solved through a polynomial time speed optimization procedure (SOP) as will be discussed later. The authors introduced new removal and insertion operators aimed at improving solution quality in terms ofCO2emissions. In order to analyze the fuel consumption more accurately, the authors generated benchmark instances by randomly selecting cities from the United Kingdom and therefore using real geographical distances. All instances can be downloaded from http://www.apollo.management.soton.ac.uk/prplib.htm. According to their results, the reduction onCO2emissions were around 10%. In a related research, Demir, Bektaş, and Laporte (2013) investigated the trade-offs between fuel consumption and driving time via CMEM. They showed that trucking companies need not compromise greatly in terms of driving time in order to achieve a significant reduction in fuel consumption andCO2emissions. The converse of this insight also holds, i.e., considerable reductions in driving time are achievable if one is willing to increase fuel consumption only slightly.Using CMEM, Ramos, Gomes, and Barbosa-Póvoa (2012) investigated the service areas and routes that minimize theCO2emissions of a transportation system with multiple products and depots. The authors proposed a decomposition solution approach and applied it to a case study in order to reshape the current system and create more environmental-friendly routes. According to their results, by comparing theCO2emissions of the current system with the proposed one, a decrease of 23% can be achieved if the company reshapes both its service areas and vehicle routes. The total potential savings can be up to 20% if the company keeps its current service areas.One last application of CMEM reviewed here is by Franceschetti, Honhon, Van Woensel, Bektaş, and Laporte (2013) who investigated fuel consumption,CO2emissions and driver costs under traffic congestion. The authors identified the conditions under which it is optimal to wait idly at certain locations in order to avoid congestion and to reduce the cost of emissions. Their results suggest that a 20% reduction in the cost of fuel,CO2emissions and driver cost is achievable based on the instances generated by Demir et al. (2012).The MEET model (Eq. (1)) has been widely used by several researchers. One of the first applications of MEET is due to Kim, Janic, and Van Wee (2009) who investigated the relationships between freight transport costs andCO2emissions in intermodal and truck only freight networks, as a part of multi-objective study.CO2emissions were estimated as a function of cruising speed and distance traveled, and average values were used for other factors, such as cold-start emissions and ambient temperature.The second application is due to Figliozzi (2010) who studied the minimization of emissions and fuel consumption. The author introduced the emissions vehicle routing problem (EVRP), an extension of the time-dependent vehicle routing problem (TDVRP). The author described a formulation and an algorithm for the problem. The objective of the EVRP is the minimization of emission cost, which is proportional to the amount of GHG emitted, which in turn is a function of travel speed and distance traveled. In the proposed algorithm, a partial EVRP is first solved to minimize the number of vehicles by means of a TDVRP algorithm, following which and emissions are optimized subject to a fleet size constraint. The departure times are also optimized using the proposed algorithm for any pair of customers. The author worked with three traffic conditions: uncongested, somewhat congested, and congested traffic conditions. Results presented on the Solomon (1987) instances suggested that uncongested travel speeds tend to reduce emissions on average; however, this is not always the case, and the opposite trend is sometimes observed. The author suggests that a 20% reduction is possible by optimizing departure times. In another study (Figliozzi, 2011), the same author analyzedCO2emissions for different levels of congestion and time-definitive customer demands. Travel time data from an extensive archive of freeway sensors, time-dependent vehicle routing algorithms, and instances with different types of binding constraints were used to study the impacts of congestion on commercial vehicle emissions.Pan, Ballot, and Fontane (2010) have used MEET to analyze the effect of pooling supply chain networks on the reduction of transport-relatedCO2emissions. The authors have computedCO2emissions for two transport modes with real data. Their results show that reductions of 14% inCO2emissions for road transport only and of 52% for joint road and rail transport can be achieved.Another application of MEET is due to Jabali, Van Woensel, and de Kok (2012) who have investigated travel times andCO2emissions in the context of the TDVRP by analyzing the effect of limiting vehicle speed. The authors also addressed the issue of congestion, where the vehicle is forced to drive slower and therefore emits moreCO2. The authors provided a formulation of the problem in which the costs of driving, fuel andCO2are included. Using tabu search algorithm, they achieved a reduction of 11.2% inCO2emissions on average, which required increasing the travel time by 14.8% under a 90kilometer/hour speed profile. Under a speed limit of 80kilometer/hour, the authors report that an increase of 4.7% in travel time yields a reduction of 3.7% inCO2emissions.Omidvar and Tavakkoli-Moghaddam (2012) introduced a vehicle routing model for alternative fuel vehicles (AFV) (e.g., hybrid, electric and fuel cell vehicles) in order to minimize fuel consumption andCO2emissions. They have tested their model on the Solomon benchmark instances. Their results suggest that the importance ofCO2emissions costs for these vehicle is around 3% of the total costs.Another application of MEET is due by Saberi and Verbas (2012) who looked at emissions minimization in the context of the TDVRP. The authors have developed a continuous approximation model to analyze strategic planning of one-to-many distribution systems and have evaluated the effects of emissions costs. Their results suggest that a 50% reduction in emissions is possible.The NAEI (Eq. (5)) model was applied by Maden, Eglese, and Black (2010) to the vehicle routing and scheduling problem with an objective of minimizing the total travel time under congestion. The authors take into account regular congestion due to volume of traffic, and long-term road works, which can be predicted from historical data. Their results suggest that the proposed approach may yieldCO2emissions savings of up to 7%.Urquhart, Scott, and Hart (2010) have sought to identify traveling salesman tours with lowCO2emissions. The authors examined two different fuel emission models: a power based instantaneous fuel consumption model (IFCM) and a simpler spreadsheet based model (NAEI). The authors have applied their algorithm to the latter model. Computational results on six randomly generated instances having between 10 and 30 delivery points suggest that only a small improvement can be achieved by using the fuel emission model because of the inadequacy of the emission model.MOVES model was used by Wygonik and Goodchild (2011) who introduced the emissions minimization VRP with time windows (EVRPTW). The authors have modeled a specific case study involving a real fleet with specific operational characteristics and have analyzed different external policies and internal operational rules. Their results show a stable relationship between monetary cost and kilograms ofCO2emissions: each kilogram ofCO2results in an increase in cost by 3.5 dollars.COPERT (Eq. (3)) emission models have been widely used in different studies. The first study was conducted by Tavares, Zsigraiova, Semiao, and da Graça Carvalho (2008), who looked at the optimization of routing networks for waste transportation. Their model takes into account both the road angle and the vehicle load. Their findings indicate that optimizing fuel consumption can yield savings of up to 52% in fuel when compared with minimizing distance. Another paper of Tavares, Zsigraiova, Semiao, and Carvalho (2009) is concerned with the optimization of municipal solid waste collection routes to minimize fuel consumption using 3D GIS modeling. The results of this study suggest that the proposed approach reduces traveled distance by 29% and fuel consumption by 16%.Scott, Urquhart, and Hart (2010) have studied the effect of topology and payload in the context ofCO2optimized vehicle routing. They worked on two different data sets: delivery of groceries to households and delivery of paper from a central warehouse. They also worked on several traveling salesman instances randomly chosen from problem data sets, and assigned average speeds for each road category. Their results suggest that the effect of gradient and payload are highly dependent on the instances considered. The difference inCO2emissions between the instances was found to be less than 2.1% for the solutions obtained with COPERT.Using COPERT models, Jovičić et al. (2010) have investigated the energy efficiency to estimate the potential for reduction of fuel consumption and thusCO2emissions through the optimization of solid waste collection. The authors show that in the City of Kragujevac in Serbia, savings of up to 20% can be achieved in costs and the associated emissions.The PhD thesis of Qian (2012) studies fuel emission optimization in VRP with time-varying speeds. The author aims to generate routes and schedules for a fleet of heavy goods vehicles so as to minimize the emissions in a road network where travel speeds are time-dependent. Computational results obtained by the algorithm on a London case study suggest that 6–7% savings in fuel consumption may be achieved using the proposed approach.Another eco-routing study was carried out by Kang, Ma, Ma, and Huang (2011) who used the IVE model to minimize fuel consumption and vehicle emissions. The authors sought to determine the vehicle specific power, which is derived from their vehicle routing and scheduling model. Their eco-routing approach may yieldCO2emissions savings of up to 18% compared a time-minimizing objective and by 8% compared to a distance-minimizing objective.EMVRP: The energy-minimizing vehicle routing problem was introduced and formulated by Kara et al. (2007). The objective of the EMVRP is to minimize a weighted load function as a way of estimating fuel consumption. This function is based on a physics rule stating that on a flat surface work equals force times distance. The integer linear programming model proposed for the EMVRP is based on that of the capacitated VRP. Since the model minimizes the total work done on the road, the authors argue that this leads to minimizing the total energy requirements, at least in terms of total fuel consumption. They study the differences between distance-minimizing and energy-minimizing solutions on benchmark capacitated VRP instances from the literature and find that energy usage increases as total distance decreases. They conclude that there is a considerable difference between energy-minimizing and distance-minimizing solutions, and that the cost of routes minimizing total distance may be up to 13% less than those minimizing energy.FCVRP: Xiao, Zhao, Kaku, and Xu (2012) studied the fuel consumption rate in the context of the capacitated VRP. To estimate fuel consumption, the authors use a regression model based on statistical data, proposed by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism of Japan. They present a mathematical model and apply a simulated annealing algorithm to solve the problem.EVRP-VC: The emission minimization vehicle routing problem with vehicle classes were introduced by Kopfer, Schönberger, and Kopfer (in press). The model minimizes fuel consumption instead of driving distance by offering the possibility of using several types of vehicles. The authors compared their model to that of the traditional VRP. They replaced the distance minimizing objective function with an affine and piecewise linear fuel consumption function which considers payload. According to their results, a significant amount of reduction is possible through the use of a heterogeneous fleet of vehicles.SOP: The speed optimization procedure (SOP) is a polynomial time exact algorithm and used by Demir et al. (2012) in solving the PRP. Given a vehicle route, the SOP consists of finding the optimal speed on each arc of the route between successive nodes so as to minimize an objective function comprising fuel consumption costs and driver wages. The objective of SOP is non-linear due to the function used to estimate the fuel consumption of a vehicle.DSOP: The departure time and speed optimization procedure is an extension of SOP and was studied by Franceschetti et al. (2013) to calculate the departure times from depot and customer sites while optimizing speeds on each arc of a given route.In this section, we presents several statistics of the growing body of literature on green road freight transportation. The section is organized based on three indicators, namely the type of publication, the factors taken into account in estimating fuel consumption, and the reported savings.We first analyze the number of manuscripts and categorize them according to publication type and year: journal articles (JA), conference proceedings (CP), technical reports (TR), and PhD theses (PT). The number of publications of each type is shown in Fig. 3.As can be seen from Fig. 3, a total of 58 publications are associated with the reduction of fuel consumption in vehicle routing and scheduling. There is an indication of the increase of publications after 2009. The number ofJA,CP,TRand PT publications are 33, 16, 6 and 3, respectively. The increase in the number of publications is approximately 430% from 2009 to 2012.In this section, we analyze publications based on the factors used in their research. Fig. 4illustrates the factors used in 58 publications reviewed in this paper.This figure is quite revealing in several ways. First, we see that most of the studies consider speed and load in their formulations. As discussed in Demir et al. (2012), speed has a significant effect in fuel consumption, and optimal speed could lead better reduction in terms ofCO2. Second, congestion is another important factor but only very few studies have looked at this factor. Third, driver behavior and road gradient are mostly studied in eco-routing studies with the help of GIS softwares. Finally, fleet size and mix are attracting increasing attention due to the benefits of selecting the right type of vehicle. As discussed in Section 2, the total vehicle mass is directly related to the fuel consumption and any extra weight will lead more consumption.In this section, we analyze theCO2e savings reported in the literature based on various applications. These are grouped into four categories: Group I: 0–5.99%, Group II: 6–10.99%, Group III: 11–15.99%, and Group IV: higher than 16%. We provide a graph of savings in Fig. 5. It is apparent from this figure that the actual savings are heavily dependent on the vehicle emission model used, but significant reductions inCO2e emissions are possible. We note, however, that the savings are related to the particular factors considered in the solution methodology.Tables 9 and 10contain a summary of the publications reviewed in this paper. Since the topic has received attention from researchers of various backgrounds, this categorization can be very useful to the research community. As can be seen from Tables 9 and 10, most of the papers are supported by case studies, which indicates the interest of grounding the research in real-life applications. The most popular models are the COPERT at a macroscopic level and CMEM at a microscopic level. Solution approaches remain mostly heuristic, given the increasing complexity of the problems when emission models are integrated.Over the years, the minimization of the total traveled distance has been accepted as the most important objective in the field of vehicle routing and freight transportation. However, the interaction of operational research with mechanical and traffic engineering shows that there exist factors which are critical to explain fuel consumption. This triggered the birth of the green road transportation studies in operational research. In recent years, the number, quality and the availability of the available models have increased considerably. Our research leads to the following five important conclusions:•Most studies in the field of green road freight transportation have focused on a limited number of factors, mainly vehicle load and speed. In particular, vehicle speed is shown to be quite crucial and that it is important to travel at a speed that leads to minimum fuel consumption for a given routing plan.Several studies suggest that, for a same load, light duty vehicles should be preferred over medium duty (MD) and heavy duty (HD) vehicles. MD should be also preferred to HD vehicles if possible.A positive road gradient leads to an increase in fuel consumption and it should be taken into account in route planning in future applications. Current GIS software can provide information of the road gradient.Further studies should focus on the selection of appropriate emission tools and standardize them. Our findings show that the COPERT and CMEM models serve different purposes but greatly depend on the availability of data for accurate calculations.BesidesCO2e emissions, other traffic externalities could be examined at the local and regional levels, such as other pollutants, noise, accidents, and environmental damage.Considering current studies on green road freight transportation, the following five areas were identified as further research directions.•The current GIS software uses very simple regression models, based solely on the distance traveled, to estimate fuel consumption. The microscopic models could be integrated within such software to take fuel consumption into account. The integration of the algorithms reviewed in this paper and GIS software could save both fuel and time.The interactive selection of solutions generated via multi-objective optimization should allow for flexibility, productivity and support for the route planners of freight companies. Multi-objective optimization may come to play a vital role in green road transportation studies, particularly as the different objectives (e.g., distance, time, emissions) are incommensurable.Most studies only focus on the routing aspect of green logistics. Other problems that can be linked to routing may offer former reductions in emissions. For example, facility location is concerned with physically locating a set of facilities (depots) so as to maximize the profit generated by providing service to a set of customers. The relocation of a depot may lead to reductions inCO2e emissions. Some attempts in this direction have already appeared in the literature (see, e.g., Harris, Mumford, & Naim, 2011).The selection of the right vehicles from an available set is another promising area to minimizeCO2emissions. The effect of the characteristics of a vehicle onCO2e emissions is reviewed in Section 2 but this is an area in need of more effort for comprehensive investigations. The fleet size and mix vehicle routing problem usually consists of determining the type and the number of vehicles of each type in order to minimize acquisition and routing costs. To our knowledge, there exist only very few studies carried out within the perspective of fuel consumption and emissions.Driver working hours should be considered in the green logistics studies because of law requirements, as well as the acknowledged health hazards arising from intensive workload of some routing plans. Although some of the available studies could conceivably be modified to reflect these type of real-life requirements, this issue still requires further attention.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
