@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Seasonality and idiosyncratic risk in mutual fund performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Seasonal pattern in January, February, April and May.No significant relation between fund returns and idiosyncratic risk.Idiosyncratic risk cannot be eliminated for most funds.Idiosyncratic risk can explain seasonality in the month of April.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mutual fund performance,Seasonality,Idiosyncratic risk,Tax-loss selling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper examines the relationship between seasonality, idiosyncratic risk and mutual fund returns using multifactor models. We use a large sample containing the return histories of 728 UK mutual funds over a 23-year period to measure fund performance. We present evidence that idiosyncratic risk cannot be eliminated, we also find evidence of seasonality in all fund categories. Specifically, we find a close relation between the seasonality and the end of the tax-year. We document that the idiosyncratic risk puzzle cannot explain seasonality in fund performance in the UK. Although, we do find that idiosyncratic risk can account for the seasonality in the month of April. Thus, the results show a link between the tax-loss selling hypothesis in April and idiosyncratic risk in that month. Finally, we report evidence that idiosyncratic risk is negatively related to expected returns for most fund classes.The aim of this paper is to contribute to our understanding of fund return seasonality, the idiosyncratic risk puzzle in mutual funds, and the relationship between returns and idiosyncratic risk in fund performance. The motivation is that there are calendar anomalies that affect stock returns and it does not seem unreasonable to suppose that they might affect returns on mutual funds in a similar way. In this paper we empirically test whether there is monthly seasonality as well as idiosyncratic risk in fund performance, and their relationship.Despite idiosyncratic risk in stock returns has been widely tested, there have been few papers that use idiosyncratic risk to explain the cross-sectional differences in expected returns among fund categories. The empirical literature has not examined general idiosyncratic risk across funds. Investors usually consider that a mutual fund is a well-diversified portfolio in which all idiosyncratic risk is eliminated.After the finding of seasonality in stock returns in the mid-seventies there have been several papers that explain calendar and size effects. In one of the early papers, Gultekin and Gultekin (1983) found a January effect in sixteen countries, even if the tax-year-end was not December. Since returns are affected by systematic and idiosyncratic risk, idiosyncratic risk may provide meaningful information on the observed seasonality of returns.Most studies examining seasonality or idiosyncratic risk are based on USA data. Studies of the UK market are more limited and have mainly focused on the analysis of stock returns. This paper aims to add to the existing literature about mutual funds, looking at the relationship between idiosyncratic risk and seasonality with regard to performance of UK mutual funds, using a larger data set than previous studies on UK mutual funds. Furthermore, the issue of fund classification is taken into consideration.The motivation behind fund classification is that the fund category is also an important component of stock returns. Investors who cannot diversify their stocks are influenced by industry-specific and idiosyncratic volatilities, as well as market volatility. The price of a fund depends on the total volatility of the fund return, including industry-specific and idiosyncratic volatility, in addition to market volatility.The study reports the following results. First, idiosyncratic risk cannot be eliminated for most funds categories. Second, idiosyncratic risk can explain the seasonality in the month of April for all fund categories for which this month presents seasonal effects. Thus, the results show a link between the tax-loss selling hypothesis and idiosyncratic risk in April. Third, idiosyncratic risk is negatively significant in predicting market returns in most fund categories. We also document no evidence that funds with high idiosyncratic risk have higher returns. Finally, we find that idiosyncratic risk can forecast fund returns after controlling for macroeconomic variables.The risk-return relation is an important topic in asset pricing. Merton (1973) showed a positive relation between risk and return in the stock market. However, after a long empirical literature, there is no a clear consensus about the tradeoff for stock market indices.The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) assumes that all investors hold the market portfolio. Then, only systematic risk is considered. For several reasons, investors may not hold perfectly diversified portfolios. There are various asset pricing models in the literature that consider idiosyncratic risk. Some theories predict that idiosyncratic risk is positively related to expected stock returns. Levy (1978) and Malkiel and Xu (2006) state that the idiosyncratic risk is important as many investors do not hold diversified portfolios. Similar to Merton (1987), they create a CAPM model where investors hold undiversified portfolios. The new model relates the beta of the stock to the market and with a measure of idiosyncratic risk. Mayers (1976) incorporates a human capital factor in a CAPM and reaches a similar pricing model.Campbell, Martin, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) study long-term trends in firm and market volatility in United States stock markets from 1962 to 1997. They find a significant positive trend in idiosyncratic firm-level volatility, while market volatility has no significant trend using monthly data from 1926 to 1997. The authors argue that the correlations among individual stock returns have declined in the last decades, as the trend in idiosyncratic volatility has increased relative to market volatility. They suggest several causes, like the preference for firms to access the stock market earlier, executive compensation schemes that reward stock volatility, and large conglomerates broken into smaller corporations. In contrast, Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2012) show that there is no upward trend in idiosyncratic volatility anywhere in the developed world. They find that idiosyncratic volatility is well described by a stationary regime-switching, mean reverting process with occasional shifts to a higher-mean, higher-variance regime. They point that idiosyncratic variability is highly correlated across countries, and this correlation has increased over time. Brandt, Brav, Graham, and Kumar (2013) present new evidence about the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle, they show that by 2003 volatility falls back to pre-1990s levels. They also find that the increase and subsequent reversal is concentrated among firms with low share prices. They suggest that the increase in idiosyncratic volatility through the 1990s was an episodic phenomenon rather than a time trend, and was partially associated with the trading of retail investors.Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003, hereafter GS) find a new approach to test the relevance of a time-series relationship between risk and return in the aggregate stock market. Their relevant contribution is to consider average stock risk for predictability. They compute average stock risk for each month as the cross-sectional average of the variances of all the stocks traded in that month. Consistent with some previous studies, they show that the lagged variance of the market has no predictive power for the market return. However, GS find a relevant positive relation between the equal-weighted average stock volatility and the value-weighted portfolio returns.Many authors do not agree with CAPM or Merton (1973), among them Campbell (1987), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), and Whitelaw (1994) discover that there is no relation between risk and return or exist a negative tradeoff in the time-series data. Early empirical research that rejected the model include Lintner (1965), Douglas (1969), Miller and Scholes (1972). Douglas (1969) argues that residual variance is also priced according to average returns in a single cross-sectional regression. Fama and MacBeth (1973) create a new cross-sectional test and reject the role of idiosyncratic risk in the CAPM. Miller and Scholes (1972) find that different bias may exist, like errors in measuring beta, correlation between betas and residual variances, and omitting the risk free rate. King, Sentana, and Wadhwani (1994) study the volatility relation among national stock markets, they find that idiosyncratic economic shocks are priced and that the price of risk differs across stock markets. Falkenstein (1996) provides evidence that idiosyncratic volatility influenced the equity holdings of mutual fund managers.Wei and Zhang (2005) have re-examined the result of GS in an extended sample period from 1963 to 2002, an additional three years, and in contrast with GS, they did not find significant positive relationship between average returns and pre-determined average return volatility measures. Another study by Bali, Cakici, Yan, and Zhang (2005) find that GS results are not robust for different stock portfolios and sample periods. They find that GS result is due to small stocks traded on the Nasdaq, and is partly driven by liquidity premium.Guo and Savickas (2006) argue that idiosyncratic risk, jointly with stock market risk and liquidity risk, is a significant determinant of the equity premium. Furthermore, they show that idiosyncratic volatility is negatively related to future stock returns. Similarly, Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) and Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang (2006), Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang (2009) find that stocks with high past idiosyncratic volatility have lower future returns compared to stock with relatively low past idiosyncratic volatility. Chen, Huang, and Jha (2012) show that the variation in idiosyncratic return volatility from 1978 to 2009 is attributable to managerial discretion in accruals after controlling for operating uncertainty. They state that the findings hold during various subperiods, including the recent financial crisis, and after controlling for a number of alternative explanations.Ang et al. (2006) provide empirical evidence suggesting that US stocks returns are negatively related to lagged idiosyncratic volatility. They find a large difference in average returns between stocks with low and high idiosyncratic volatility. Another paper of Ang et al. (2009) show that the negative relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatility and future average returns exists in a sample of international markets. Strong negative relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatility and average excess returns is observed in each of the largest seven equity markets (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the US and UK) and also in a larger sample of 23 developed markets. They point out that the idiosyncratic volatility effect strongly co-moves with the low returns earned by stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility around the world. Hueng and Yau (2013) find that lagged idiosyncratic volatility is a better proxy for expected idiosyncratic risk in the country-level data than in the firm-level data. They point that, in the case of global equity indices, past idiosyncratic volatility is a good predictor of expected idiosyncratic volatility.Eiling (2013) relates human capital to the premium for idiosyncratic risk that is shown in several empirical papers. She shows that when (industry-specific) human capital is excluded from the benchmark used to measure systematic risk, the resulting residual risk affects the cross-section of expected returns. Furthermore, the importance of the idiosyncratic risk premium depends on the exposure to human capital returns. Panousi and Papanikolaou (2012) show that the negative effect of idiosyncratic risk on investment is stronger when executives own a larger part of the company’s shares, they point that this negative effect arises from poor managerial diversification. Although, the effect of insider ownership on the investment–uncertainty relation disappears if institutional investors form a large part of the shareholder base, possibly due to more effective monitoring of managerial decisions.Seasonality in equity returns results from a seasonality effect in the action of investors. A growing number of authors suggest that share turnover may have a relevant role in determining assets price movement. Many studies, including Karpoff (1987), state that turnover and return are positively correlated using daily or monthly data and that past turnover have predicting power for future returns (see Baker and Stein (2004) or Piqueira (2005)).The three most common explanations found in the literature for seasonality are holiday effect, window dressing, and tax-loss selling. The holiday effect improves a stock performance in the month prior to the holiday period, and leads to a lower than normal performance in the month after the holiday period. Window dressing consists in adjusting a portfolio in a specific time period, usually in the last few days before the end of a fiscal year. Tax-loss selling leads a stock’s performance to be lower than normal in the month in which investors sell their stocks for tax-loss purposes.There is a growing research that evaluates the relation between variation in the trading patterns of investors and seasonality in equity returns. Some relevant contributions include Gibson, Safieddine, and Titman (2000) who find seasonality in fund trading activity prior to the tax year end, which is consistent with selling underperforming stocks more quickly than other stocks. Carhart, Kaniel, Musto, and Reed (2002) find evidence of the inflation of stock prices held by US mutual funds at the end of each quarter, as a consequence of managers following aggressive trading strategies. Ng and Wang (2004) find that US institutional traders are more active in sales of small loser stocks in the last quarter of the year, then institutions buy both winner and loser small stocks in the following quarter. They argue that the January effect is due to the institutional trading behavior amongst small stocks. In a similar way, using Finnish data, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2004) show that investors incur tax-loss selling before tax-year end.In a recent paper, Hong and Yu (2008) investigate seasonality in stock trading activity associated with summer vacation. Using turnover and stock data from 51 stock markets, they discover that turnover is lower for the summer period compared to the rest of the year by an average of 7.9%. They define summer as three months period, being July August and September for Northern Hemisphere and January, February and March for Southern Hemisphere. They also find that stock returns are lower in the summer, the mean monthly value-weighted market return being lower during the summer by 0.90%. Both effects, the turnover and the stock return, are larger for the ten biggest stock markets, and more significant for North America and Europe. This is related to other papers on the summer effect, one of them is Bouman and Jacobsen (2002), which documents that stock returns are lower from May to October than during the rest of the year for a cross-section of 37 countries. They find this ‘Sell in May’ effect to be more important in European countries and constant over time. They provide sample evidence of a ‘Sell in May’ effect noticeable in the UK stock market since 1694, in several other countries has been noticeable for a very long time. Another paper that considers summer seasonality is Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi (2003), they argue that seasonal affective disorder (SAD) affects stock market returns during the summer. They explain that research in psychology has found a relationship between depression and lowered risk-taking, then seasonal variation in the length of days can influence equity returns. They consider stock markets data from countries around the world, and affirm that there is an important effect of seasonal affective disorder on stock returns in all markets. Garrett, Kamstra, and Kramer (2005) question whether the Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD) can be explained by a conditional asset pricing model with a risk premium varying over time. They study daily and monthly stock market returns for a number of countries, including US, Sweden, New Zealand, UK, Japan and Australia. Following Bekaert and Harvey (1995), they find that a conditional version of the CAPM, which takes into account the SAD, allows for time-variation in market risk and a time-varying price of risk.Kelly and Meschke (2010) re-examine the SAD effect by replicating and extending Kamstra et al. (2003) paper. They show that the SAD hypothesis is unsupported by the psychological literature, that there is no relation between the stock returns and the prevalence of SAD in the general population, and that the econometric specification of the SAD model creates the statistical significance cited as evidence for the SAD effect. They state that an association between sentiment-affecting events and stock prices is not enough to establish a causal link between the two. They explain that papers that investigate whether investor sentiment influences stock returns focus on identifying events that affect mood and are unlikely to affect economic opportunities. They state that these papers do not take into account three relevant aspects by not investigating whether the event induced mood change affects investor perception of financial risk or return, whether this change is reflected in trading behavior, and whether these sentiment-based trades affect stock prices.One of the common forms of seasonality in stock returns in the literature is the “January effect”. An early study by Dyl (1977) showed that capital gains taxation on stocks influence investors’ year-end decisions, as capital gains taxes give investors an incentive to realize capital losses, and this has an effect on the trading volume in December. He finds abnormal trading volume in December, with low volume for stocks that have appreciated during the year, and high volume for stock prices that have decreased in the year, showing tax loss sales at the end of the year. Ritter (1988) is another relevant paper that studies the “January effect”, he argues that investors sell stocks in December, which have experienced a decline in price during the year in order to realize losses for tax purposes. Then, investors wait until January to invest their profits in a wide range of small stocks, creating the “parking the proceeds” hypothesis. He suggests that the January effect may be increased by cash injections from year-end bonuses and from sales of larger companies. Haug and Hirschey (2005) also provide evidence of the January effect using large capitalization and small stocks for the period 1802–2004. They find a persistent January effect for small capitalization stocks even after the Tax Reform Act of 1986. They confirm that Fama and French (1993) size and book factors foster the January effect for small cap stocks. They also show a persistently negative January effect for momentum stocks. The authors conclude stating that the January effect is mainly driven by small stocks, and has not been influenced by the Tax Reform Act of 1986.Yao (2012) investigates the causes of the success of long-term contrarian and intermediate-term momentum using several tests. They find that long-term contrarian is due entirely to the January size effect. He shows that the January contrarian strategy is extraordinarily profitable, while the contrarian strategy outside of January is economically and statistically unprofitable. His findings are robust to different subperiods. He points that his findings answer the question raised by Novy-Marx (2011) about the heavy dependence of momentum on intermediate-term prior returns. In a series of tests, he shows that the superior performance of intermediate-term prior returns in momentum is due to the January seasonality profits neutralizing the well-known January momentum losses.Zhang and Jacobsen (2012) state that seasonal monthly anomalies strongly depend on the sample period considered. They show that few calendar months have significantly outperform, or underperform persistently over 300years. They interpret that their result confirms the potential problems caused by data snooping, noise and selection bias, and highlights the importance of studying long time series. They point that many if not all calendar month anomalies may be spurious. Their overall conclusion is that monthly seasonals might simply be in the eye of the beholder.The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present a theoretical analysis, including a link between fund return seasonality and idiosyncratic risk. In Section 3, we introduce the data set and present some preliminary analysis. In Section 4, we describe the methodology used in the research. In Section 5, we examine and discuss the empirical results. Concluding comments are contained in Section 6.Evidence from psychology and financial decision making states that investors change their risk-taking behavior when decisions are taken in a multi-period scenario. Thaler (1985) explains that financial decisions concerning multiple periods are examined in intertemporal mental accounts, and the results from last period influence the risk-taking tendency in the subsequent period. Barberis and Huang (2001) explain that mental accounting by investors is relevant for understanding stock return anomalies such as the value effect. Thaler and Johnson (1990) show that after gaining in the lottery, individuals become more risk seeking in the following lottery games, this is known as the “house money effect”. They also show that after a loss and being offered the option to break even, individuals are also more willing to continue gambling, this is known as the “break-even effect”. Several authors, including Ackert, Charupat, Church, and Deaves (2006), O’Connell and Teo (2007), and Liu, Tasi, Wang and Zhu (2010), find evidence supporting these effects in several markets. Thus, if the turn of the New Year is the starting point for a new round of investing, we would expect that changes in risk-taking behavior happen more often at the start of the New Year.We can conclude that theoretical models suggest that investor risk-taking preference can impact equilibrium asset prices. The finance literature has paid increasing attention to return anomalies in recent years, as we have mentioned in the introduction there are several patterns unexplained by systematic factor models. Research evidence in individual risk taking shows that investors exhibit stronger risk-taking preferences at the turn-of-the-new-year. Thus, we expect stocks to outperform at this time of the year as a consequence of an excess demand from investors. We investigate this hypothesis using UK mutual funds.A recent body of empirical literature has arisen about the hypothesized link between seasonality and idiosyncratic risk. Doran, Jiang and Peterson (2012a,b, hereafter DJP) show that the volatility-return relation can be better understood by taking into account January from non-January months. The authors provide evidence that the underperformance of stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility is mainly in the non-January months, what they call the “non-January idiosyncratic volatility puzzle”. In January highly volatile stocks normally outperform low volatile stocks. However, there is a significant underperformance of high idiosyncratic volatility stocks when January returns are not included. This study is the first to research the relation between idiosyncratic volatility and stock returns for January and non-January months. DJP state that since highly volatile stocks tend to be small companies and past losers, they are likely to be exposed to the January effect. This fosters a positive relation between returns and idiosyncratic volatility for January. Finally, they provide evidence showing that some highly volatile stocks have better than expected earnings and return performance near earnings announcements. Thus, they state that their evidence is consistent with behavioral models, proving that high idiosyncratic volatility is associated with systematic over- and under-pricing.In a recent study, the same authors (Doran, Jiang and Peterson (2012a,b, hereafter DJP 2012)) provide an explanation for the positive volatility-return relation of January, they argument that the January volatility effect is due to stocks with lottery returns. Usually these stocks trade at low prices and have negative and skewed returns during the rest of the year. DJP 2012 argument that two characteristics make low-price and high-volatility stocks so attractive for individual investors at the beginning of the New Year. First, investors have a preference for stocks with lottery features, as recent research shows that investors tend to prefer positively-skewed returns (see Barberis and Huang (2008)). The second characteristic of their conjecture is the “mental accounting” of financial investments. It is normal that individuals take New Year’s decisions about investments, as they do about family or health, and start with these plans in January. Hence, at the beginning of a new year investors will have a stronger preference for lottery-type stocks and will impact stock prices more than at other periods of the year. DJP 2012 make the assumption that the large allocation of individual investor funds in lottery-type securities at the beginning of the New Year can create abnormally high January returns in stock with high idiosyncratic volatility and low prices.The data consists of a sample of multi-sector mutual funds for the UK over the period January 1987 to December 2010. The fund names, ISIN codes, and fund classifications are obtained from Bloomberg, and the returns are from Datastream. We study local currency returns for all the mutual funds in the UK (728), including non-surviving funds. We divide the funds in sub-samples of multi-sector funds classified as per Bloomberg as: (a) Value (37); (b) Small capitalization (110); (c) Large capitalization (93); (d) Growth (223); (e) Emerging markets (34); (f) Multi capitalization (118); and (g) Global equity (143). These sub-samples account for around half of the whole sample of funds, the other funds might fall under other Bloomberg classification, which we are not going to consider for this study. We focus on the fund categories used by institutional investors.The fund data comprises monthly prices and returns for all the active and non-surviving mutual funds in our fund categories over the sample period. The monthly returns measure the performance of the fund, assuming that dividends are re-invested to purchase additional units of the funds at the closing price applicable on the ex-dividend date. The one-month UK Treasury bill rate is used as a proxy for the risk-free rate. The return on FTSE All Shares Index is used as a market return proxy. The FTSE All-Share Index is a capitalization-weighted index, which is an aggregation of the FTSE 100, FTSE 250 and FTSE Small Cap Indicescomprising around 800 of more than 2000 companies that are traded on the London Stock Exchange, which represents 98–99% of the UK market capitalization.The focus is on monthly returns for three reasons. First, monthly returns do not reflect short-term asymmetric information and changes in liquidity around earnings announcement dates. Second, monthly returns are a common unit for financial economists and permits easy comparison to existing patterns. Third, considering a short window around the earnings announcement date misses much of the premium, this is relevant as missing the premium does not provide sufficient window to measure seasonality. A month window is more informative than a shorter window, as prior to the announcement day, there is an important pre-event run-up, and a positive drift after the announcement.We specify a local version of the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model to estimate idiosyncratic risk. We use the FTSE All-Shares Index to calculate the market factor, the FTSE Small Cap Index monthly return minus the FTSE 100 Index monthly return yield the country-specific factor SMB, and the monthly return of the MSCI UK Value Index minus the monthly return of the MSCI UK Growth Index will yield the value factor HML (see Banegas, Gillen, Timmermann, and Wermers (2013)). We will use these monthly data for the three factors for the whole period of the study. The data for these indices is obtained from Datastream.Table 1presents summary statistics for the fund returns for each sub-sample, it provides mean returns and standard deviations of returns for each of the fund categories. The standard deviation of a funds’ return series gives an indication of the risk for each group of funds over the period, it measures the investment’s volatility. There is a positive relationship between fund return and risk. Although the risk-return trade off is not proportional across all sub-samples of funds, some fund categories have lower returns while present a higher risk than others. For example, large capitalization funds earn a return of 0.422 with a standard deviation of 1, while multi-capitalization funds present an average return of 0.384 and a standard deviation of 1.053.There is a moderate variation in the average returns across the sub-sample of funds. The average return ranges from 0.384 for multi-capitalization funds to 0.671 of the emerging market funds. Although, the whole sample of funds presents a return of only 0.482, while the FTSE All Share Index shows a return of 0.342. Thus, an investor will earn a higher return if he replicates our sub-samples of funds that if he invests in a fund that replicates the whole sample or the FTSE All Share Index. This could be due to the fact that, usually, funds in each sub-sample have a more active fund manager than the rest of the funds in the entire sample. Thus, these fund managers succeed in beating the market as well as other funds which follow a more passive strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
