@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An outlook on behavioural OR – Three tasks, three pitfalls, one definition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It is crucial for the development of Behavioural OR (BOR) to have a broad outlook.The paper proposes 3 research tasks that BOR should address.The paper addresses 3 pitfalls that BOR should avoid.The paper suggests a definition of BOR that takes all these aspects into account.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioural OR,Interdisciplinary,Social sciences,Organizations,Hard and soft OR,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In their recent paper, Hämäläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013) have made a strong case for the importance of Behavioural OR. With the motivation to contribute to a broad academic outlook in this emerging discipline, this rather programmatic paper intends to further the discussion by describing three types of research tasks that should play an important role in Behavioural OR, namely a descriptive, a methodological and a technological task. Moreover, by relating Behavioural OR to similar academic endeavours, three potential pitfalls are presented that Behavioural OR should avoid: (1) a too narrow understanding of what “behavioural” means, (2) ignorance of interdisciplinary links, and (3) a development without close connection with the core disciplines of OR. The paper concludes by suggesting a definition of Behavioural OR that sums up all points addressed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since its inception, Operational Research (OR) has been successful at finding solutions for a wealth of practical problems, often pioneering novel and sophisticated analytical techniques for difficult and complex decision problems. For practitioners in the field it has always been obvious that the application of these OR techniques and the implementation of their results in a concrete real-world setting poses challenges on its own – challenges that go beyond the analytical sophistication of OR methods and are related to the “human factor” in decision-making. Only rarely, however, have these behavioural challenges led to research in the field of OR that systematically addresses them, with the exception of a few single contributions (such as Richels, 1981), some of the papers presented at two conferences on “OR and the Social Sciences” in 1964 and 1989 (Jackson et al., 1989; Lawrence, 1966) and more regular contributions within some OR sub-disciplines, such as Decision Analysis (based on the seminal results of Tversky & Kahneman, 1974, for example) and Problem Structuring Methods (e.g. Rosenhead & Mingers, 2001).Recently, there has been an increased interest in behavioural issues related to Operations Research. In a paper in the European Journal of Operational Research, Hämäläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013) have made a strong case for the need of a new sub-discipline Behavioural Operational Research that explicitly studies “behavioural aspects related to the use of Operational Research (OR) methods in modelling, problem solving and decision support” (Hämäläinen et al., 2013: 623), and the 20th IFORS conference in Barcelona in 2014 featured the first stream of papers on Behavioural OR. The present paper intends to make a programmatic contribution that may enrich the discussion about the focus and direction that this newborn member of the family of OR sub-disciplines could take. In particular, it is motivated by the wish to contribute to a broad academic outlook of the newly emerging discipline, especially regarding its research questions, its research paradigms, and its links with both neighbouring academic disciplines outside OR and other fields within OR. Accordingly, it brings together a diversity of lines of enquiries, research programs, perspectives and paradigms from various strands of academia to offer a panorama view on existing and possible future research in Behavioural OR and to demonstrate the merits and rich potential of a broad perspective on Behavioural OR.The remainder of the paper is structured into three parts. The next section will address three types of research foci that could play an important role in Behavioural OR. On this basis, the following section relates Behavioural OR to similar academic endeavours in other academic fields and presents three potential pitfalls that Behavioural OR should avoid. The paper concludes by suggesting a definition of Behavioural OR that sums up all points addressed.We will begin by considering the aims of Behavioural OR. The study of aspects of human behaviour in general has a long academic tradition that has led to the emergence of a variety of social sciences, such as economics, management studies, psychology, sociology, political science, anthropology and cultural studies, just to mention a few. Any serious approach to studying human behaviour in the context of OR methods therefore necessarily has an interdisciplinary orientation and cannot ignore concepts, methods and insights of the social sciences. The rich history of the social sciences provides a basis for a diverse array of potential topics for research in Behavioural OR.As with all interdisciplinary endeavours, there are two ways in which an academic discipline A can advance by making contact with a discipline (or set of disciplines) B:(1)discipline A can draw on concepts, methods or insights from discipline B by using them within its own core paradigms of research, andresearchers of discipline A can step out of the traditional paradigms of their own discipline and assume the perspective of researchers of discipline B, with the intention to shed light, “from the outside”, on problems and concerns that discipline A faces.For Behavioural OR, approach (1) means developing new analytical methods that incorporate aspects of human behaviour to enable decision makers to arrive at better decisions. Examples for this type of research can be found in agent-based modelling (e.g. Tesfatsion, 2003), for example, in game-theoretical approaches from economics to analyze decision situations (e.g. Kittsteiner & Molduvanu, 2005), in the principal-agent models of economics that consider the consequences of information asymmetries to determine (under certain strict Behavioural assumptions) optimal incentive structures (e.g. Eisenhardt, 1989), in elaborated ways of modelling preferences to arrive at better decision analytic methods (Roy, 1996), and in the psychological underpinning of problem structuring methods such as SODA (Eden & Ackermann, 2001).In approach (2), the operations researcher builds on concepts, methods and insights of the social sciences by assuming the role of a social scientist. The relevance of this approach for Behavioural OR lies in the fact that OR interventions, i.e. the application of OR techniques in a concrete practical setting, are a type of human behaviour and therefore susceptible to being studied via the concepts and methods of the social sciences. Carrying out Behavioural OR against the background of this perspective on OR interventions means studying the way in which human behaviour and human interactions11Here and in the following, we will occasionally refer to “human interactions” in conjunction with, or in lieu of, the term “human behaviour” to emphasize that Behavioural OR should not only focus on the behaviour of individuals, but also on the interactions between several individuals and the interplay between the use of OR techniques and individuals. As OR is primarily carried out in organizations, this wider focus is indispensable for the practical relevance of Behavioural OR.shape and are shaped by the use of OR techniques.Following this approach (2) is clearly a challenging task. Stepping out of well-known paradigms of one's own discipline to look at OR interventions via a social science perspective cannot be done casually, but requires serious interdisciplinary work, and as such it is susceptible to all typical problems of interdisciplinary endeavours. However, if the discipline of OR would like to make progress in understanding the behavioural side of its methods and techniques, it can neither hope to be able to develop, one day, a genuinely new perspective on behavioural phenomena on its own, i.e. a perspective that can do without existing social scientific expertise, nor wait for the social sciences to carry out this type of research on its behalf – particularly if this type of research is ultimately intended to foster OR's agenda of modelling, problem solving and decision support. Fortunately, as we will see in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, Behavioural OR is not alone with this this interdisciplinary challenge; there are role models in some sub-fields of OR and in closely related disciplines that Behavioural OR can follow and draw on. But at first, for the remainder of this section, let us have a look at the three highly relevant tasks or avenues of research for Behavioural OR that this approach of studying OR techniques from a social science perspective has to offer to the discipline of OR as a whole.(i)As OR is concerned with solving real-life decision problems, it is important to gain, on a descriptive level, theoretical and empirical insights into the behavioural implications of the use of OR techniques. This means first to study the impact of OR methods on organizations. Given that OR aims at being “The Science of Better”, it is surprising how little research there has been that empirically and critically investigates the question of the consequences for the functioning of organizations that result from applying OR methods. One of the few articles that can serve as an example for further research is a recent empirical study by Cabantous, Gond, and Johnson-Cramer (2010) that looks at the way in which decision analysis imparts rationality to organizations. There is a broad variety of useful research questions that are of relevance for the OR practitioner. Research of this type could, for example, shed light on the behavioural challenges that may result from implementing the solutions of mathematical models within an organization (see Ackoff, 1960; Geisler, 1966; and Ratoosh, 1966, for early research of this type) or could examine the potential behavioural consequences (such as a shift in power relations or a change in the distribution of, and the access to, information within a company) that may arise from new quantitative descriptions for aspects of organizational processes that were formerly not amenable to quantitative analysis, or it could address the consequences of the tendency of some methods of utility optimization to lead to “postdecision surprises” (Harrison & March, 1984; Smith & Winkler, 2006).Second, research of this type would study the impact that behavioural aspects have on the use of OR methods, including their successes and failures. Also this is a surprisingly under-researched area. For optimizing train schedules in transportation systems, for example, it is relevant to be aware of the fact that people make their travel decisions not only on the basis of travel preferences (departure time, travel time, number of connections, etc.), but are also influenced by the design of the map of the public transport system (Guo, 2011). In organizations, behavioural aspects can prevent OR methods from being used. Loch, Pich, Terwiesch, and Urbschat (2001), for example, present a case study that describes a carefully executed OR intervention, in which the resulting Mathematical Programming model was in the end not used by the organization due to the organizational change this would have implied. A better understanding of these and other phenomena could help significantly to improve the benefits of OR. Research of this type could also shed light on some “dark spots” in the application of OR methods in organizations, such as the purposeful abuse of models by exploiting the image of the objectivity of mathematical models to support a certain organizational agenda, or problems that may be caused by limited quantitative abilities or the incompetent application of OR methods (cf. Brown, 2005; Cronin, Gonzales, & Sterman, 2009), or ethical dilemmas that OR practitioners encounter (cf. Taket, 1994).Third, bringing the aspects of the previous two points together, research that aims at investigating on a descriptive level the behavioural side of the use of OR would also have a lot at how the process of using OR methods is shaped by the mutual interplay between OR techniques and human interaction within an organizational context. In research on information technology, this is interplay has been studied under the notion of the “duality of technology” (Orlikowski, 1992). For OR, studying the “duality of models” would help operations researchers to carry out OR interventions more effectively. With respect to Problem Structuring Methods, White (2009) has made a convincing case for research that falls into this category.As the application of OR in a real-world organization can be challenging (Mitchell, 1993), OR practitioners would benefit from research that provides, on the level of OR methodology, concepts that allow for reflecting on the use of OR techniques in concrete practical settings. These concepts would typically be grounded in the type of descriptive research addressed in the previous item (1) and/or on more general concepts and insights from the social sciences. An early example of this type of research is a study by the German management researcher Drumm (1984; see also Drumm & Scholz, 1986) who used questionnaires and interviews to determine five criteria that are necessary for the acceptance of quantitative methods in human resource planning (covering aspects such as power, technical competence, how pressing the problem is, and that new methods may threaten people's competence). Research of this type provides OR practitioners with guidelines that help them to reflect on their praxis and to arrive a successful outcome of an OR intervention. Another useful example is a recent article by Franco (2013), who describes, based on two case studies, the different types of roles and effects that OR models can have on organizations, highlighting the syntactic, semantic and pragmatic aspects of modelling. While focusing on Soft OR interventions, the concepts presented in the article are useful for quantitative, “hard” applications of OR, too.Research in Behavioural OR would not reach its fully potential if it did not stimulate, on the technological level, the development of novel or improved OR techniques. We have already addressed in approach (1) above the potential for improving models by incorporating concepts and insights from the social sciences. In the context of items (i) and (ii) of approach (2) that we are discussing here, there is another way in which Behavioural OR can lead to improved OR techniques, namely by taking into account the behavioural consequences that research of the type (i) and (ii) sheds light on. This leads to models and techniques that are better adapted to the behavioural context in which they are used, even when they do not explicitly model human behaviour and interactions.Research of this type would lead to OR techniques that may focus on aspects such as robustness, convenience of use, implementability, end-user transparency or technological acceptance in addition to analytical precision. The community of Problem Structuring Methods has long been aware of the importance of the behavioural issues involved in OR interventions, and a major contribution of Behavioural OR could be to foster systematically the development of corresponding quantitative techniques that take into account that OR is typically carried out in a social context (Rosenhead & Mingers, 2001). An interesting example in research on vehicle routing, which, even though it is based on practitioners’ experience rather than social scientific research, may serve as an illustration here: optimal mathematical solutions to routing problems may not find acceptance by practitioners due to behavioural aspects related to their practical implementation. This has led to the development of OR techniques that yield sub-optimal, but “visually attractive” solutions to routing problems, i.e. techniques that include additional constraints to ensure that the solutions are geographically compact, non-overlapping and have little intra-route crossover (e.g. Hollis & Green, 2012).In total, we have identified and illustrated three tasks for Behavioural OR: to investigate on a descriptive level the interplay between the use of OR techniques and human behaviour and interactions; to provide, on the methodological level, concepts that allow for reflecting on the use of OR techniques in concrete practical settings; and to stimulate, on a technological level, the development of novel or improved OR techniques. In the latter case we have seen that these techniques either may integrate behavioural aspects into the model or, not less importantly, may be adapted to the behavioural context in which they are used.The previous section aimed at providing a broad outlook on Behavioural OR by addressing various types of research where the discipline of OR would benefit from taking into account behavioural aspects. In this section we will have a look at three pitfalls that could prevent the newly emerging discipline of Behavioural OR from achieving a broad outlook. We will begin by having a closer look at research in the social sciences.While the core of the OR discipline has developed primarily in close contact with disciplines such as mathematics, statistics, computer science and engineering, OR has also always had close ties with the social sciences, among these particularly economics and, to a much lesser extent, psychology. If, however, we wish to become aware of the full potential of Behavioural OR we must not overlook that research about human behaviour is carried out by a variety of social sciences other than economics and psychology (such as management studies, sociology, political science, anthropology, cultural studies, etc.) not all of which are solely based on historical roots similar to those of OR. In fact, one of the main characteristics of the disciplines that study human behaviour is that they draw on both of the two intellectual traditions (or “two cultures” in the famous words of the British scientist and novelistSnow, 1959) that constitute academia, namely the sciences and the humanities, while the roots of OR can predominantly, albeit not exclusively, be found in the tradition of the sciences.The position of the social sciences between the sciences and the humanities opens up a multi-paradigmatic wealth of perspectives and fascinating research questions that can enrich our tool set for modelling, problem solving and decision support in OR. To illustrate the variety of approaches that can be found within the broad spectrum of perspectives in the social sciences, this section sketches five different paradigms of studying human behaviour, each of which is of central importance for larger number of disciplines in the social sciences. Apart from their general relevance in the social sciences, the approaches presented in the following have also been chosen due to their particular relevance for researchers who study management and organizations and because their diversity serves well at illustrating the wide range of approaches to analyzing human behaviour that can be found in the social sciences.This approach of conceptualizing human behaviour is probably the most well-known in the OR community. In its classical form, this approach can be found in the large body of work in microeconomics that uses quantitative models of rational choice in the utilitarian tradition (e.g. Becker, 1976). In these publications, a typical aim is to explain economic (i.e. social) phenomena by referring to the behaviour of individuals in terms of utility functions, which have a deterministic or probabilistic character similar to the quantitative laws in the natural, and to “environmental” factors such as other individuals represented by utility functions or a set of resources that also follow certain quantitative laws. In these models human cognitive processes are reduced to individuals attaching quantitative values (utilities) to particular resources or outcomes, and all social phenomena are to be explained with recourse to individual decisions (so-called methodological individualism, cf. Rutherford, 1996: 27–50; Berger, 1963). In the OR community, this approach of conceptualizing human behaviour has frequently been used for modelling, such as in game theoretical models, or as a normative ideal in Decision Analysis, for example, but has also been applied with a stronger behavioural interest, namely as a basis for empirical experiments about the way in which people solve OR problems (see e.g. Schweitzer & Cachon, 2000, for the newsvendor problem).This classical approach has been extended significantly over the past decades, mainly due to a better understanding of the boundaries of rational choice and the insight that human behaviour cannot be reduced to studying utility functions. Research that follows the behaviour-as-choice paradigm can roughly be divided into two streams, both of which have their historical origin in the seminal work bySimon (1949), which was intended to overcome the limitations of the classical economic perspective. One stream focusses on studying the “boundedness” of human rationality, either by studying deviations from rational behaviour or by exploring alternative ways to describe and formalize human decision making (see Katsikopoulos, 2014, for an overview). While this first stream has strong connections mainly with economics and psychology, the second stream, within Management Studies, has also taken up ideas from sociology. Similar to the first stream, it tends to focus on individual decisions as the main unit of analysis (methodological individualism), but right from the outset, this approach also aimed at going beyond the level of individual behaviour, incorporating insights into aspects of management and organizations that transcend individual actors. Moreover, going beyond the idea of utility functions and optimization models that shapes the first stream, it also takes into account the complex meaningful mental processes that underlie decision-making and sheds light on aspects of ambiguity and interpretation involved in decision-making processes (cf. March, 1994: chapter 5; Brunsson, 1985), thereby opening this stream of research to the so-called “interpretative” and “institutional” approaches that we will consider in the following subsections. Ultimately, this second stream of research even questions classical notions of bounded rationality by pointing out, for example, that decisions may follow a “logic of appropriateness” instead of a “logic of consequences” (e.g. March & Olsen, 1998). Researchers in OR have so far primarily drawn on approaches from the first stream of research, namely in the area of decision analysis (e.g. Morton & Fasolo, 2009). Future research could study, for example, decision processes in OR interventions in general, i.e. beyond decision analysis, and build on this paradigm to add new behavioural components to mathematical models.Another approach to studying social phenomena consists in analyzing human behaviour as the results of processes of sense-making. Proponents of this approach contend that there is a fundamental difference between human behaviour and the material phenomena that the natural sciences study because humans, when acting, interpret the world and impart meaning to it on the basis of the cognitive schemes and patterns they have become accustomed to. Consequently, advocates of these so-called interpretative approaches (cf. David, 2010, and Weick, 1995, for an overview with respect to behaviour in organizations) do not aim at finding laws that govern human behaviour and can explain or even predict it. Instead, they focus on adequately describing, analyzing and interpreting the processes by which human beings make sense of the world and that allow them to engage in meaningful interactions and deal with the situations they encounter. By analyzing the mental (i.e. cognitive) processes by which individuals create meaning, these approaches contribute to a deeper understanding of the cultural layers of meaning that can be found in everyday behaviour within and outside organizations, in particular in human interactions.There exists a large variety of interpretative approaches, with intellectual roots going back for a century, such as Herbert Blumer's symbolic interactionism, Alfred Schuetz's sociological phenomenology or Harold Garfinkel's ethnomethodology, just to name a few. In the OR community, also these ideas have so far been taken up primarily in the context of “soft OR”, namely approaches such as Strategic Options Development and Analysis (e.g. Eden, 1989) and Soft Systems Methodology (e.g. Checkland, 1981; cf. Mingers, 1984, for a critique). It would be a highly relevant task for further research in Behavioural OR to apply this perspective to studying the interactions between people in processes of building and using mathematical models in quantitatively-oriented OR interventions.Another approach, which is known as sociological neo-institutionalism, analyzes social phenomena (in particular organizations) by studying social institutions, i.e. mechanisms of social order that comprise of complexes of roles, positions, expectations, rules and values, to understand how they shape human behaviour. These institutions may have legal components (such as contracts and laws), but primarily consist of normative and cognitive rules and patterns that provide actors with a framework of how to conceptualize reality and of how to act (Scott, 2001). Similar to interpretative approaches, with which sociological neo-institutionalism shares some of its intellectual heritage (e.g. Berger & Luckmann, 1966), this strand of research is not interested in finding laws that govern human behaviour, but aims at gaining a rich understanding of the various layers of meaning and interpretation that shape human behaviour. However, in contrast to interpretative approaches, it does not primarily focus on analyzing social phenomena as the outcome of individual decisions or behaviour, but as the result of societal institutions that “materialize” in the way organizations are structured. Research of this type has shown, for example, that certain aspects of organizations can best be explained by institutionalized norms and cognitive schemes that confront organizations with societal expectations.The author of this paper is not aware of any current application of this (or a similar) perspective within the OR community. However, research in accounting that investigated the way in which organizations have adopted particular accounting concepts and methods to comply with institutionalized expectations of rationality by their environment (see Chapman, Cooper, & Miller, 2009: 12–14, for a brief introduction), suggests that approaches in this tradition have a potential to guide research in Behavioural OR. Research of this type could, for example, shed light on the reasons why organizations seek OR interventions and what the consequences of these are for the form and functioning of organizations.Researchers who employ this approach look at the nexus of social phenomena as a discourse or text, i.e. as a structured web of interwoven meaningful signs and symbols. In studying written texts, conversations and other communicative events, proponents of this approach work on uncovering concepts, paradigms and ideologies that, explicitly or implicitly, permeate these discourses and on giving a rich understanding of the semantic forces that drive them. In research on management and organizations, for example, there exists a stream of research called critical discourse analysis that looks at management phenomena as part of a textual chain of events by employing various means of linguistic textual analysis. Topics of research in this stream include the formation of organizational strategies, collaboration between organizations and behaviour in the workplace, for example (see Grant, Idema, & Oswick, 2011, for a short introduction).This approach of studying social phenomena is, in a certain sense, diametrically opposed to analyzing human behaviour as a result of individual rational choice. Instead of studying individual behaviour, discourse analysis focuses on analyzing the discourses themselves. In doing so, it studies how these are semantically structured by concepts, ideas, paradigms and ideologies that determine what can be communicated reasonably within a certain discourse and what is excluded from it. Moreover, the cultural patterns within discourses are even analyzed as a force that shapes actors, their identities and what they perceive as reasonable or rational. In other words, in this approach management practices are analyzed as being part of a network of semantic events where the individual statements within a discourse are considered as being shaped, to a great extent, by anonymous, supra-individual cultural patterns, or, in the words of Michel Foucault, one of major theorists that developed this approach, by “great anonymous strategies” (Foucault, 1976: 95). As a consequence, this approach also has a strong focus on analyzing how discourses establish and are formed by power relations (Foucault, 1980).Another difference between this approach and a pure rational choice approach consists in the fact that the discourse analytic strand of research does not aim at explaining social phenomena via scientific laws. Instead it aims at understanding, by careful textual analysis, the relationships among concepts and notions within a discourse and the inter-textual relations of a discourse with other discourses, and at uncovering underlying semantic patterns, such as ideologies, that carry through various texts.In OR, this perspective and related ones have so far only been taken notice of in the “soft OR” community (e.g. Brocklesby & Cummings, 1996; Taket & White, 1993). In a thought-provoking text, White and Taket (1994) have critically analyzed the notion of OR consultants as experts, for example. With its critical interest, in particular by uncovering paradigms of thought or ideologies, research of this type may appear to undermine the very basis of OR praxis; White and Taket (1994) even advocate the “death” of the OR expert. However, what some may perceive as threatening can also be seen as an invitation to question assumptions on OR praxis that were previously taken for granted and as an opportunity to become a more reflective OR practitioner, which may ultimately contribute to a “better” “Science of Better” – even though this may not always be the primary interest of proponents of these approaches. As the history of the sciences and the humanities overwhelmingly demonstrates, academia can only benefit from a critical examination of predominant, but unquestioned concepts, ideas and paradigms. An interesting topic for research in Behavioural OR that follows this approach would be to study the way in which the mathematical OR discourse shapes the managerial discourse within an organization during a (quantitative) OR intervention.The last approach that we will consider here is a family of related theories called theories of social practices, which has developed on the basis of various concepts from different theoretical roots in the humanities (cf. Reckwitz, 2002; Nicolini, 2013), with the intention to reconcile extreme paradigmatic positions in the social sciences (cf. Bourdieu, 1984; Giddens, 1984). The main units of analysis in this approach are “practices”, i.e. bundles of routinized behaviour common in a particular society or organization, such as the practice of calling a meeting, of writing an email, or of reading a book. Theories of Social Practices have a strong focus on understanding the layers of meaning that are involved in carrying out practices, but they have also taken up important aspects from approaches that aim at finding scientific laws that govern behaviour, which has led to an emphasis on the material aspects of human behaviour (e.g. resources) and empirical studies with a strong quantitative component, for example. The practice-based strand of social theorizing has also tried to find some middle ground between studying individual behaviour/interactions (as rational choice and interpretative approaches do) and analysing overarching cultural mechanisms (as discourse analysis does), namely by investigating both the micro-activities that result from individual actors carrying out social practices and by studying these practices as the very foundation of what constitutes actors, their identities and competences in the first place. In fact, the general capability of Theories of Social Practices to go beyond traditional social-theoretical dichotomies is one of the central aspects that has made them particularly innovative in management research (Feldman & Orlikowski, 2011). This approach has been used for a while for studying the use of information technology in organizations (e.g. Orlikowski, 2000) and other areas of management (see Nicolini, 2013, for an overview). Within the OR community, a recent application of the practice-based perspective sheds light on the practical challenges of decision analytic interventions (Becker, Montibeller, & Barcus, 2015), and, in another paper, this approach has led to an analysis of a soft-OR intervention (Paroutis, Franco, & Papadopoulos, 2015). Further research could analyze, for example, the social practices that are carried out in organizations for building, implementing and actually using OR models.We will end our journey through social scientific approaches here, even though there would be many more approaches to explore, such as neo-institutional microeconomics (e.g. Rutherford, 1996, cf. Cordella, 2006, with respect to information systems), Luhmann's Theory of Social Systems (e.g. Seidl & Becker, 2005) or Latour's Actor Network Theory (e.g. Latour, 2005), Habermas’ critical theory, which stimulated “emancipatory systems thinking” (e.g. Ulrich, 1983) and “critical systems thinking” (e.g. Jackson, 1985, 1991; Mingers, 1980, 1992) in OR, or the various methodologies for empirical research that can be associated with certain theoretical perspectives (e.g. Creswell, 2014, and Eden & Huxham, 1996; Ormerod, 2014, with a particular relevance for OR case studies). For us here, it certainly suffices to have obtained an idea of the diversity of perspectives that the position of the social sciences between the sciences and the humanities entails.It goes without saying that no researcher in Behavioural OR, and, in fact, no social scientist, can be expected to be well-versed in several of these paradigms of research. And certainly, with OR having been shaped more strongly by perspectives that focus on individual behaviour (as in rational choice approaches, for example) and having a strong interest in formal models, the divide between the two cultures of academia does imply a challenge for Behavioural OR (as it does for many a social scientist!). But if Behavioural OR manages to be open-minded and to embrace the richness of the social scientific traditions it will be rewarded with a multi-paradigmatic wealth of concepts, methods, insights and research questions that our tool set for modelling, problem solving and decision support in OR will certainly benefit from.Since its inception, OR has been an interdisciplinary endeavour and has had close contacts with disciplines such as Mathematics, Statistics, Information Science, Engineering, Economics, Finance, Operations Management and Accounting. The future development of Behavioural OR will crucially depend not only on drawing on these established interdisciplinary links, but even on expanding them. For studying the behavioural aspects related to models and decision support, Behavioural OR does not have to start at square one. Many of the disciplines that have stimulated OR over the past decades (and that OR has stimulated in return) have in the meantime developed sub-disciplines that are closely related to the research tasks of Behavioural OR and provide a wealth of ideas, concepts, methods and insights that may give the emerging discipline of Behavioural OR a head start on its journey (see Fig. 1). In the following we will have a brief look at these sub-disciplines.Organization Studies is an interdisciplinary sub-discipline of research on management that is concerned with human behaviour, including decision making, related to the form and functioning of organizations. Due to the fact that OR is typically carried out in organizations, the insights of Organization Studies are directly relevant for research in Behavioural OR that is interested in how organizations shape and are shaped by the use of OR methods. Research about organizations has been conducted for more than a century. During this time scholars in Organization Studies have developed a wealth of perspectives and methods that draw on both the sciences and the humanities and have fruitfully employed the full spectrum of approaches in the social sciences, including all five paradigms of behaviour sketched in the previous section (see Clegg, 2010; Clegg & Bailey, 2008; Hatch & Cunliffe, 2012, for an overview).Behavioural Accounting22Due to the diversity of the field, there exists no generic term that encompasses all social-science-related research in accounting. The term “behavioural accounting” is frequently used by researchers that follow paradigms that are similar to the approach of analyzing behaviour as choice. Research that employs other paradigms is occasionally referred to as “organizational/sociological accounting”, but is often described by a more specific term to indicate the particular approach more precisely. Researchers that study “behaviour as statements within a discourse” may use the terms “critical accounting” and “alternative accounting” to refer to their approaches (cf. Gendron & Baker, 2005; Chapman et al., 2009; Baker 2011). In the following, we will use “behavioural accounting” as a generic term, for convenience of expression.is a sub-field of the discipline of Accounting that emerged in the 1970s on the basis of the insight that accounting is not a set of neutral techniques, but involves actual people in real organizations – an insight that was convincingly made by a ground-breaking book byHopwood (1974). The relation of Behavioural Accounting to the quantitative techniques of managerial accounting could become a role-model for those researchers in Behavioural OR who are interested in studying from the perspective of a social scientist the interplay between human interactions and OR techniques (see Section 2). In this sense Behavioural Accounting is a direct sister discipline of Behavioural OR, which may draw on the decades of experience of this discipline, particularly when it is about studying the behavioural implications of the methods of “hard OR”. After an initial focus on behavioural aspects in a fashion similar to research on behavioural decision making (see previous subsection), this discipline has long developed a rich multi-paradigmatic perspective very similar to Organization Studies (see Chapman et al., 2009). This is reflected in the diversity of publications in the flagship journal Accounting, Organizations and Society, which even includes historical research on how areas of society have been transformed by accounting practices (see Gendron & Baker, 2005, for insights into the history of the journal). Particularly relevant for Behavioural OR is that the discipline broadened its scope more recently to studying “calculative practices” (Miller, 2001), i.e. a behavioural perspective on OR techniques is, at least in principle, also of interest to researchers in Behavioural Accounting.Behavioural Operations Management, also referred to (in our context misleadingly so) as Behavioural Operations Research, is a very recent development and a sub-discipline of Operations Management that is guided by interests similar to those that have led to the emergence of Behavioural OR. The research undertaken has led to insights into the way in which people deviate from rational behaviour in the context of typical Operations Management decisions and possible ways of dealing with this (e.g. Becker-Peth, Katok, & Thonemann, 2013), for example. It has also investigated the question of how rules of operations management affect human behaviour. Given its origin in Operations Management this discipline focusses exclusively on problems in the operations domain of companies. Despite the obvious overlap between Operations Management and OR, as OR focusses more on techniques that are generally applicable to complex decision problems and not only on those in the operations domain, we can expect Behavioural OR, in contrast to Behavioural Operations Management, to focus more on the behavioural aspects of models and decision support in general than on specific organizational functions. Currently, research in Behavioural Operations Management is mainly of a type similar to behavioural decision making. It remains to be seen whether this young discipline will develop a broad outlook similar to Organization Studies and Behavioural Accounting.Behavioural Finance and Behavioural Economics are, as the names suggest, sub-fields of Finance and Economics. They developed, parallel with the rise of behavioural decision making (see below in this sub-section), but with a certain temporal delay compared with the latter discipline (due to predominant paradigms that define what characterizes “proper” research in Economics and Finance), out of the insight that the utility functions in classical models do not adequately describe the empirical reality of human behaviour and cannot explain certain observed market inefficiencies (e.g. Bloomfield, 2008; Wilkinson & Klaes, 2012). Focusing on empirical research on deviations from the model of rational decision making and their consequences, they have had a strong impact of the development of the much younger discipline of Behavioural Operations Management. Due to their interest in model building these disciplines will be particularly insightful for those researchers in Behavioural OR who seek to incorporate behavioural aspects directly into their models. Concepts and methods of Behavioural Finance and Behavioural Economics may also be useful for those interested in conducting quantitative empirical studies in the tradition of “behaviour as choice” and/or experimental studies of human behaviour (e.g. Ockenfels & Sadrieh, 2010).Economic Sociology is the branch of sociology that studies the structure and processes of the economy as a subsystem of society, i.e. as being embedded in the wider societal context (e.g. Swedberg, 2007). For Behavioural OR is may be relevant in so far as it might inspire research that considers the wider societal impact of the use of OR methods. With the multi-paradigmatic research in Economic Sociology covering most of the vast spectrum of approaches in the social sciences (including the five paradigms outlined in the previous sub-section), the contrast between economic sociology and economics may also be instructive with respect to the way in which different paradigms lead to different research foci and explanations for empirical phenomena. In so far as research in Economic Sociology studies the form and functioning of organizations it complements Organization Studies by focusing less on a managerial perspective on organizational phenomena (e.g. Boltanski & Chiapello, 2005). An interesting sociological counterpart to Behavioural Finance is the sub-field called Social Studies of Finance, which looks at financial markets from a sociological perspective (e.g. Callon, 1998; MacKenzie & Millo, 2003). Of particular relevance for Behavioural OR maybe the insights on the impact of mathematical models on financial markets (MacKenzie, 2008).Behavioural Decision Making is a sub-discipline of psychology that has long studied the various psychological factors that characterize human behaviour (cf. the description of the “behaviour-as-choice” paradigm in the previous section) and has already found its way into OR (e.g. Morton & Fasolo, 2009; von Winterfeldt & Edwards, 1986). In their article on Behavioural OR, Hämäläinen et al. (2013) discuss various ways in which the perspective and the results of this sub-discipline are useful for Behavioural OR.Information Systems is a long established discipline that is concerned with the use of information and communication technology (ICT) in the social context of organizations. In contrast to the focus of disciplines such as Computer Science, the notion of an information system goes beyond hardware and software and includes data, procedures and people. Within the discipline there are two major strands of research, namely a descriptive strand that studies the relation between ICT and the organizational and societal context and a design-focused strand that is concerned with creating information systems (Hevner, Park, & Ram, 2004).With these research interests, the discipline of Information Systems covers the information system counterparts of all research tasks for Behavioural OR that were discussed in Section 2 and, additionally, those parts of OR that are concerned with the practical application of OR techniques (as opposed to those parts of “pure” research in OR that focus on studying mathematical structures and developing algorithms for generic problems, as in the fields of Combinatorial Optimization and Graph Theory, for example). Moreover, the descriptive strand of research in Information Systems has a wide multi-paradigmatic perspective similar to Organization Studies and Behavioural Accounting (cf. also Orlikowski & Barley, 2001).For these reasons, the discipline of Information Systems can serve as an impressive role-model for a comprehensive approach to the behavioural aspects related to OR methods. Additionally, due to the fact that algorithms (and hence ICT) are an essential part of OR, Behavioural OR can also directly benefit from various concepts, methods and insights of Information Systems, for instance those pertaining to technology acceptance and implementation problems (e.g. Davis, 1989), to the intricate interplay of human behaviour and the material reality of ICT (e.g. Leonardi et al., 2012; cf. also Eden, 1992, for the impact of portable computers on OR), and to the way in which technology governs social relationships (e.g. Kallinikos, Hasselbladh, & Marton, 2013).While it would be futile to attempt at providing a comprehensive list of all interdisciplinary endeavours that maybe relevant for Behavioural OR, let us briefly mention some small disciplines that relate to Mathematics, not by using or inventing new Mathematics, but by studying it as an object of research. In these fields, such as the Philosophy of Mathematics, the Sociology of Mathematics and the Psychology of Mathematics (e.g. Bockarova et al., 2012; Hersh, 1997; Nesher & Kilpatrick, 1990; Restivo, 1992), Mathematics is considered a human activity or an object of human activity. Research in Behavioural OR can draw on the results of this type of research to enrich our understanding of what a mathematical model is, what it means to do Mathematics and what cognitive processes are involved in using Mathematics, which seems to be a promising perspective for studying the behavioural aspects of the application of mathematical models to practical problems in OR.All in all, while being without any guarantee of comprehensiveness, our excursion to various fields in the vast universe of academia should have illustrated the huge potential that lies for Behavioural OR in drawing on the concepts, insights and methods of other, longer established disciplines. We have seen that for all research tasks discussed in Section 2 and all social-theoretical paradigms outlined in the previous subsection, there exist several role-models, paths that have already been taken, perspectives that are useful for the discipline of OR. Behavioural OR is not the only one of its kind; it is born into a rich intellectual community.There is no guarantee of success for a newly emerging (sub-)discipline. The history of science shows that the acceptance of new approaches and paradigms does not only depend on their fruitfulness to shed light on previously obscure aspects of reality, but also on more mundane aspects, such as the dissemination of results, the openness of peers, career options, and – in particularly unfortunate cases – even on the passing of their adversaries (see Kuhn, 1962).What could be done to ensure that the discipline of Behavioural OR will grow and prosper? Let us consider the situation of two sub-disciplines related to Behavioural OR: Problem Structuring Methods and Behavioural Accounting, both of which have been around for approximately 40 years, have a strong UK background and worked for gaining acceptance in an academic environment dominated by prescriptive quantitative approaches. Over these 40 years, the field of Problem Structuring Methods has, without a doubt, been highly active and successful in developing and refining OR methods for the analysis of complex decision problems that complement traditional quantitative approaches in “messy” settings where behavioural aspects are not negligible. Due to this research interest it has been a pioneer, within OR, for a number of types of research questions and paradigms that are also relevant for Behavioural OR. And yet, despite an impressive record and its obvious practical relevance, the Problem Structuring Methods community is, unfortunately, comparably small, and Problem Structuring Methods are not widely disseminated outside the UK and are, in some circles, even considered as “not real OR” (Mingers, 2011: 737), which prevents their publication in some top journals. In contrast to this, Behavioural Accounting has a comparably large international community with its own flagship A+ journal, as acknowledged by major international journal rankings, and behavioural aspects of accounting are even addressed in textbooks for the education provided by professional accounting bodies (e.g. Kaplan, 2015).The difference in the development of these sub-disciplines can certainly not be attributed to a difference in quality or effort of researchers in the fields. Instead there are structural reasons and historical happenstances that have led to the different paths of the two disciplines (Mingers, 2011). Behavioural Accounting has developed in a somewhat easier environment since the degree of mathematical sophistication expected in Accounting does not reach the level that can be found in OR; it has benefitted from the effort of Accounting, Organizations and Society editor Hopwood, who worked hard on keeping connections between different research paradigms (Gendron and Baker, 2005); it has been helped, luckily, by political decisions in the UK in the 1980s that led to a large influx of academics with a background in the social sciences and humanities into the field of Accounting (Baker, 2011: 216); and it has been able to fill many open positions in Accounting with researchers in Behavioural Accounting as a large number of graduates in classic Accounting disciplines are lured away from academia by the salaries paid in the industry. All these circumstances have contributed to a boost for the development of the discipline.Behavioural OR is unlikely to be in such a comfortable position. Its success and relevance will depend on the benevolence of the established disciplines in OR. As we have seen in the examples given in Section 3.1, so far it has primarily been researchers with an interest in “soft OR” who have drawn on research paradigms in the social sciences to study behavioural aspects of OR interventions. For Behavioural OR it is therefore crucial to develop close links with research in core disciplines of OR with a strong mathematical focus. It has to make additional efforts in effectively communicating its research interests and in actively seeking collaboration beyond sub-disciplines of OR that are per se comparably open to integrating behavioural aspects into their work; it has to follow the methodological standards established in the social sciences to become visible also in top journals of disciplines related to OR and in this way prove the respectability of its academic work to colleagues within OR; and it has to demonstrate its relevance particularly for the application of mathematical innovations in OR.However, while Behavioural OR is not in the comfortable situation of Behavioural Accounting, it can create for itself a fruitful environment within OR by seeking a broad outlook regarding the research tasks it sets for itself (cf. Section 2), regarding the perspectives on behavioural phenomena it may take (Section 3.1), and regarding the intellectual support it can find from closely related disciplines (Section 3.2). The diversity of examples and aspects provided in the previous sections were an attempt at illustrating that Behavioural OR, when being equipped with such a broad outlook, can achieve a degree of openness that ensures that the newly emerging discipline does not have to shy away from seeking contact with established core disciplines of OR, can be open to the problems of applying OR methods to complex real-world decisions in these disciplines, and can optimistically demonstrate its relevance. In this way, and possibly only in this way, will Behavioural OR be able to achieve the broad outlook within OR, on OR itself that may lead to its success as a field of academic enquiry.Behavioural OR is a newly emerging discipline of Operations Research. This paper set out to provide a broad outlook on what this discipline could be about. For this purpose it has made three suggestions for research tasks that Behavioural OR may focus on and addressed three pitfalls that it should aim at avoiding during the next phase of its development. If we take all these insights seriously and consider them as crucial, defining characteristics of the new discipline of Behavioural OR, the aspects addressed in the previous sections of this paper motivate the following (somewhat idealistic) definition of Behavioural OR, which may be seen as one possible way of unfolding the definition given by Hämäläinen et al. (2013). It goes without saying that this definition is by no means intended to be normative, but it may serve as a useful reminder of the huge potential that lies in a broad understanding of Behavioural OR and inspire further discussion about the scope of the discipline.Behavioural OR is the sub-discipline of OR that– in carrying forward the interdisciplinary tradition of OR,– on the basis of the current level of theoretical, empirical and methodological insights in the social sciences, understood as a broad, multi-paradigmatic field,– in close connection with recent problems and results of other OR sub-disciplines, including those with a strongly quantitative focus,studies the way in which insights into human behaviour can be integrated into OR techniques and the way in which the use of OR techniques shapes and is shaped by human interactions, in order to(a) investigate, on a descriptive level, the consequences of the use of OR techniques in the social context of organizations,(b) provide, on the level of methodology, concepts that allow for reflecting on the use of OR techniques in concrete practical settings, and,(c) stimulate, on a technological level, the development of novel or improved OR techniques that enable organizations to make better decisions;thereby contributing to realizing OR's raison d’être and aspiration of being The Science of Better.It has been demonstrated from various angles throughout this paper that there are fascinating new research questions and insights that are awaiting researchers in Behavioural OR, insights, which have the potential to lead to a better understanding of what it means to do OR, to enrich our approaches to modelling, problem solving and decision support, and, ultimately, to better our efforts to solve complex real-world decision problems. The success of the endeavour of Behavioural OR will depend, to a significant extent, on whether the Behavioural OR community itself will live, also across the inevitable boundaries that constitute it as a sub-discipline, the open-minded, broad outlook that hopefully will be shown towards Behavioural OR by those who work in one of the traditional core disciplines of OR. And it will depend on whether the Behavioural OR community will be able to communicate to these colleagues that the insights of Behavioural OR do matter for their work and its practical relevance. – This, at least, is the conviction out of which this paper has been written.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
