@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Joining the CCS club! The economics of CO2 pipeline projects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the conditions for a widespread adoption of CO2 pipeline systems using a club-theoretic perspective.We propose a model-based contribution to the policy debate related to the economic regulation of CO2 pipelines.We study the interactions between CO2 pipeline tariffs and the adoption of CCS.We detail an application to a real European CO2 pipeline project and compare several possible pricing schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OR in environment and climate change,Carbon capture and storage,CO2 pipeline,Club theory,Regulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper examines the conditions for a widespread adoption of Carbon Capture transport and Storage (CCS) by a group of emitters that can be connected to a common CO2 pipeline. It details a modeling framework aimed at assessing the critical value in the charge for the CO2 emissions required for each of the emitters to decide to implement capture capabilities. This model can be used to analyze how the tariff structure imposed on the CO2 pipeline operator modifies the overall cost of CO2 abatement via CCS. This framework is applied to the case of a real European CO2 pipeline project. We find that the obligation to use cross-subsidy-free pipeline tariffs has a minor impact on the minimum CO2 price required to adopt the CCS. In contrast, the obligation to charge non-discriminatory prices can either impede the adoption of CCS or significantly raise that price. Besides which, we compared two alternative regulatory frameworks for CO2 pipelines: a common European organization as opposed to a collection of national regulations. The results indicate that the institutional scope of that regulation has a limited impact on the adoption of CCS compared to the detailed design of the tariff structure imposed on pipeline operators.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The current dominance of hydrocarbon fuels in the global primary energy mix is likely to persist in the foreseeable future, suggesting that there will be no sharp decline in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions (IEA, 2011). Against this daunting background, geologic Carbon Capture transport and Storage (CCS)11CCS is a generic name for the combination of technologies applied in three successive stages: (1) the capture which consists of a separation of CO2 from the emissions stream generated by the use of fossil fuels at industrial plants; (2) the transportation of the captured CO2 via a dedicated infrastructure to a storage location; and (3) the long-term storage of the CO2 within a suitable geological formation in a manner that ensures its long-term isolation from the atmosphere (IPCC, 2005).represents a technically conceivable option to isolate large volumes of CO2 from the atmosphere. A widespread deployment of this abatement technology to large industrial CO2 point sources could reconcile the world's current dependence upon hydrocarbons with the large and rapid reduction of anthropogenic CO2 emissions required to prevent the effects of global warming (Pacala & Socolow, 2004). However, the large-scale deployment of CCS faces an enduring economic challenge: as CCS scales up from local, small-scale demonstration projects, it becomes contingent upon the construction of a costly CO2 pipeline infrastructure with national or continental scope (Herzog, 2011).The purpose of this paper is to contribute to the burgeoning analysis of the economics and regulatory issues of CO2 pipeline projects. We consider the case of the ex nihilo creation of a sizeable CO2 pipeline system, aimed at gathering the emission streams produced by a given collection of independent industrial plants and transporting them to a storage site. We address two related questions. First, how far would the price of CO2 emissions have to rise for the CCS technology to be adopted by that collection of emitters? Second, to what extent do the tariff and/or the regulatory structure imposed on the CO2 pipeline operator modify this break-even value for joint CCS adoption?Over the past decade, a large body of literature has emerged on CCS.22A tentative and non-exhaustive clustering of these contributions includes: (i) the applications of top-down dynamic models to contrast the relative performances of policy instruments and to check their influence on the adoption of CCS (e.g., Gerlagh & van der Zwaan, 2006); (ii) the detailed bottom-up analyses on the future prospects for CCS (e.g., Kemp & Kasim, 2008; Lohwasser & Madlener, 2012); (iii) the application of differential game models to analyze the strategic behavior of countries that consider reducing their emissions through CCS while facing transboundary CO2 pollution (Bertinelli et al., 2014); (iv) the investment analyses applying the real-option approach to value CCS projects (e.g., Heydari et al., 2012); (v) the contributions aimed at determining an optimal R&D policy for the CCS technology (Baker & Solak, 2011; Eckhause, 2011; Eckhause & Herold, 2014) and (vi) studies aimed at identifying the tax incentives required for new power plants to be willing to adopt carbon capture technology immediately (Comello & Reichelstein, 2014).Despite the amount of literature, however, little research has considered the spatial nature of this abatement technology (i.e., the fact that sources can be remotely located from geologic sequestration sites imposing the construction of dedicated CO2 transport systems). This relative lack of consideration can probably be explained by the engineering cost studies that typically highlight the inexpensive nature of CO2 transportation relative to the other components of the CCS chain (i.e., capture and storage). Nevertheless, CCS experts repeatedly emphasize the importance of carbon transportation issues (Flannery, 2011). According to Herzog (2011), at least two barriers hamper the construction of a sizeable transportation infrastructure. The first is the “chicken and egg problem” faced by CO2 pipeline project developers: on the one hand, it is not worth building a pipeline system without a critical mass of capture plants to feed CO2 into it, but on the other hand, emitters are unlikely to invest in a costly capture equipment without being certain that a CO2 pipeline will be constructed. The second is the lack of clarity in the regulatory regimes (and the tariff policies) governing CO2 pipelines.The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we provide a modeling framework that analyzes the coordination issue at hand with the help of cooperative game-theory techniques. The theoretical basis of our approach stems from a club theory perspective (Buchanan, 1965) and follows the early works of Littlechild (1975) and Sharkey (1982). Accordingly, the CO2 emitter's decision to install or to not install capture equipment can be viewed as the outcome of a voluntary application to a “CCS club” aimed at aggregating the emissions captured in a given industrial cluster to generate economies of scale in the construction and subsequent operation of a joint CO2 transportation infrastructure. Our aim is to derive conditions for the large voluntary adoption of CCS, as a function of: (i) the price of CO2 emissions (set through a tax or a cap-and-trade system), (ii) the CO2 transportation technology, and (iii) the nature of the tariffs regulation imposed on the pipeline operator.Second, we consider an application of the proposed framework to the case of the construction of a trunkline system collecting the CO2 captured by 14 industrial facilities located in northwest France and Belgium, and transporting it to the Netherlands.33To be precise, this project assumes the construction of a trunkline system aimed at collecting the CO2 captured by 14 small to large-sized industrial facilities located in both Le Havre (France) and Antwerp (Belgium), and transporting it to the Rotterdam area (Netherlands), where it can be stored in depleted oil fields in the North Sea. This sizeable project could represent one of the first attempts to build a transnational CO2 pipeline system in Continental Europe.Our findings confirm that spatial pricing issues significantly narrow the possibility of constructing a pipeline tariff structure: any kind of uniform postage stamp tariff impedes the adoption of CCS, whereas geographical price discrimination is more effective. Our findings reveal that CCS adoption is easier to achieve in case of a smaller project that solely considers the 12 largest emitters. Our modeling framework can also be used to compare two alternative organizations for the regulation of CO2 pipelines: a regulation designed at the EU-level and a collection of national-based regulations. Our findings indicate that an integrated European regulation is preferable to ease the deployment of that carbon removal technology. Yet, the choice of the institutional scope of the pipeline regulation (national vs. European) seems quantitatively less important for the adoption of CCS than the detailed decisions related to the tariff structure imposed on pipeline operators.Our framework should prove useful in evaluating the cost effectiveness of CO2 abatement via CCS. A series of widely quoted studies have attempted to estimate the cost effectiveness of carbon abatement by means of CCS technologies (IPCC, 2005; McKinsey, 2008; MIT, 2007). Apart from the accounting controversies pointed out in İşlegen and Reichelstein (2011), all these studies typically make reference to average cost concepts. However, accounting-only approaches neglect the coordination issues associated with the joint adoption of CCS by a group of heterogeneous emitters. Because of this omission, average cost figures can underestimate the real break-even value. The empirical results reported in this paper document the magnitude of this underestimation and indicate that the difference can be substantial and varying depending on the emitters’ heterogeneity and the tariff system used.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 justifies our approach. Section 3 presents a cooperative game theoretic model of the adoption of pipeline transport of CO2. In Section 4, this framework is used to derive a numerical methodology aimed at evaluating the break-even value for joint CCS adoption. Then, Section 5 details an application of this methodology to the case of a real European project. Finally, the last section offers a summary and some concluding remarks. For the sake of clarity, all the mathematical proofs are presented in Appendix A.In this section, we justify our approach by detailing the main economic features of a pipeline-based CO2 transportation service. In Section 2.1, we highlight the presence of very marked economies of scale. Section 2.2 reviews the recent models proposed to determine the deployment of a CO2 pipeline system and argues that the decision to construct a CCS infrastructure resembles the decision to create a “club.” Lastly, Section 2.3 introduces the tools needed to analyze club goods and the organizational structures to be analyzed.Recently, a series of engineering analyses have been conducted to model the economics of simple point-to-point pipeline systems capable of transporting a given steady flow rate of CO2 across a given distance (e.g., McCoy & Rubin, 2008; McCoy, 2009). These studies detail an exhaustive, engineering-based, representation of the CO2 pipeline technology44A comprehensive presentation of these engineering considerations is beyond the scope of this paper. These studies typically include: (i) a flow equation that describes the frictional loss of energy through the pipe (i.e., the pressure drop) as a function of the fluid's properties (e.g., flow-rate, pressure, temperature) and engineering parameters (e.g., the pipeline length, its diameter, an empirically determined friction coefficient); (ii) the mechanical constraints related to the pipeline's maximum operating pressure; and (iii) the equation governing the power required to pump the CO2.and put that representation to work to determine the cost-minimizing design of a given CO2 pipeline infrastructure (the pipeline diameter; the size of the compression equipment installed along the pipeline).From a conceptual perspective, these studies bear a strong analogy with the engineering economic methodology used in the natural gas industry. As far as natural gas pipelines are concerned, a prolific literature, stemming from Chenery's (1949) seminal contribution, has combined engineering and economics to guide both investment and operational decisions.55For example: (i) the analytical studies conducted on simple point-to-point natural gas infrastructures (André & Bonnans, 2011; Massol, 2011), and (ii) the numerous applications of mathematical programming to model meshed networks (e.g., De Wolf & Smeers, 1996; André et al., 2009).Using that analogy,66There exists some technological differences between natural gas and CO2 pipelines systems as methane is typically piped in a gaseous state whereas CO2 is piped in a supercritical state (McCoy & Rubin, 2008). Nevertheless, these differences are not sufficient to denounce the validity of this analogy.one may describe the CO2 pipeline technology as an engineering production function that has two inputs: (i) energy (to power the pumping equipment) and (ii) capital (to install a pipeline and the pumping equipment), which can be combined in varying proportions to transport a given future flow of CO2. In the long-run, the CO2 planner's problem amounts to finding the cost-minimizing combination of inputs compatible with this engineering production function.Using these engineering models, a number of studies have examined how the cost of a simple point-to-point CO2 pipeline varies with the output level. These cost simulations consistently indicate that the technology at hand exhibits very marked increasing returns to scale over a large range of output in the long run (IPCC, 2005; McCoy, 2009; McCoy and Rubin, 2008). The presence of decreasing marginal costs has important implications for the industrial organization of the CO2 transportation industry. In principle, each of the potential users of a given CO2 pipeline system could independently build an infrastructure for itself, but the cumulated cost of these individual infrastructures would be prohibitive compared to those of a common pipeline system. Hence, economies of scale represent an incentive for the aggregation of the emitters’ transportation demands and the construction of a unique pipeline infrastructure.In recent years, there has been an upsurge in interest in the application of optimization techniques to determine the cost-minimizing design of an integrated CCS infrastructure network (Bakken & von Streng Velken, 2008; Bielicki, Calas, Middleton, & Ha-Duong, 2014; Kemp & Kasim, 2010; Klokk, Schreiner, Pagès-Bernaus, & Tomasgard, 2010; Kuby, Bielicki, & Middleton, 2011; Mendelevitch, Herold, Oei, & Tissen, 2010; Middleton & Bielicki, 2009; Morbee, Serpa, & Tzimas, 2012; Spiecker, Eickholt, & Weber, 2014).77These contributions are directly related to the operations research literature on the optimal design of a pipeline network, a well-known problem with numerous applications in the energy industries (e.g., Rothfarb et al., 1970; Bhaskaran & Salzborn, 1979; Brimberg et al., 2003; Babonneau et al., 2012; André et al., 2013).While very much needed for indicative regional planning purposes (e.g., to organize the source-to-sink allocation), these optimization models implicitly posit an idealized industrial organization: a unique decision maker is supposed to have total control of the whole CCS chain. However, the validity of such a central planning approach is controversial because, in reality, several independent stakeholders are likely to be involved in the creation of a CCS infrastructure (e.g., the emitters, the CO2 pipeline operator).88This statement is also shared by Mendelevitch (2014) who recently examined CCS deployment using a large-scale market equilibrium model formulated as a mixed-complementarity problem. However, in contrast to ours, this analysis assumes the presence of constant returns to scale in the CO2 pipeline industry (and thus neglects the role of decreasing marginal costs).This fact can hardly be overlooked: according to the policy discussion in Herzog (2011, p. 600), an inappropriate coordination of these individual decisions can impede the massive deployment of CCS.99Herzog (2011, p. 600) attributes the lack of deployment of CO2 pipeline systems to what he casually depicts as a “chicken and egg” problem: on the one hand, a transportation infrastructure is required to foster the deployment of carbon capture equipment in a given area but, on the other hand, a critical flow of captured CO2 is needed to justify the construction of the infrastructure.In this paper, we investigate these coordination issues.Coordination is especially important in the pipeline industry because timing considerations matter. On a given CO2 pipeline project, there is an incentive to organize the aggregation of the emitters’ demands ex ante, i.e., during the planning phase. The size of a pipeline system is mainly determined by the diameter of the pipe, a parameter that cannot be modified ex post (i.e., once the infrastructure is installed). Because of this irreversibility, any ex post expansion in the demand for transportation requires the addition of extra pumping equipment, a move that would either be blocked by technological considerations (e.g., the allowable maximum stress of the pipe) or would result in an excessive cost (compared to those of an optimally designed pipeline with an adapted capacity). Hence, the CO2 transportation service is a good characterized ex post by rivalry and the excludability of benefits.1010We refer to Sandler and Tschirhart (1980) for a comprehensive presentation of these notions.The conjunction of this feature together with the presence of marked economies of scale indicates that the CO2 transportation service resembles a “club good” (Sandler & Tschirhart, 1980). Thus, the construction of a CCS infrastructure amounts to the creation of a club of CCS adopters (Buchanan, 1965). The very marked returns to scale calls for an optimum club size that consists of all the potential adopters. However, the creation of such a club is not granted: it would result from the voluntarily adhesion of the CO2 emitters. A poorly defined institutional structure can create an incentive for a subset of emitters to prefer to either disband or create a smaller club.Club goods are usually analyzed making use of cooperative game techniques (Sandler & Tschirhart, 1980). A cooperative game consists of the following two elements: (i) a set of players; and (ii) a “characteristic function” specifying the value created by different subsets of the players in the game. A group of players who commit themselves to join together is called a “coalition.” What the members of the coalition get, after all the bribes, side payments, and quid pro quo have cleared, is called an “allocation.” The main solution concept of a cooperative game is the core. The core of a cooperative game consists of all undominated allocations. In other words, the core consists of all allocations with the property that no subgroup within a coalition can do better by deserting that coalition.1111We refer to Massol and Tchung-Ming (2010) for an illustration of this concept in the natural gas sector.In the following, we shall consider and compare two types of cooperative games and therefore two types of allocations. First we analyze the decisions of a heterogeneous group of emitters that can own and share a common pipeline system, and thus form a “vertically integrated” club. The club is assumed to gather the individual net benefits of the infrastructure and redistribute them among its members. Second, we examine the decisions of the emitters in the case that an independent pipeline operator can sell CO2 transportation services. Before deciding its construction, the pipeline operator has to design and sign an enforceable long-term contract with each emitter that specifies the amount that will be charged to that emitter for the transportation service. In the theoretical literature, the resulting game is considered a “cost-sharing game” (Young, 1985).In this section, we present our framework and our main analytical results. In Section 3.1, we present the assumptions and clarify the notation. In Section 3.2, we detail the conditions required for CCS adoption in the case of a group of emitters that own and share a common pipeline system, and thus form a “vertically integrated” club. In Section 3.3, we examine CCS adoption in the case of an infrastructure owned by an independent pipeline operator. In Section 3.4, we show that the conditions required for the creation of a vertically integrated club of emitters are equivalent to those required for the deployment of CO2 pipeline infrastructure owned by an independent operator.To begin with, we detail the assumptions and clarify the notation.This paper examines the economics of a CO2 pipeline project aimed at transporting the CO2 captured at a number of industrial facilities and transporting it to a storage site. We let N denote the finite set of emitters that could potentially be connected to that CO2 pipeline system (still, N is a subset of the total set of emitters in the economy in question). The objective of the paper consists of determining the minimum set of conditions that ensure that a pipeline infrastructure connecting all these emitters is constructed. Hereafter, the emitters in this set are indexed by subscript i and we let |N| denote the cardinality of this set and S denote a subset of N.The project is located in a large economy where an environmental regulation is aimed at reducing CO2 emissions by putting a price on these emissions (either a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system). We letpCO2denote the prevailing price for the emission of one ton of CO2. We assume that, though important in volume, the emissions of the emitters in N represent only a tiny share of the economy's emissions so that the impact of the emitters’ decisions on the carbon pricepCO2can be neglected.1212This assumption is satisfied even in the case of the large-scale European CCS project examined in Section 4. In this project, the emitters that can potentially be connected to the pipeline system together control less than 0.9 percent of the total amount of CO2 emission allowances in the EU cap-and-trade system. As a result, their decisions to adopt CCS are unlikely to greatly modify the prevailing carbon price. Conceivably, the interactions between the emitters’ decisions and the prevailing supply and demand conditions on the CO2 market could become significant in case of a very large CCS project. To model these interactions, further developments would be needed (e.g., to introduce a complete market equilibrium model for the CO2 market). Such developments are clearly beyond the scope of the present paper. Nevertheless, we believe that this approach is general enough to examine a very large number of proposed CCS projects.Each emitter faces a binary decision concerning whether or not it adopts the CCS technology. We let σ denote the price of the storage service provided by an independent storage operator.1313The parameter σ may also be interpreted as a levelized unit cost of storage.For each emitter i, we let Qidenote the annual quantity of CO2 that can potentially be captured, and χi denote the levelized unit cost of the site-specific carbon capture unit. As a result, the amount(pCO2−χi−σ)Qirepresents the willingness to pay for a CO2 pipeline service for each emitter i.Let C be a finite real-valued function on the subsets of N. Here, C(S) denotes the stand-alone, long-run cost of a pipeline system gauged to transport the CO2 emitted by the subset S. In the empirical section, the 2|N| values taken by the function C will correspond to the numerical outcomes of an engineering process model.1414As there is no global information available about the shape of that cost function beyond these 2|N| local evaluations, it should be clear that we cannot use the arsenal of useful results obtained in the analytical literature dedicated to continuous multiproduct cost functions (e.g., Baumol, 1977; Sharkey, 1982).We assume thatC(∅)=0and C(S) ≥ 0 for any non-empty S in N. Following the discussion in Section 2.1, we assume that the cost function C is sub-additive: i.e.,C(S∪T)≤C(S)+C(T)for any coalitions S, T⊆N, withS∩T=∅.1515Testing the global sub-additivity of that cost function is computationally demanding as a total of∑j=1|N|(|N|j)(2j−2)conditions, where(|N|j)is the number of j-combinations from a given set N, have to be considered. From an empirical perspective, checking the sub-additive nature of a discrete cost function can be challenging (e.g., with a moderate size of|N|=20facilities, nearly 3.5 billion conditions must be verified). Yet, for small enough problems such as the one considered in the next section, an exhaustive enumeration of all these conditions remains computationally feasible.This assumption suggests that, for a given set of emitters, the construction of a common CO2 pipeline system lowers the transportation cost compared to a situation where the transportation service is provided by several pipeline systems.In this section, we think of emitters as potential members of a club aimed at constructing and operating a common pipeline infrastructure, i.e., a vertically integrated club. The club is assumed to gather the individual net benefits and redistribute them among its members. We proceed as follows. We first define the total net benefits that could be collectively obtained by any group of emitters S creating their “restricted” club. Then, we explore the conditions required for a club gathering all the emitters in N to build the largest-possible infrastructure, i.e., a pipeline infrastructure connecting all the |N| emitters. Lastly, we examine the conditions for an incentive-compatible sharing of the benefits generated by that largest-possible infrastructure, i.e., those that ensure that no subgroup within the grand coalition could do better by deserting the coalition.Consider any given group of emitters S, with S⊆N and S ≠ ∅. We assume that they can form a restricted club aimed at operating a shared CCS infrastructure. The club's objective is to install and operate the infrastructure that maximizes the difference between the total benefits obtained by the members and the cost of the infrastructure. Conceivably, the non-adoption of CCS by some emitters in that group S may be needed to obtain the maximum net benefits that collection can provide to that group S. Side payments among the club members may be necessary to reach an agreement.Formally, a pipeline project aimed at serving the emitters in any subgroup R, with R⊆S, would generate a net benefit equal to the difference between:∑i∈R(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi, the willingness to pay for a CO2 pipeline service of the connected emitters, and C(R), the pipeline cost. Hence, the maximum net benefits which can be received by the emitters in the club S, denoted by v, is obtained by considering all the possible configurations of CCS infrastructures that can be formed with these emitters (i.e., all the possible subgroups R with R⊆S):(1)v(S,pCO2)=MaxR⊆S{∑i∈R[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi]−C(R)},∀S⊆N.Of course it can be that the maximum takes place at R=S, and thereforev(S,pCO2)=∑i∈S[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi]−C(S).We assume that if no CO2 is captured then no costs are incurred, which means thatv(S,pCO2)≥0for all S. By construction, v is monotonic since the conditionv(S1,pCO2)≤v(S2,pCO2)systematically holds for any pair of subsets S1, S2 in N with S1⊂S2.We now explore the condition required by the largest possible club N to construct the largest-possible infrastructure, i.e., a pipeline system aimed at transporting the emissions captured by all the emitters.For that largest-possible infrastructure project to be rationally selected by the club N, it has to provide the members with a total net benefit that is greater than that obtained with any of the alternative infrastructure configurations that connects a subset of emitters. Formally, it means that the total net benefit∑i∈R[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi]−C(R)must be maximized when R is equal to N, or equivalently, that the equalityv(N,pCO2)=∑i∈N[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi]−C(N)holds. Following Sharkey (1982, p. 62), this condition is equivalent to:(2)∑i∈S[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi]≥C(N)−C(N∖S),∀S⊂N.This condition states that the total benefit of any subgroup of club members S must be at least as large as the incremental cost of serving these emitters.Rewriting, condition (2) holds if and only if, the prevailing carbon pricepCO2verifiespCO2≥pCO2̲wherepCO2̲is the following threshold level:(3)pCO2̲:=MaxS⊂N{∑i∈SχiQi+C(N)−C(N∖S)∑i∈SQi}+σ.So, any carbon pricepCO2that is lower than this threshold level impedes the construction of the largest-possible infrastructure. In the rest of this section, we assume that the prevailing carbon price verifies the conditionpCO2≥pCO2̲.So far, we have focused on the total net benefit the grand coalition can provide. But we have not yet investigated whether the creation of such a largest-possible club is a rational decision for each of the potential members. So, this section focuses on the emitters’ individual decisions to join the largest-possible club N.We examine the repartition of the total benefitv(N,pCO2)among the emitters. We let the vectory=(y1,…,y|N|)′denote the payoffs allocated to each of the emitters. By construction, this vector is expected to allocate the club's total net benefit to its members, i.e.:(4)∑i∈Nyi=v(N,pCO2).For the sake of stability, this payoff should prevent each possible subgroup of emitters from preferring the creation of a restricted club (and thus seceding from the grand coalition). Hence, this vector must provide each subgroup of emitters with a total payoff that is at least greater than the total benefit that would be obtained with a stand-alone attitude. So, this payoff vector has to verify the following condition:(5)∑i∈Syi≥v(S,pCO2),∀S⊂N.A payoff vector that verifies this condition is said to be coalitionally rational. Note that if that condition is verified, the emitters’ individual payoffs are non-negative.In the game theoretic jargon, a payoff vector that verifies both condition (4) and (5) is said to be in the core of the cooperative game (N,v), where N is the set of players and v is the characteristic function, i.e., the set:(6)ΓpCO2:={y∈R|N|:∑i∈Nyi=v(N,pCO2)and,∀S⊂N,∑i∈Syi≥v(S,pCO2)}.A non-empty coreΓpCO2indicates that it is possible to share the club's total net benefit in a manner that insures the voluntary participation of the |N| emitters because none of them would have an incentive to opt out or prefer an alternative organization. Recall that because the carbon price verifiespCO2≥pCO2̲, the club's net benefit to be apportioned is maximized when all the emitters are connected to a common pipeline infrastructure. Thus, any payoff vector in the core would ensure the spontaneous adoption of CCS by all the emitters in N.1616As a side remark, we can note that from a practitioner's perspective, checking whether a proposed payoff vector is in the coreΓpCO2is computationally cumbersome. Two alternative computational tactics can be employed. The first one requires: (i) to pre-compute the values of the function v for each of the possible sub-coalitions S⊂N (which is computationally demanding as the pre-computations requires, for each possible sub-coalition S⊂N, to determine a maximum over a discrete set that has 2|S| elements), and (ii) using these values to verify whether the allocation equation (4) and the2|N|−2linear inequality constraints (5) are jointly verified. The second strategy uses an equivalent definition of the constraints (5). Using definition (1), these constraints can be replaced by the following equivalent:∑i∈Syi≥∑i∈R[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi]−C(R), ∀S⊂N, ∀R⊂S. With this second approach, there is no need to pre-compute the values of v but the number of linear inequality constraints becomes very large (since the2|N|−2constraints (5) are replaced by these∑j=1|N|(|N|j)2jlinear inequality constraints).This suggests a definition of the club's feasible set:Definition 1The vertically integrated club's feasible set is defined by all the payoff vectors of net benefits y that ensure the voluntary participation of all the individual emitters in the grand coalition. Formally, the vertical integrated club's feasible set is given byΓpCO2.We now focus on an alternative organization where the pipeline infrastructure is owned by an independent firm that sells a CO2 transportation service to the emitters. Pipeline operators can construct and operate pipeline infrastructures aimed at serving emitters. Before deciding its construction, a pipeline operator has to design and sign an enforceable long-term contract with each emitter specifying the amount that will be charged to that emitter for the transportation service. In this section, we examine the conditions required for that construction to be decided.The technology used in CO2 pipelines is reputed to be not proprietary. So potentially there are several pipeline firms that may have access to the same technology and thus the same sub-additive cost function C defined in the preceding section. These rivals can potentially serve any subgroup of emitters. As a result, we assume entry to be free in the pipeline industry.Following the theoretical literature on contestable markets, in case of an industry where entry is set free, a firm has to take into consideration the possible entry of a potential rival when deciding its pricing policy. The sustainability of an industrial structure based on a unique operator serving all the emitters is achieved if and only if this operator charges a revenue vectorr=(r1,…,r|N|)′, where riis the amount charged to emitter i, that insures that: (i) this operator is financially viable, and (ii) a potential entrant cannot find any financially viable opportunity to serve any market S with S⊆N. Formally, these conditions are:(7)∑i∈Nri≥C(N),(8)∑i∈Sri≤C(S),∀S⊆N.These two conditions jointly indicate that:(9)∑i∈Nri=C(N).Thus, even in the absence of a regulatory profit constraint imposed on the pipeline operator, these conditions jointly demand that the pipeline operator adopts a revenue vector r that exactly recovers the total cost (Sharkey, 1982). Note that the conditions (8) and (9) are the conditions for subsidy-free revenues proposed by Faulhaber (1975) that ensure that no set of customers pays more for service than their stand-alone cost (i.e., the cost to exclusively serve that group of customers).In the game-theoretic jargon, any revenue vector r that verifies these constraints is a cost allocation that belongs to the core of the cooperative cost game (N,C), i.e., the set:(10)Λ:={r∈R|N|:∑i∈Nri=C(N)and,∀S⊂N,∑i∈Sri≤C(S)}.Therefore, sustainability issues impose the pipeline operator to propose a cross-subsidy-free revenue vector. Thus, a non-empty set Λ is an important condition for the feasibility of such a pipeline project. Hereafter, we assume that the condition Λ ≠ ∅ is verified. From an empirical perspective, the non-emptiness of this set can be checked using the linear program LP-B detailed in 0.We now examine the emitters’ decision to adopt the proposed CCS project. Recall that for any emitter i, the amount(pCO2−χi−σ)Qirepresents its willingness to pay for a CO2 pipeline service and, thus, the amount(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−riis its individual net benefit. Because of individual rationality, the pipeline operator must provide a non-negative net benefit to each individual emitter, i.e.:(11)(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−ri≥0,∀i∈N.As entry is free in the CO2 pipeline industry, a rival could potentially propose an alternative project aimed solely at connecting the emitters in a given sub-coalition S⊂N. This rival would charge a revenue vectorr˜Sand incur a cost C(S). Hence, for the largest infrastructure project to be preferred, it has to provide each possible sub-coalition with a net benefit larger than the one obtained with the rival's project:1717Otherwise, the rival would potentially be able to charge a revenue vectorr˜Scapable of providing each emitter i ∈ S with a larger net benefit and thus convincing all the emitters in that subgroup to opt for the alternative project.(12)∑i∈S(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−ri≥∑i∈S[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−r˜iS],∀S⊂N.As the rival must be financially viable, its revenue vector must verify∑i∈Sr˜iS≥C(S). As entry is free in the pipeline industry, the rival also has to charge a revenue vector that does not provide any financially viable opportunity to another potential entrant:∑i∈Sr˜iS≤C(S). Thus, for any sub-coalition S⊂N, the rival's revenue vector has to verify∑i∈Sr˜iS=C(S). Using this remark, the condition (12) can be rewritten as:(13)∑i∈S(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−ri≥∑i∈S[(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi]−C(S),∀S⊂N.To summarize, the construction of the grand infrastructure is subject to two types of conditions. First, according to the theory of contestable markets, the promoter of the pipeline project has to charge a sustainable revenue vector: i.e., r ∈ Λ (cf. the conditions (8) and (9)). Second, the pipeline operator must charge a revenue vector r such that the emitters’ individual benefits provide them with an incentive to accept the operator's proposition (cf. the conditions (11) and (13)). At first sight, these two types of conditions jointly impose numerous constraints on the selection of a revenue vector.1818The set Λ is defined by one equation and2|N|−2linear inequality constraints. The conditions (11) and (13) jointly impose a total of|N|+2|N|−2linear inequality constraints.However, the conditions (8) and (13) are redundant, which suggests the following parsimonious definition of the pipeline operator's feasible set:Definition 2The pipeline operator's feasible set is defined by all the revenue vectors r that are both sustainable and provide a non-negative net benefit to any individual emitters in the grand coalition. Formally, we letypCO2:r↦((pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−ri)i=1,…,|N|so thatypCO2(r)is the vector of the emitters' individual net benefits associated with the revenue vector r charged by the pipeline operator. The pipeline operator's feasible set isΛ∩IPpCO2whereIPpCO2:={r∈R|N|:ypCO2(r)≥0}is the set of revenue vectors that verify condition (11).As the prevailing carbon price intervenes in the evaluation of the individual net benefits, one may wonder whether the proposed pipeline project can be accepted for any carbon price level. The following proposition addresses this issue.Proposition 1For any carbon price level such thatpCO2<pCO2̲, wherepCO2̲is the threshold level defined in (3), a financially viable pipeline operator cannot decide the construction of the pipeline infrastructure aimed at serving all the |N| emitters. For such carbon price levels, the feasible setΛ∩IPpCO2is systematically empty.According to this proposition, a carbon price level that verifiespCO2≥pCO2̲is necessary (but possibly not sufficient) for the pipeline project to be decided. Note that the threshold price levelpCO2̲that was derived in the benchmark case of a vertically integrated club also affects feasibility when the pipeline infrastructure is owned by an independent pipeline operator.In the preceding sections, we detailed the conditions required for the construction of the largest-possible infrastructure in the case of a vertically integrated club of CCS emitters and in those of an independent pipeline operator. We now clarify the relation that exists between the benefit-sharing problem of a vertically integrated club and the tariff setting problem of an independent CO2 pipeline operator.Recall that in the case of an independent pipeline operator,ypCO2(r)denotes the vector of the emitter's individual net benefits associated with the revenue vector r charged by the pipeline operator. Similarly, in case of a vertically integrated club, it is possible to associate any payoff vector y allocated by the club with an associated pipeline revenue vectorrpCO2(y)whererpCO2:y↦((pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−yi)i=1,…,|N|. There is a relation between the conditions imposed on a pipeline operator that wishes to charge a sustainable revenue vector and those required for the creation of a stable vertically integrated club of CCS emitters:Proposition 2Sharkey, 1982If the prevailing carbon price verifiespCO2≥pCO2̲, then for any allocation y in the club's feasible set, the associated revenue vectorrpCO2(y)is sustainable. Under the assumptionpCO2≥pCO2̲, ify∈ΓpCO2, thenrpCO2(y)∈Λ.Proposition 2 indicates that selecting a cross-subsidy-free tariff (i.e., a revenue vector r in Λ the core of the cost game) is a necessary condition to obtain a vector of individual benefits y capable of triggering the formation of a vertically integrated CCS club. However, that condition is not a sufficient one. So, we now propose a complementary condition to achieve a necessary and sufficient condition.Proposition 3If the prevailing carbon price verifiespCO2≥pCO2̲, then:(i)If the allocation y is in the vertically integrated club's feasible set,y∈ΓpCO2, then the associated revenue vectorrpCO2(y)is in the pipeline operator's feasible set,Λ∩IPpCO2If a pipeline operator charges a revenue vector r in the feasible setΛ∩IPpCO2, then the associated allocationypCO2(r)is in the vertically integrated club's feasible set,y∈ΓpCO2.This proposition indicates that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the tariff setting problem faced by the promoter of an independent CO2 pipeline project and the benefit-sharing problem faced by a vertically integrated club. It proves that the revenue vector charged by the pipeline operator must provide emitters with a share of the net benefits that verifies all the conditions required for the creation of a stable club of CCS emitters.From a computational perspective, this one-to-one correspondence also provides a useful simplification. Recall that in case of a vertically integrated club, checking whether a proposed payoff vector y is in the coreΓpCO2can be computationally demanding (cf. footnote 16). However, using Proposition 3, it is necessary and sufficient to consider the associated revenue vectorrpCO2(y)and check whether it verifies the following conditions: (i) the linear equation (9), (ii) the2|N|−2linear inequality constraints (8), and (iii) the |N| linear inequality constraints (11). Hence, this proposition offers a sharp reduction in the number of conditions to be verified. In the sequel, we make use of these simplifications to examine the role played by the prevailing carbon price on CCS adoption.In the sequel, our analysis proceeds focusing solely on the case of an independent pipeline operator. Nevertheless, it is important to keep in mind that using the one-to-one mapping functionypCO2(r), the tariff setting problem faced by a pipeline operator can systematically be reformulated and re-interpreted as a club formation problem.In this section, we address an important question: what is the critical value in the charge for CO2 emissions that would allow the adoption of CCS technologies? To answer it, we define the break-even value for joint CCS adoption and propose a linear programming approach aimed at evaluating this critical value. We then consider two extensions of this model. The first extension focuses on the case of a pipeline operator that is compelled to use an exogenously predetermined, non-discriminatory tariff structure. The second one examines the case of a transnational pipeline infrastructure that is supervised by a collection of national regulators.In the preceding section, we have shown that the deployment of the largest infrastructure connecting all the emitters is systematically impeded if the prevailing carbon price is strictly lower than the threshold levelpCO2̲. However, is it possible to obtain that deployment with any carbon price larger than this threshold?To answer this question, we can observe that the prevailing carbon price does not intervene in the definition of a sustainable revenue vector (i.e., in the definition of Λ the core of the cooperative cost game). In contrast, for any sustainable revenue vector r, the associated emitters’ individual net benefits(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−yiare monotonically increasing in the prevailing carbon price. These two remarks together suggest that if the pipeline operator's feasible setΛ∩IPpCO2is reputed to be non-empty for a given carbon price, so is the case with any carbon price level larger than this value. For the pipeline operator, it is thus crucial to determine the lowest value in the charge for CO2 emissions that allows the pipeline operator to charge a revenue vector that is sustainable and such that every emitter obtains a non-negative net benefit.Definition 3We letpCO2*be the break-even value for joint CCS adoption, that is the minimum value of the prevailing carbon price that is compatible with the construction of the projected infrastructure, i.e.,pCO2*:=MinpCO2{pCO2∈R:Λ∩IPpCO2≠∅}.From a computational perspective, this break-even value for joint CCS adoptionpCO2*can be evaluated using the following linear programming problem:(14)LP1:̲Minr,pCO2pCO2(15)s.t.∑i∈Nri=C(N),(16)∑i∈Sri≤C(S),∀S⊂N∖{∅,N},(17)(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−ri≥0,∀i∈N.In that linear program, the constraints (15) and (16) compel the pipeline operator to charge a sustainable revenue vector and the condition (17) represents the emitters’ individual participation constraints. The following proposition ensures that a solution to LP1 exists.Proposition 4There is at least one solution to LP1 if and only if Λ ≠ ∅. Moreover, if Λ ≠ ∅, the optimal value of the objective function is unique and equal topCO2*the break-even value for joint CCS adoption. In addition, if Λ ≠ ∅, the break-even value for joint CCS adoption verifiespCO2*≥pCO2̲.This proposition confirms that a carbon price levelpCO2, withpCO2≥pCO2̲, is necessary but may not be sufficient to obtain the deployment of a pipeline infrastructure connecting all the |N| emitters as a carbon price level larger than the break-even value for joint CCS adoption is required for that infrastructure to be decided. So, to summarize from an empirical perspective, any attempt to solve LP1 results in one of the three following outcomes:Case #1: a solution is found andpCO2*, the obtained break-even value for joint CCS adoption, verifiespCO2*=pCO2̲.Case #2: a solution is found andpCO2*, the obtained break-even value for joint CCS adoption, verifiespCO2*>pCO2̲. In that case, the threshold price levelpCO2̲is not sufficient to trigger the construction of the largest CCS infrastructure.Case #3: there is no solution to LP1. Thus,Λ=∅, which means that the pipeline operator cannot recover its costs without generating cross-subsidizations à laFaulhaber (1975) among customers.So far, we have supposed that the pipeline operator is left free to charge any revenue vector in its feasible set. This analysis implicitly assumes that the pipeline operator can charge discriminatory tariffs. However, such a perfect discrimination hardly looks realistic. For example, the pricing scheme used by European infrastructure firms is usually subject to approval by a regulator that does not directly select the individual prices but typically instructs the operator to use a non-discriminatory tariff policy. Therefore, we now consider the situation where the pipeline firm is compelled to use non-discriminatory tariff structures and examine whether the existence of this exogenous regulatory constraint modifies the break-even value for joint CCS adoption.In this section, we successively examine two types of non-discriminatory tariff structures: (i) the case of a multipart linear tariff; and (ii) the case where the pipeline operator is compelled to offer a menu of tariffs using the so-called second degree price discrimination principles. In each case, we address the following questions. First, is the proposed tariff structure compatible with the conditions for the deployment of a large CO2 pipeline infrastructure? Second, in case of a positive answer to the previous question, does this tariff structure modify the break-even value for joint CCS adoption?We analyze the case of a possibly multipart, non-discriminatory, linear tariff whereby the pipeline operator is allowed to use a series of k, with k ≤ |N|, observable emitter-specific features (e.g., the volume of CO2 emissions Qi, the peak flow of emissions). Let the vectorϕi=(ϕ1i,…,ϕki)′denote the value of these parameters for emitter i; and the vector of decision variablest=(t1,…,tk)′denote the tariffs charged by the pipeline operator. According to this tariff structure, the amount charged by the pipeline operator to emitter i is∑j=1kϕjitj. For example, a simple linear pricing would correspond tok=1,ϕ1i=Qi, andt1=pthe price per unit.We now detail a modified version of the linear program LP1 to examine how the proposed tariff structure modifies the break-even value for joint CCS adoption:(18)LP2:̲Mint,pCO2pCO2(19)s.t.∑i∈N(∑j=1kϕjitj)=C(N),(20)∑i∈S(∑j=1kϕjitj)≤C(S),∀S⊂N∖{∅,N},(21)(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−∑j=1kϕjitj≥0,∀i∈N.In the linear program LP2, the constraints (19) and (20) jointly impose the sustainability of the revenue vector charged by the pipeline operator. The emitters’ individual participation constraints are modeled using the condition (21). Compared to LP1, the decision variablesr=(r1,…,r|N|)′are simply replaced by the prices variablest=(t1,…,tk)′together with the tariff structure.From an empirical perspective, any attempt to solve this problem results in one of the three following outcomes. In Case #1, a solution is found and corresponds to a minimum allowance pricepCO2**that verifiespCO2**=pCO2*. In that case, the use of this tariff structure has no impact on the feasibility of the CCS project as its break-even value is not modified. In Case #2, a solution is found and corresponds to a minimum allowance pricepCO2**that verifiespCO2**>pCO2*. In that case, the tariff structure imposed on the pipeline operator impedes the creation of the largest CCS infrastructure when the prevailing carbon price is in the interval[pCO2*,pCO2**). Lastly, in Case #3, there is no solution to LP2, which means that the feasible set associated with LP2 is empty. As there is no maximum bound on the carbon price in LP2, a sufficiently large value ofpCO2can ensure that none of the emitters’ individual participation constraints in (21) is binding. Thus, the empty nature of the feasible set indicates the impossibility to jointly verify the conditions (19) and (20), which means that the pipeline operator cannot implement this tariff structure and recover its costs without generating cross-subsidizations among customers.1919As entry is assumed to be free in the CO2 pipeline industry, imposing the use of this pricing scheme would create the conditions for a profitable entry for a pipeline competitor serving a subset of emitters, and thus artificially generate a suboptimal organization of the CO2 pipeline industry (i.e., an organization where several firms coexist whereas a single-firm organization would have been less costly).We now consider a second type of tariff that corresponds to a so-called second-degree price discrimination scheme. The pipeline operator is compelled to design a menu of m different multipart linear tariffs. Knowing that menu, emitters are then assumed to choose the tariff that minimizes their CO2 transportation cost given their emission features.Formally, for each tariff l withl∈{1,…,m}, the pipeline operator is allowed to use an emitter-specific vectorϕi=(ϕ1i,…,ϕki)′of quantitative features and determines a total of k parameters: the vectortl=(t1l,…,tkl)′of unit prices. For example, if the operator is allowed to propose a menu of two-part tariffs that are based on a fixed charge plus a variable price then,k=2,t1l=flare the fixed price components,t2l=plare the variable price components, and the emitters’ features areϕi=(1,Qi)′. To avoid indeterminacy, we impose the following restriction: mk ≤ |N|. For simplicity, we use t as a short notation for the collection of these m price vectors.In that case, each emitter is assumed to rationally select the tariff that minimizes its CO2 transportation cost. This choice in turn determines the revenue charged by the pipeline operator. Thus, we are dealing with a bi-level optimization problem (Bracken & McGill, 1973; Bard, 1998; Colson, Marcotte, & Savard, 2007) where the upper level problem is analogue to LP2 (determining the tariff levels and the minimum value of the prevailing carbon price that are compatible with the conditions required for the deployment and adoption of the proposed infrastructure), and the lower-level problem corresponds to the emitters’ individual decisions.Regarding the lower-level, every emitter takes the proposed menu of tariffs t as given and rationally selects the tariff that minimizes its CO2 transportation cost. From the pipeline operator's perspective, it means that the maximum amount of revenue rithat can be obtained from an emitter i is equal toMinl∈{1,…,m}{∑j=1kϕjitjl}and is thus lower than the collection of amounts{∑j=1kϕjitjl}l∈{1,…,m}invoiced with the various proposed tariffs. Formally, that emitter's choice can be modeled using the following linear program:(22)LP3i(t):̲Maxriri(23)s.t.ri≤∑j=1kϕjitjl,∀l∈{1,…,m}.Regarding the upper-level, we are looking for the minimum selling price of an emission allowance and the associated tariff design that ensures an incentive-compatible allocation of the total net benefit.(24)BLP4:̲Mint,pCO2pCO2(25)s.t.∑i∈Nri=C(N),(26)∑i∈Sri≤C(S),∀S⊂N∖{∅,N},(27)(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−ri≥0,∀i∈N,(28)(Maxriris.t.ri≤∑j=1kϕjitjl,∀l∈{1,…,m},)∀i∈NIn this bi-level optimization problem, the objective is to determine the critical value in the charge for CO2 emissions that is required for: (i) allowing the pipeline operator to charge a sustainable revenue vector (cf. conditions (25) and (26)), (ii) ensuring the participation of all the emitters (cf. condition (27)), and (iii) taking into consideration the emitters’ choice with respect to the proposed menu of tariffs (cf. the lower-level problems (28)).From a computational perspective, a reformulation is needed to solve this two-level optimization problem. In Appendix C, we apply the reformulation proposed in Fortuny-Amat and McCarl (1981) to construct the equivalent problem MILP-C which is a mixed-integer linear programming problem.As in the case of LP2, any attempt to solve this bi-level optimization problem results in one of the three following outcomes. In Case #1, a solution is found and verifiespCO2**=pCO2*which indicates that the pricing scheme has no impact on the feasibility of the CCS project. In Case #2, a solution is found and verifiespCO2**>pCO2*which means that the tariff structure imposed on the pipeline operator impedes the creation of the largest-possible CCS infrastructure when the prevailing carbon price is in the interval[pCO2*,pCO2**). Lastly in Case #3, there is no solution, which indicates that the tariff structure imposed on the pipeline operator is not compatible with the conditions required for the construction of the infrastructure (i.e., charging a cross-subsidy-free revenue vector and providing every emitter with a non-negative individual net benefit).In Europe, a number of the projected CO2 pipeline infrastructures will have a transnational nature (e.g., Mendelevitch, 2014). So there is a possibility for these infrastructures to be supervised by a collection of national regulatory authorities. One may wonder whether a state-based regulatory organization could have an impact on the break-even value for joint CCS adoption.To address this question, we consider the case of a transnational pipeline infrastructure installed across two states labeled A and B. The set of emitters connected to that pipeline can be decomposed as follows:N:=NA∪NBwhere NA(respectively NB) is the subset of emitters in country A (respectively B) andNA∩NB=∅because each emitter is associated with a unique country. To simplify, we assume that the CO2 emissions captured in A are piped to B where the infrastructure transports all the emissions captured in both countries. The notation CA(.) (respectively CB(.)) denotes the pipeline total cost function in country A (respectively B). The total cost incurred in country A (respectively B) is CA(NA) (respectively CB(N)).We assume that there are two national regulators and that each of them has an exclusive competence to regulate the pricing structure used by the pipeline operator in its jurisdiction. Each regulator: (i) imposes the pipeline operator to maintain a distinct accounting system on its jurisdiction; (ii) demands that the revenues obtained in its jurisdiction recover exactly the total cost incurred on that territory; and (iii) imposes the pipeline operator to charge cross-subsidy-free revenues à laFaulhaber (1975). Thus, in each jurisdiction, the pipeline operator is left free to charge possibly discriminatory prices provided that the amount charged to any subgroup of emitters does not exceed the stand-alone cost to serve solely that group of customers. We let rAdenote the revenue vector charged by the pipeline operator to the emitters that are using the infrastructure located in country A; and rBdenote the revenue vector charged to those that are using the infrastructure located in country B. Thus, the total amount that is charged to an emitter i is equal: toriA+riBif i ∈ NA, and toriBif i ∈ NB.Using these assumptions, we propose a modified version of the linear program LP1 to examine how the existence of a state-based regulatory organization modifies the break-even value for joint CCS adoption:(29)LP5:̲MinrA,rB,pCO2pCO2(30)s.t.∑i∈NAriA=CA(NA),(31)∑i∈SriA≤CA(S),∀S⊂NA∖{∅,NA},(32)∑i∈NA∪NBriB=CB(N),(33)∑i∈SriB≤CB(S),∀S⊂N∖{∅,N}(34)(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−(riA+riB)≥0,∀i∈NA,(35)(pCO2−χi−σ)Qi−riB≥0,∀i∈NB.In LP5, the conditions (30) and (31) compel the pipeline operator to charge a revenue vector rAthat belongs to the core of the cooperative cost game (NA, CA). These two conditions model the restrictions imposed by the first regulator that instructs the pipeline operator to charge a cross-subsidy-free revenue vector that recovers the total cost incurred in country A. Similarly, the conditions (32) and (33) jointly insure that the revenue vector rBis in the core of the cooperative cost game (N, CB). These conditions impose the pipeline operator to charge a cross-subsidy-free revenue vector in country B. Condition (34) represents the individual participation constraints of the emitters in country A: it ensures that for each of these emitters, the sum of the amounts charged by the pipeline operator in each jurisdiction does not exceed that emitter's willingness to pay for a CO2 pipeline service. The condition (35) represents the individual participation constraints of the emitters in country B.We letpCO2*,Nationaldenote the solution of the linear program LP5 which is the break-even value for joint CCS adoption in case of an institutional organization based on two independent regulators that leave the pipeline operator to determine a cross-subsidy-free tariff structure. From a regulatory policy perspective, it is interesting to compare this valuepCO2*,National, withpCO2*the break-even value for joint CCS adoption obtained in case of a transnational regulator. Recall thatpCO2*can be computed using LP1 with the definitionC(S):=CA(S∩NA)+CB(S). As any solution to LP5 can be associated with a vector in the feasible set of LP1,2020A brief proof of this statement follows. If the feasible set associated with LP5 is non-empty and(r^A,r^B,p^CO2)verifies the conditions (30)–(35), then the vector(r^,p^CO2), wherer^is the revenue vector such thatr^i=r^iA+r^iBif i ∈ A, andr^i=r^iBotherwise, verifies the conditions (15)–(17).the following relation holds:pCO2*,National≥pCO2*.So any attempt to solve LP5 results in one of the three following outcomes. In Case #1, a solution is found and verifiespCO2*,National=pCO2*which indicates that the use of a state-based regulatory organization has no impact on the feasibility of the CCS project. In Case #2, a solution is found and verifiespCO2*,National>pCO2*which means that the use of a state-based regulatory organization impedes the creation of the largest-possible CCS infrastructure when the prevailing carbon price is in the interval[pCO2*,pCO2*,National). Lastly in Case #3, there is no solution, which indicates that the tariff structure imposed on the pipeline operator is not compatible with the conditions required for the construction of the infrastructure (i.e., charging a cross-subsidy-free revenue vector and providing every emitter with a non-negative individual net benefit).The program LP5 can also be used in a series of extensions. In LP5, the pipeline operator can charge possibly discriminatory prices. As in the preceding section, this program can also be adapted to deal with the case where the pipeline operator is compelled to use a predetermined pricing structure in each jurisdiction. This extension can be useful to examine the compatibility of two given national tariff structures. This extension is based on a modified version of the linear program LP5 where the decision variables rAand rBare replaced by the proposed price variables together with the associated tariff structure. For the sake of brevity, we shall not further detail these modifications which are analogous to the ones used in the construction of LP2 from LP1.In this section, we detail an application of our framework to analyze the economics of a European project that involves the construction of a transnational CO2 pipeline system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
