@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Carbon capture and storage and transboundary pollution: A differential game approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Theoretical study of Carbon capture and storage from economic point of view.Differential game is applied to study impact of open-loop and some Markovian strategies.Feedback strategy may lead to less social waste.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transboundary pollution,Carbon capture and storage,Differential game,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study the strategic behavior of two countries facing transboundary CO2 pollution under a differential game setting. In our model, the reduction of CO2 concentration occurs through the carbon capture and storage process, rather than through the adoption of cleaner technologies. Furthermore, we first provide the explicit short-run dynamics for this dynamic game with symmetric open-loop and a special Markovian Nash strategy. Then, we compare these strategies at the games’ steady states and along some balanced growth paths. Our results show that if the initial level of CO2 is relatively high, state dependent emissions reductions can lead to higher overall environmental quality, hence, feedback strategy leads to less social waste.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the International Energy Agency (2011), energy related CO2 emissions have increased by 5.9 percent in 2010, with no perspective of a slowdown in the coming decade. Although 75% of this increase has been driven by emerging economies such as China or India, energy consumption in developed countries remains at high and increasing levels. The largest share of this increase in energy demand is absorbed by new coal, gas, and oil fired power plants, oil sands and more recently unconventional gas sources.2Unconventional gas sources refers to gas which has not been exploited to its full extent, essentially unprofitable. These gas sources include: (i) deep natural gas, trapped in very deep deposits underground, (ii) tight natural gas, stuck in tight formations, trapped in impermeable rocks or non-porous sandstone formations, and (iii) shale gas, caught in shale rock formations, deep underground. See Smith (1980) for more details about unconventional gas sources.2As a consequence, non-renewable energies will be used over a longer period, but they need to be used more efficiently. Unfortunately, improvements in energy use can only be applied progressively, as they often entail a switch in technology and ensuing adoption costs. Conversely, capture technologies, which do not require a change in production technology, could be more rapidly applied at a large scale, mainly for two reasons: (i) their only requirement is to fit coal-fired power plants with capture technologies; and (ii) capture technologies can be implemented on large energy supply sites at lower cost than current low emissions technologies.3The International Energy Agency (2010) noted that carbon capture and storage is fundamental in a least-cost carbon abatement mix. If carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies are not implemented, the overall costs to limit to20C global mean temperature would rise by 70%. Furthermore, this figure could be even larger if CCS is used at a larger scale because it will further reduce its costs. Biello (2009) mentions that the present CO2 capturing cost is about $50 to $90 per metric ton, and costs could potentially be reduced to $20 by scaling up the process.3Carbon capture and storage (CCS) has been at the forefront lately, as it encompasses a broad set of technologies, and it essentially consists in capturing CO2 emissions from large point sources and storing it in geological formations.4The storage technology is not new and has been in use mainly in oil fields and nature gas extracting wells. More details on key projects on http://www.globalccsinstitute.com/ccs/key-projects.4In the recent past CCS has raised increasing interest among scientists and policy makers. In 2007 for instance, CCS was accepted as a climate change mitigation possibility within the Kyoto Protocol, on top of national regulations (see IEA, 2010). However, the implementation of large scale transboundary policies remains largely an unaddressed issue, dealt at the national or regional level so far. This is notably true for the development of large scale CCS demonstration sites. International cooperation on CCS regulation seems unavoidable, given the international nature of climate change. In the coming years, CCS will therefore certainly be part of a mix of solutions to mitigate climate change, as it permits non-negligible reductions of CO2 emissions.In the present paper, we use a dynamic framework to analyze the strategic behavior of countries when pollution is borderless and mitigation policies are nationally financed. This framework corresponds to the CCS case nowadays. Our framework focuses on non-renewable resources, i.e. we do neither consider the possibility of adopting technologies based on renewable resources nor energy saving technological progress. This is consistent with the view that CO2 emissions due to the usage of non-renewable resources will still be an important issue in the future.Furthermore, the transboundary nature of pollution is of tremendous importance when dealing with CO2 emissions. A number of contributions have tackled this issue: Copeland and Taylor (1994, 1995) study the relationship between trade and transboundary pollution. In their 1994 contribution, they note that “…free trade increases world pollution…” and propose a number of policies regarding global pollution in their subsequent 1995 paper. Building on these results, Hatzipanayotou, Lahiri, and Michael (2002, 2005) offer complementary abatement policies, while Alemdar and Ozyildirim (2002) study the relationship among transboundary pollution, knowledge spillovers and growth in a North–South model. However, these studies ignore the possibility of having recourse to CCS, and only analyze long term issues. In the present work, we take these aspects into account. Our contribution also differs in this regard to Kalkuhl, Edenhofer, and Lessmann (2012), who explicitly model the CCS mechanism and provide some comparison elements between CCS and pure renewable energy policies. Nevertheless, their setting is based on one country model without any strategic interactions nor international competition.Our framework partly relies on Dockner and Van Long (1993, 2000)’s model of a two-player dynamic game of international pollution control and transboundary pollution which characterizes cooperative and non-cooperative strategies of a government maximizing the discounted stream of benefits of the representative consumer. Special attention is paid to the existence, multiplicity and properties of stationary steady states via Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equations. We however depart from previous work in several ways. First, we provide the short-run dynamics via a transitory dynamic analysis using Pontryagin Maximum Principle. The short run is crucial in the case of CCS since its implementation requires to complement existing technologies in the short run. Second, we present two alternative non-cooperative scenarios characterized by open-loop strategies and one scenario using a special type of Markovian strategies. In the absence of supranational institutions enforcing environmental regulations, our scenarios describe some alternatives available to policy makers, the multilateral negotiations involved and the optimal strategies. Notice that optimal strategies are adaptable in time and depend on the state of pollution. Further details about the strategic choices and their implications are provided in Section 4.1.Further, we can describe analytically the short run dynamics. Adoption of new, more environmental friendly technologies is lengthy and involves considerable inertia due to high fixed costs of present technologies. This is not so much the case for CCS technologies, more readily applicable, and to which we refer to in the present paper. In terms of the modeling strategy, we suppose that pollution is predetermined and that agents decide the amount of emissions to reduce. As a corollary, pollution reduction does not imply a direct reduction of output in the production process. Following Aghion and Howitt (1998), we introduce a potential rate of regeneration in the equation for environmental quality. In the existing literature, most studies ignore the possibility that different countries may be endowed with different capacities to absorb pollution. We believe it is of considerable importance since the self-regeneration capacity of nature acts as a pollution sink.Countries with open-loop strategies commit once and for all to a trajectory of reduction of emissions.5More about strategies choice and related literature are presented in the next Section.5Open-loop strategies are used in situations in which it is difficult or too costly to check commitments. We find a unique equilibrium solution to the dynamic system, which is interior under certain assumptions. Furthermore, weakly restricting the parameter set, we prove the existence of a balanced growth path where pollution and efforts displayed to absorb emissions grow at the same rate as the emissions. Contrary to most of the previous findings, and in line with Wirl (1994), we prove that Markovian strategies are not always socially less desirable. Indeed, allowing countries to revise their effort to reduce emissions every period leads to lower overall levels of pollution, provided levels of pollution are sufficiently high.The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we briefly introduce the basics of CCS economics, and possible challenges for future multilateral rounds of negotiations. The model is unfolded in Section 3. Section 4 displays the different strategy choices, and explains the theoretical results; in Sections 5 we compare the outcomes from different strategies. Section 6 concludes.6This section relies on Intergovernmental panel on climate Change (2007) and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2007).6The tremendous growth performance of a number of economies and the ensuing energy famine thereof has led to a situation where new coal-fired power plants open every week worldwide, most of which are located in China and in a number of other emerging economies. Furthermore, coal plays also a significant role in countries like Poland or Germany, notably to progressively compensate for the reduction of nuclear energy. All these facts indicate that increases in energy supply will not come from zero-emission sources in the medium run. In this regard, CCS appears as a transition technology for the coming decades, as these technologies build on traditional energy supply technologies.Whenever fossil fuel is burned, it generates CO2, which is usually emitted in the atmosphere, contributing to climate change. CCS refers to a set of technologies meant at capturing, compressing, transporting and storing CO2 emissions permanently. Despite its advantages, CCS technologies have not been massively adopted since they remain relatively costly: estimates show that fitting a power plant with additional CCS technology might increase its cost by about 50 per cent for the installation of the capture equipment.7See, for example, the Global CCS Institute report (2011).7On top of the capture process itself, the transport and storage systems have to be built and operated, increasing the running costs further (Heal & Tarui, 2008). Inferring the cost structure on CCS is not straightforward, as the returns to scale depend on the interlink of costs of capture, transport and storage, each of which highlights potential economies of scale at given emissions levels (Bielicki, 2008).From a legal point of view, there have been a number of steps undertaken to foster CCS regulation at national and international levels. Probably the most noticeable advance has been the integration of CCS as a climate change mitigation instrument within the Kyoto Protocol in 2007, although so far, no agreement has been found regarding their inclusion of CCS in the Clean Development Mechanism.8The Clean development Mechanism allows developed countries to invest in the reduction of emissions in less developed countries, earning this way certified emissions reduction credits.8A further issue facing CCS regulation is the classification of CO2 emissions as industrial by-product or as waste product. This seemingly unimportant detail has profound consequences as industrial projects are in general subject to less stringent regulations than waste disposal projects. In the London Convention, CO2 from capture processes is defined as industrial waste, which then opens the path to further legislation allowing its storage in sub-seabed geological formations.9The London Convention dealt with the prevention of marine pollution. It is in force since 1975 and was largely amended and modernized in 1996.9There is however no mention to CO2 transport across borders in this Convention.There is a number of further regulatory and policy initiatives at the regional level. The Oslo-Paris Convention consists of the European Union, fifteen governments of the western coasts and catchments of Europe. They cooperate on issues related to marine environment protection. In the US, the Enhanced Oil Recovery has a long experience in transporting, injecting and storing CO2 (see Marston & Moore, 2008).Despite existing regulations, many issues remain legally unframed. Among others, let us mention questions related to permits to explore and store, risk regulation, assessments of the effects of projects, measures in case of leakage, responsibility transfer and transport-related regulation. The lack of a complete regulation on CCS leaves many countries in a situation of self-organization.In this present paper, we avail of the legal and policy aspects of CCS to develop a framework, allowing us to take account of the strategic interactions arising in a international competition setting, where CO2 emissions freely move between countries and affect their wellbeing. To address these issues, we present a model where countries act strategically to determine the level of CO2 emissions that each country will reduce. In the first version of the model, countries pre-commit simultaneously to an entire path of CCS (open loop strategies). Then, in a second version, countries condition their action to the current period’s level of pollution (Markovian strategies).Suppose there are two neighboring countries, i and j. Both produce the same consumption good with pollution as a byproduct. These two countries share the same CO2 pollution state,x(t), measured in gigatonnes of carbon (GtC), whose evolution in time is given by the following equation10Long (1992), Dockner and Van Long (1993), Aghion and Howitt (1998), Schumacher and Zou (2008) and Stokey (1998) employ similar pollution accumulation processes.10(1)ẋ(t)=E(t)-β(ui+uj)-δx(t),t⩾0,where the initial conditionx(0)⩾0is given and parameterδ∈[0,1]measures the CO2 absorption rate of nature. The total stock of emissions is the sum of each country’s stockE(t)=Ei(t)+Ej(t), and it is a known, given, and positive function of CO2 emissions. In the long runE(t)may be constant, increasing or decreasing at a constant rate.uiandujmeasure the quantity of captured CO2 emissions by country i and j, respectively. The positive coefficientβmeasures the unit effect of CO2 emissions reduction. Notice that if abatement is zero, pollution will increase much faster. Furthermore, if emissions are over the absorption rate of nature itself, CO2 accumulation will increase without bound. In our context, CO2 capture depends on countries’ infrastructures resulting from specific investments and CCS qualifies in this regard.Facing the CO2 emissions reduction problem, the two countries need to choose their capture ratesul,l=i,j, that maximize their utility(2)maxul∫0Te-rlt-clx2(t)2-ul22-blx(t)uldt+S(x(T)),l=i,j,subject to the state constraint (1), whererl∈[0,1)is the time preference. The two first terms in the integral are standard in the literature on CO2 emissions reduction. The first termclx2(t)2measures the direct cost of a CO2 polluted environment, andcl2is the unit adjustment cost, a positive constant. The second term,ul22, represents the adjustment cost of emissions reduction where the unit adjustment cost is normalized to one. In particular, the adjustment cost encompasses costs due to CO2 transport and storage, as well as the expenditure of developing, installing and running systems to monitor the CO2 stock and possible leakages.The third term,blx(t)ulis specific to CCS technologies. Indeed, note that the amount of CO2 one country can capture is not constrained so that we implicitly assume that countries can capture and store any fraction of their emissions. Consequently, at any time t countries must have a storage capacity as large as their stock of pollution in case it is optimally required. Although it is easy to capture and store small stocks of CO2, the difficulty to find appropriate storage capacities increases with the size of the stock of CO2. The positive constantblweights the mentioned difficulty to find appropriate storage capacities for CO2. Hence, the total marginal cost of storing is increasing, and it is given in the present setting byul+blx.11In Harford (1991, 1993) a different state-dependent pollution control enforcement is implemented.11Whenbl=0,l=i,j, the problem boils down to the case of Dockner and Van Long (1993) where the reduction cost is state independent. Despite this, our analysis deviates from Dockner and Van Long (1993) as they compare cooperative outcomes to Markovian strategies along the stationary path, whereas we study the complete trajectory dynamics of the difference between open loop and Markovian strategies.12A more detailed account of the deviations from the existing literature is provided in Section 4.1.12In line with this literature, we assume that the direct cost from CO2 pollution is more important than the reduction cost, that is,cl>bl2⩾0,l=i,j.S(x(T))is a given positive function forT⩽∞satisfyinglimT→∞S(x(T))=0andSx<0.13In Stern (2007), it is estimated that unmitigated climate change would reduce global GDP by as much as 5–20%.13In contrast with Dockner and Van Long (1993), countries’ emissions are exogenously given while emissions reduction is endogenously chosen.Furthermore, it should be noticed thatuimay be larger thanEisince we do not impose any restriction onui. That is, country i can capture and store more CO2 than it emits. This is possible because the pollutant can cross-borders. This case arises if country i cares more about the transboundary pollutant CO2, which may arise if (i) country j does not have enough storage capacity, (ii) it is too costly for j, or (iii) country j does not have the CCS technology yet. In particular, this could be the case when the direct pollution costclx2(t)2is very high in country i.In the next section, for the above defined game, we present both short-run and long-run open-loop strategies and one kind of Markovian Nash strategy. A detailed explanation of these different cases is provided in this section as well. Then following literature, Section 5 compares the outcomes of these two strategies in terms of their long-run steady states and their balanced growth paths.In this section, we first provide a general description of the strategic choices available to the players. In particular, we provide a lengthy explanation as to how the two chosen strategies differ from each other and how they differ from previous work.Second, we study the case in which the countries play open-loop strategies. At the beginning of the game, both countries commit to reduce emissions levelsul=ul(t)for all periods in time, independently of the state of the world. We compute the explicit solution path. Then, we analyze the model’s steady state and its balanced growth path. The effect ofblon emission reductions and on the pollution state is analyzed.Third, we study one (among many) Markovian Nash equilibrium via the Pontryagin maximum principle where the emissions reduction strategies change according to the state of pollution: forl=1,2,ul=ul(x,t)and evaluated at timet,ul(t)=ul(x(t),t).In their seminal work, Dockner and Van Long (1993) are the first to introduce a differential games approach into the study of a transboundary pollution control problem. They mainly compare the outcome between cooperative and non-cooperative pollution control strategies, considering the former strategy as their benchmark. Their main finding states that if both countries chose linear strategies, then there are losses, as both countries face a higher pollution stock at the steady state. However, if both countries opt for non-linear strategies, with small discount rates, the non-linear Markovian Perfect strategies may lead to an outcome which is very close to the cooperative strategy outcome.In subsequent work, Rubio and Casino (2002) confirmed Wirl (1994) and Wirl and Dockner (1996)’s earlier finding that non-linear strategies may be Pareto-inferior to the linear strategies, thus weakening the argument for non-linear strategies. Our approach differs from Dockner and Van Long (1993) as well as from Rubio and Casino (2002), as we extend our analysis beyond the steady state and focus on the trajectory dynamics. In the present study of CCS technologies, the trajectory dynamics are crucial since they might well establish as a transition technology.Furthermore, following Dockner and Sorger (1996), most studies have simply ignored open-loop strategies. It was thought that players are naive, as they do not use any information acquired during the game and consequently do not respond to changes in the current stock. In the context of climate change and mitigation policies, it is important to distinguish between countries which have taken binding commitments to stabilize/reduce their GHG emissions, such as in the Kyoto Protocol, and countries which have proposed more flexible approaches, based on regular updates of the targets to reach, according to current states of the world. Stated differently, the open-loop strategy can be considered as a translation of the current mechanisms to curb down GHG emissions.The difference between open-loop and the Markovian Nash strategies can be illustrated using the Kyoto protocol as follows: the proponents of the former approach have taken commitments about emission reductions from which they cannot deviate. The holder of the latter approach can, on the contrary, deviate from their commitment and regularly revise their target.In Rubio and Casino (2002), the authors find that in linear-quadratic games, the linear Markov-perfect equilibrium is typically less efficient than the open-loop equilibrium outcome and far less efficient than the cooperative outcome. However, given that “⋯each country realizes that the other country’s future emissions may depend directly or indirectly on its own current emissions, the perceived feedback effect may cause it to choose a different course of action. This intertemporal dimension may attenuate the free-rider problem,” (Dockner and Van Long, 1993, p.14). Indeed, our results dig further in the standard free-rider problem, as we explain in the next section.A further departure from Dockner and Van Long (1993) comes from the fact that we are not comparing open-loop Nash equilibrium with all infinitely many stationary Markovian Perfect Nash Equilibria provided by the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman.14The statement and reasoning of infinitely many Markovian perfect Nash equilibria can be found in Dockner and Van Long (1993), Rubio and Casino (2002) and the references therein.14Rather, we take one particular equilibrium via Pontragin’s maximum principle, which yields the stationary equilibrium and the trajectory path.15For the Hamilton-Jacob-Bellman equation, due to a lack of boundary conditions, there are infinitely many stationary solutions if the given functions are time independent. However, given the time dependency of our functions, there is no guarantee of a stationary solution during the trajectory path. Hence, the Hamilton-Jacob-Bellman equation is not useful in our situation. Note however that for linear-quadratic games, a linear-strategy can give a time dependent trajectory path.15In the sequel of this paper, we focus on symmetric solutions, i.e., countries adopt the same strategy.16We are thinking for example, on the largest CO2 emission parties, such as U.S.A, China or the EU.16In our model, the two countries are identical and commit to a reduction strategy which only depends on time t. Then country i’s problem consists in finding a trajectory{ui(t)}t=1∞to maximize its utility, subject to the state constraint (1). Let us define the open-loop Nash Equilibrium:Definition 1A couple(ϕi,ϕj)of functionsϕl:[0,+∞)→R+,l=i,j, is called an open-loop Nash Equilibrium if an optimal control pathul(·)exists and is given by the open-loop strategyul(t)=ϕl(t), for eachl=i,j.Under the assumption of the existence of a symmetric equilibrium, we obtain the following system(6)u(t)=-(bx(t)+βλ(t)),ẋ=E(t)+(2bβ-δ)x+2β2λ,λ̇=c-b2x+(r+δ-bβ)λ,with the initial condition of x and a terminal or transversality condition onλ.We next solve system (6) under two different scenarios for the long term. In the first case, we assume that emissions are constant, and in the second that E grows at a constant rate.If emissions are constant over time in the long run,E=E‾, there are two possibilities whenbβ=r+δ. In the first situation, the country absorbs all new emissions, and the stock of pollution falls down to zero:x¯=0,λ¯=-E‾2β2andu¯=E‾2β. In the second situation, the country faces indeterminacy. Indeed, any combination of(x¯,λ¯)is a possible steady state for given emissionsE‾as long asλ¯=-E‾+(2r+δ)x¯2β2. Ifbβ≠r+δ, then there exists one long-run positive saddle path stable steady statex¯=E‾(r+δ-bβ)Dandλ¯=-c-b2E‾D, if and only ifr+δ-bβandD=2β2(c-b2)-(2bβ-δ)(r+δ-bβ)are both positive andc>b2. Otherwise, the long run steady state is unstable. Taking into account all considerations above, we impose the following assumption to ensure existence and stability:Assumption 1Supposec>b2,r+δ>bβ,D=2β2(c-b2)-(2bβ-δ)(r+δ-bβ)>0.Under Assumption 1, the explicit solution for CO2 accumulation can be given as follows, for anyt⩾0,(7)x(t)=1ξ2-ξ1(2bβ-δ-ξ1)eξ2tx(0)+∫0te-ξ2sE(s)ds-(2bβ-δ-ξ2)eξ1tx(0)+∫0te-ξ1sE(s)ds+2bβ-δ-ξ2ξ2-ξ1(eξ1t-eξ2t)λ(0),whereξ1andξ2are the eigenvalues of system (6):ξ1=r+bβ-(r+bβ)2+4D2(<0),ξ2=r+bβ+(r+bβ)2+4D2(>0).Obviously,x(t)is an accumulative process and depends on the emission of pollution of the two countries,E(t), and the initial shadow value. Furthermore, the shadow value of pollution accumulation is:(8)λ(t)=(2bβ-δ-ξ1)ξ2-ξ1(eξ1t-eξ2t)x(0)+∫0t(eξ1(t-s)-eξ2(t-s))E(s)ds+Λ(t)ξ2-ξ1λ(0),with initial value(9)λ(0)=ξ2-ξ1Λ(T)λ(T)-(2bβ-δ-ξ1)Λ(T)(eξ1T-eξ2T)x(0)+∫0T(eξ1(T-s)-eξ2(T-s))E(s)ds,andΛ(t)=(2bβ-δ-ξ1)eξ1t-(2bβ-δ-ξ2)eξ2t.It is straightforward to check that the initial shadow valueλ(0)is determined by the discounted terminal conditionξ2-ξ1Λ(T)λ(T), withλ(T)=Sx(x∗(T)), and the discounting factors essentially depend on the convergence speedξ1andξ2.Combining the above analysis with the solution foruiin (6), we could obtain the optimal open-loop CCS strategy,ui(t)=-(bx(t)+βλ(t)), which essentially depends on the countries emissions, their terminal targets, and the initial level of pollution.We conclude with the following proposition:Proposition 1IfD>0the dynamic system(6)has a unique solution which is given by(7) and (8)together with(9), for any given terminal conditionS(x(T)). Furthermore, ifE(t)is constant in the long run andAssumption 1holds, then there exists a unique interior positive steady state for the pollution stock, which is a saddle point.See the Appendix. □Suppose now that in the long-run,E(t)is not constant but grows at a constant rateg∈R. We define a balanced growth path as the path where all the endogenous variables grow at constant rates, which can be negative, zero or positive. Hence, along its balanced growth path variable X can be expressed asX(t)=X^egXt, withX^the level where the balanced growth path starts andgX, its growth rate.Then the dynamic system (6) shows that there is a balanced growth path along which the pollution stock x, its shadow valueλand emission reductions u grow at the same rate as emissions, so thatgX=g. Furthermore, simple calculations yield that along the balanced growth path,(10)xˆ=(g+bβ-(r+δ))E(0)F(b),uˆ=-b+β(c-b2)g+bβ-(r+δ)xˆ,providedg<(r+δ)-bβandF(b)=(g+δ)(g-(r+δ))+bβ(2r+3δ-g)-2cβ2. We can compute howxˆanduˆchange with b, the unit state-dependent cost:∂uˆ∂b=-E^(g+δ)F2(b)[(r+δ-g)2-β2c]>0,if(r+δ-g)2β2<c,=0,if(r+δ-g)2β2=c,<0,if(r+δ-g)2β2>c,and∂xˆ∂b=2E(0)βF2(b)[(r+δ-g)2-β2c]<0,if(r+δ-g)2β2<c,=0,if(r+δ-g)2β2=c,>0,if(r+δ-g)2β2>c.On the one hand, when the damage cost is low,c<(r+δ-g)2β2, the above expressions imply that any increase in b leads to a decrease in the country’s CO2 capture and a subsequent increase in the CO2 stock. This case arises when the countries are patient enough (large r) and/or the nature regeneration level is high (largeδ). The sum of r andδ, net of emissions rate g discounted by the efficiency of emissions captureβ, is larger than the direct cost of CO2 pollution. We believe this case fits a situation in which the stock of pollution is low and where CCS technologies are costly.On the other hand, when the direct damage cost is high enough, the environmental quality improves and emissions fall when the path for emissions capture is settled once and for all. More precisely, ifc>(r+δ-g)2β2, then a higher b leads to a larger CO2 capture. The reason lies on the nature of the CCS process itself, on the infinite horizon of the problem and on the perfect foresight assumption. Indeed, if c is already large and b increases, then countries have accrued incentives to capture CO2 emissions and reduce their stock of CO2 as soon as possible. Failing to do so and letting grow the stock of CO2 generates higher costs directly, because the stock is larger, and indirectly because they would require a larger storage capacity.We summarize the above analysis in the following proposition:Proposition 2Suppose emissionE(t)grows at a constant rate g and parameters verifyb2<b(r+δ-g)β<c, then there exists a balanced growth path for system(6). Along this path, all endogenous variables,x,λand u, grow at the same rate g, and their levels are given in(10). Moreover, bothxˆanduˆare increasing functions ofE(0). Provided(r+δ-g)2<β2c,uˆincreases with b whilexˆdecreases.In the next subsection, we study one type of state-dependent strategies. The level of emissions capture is revised every period according to the state of the environment. Under this scenario, countries can adapt their strategies according to the contemporaneous environmental situation.Suppose now that both countries can change their emissions capture strategies depending on the pollution state. Define the Markovian Nash equilibrium as follows:17We only study one particular Markovian Nash equilibrium but there may be others.17Definition 2A couple of functions(Ψi,Ψj),Ψl:[0,+∞)×[0,+∞)→R+2withΨl=Ψl(x,t),∀(x,t)∈[0,+∞)×[0,+∞)forl=i,j, is a Markovian Nash Equilibrium if an optimal control pathulof country l exists and is given by the Markovian Strategy for country l:ul(t))=Ψl(x(t),t), forl=i,j.In Example 4.1 in Dockner et al. (2000), players choose a mixture of open-loop and Markovian strategies via conjecturing the rival’s potential optimal strategy. We adapt this conjecturing method and prove that indeed conjecturing leads to one Markovian strategy (among possibly many).Country i’s Hamiltonian function, taking country j’s optimal strategy as given, is:Hi(x,ui(x,t),Ψj(x,t),t)=-cix2(t)2-ui2(x,t)2-bixui(x,t)+λm,i[E(t)-β(ui(x,t)+Ψj(x,t))-δx],whereλm,iis country i’s costate variable. The first order condition foruigivesum,i∗=-(bxm+βλm,i)and the costate equation isλ̇m,i=rλm,i-∂Hi∂x-∂Hi∂uj∂Ψj∂x.Then, by symmetry, country j’s expected optimal strategy isΨj(x,t)=-(bx+βλm,j(t)). Thus, the shadow value of country i checksλ̇m,i=(r+δ-2bβ)λm,i+(c-b2)xm.Country i’s maximized Hamiltonian function readsHi∗(x,λm,i,Ψ(x,t),t)=Hi(x,λm,i,um,i∗,Ψj(x,t),t)=-12c-bi2x2+(2bβ-δ)xλm,i+β22λm,i2+β2λm,iλm,j+λm,iE(t),which is strictly concave in x ifc>b2. For a given expected optimal responseof country j’s feedback strategy, country i’s objective is optimized by the above first order conditions. Thus, the above first order conditions constitute a non-degenerate Markovian Nash equilibrium.Taking the following symmetric solution withum,i=um,j=umandλm,i=λm,j=λm, the optimal choiceum, the state equationxmand the costate variableλm, it follows:(11)um(xm,t)=-(bxm+βλm(t)),ẋm=E(t)+(2bβ-δ)xm+2β2λm,λ̇m=c-b2xm+(r+δ-2bβ)λm,with the initial condition for x known and the transversality condition forλmgiven by(12)limt→∞e-ritλm(t)xm(t)=0ifT=∞,orλm(T)=Sx(x∗(T))ifT<∞.Note that the difference between the open-loop and Markovian strategy is the feedback effect which is presented by the extra term,bβλm, in theλmequation.It is easy to check that there exists a positive non-trivial saddle path stable steady state for the CO2 stock if and only if Assumption 2 holds.Assumption 2c>b2,r+δ-2bβ>0,Dm=2β2(c-b2)-(2bβ-δ)(r+δ-2bβ)>0.If Assumption 2 does not hold, either there is no positive steady state or the positive steady state is unstable. Under Assumption 2, using the same arguments as before, we can get the explicit trajectory solution of system (11) replacingξibyξm,i, withξm,i=r±r2+4Dm2,i=1,2, withξm,1<0andξm,2>0.To close this section, we summarize the results as follows:Proposition 3For any given emissionE(t)and terminal conditionS(x(T)), there exists a symmetric explicit short run Markovian Nash strategy for a CCS processum,iand the corresponding pollution accumulation and shadow value. Furthermore, ifE(t)grows at a constant rate g,E(t)=E^egt, and parameters verify2b2<b(r+δ-g)β<c, then there exists a balanced growth path along which all endogenous variables,xm,λmandum, grow at the same rate g. That is,xm=xˆmegt,λm=λˆmegtandum=uˆmegt, wherexˆm=E^g-(r+δ+2bβ)G(b)withG(b)=(g+δ)(g-(r+δ))+2bβ(r+2δ)-2β2(c+b2)anduˆm=-xˆm(g-(r+δ))b+β(c-b2)g-(r+δ)+2bβ.So far, we have presented the short run trajectories of two different strategies: open-loop commitment and one special case of Markovian Nash Equilibrium. In the two settings, trajectories are explicit and essentially depend on short-run targets. In the next section, we go one step further and analyse the long run of the strategies established in this section. We shall assume there are two possibilities for emissionsE(t)in the long run: either E is constant or it grows at a constant rate. We will pay special attention to the additional information provided by the feedback strategies about the capture process.First, we notice that Assumptions 1 and 2 are not identical even whenE(t)is a constant. If Assumption 1 holds and Assumption 2 fails, then there is a positive steady state with open-loop strategies while there is no steady state with Markovian strategies. Similarly, if Assumption 1 fails and Assumption 2 holds, there exists a positive steady state with Markovian strategies but not under open-loop strategies. In this section, we focus on the situation in which both open-loop and Markovian feedback strategies have positive CO2 stock at the steady state.In order to compare the effect of different strategies in the long run, let us assume first thatE(t)is constant in the long run and that Assumption 2 holds in both open-loop and our special Markovian strategy. Combining Assumptions 1 and 2, we study the situations in different cases.Case 1.c>b2,δ2β<b<r+δ2β.Case 2.c>b2,b<δ2β<r+δ2β.It is easy to check that Case 1 implies thatDm>D>0and Case 2 impliesD>Dm>0.Under Case 1 or 2, both open-loop and Markovian strategies lead to positive saddle path stable steady states, though the steady state values may not coincide. In fact, the long run steady state values of the CO2 stock,x¯andx¯mcheckDmr+δ-2bβx¯m=E‾=Dr+δ-bβx¯.Hence, provided thatc>b2(13)x¯mx¯<1,from which we can deduce the following proposition:Proposition 4Suppose pollutant emission is a constant,E(t)=E‾,∀t. Under Case 1 or 2, the optimal Markovian feedback strategy leads to a lower level of long-run stock of CO2compared to the open-loop strategy. Furthermore, the Markovian strategy leads to faster convergence to its relatively lower steady state value for CO2stock, that is,|ξ1|<|ξm,1|.Proposition 4 states that the special Markovian feedback strategy leads to a lower long-run CO2 level than the open-loop commitment. The Markovian strategy offers information on the CO2 stock at every time, so that countries can compute the future reduction in costs induced by capturing existing CO2. Indeed, if countries capture a higher share of CO2, they diminish the current and future CO2 stock, diminishing the future direct cost at the same time. Notice that the indirect cost is indeed lower since the term bx diminishes as well. Hence, one can conclude that Markovian strategies lead to a lower public bad and yield less social waste. Our finding is in line with Wirl (1994) who shows a similar result, but under a different setting (see also Braden & Bromley (1981), Hoel (1991), and references therein).Furthermore, Proposition 4 also shows that countries should take into account both the environmental cost, which in our setting could be the direct cost due to CO2 emissions, and the state dependent cost of emissions reduction, that is, the indirect cost of CCS including installation and adjustment costs.Besides, Markovian feedback strategies usually lead to free riding, i.e. there is lower public goods in feedback than in open loop and hence, higher public bad in feedback. However, this is not necessarily true in our framework. We have shown that if the environmental cost is high,c>b2, it is better to reduce emissions further. People would be more willing to pay to improve the environment rather than face the consequences of higher CO2 pollution levels. Nonetheless, players with open-loop strategies will stick to their commitments ignoring real-time information.Further, comparing the two negative eigenvalues,ξ1andξm,1, we find that the convergence speed is larger under feedback strategies, that is|ξ1|<|ξm,1|. Again, depending on the cost coefficients b and c, the feedback strategy may provide countries with more information. This additional information leads to faster convergence to the lower steady state for pollution. Therefore, the Markovian Nash equilibrium can improve the long-run situation, giving the countries a chance to adjust their behaviors.Let us now consider the balanced growth case and suppose thatE(t)=E^egt. Careful calculations show that:xˆxˆm=(g-(r+δ)+bβ)G(b)(g-(r+δ)+2bβ)F(b),anduˆuˆm=xˆxˆm[g-(r+δ)+2bβ][(g-(r+δ)b)+cβ][g-(r+δ)+bβ][(g-(r+δ)b)+cβ+βb2],withG(b)=(g+δ)(g-(r+δ))+2bβ(r+2δ)-2β2(c+b2)andF(b)=(g+δ)(g-(r+δ))+bβ(2r+3δ-g)-2cβ2.18For further details, see the Appendix.18As a consequence, we conclude thatProposition 5Suppose that conditions inProposition 3hold. Then, along the balanced growth pathxˆ>xˆmanduˆ>uˆm, withb>0. Ifb=0, thenxˆ=xˆmanduˆ=uˆm.See the Appendix. □This result seems contradicting at first sight, given that agents playing in Markovian strategies capture less CO2 than under commitment,uˆ>uˆm. However, it is also true that there is less CO2 accumulated along the Markovian stationary path,xˆ>xˆm. The reason is to be found in Proposition 5: if finding pollution depots is costly,b>0, then agents playing open-loop strategies will experience a higher level of CO2 stock in the long run, and they will also capture a larger share of CO2. This picture is the limit of the short-run behavior described in Section 4. Indeed, players under Markovian strategies achieve a low long-run level of CO2 stock because they have captured more CO2 along the transition path than open-loop players. Therefore, Markovian players achieve a low CO2 stock, and having captured CO2 more intensively in the short run, they do not need to exert any intense capture effort along the balanced growth path.Nonetheless, when the capture process is state independent, that isb=0, the Markovian strategies coincide with the open-loop strategies along the balanced growth path. Therefore, policy makers should care about the cost of CO2 pollution and whether this cost is or not state dependent. Only then they can choose between an open-loop commitment or Markovian strategies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
