@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Risk analysis with contractual default. Does covenant breach matter?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Covenant violations are an underhand and often overlooked risk.We introduce a methodology for modeling the consequences of covenant breach.Results show statistically significant difference in risk profiles.Risk measures need to be readjusted to account for default risk.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Investment analysis,Project finance,Risk analysis,Monte Carlo simulation,Coherent risk measures,Covenants,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mergers and acquisitions (M&A), private equity and leveraged buyouts, securitization and project finance are characterized by the presence of contractual clauses (covenants). These covenants trigger the technical default of the borrower even in the absence of insolvency. Therefore, borrowers may default on loans even when they have sufficient available cash to repay outstanding debt. This condition is not captured by the net present value (NPV) distribution obtained through a standard Monte Carlo simulation. In this paper, we present a methodology for including the consequences of covenant breach in a Monte Carlo simulation, extending traditional risk analysis in investment planning. We introduce a conceptual framework for modeling technical and material breaches from the standpoint of both lenders and shareholders. We apply this framework to a real case study concerning the project financing of a 64-million euro biomass power plant. The simulation is carried out on the actual model developed by the financial advisor of the project and made available to the authors. Results show that both technical and material breaches have a statistically significant impact on the net present value distribution, and this impact is more relevant when leverage and cost of debt increase.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Risk analysis is a central tool for supporting investments decision-making. The main outcome of a risk analysis is the distribution of the valuation criterion (henceforth, risk profile). From the risk profile, analysts estimate all risk measures. Thus, it is crucial that the risk profile reflects as accurately as possible the reality of the investment at hand.Covenants are contractual clauses that impose on a borrower either obligations to do something (positive covenants) or to refrain from doing something (negative covenants) Smith (1993). Covenants are set tightly ex-ante (i.e., before the closing of the loan agreement), after extensive negotiation between lenders and shareholders (see the bondholder-stakeholder conflict in Smith and Warner, 1979). Because covenants are defined to provide lenders with early warning signals and safety buffers, their breach does not necessarily occur in states of actual financial distress of the borrower Chen and Wei (1993). This fact prompts the question of whether covenant breach affects an investment’s risk profile. The answer is still debated, yet more importantly, it has not been the subject of a direct quantitative investigation.Covenant breach challenges standard risk analysis practices, raising three main questions: (1) How likely is covenant breach? (2) Given a breach (either a technical default or a material breach as defined below), what consequences might sponsors and lenders face? (3) How significant is the impact on risk profiles and, consequently, on risk measures?We design a quantitative model of the consequences of covenant breach and apply it to the special case of project finance where the borrower is represented by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Esty (2003). The model has two main features. It takes into account the important distinction between technical and material breach, and it differentiates the perspectives of sponsors and lenders. A breach is material when it corresponds to a “material” event SEC (1999) and Novo (2007), that is, lenders consider the violation capable of disrupting the orderly continuation of the deal and force the borrower to default. Conversely, if the event is not deemed material, lenders “waive” the contractual breach and we are in the presence of a technical default. The determination of whether a default is material or not is achieved by carrying out a “materiality test”. The materiality test requires the ex-ante definition of a range of values of the cover ratios discussed in Section 3. At the upper end of this range there is a preset value that triggers technical default but allows creditors and the SPV shareholders to continue managing the transaction with enforced monitoring or renegotiated loan terms. At the lower end there is a final value below which the breach is considered material. At this point, creditors consider the loan subject to resolution; they accelerate the loan and force the deal into bankruptcy without the possibility of renegotiation. In this respect, covenant violations expose sponsors to a risk, which, if overlooked, can lead to grave consequences for both shareholders and lenders. The survey by Davison et al. (2010) reveals material violations in around 8% of the project finance deals analyzed in their paper. In these circumstances, lenders are in a position to take over control of the project, and can continue the initiative with the objective of recovering the amount lent to the SPV Davison et al. (2010, p. 44). In the case of a technical breach, our model accounts for the impact on the investment cash flow determined by the change in the debt schedule repayment. In fact, lenders impose a dividend lock-up on sponsors and require them to use all the available cash in the year of technical breach to accelerate debt repayment (cash sweep). In the case of a material breach, the model accounts for the shareholders’ loss of equity cash flows subsequent to the lenders’ enforcement of the security package. For lenders, the model accounts for the probability of workout and recovery of the outstanding loan amount.We translate the model into a simulation methodology that nests into the traditional Monte Carlo simulation.We apply the simulation procedure to a real project finance tra nsaction involving a recent biomass power plant located in Italy worth around 64million euro which underwent financial closing in 2009 with General Electric-Interbanca as lead arranger. For this project, the authors had access to the financial model used by sponsors and the mandated lead arranging bank in their evaluation of the deal. The availability of the financial model allows us to examine quantitative results relying on real data and not on fictitious or simulated deals. Results show that the effect of covenant breach on the cash flow distributions to the SPV’s sponsors is negligible if the violations are not material. Conversely, in the case of material breach, the cumulative distribution function of the equity net present value (NPV) exhibits a fat left tail, with a considerable change in the value of risk measures. Indeed, our findings confirm that overlooking the consequences of a material breach can lead both shareholders and lenders to underestimate the risks involved in the transaction. The impact on the risk profile is statistically significant and the values of the risk measure (Conditional Value at Risk or CVaR) can be remarkably different from those obtained in an analysis that fails to take into account the consequence of a covenant breach.We think our paper can contribute to the existing literature on investment risk analysis from different standpoints.First, available papers on covenants have analyzed contractual clauses almost exclusively in the context of corporate finance settings, i.e. in case of bond or loan contracts between lenders and already existing firmsAghion and Bolton (1992), Beneish and Press (1995), and Chava and Roberts (2008). However, much less is known about the importance and the role of covenants included in lending agreements designed for project finance, and more generally for structured deals. The typical project finance transaction is a fully self-contained, one-time financing event with a definite economic life-cycle Gatti et al. (2013). With such a deal, the previous lending relations between lenders and the SPV shareholders are much less important than the soundness of the stand-alone deal to be financed. These characteristics are true for no other corporate financing sample, making project finance deals ideal to study the disciplining role of covenants in isolation from other borrower-specific factors.Second, we discuss the use of covenants for a significant segment of international capital markets which is not extensively covered in previous theoretical and empirical papers. Thomson Reuters reports that syndicated loans amounted to US$3.9 trillion at the end of 2011, of which US$214.5bn were PF loans. These figures compare with US$180bn of private equity invested globally in 2010 and with global securitization issuance of mortgage and asset backed securities of US$799bn at the end of 2010.Third, we design a methodology that is useful to model the effect of technical and material breach of covenants for sponsors and lenders when deciding on individual investment projects. Knowledge of the expected frequency of covenant violations provides analysts with a degree of confidence as to the project’s ability to sustain stresses. This information can then be used by lenders to fine-tune the loan tenor, the spread and the debt/equity ratio. Our methodology can also help creditors assess unexpected loss and allocate equity capital in accordance with Basel II and Basel III rules (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2009).The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the motivation for the paper, discussing covenants included in credit agreements typically used by lenders and sponsors in project finance. Section 3 details the most often used financial covenant for structured deals, the Debt Service Cover Ratio (DSCR). Section 4 proposes a cursory review on risk measures and risk analysis. Section 5 presents our model. Section 6 illustrates the simulation procedure. Section 7 introduces the case study analysis and show the results. Section 8 concludes.Covenants are defined as “... supplemental obligations of the borrower in addition to the basic obligation to repay the lenders the amount due on the scheduled maturity dates [...] These supplemental obligations may be either correlated to loan repayment – as in the case the borrower does’t take certain actions that will hamper debt repayment at the scheduled dates – or required by lenders in order to monitor their credit investment and verify that it is being managed properly”Novo (2007, p. 254).Covenants characterize a vast portion of financial transactions represented by private bank debts Demiroglu and James (2009), Nini et al. (2009), and Sudarsanam and Moir (2007), leveraged buyouts (LBOs) Ljungqvist et al. (2007), private equity Cumming (2008), Cumming and Johan (2007, 2008), and Achleitner et al. (2010), corporate and project bonds Dailami and Hauswald (2003), asset-backed securitization, syndicated loans and project finance Corielli et al. (2010) and Finnerty (2007). A relevant part of these deals is financed on a structured basis, meaning that the borrower is a special purpose entity, different from an already existing firm, frequently known as sponsor or originator. In that case, the risk analysis is conducted at the investment project level, because the corresponding decision-making problem is of a binary nature, namely, “undertake the project or not”. The class of project finance investments, together with securitization and LBOs, is the prototypical example of a structured finance transaction implying such an investment decision Megginson (2010). Creditors can rely only on the cash generated by the initiative and only on the assets of the SPV as collateral, but not on the cash flows and assets of the originators/sponsors at an aggregate corporate level Esty (2001), Esty (2004), Esty and Sesia (2004), and Bonetti et al. (2009). The nature of the deal explains the need for including strict covenants in loan agreements, to give lenders the right to monitor the financial management of the initiative to avoid distress (Rajan and Winton, 1995).Since the seminal work of Smith and Warner (1979), the literature on covenants for standard corporate finance loans has been extensive and has analyzed various effects of covenant use in the financing policies of corporations. However, the studies regarding covenant and covenant breach and their effects on individual investment project performance are far less numerous. This is the most important motivation for this paper. Moreover, we cannot simply transfer the results of corporate finance literature to a project finance/structure finance setting. Second, covenants play a crucial role in project finance in preventing unexpected negative events from forcing the project into bankruptcy. Furthermore, covenants typically trigger project restructuring, leading to lower probability of default and higher recovery ratios than other more traditional corporate exposures.Starting from the first point, the evidence available for standard corporate finance settings (i.e. already existing firms with portfolios of ongoing assets) shows that most covenant violations are actually either waived by the creditors or resolved by renegotiations of the loan or refinancing with a different lender Chen and Wei (1993). Indeed, Beneish and Press (1995) and Nini et al. (2009) demonstrate that only a small fraction of violating firms experience a distressed-exit. Moreover, a covenant breach is followed by the imposition of further constraints on the borrower’s behavior (like an increased spread on the loan Smith (1993), Sweeney (1994), and Sufi (2009), request of additional collateral and limitations to dividend distributions or to additional capital expenditures Nini et al. (2009)). Finally, creditor intervention in case of covenant violation is in fact good for the borrowers’ shareholders as it is associated with enhanced operating performance and increased share price.1In the same fashion, Demiroglu and James (2009) show that shareholders respond more positively to announcements of loans with tighter financial covenants. However, Beneish and Press (1995) document wealth losses to shareholders following the renegotiation of loans triggered by a technical default.1While several of the findings in the existing literature can be extended to individual project finance transactions, there is one main difference. As previously stated, this type of transaction requires the lenders’ risk assessment of a specific project and not of an existing pool of real projects, like in an ongoing corporate entity. This fact has four important implications for sponsors and creditors that we address in the paper, implications which, to the best of our knowledge, have not been covered by previous studies.First, the breach of covenants cannot always be followed by a revision or renegotiation of the contractual terms of the debt contract. Examples are large infrastructure projects where the minimum values of the cover ratios discussed in Section 3 are breached and very close to 1. In these cases it becomes unfeasible for lenders to raise the level of spread on the loan tranches because operating cash flows cannot sustain an increased debt service and there are no other cash flows that can be used for loan repayment.Second, the request for additional collateral is excluded by definition, since these deals are based on a no-recourse clause to the originators/sponsors of the SPV. Furthermore, lenders include in the credit agreement a negative pledge clause Gatti (2012) that prohibits the borrower from allowing any other lender outside the pool of existing lenders to use the present and future assets of the SPV as collateral.Third, project finance implies the financing of one single project, so a very detailed security package is set up before the deal closing Finnerty (2007). This allows existing creditors (and no others) to take over the control rights of the shareholders when no waiver or renegotiation of the loan terms is possible. Furthermore, the security package grants lenders the option of taking full control of the SPV, taking possession of all project assets, expropriate shareholders’ control rights and capturing the remaining enterprise value. Yescombe (2002) reports that a typical project finance security package includes: (1) a pledge on the borrowers’ shares, so that banks have the right to vote in the event of default; (2) a mortgage on land rights, buildings, and other tangible and intangible fixed assets; (3) credit assignment for proceeds coming from key contracts of the borrower Bonetti et al. (2009); (4) a pledge on all the bank accounts of the borrower; and (5) assignment of insurance payments in case of damages. Given such a tight package, the option to refinance the loans with other creditors (which is a possibility in standard corporate finance settings following a covenant violation) is simply not possible in project finance.Fourth, other limitations to management behavior that have been extensively documented in the literature do not apply in a clear-cut way to project finance deals. The limitation to dividend distributions is included from the beginning in the original credit agreement with the lenders and not added after a covenant breach. Limitations to increased capital expenditures after a breach of covenants is not possible, because the SPV is created with the sole purpose of completing one single project that requires exactly the amount of money stipulated. Should the level of capital expenditures be limited after a breach of covenants, the project would automatically be terminated and forced into bankruptcy given the impossibility to complete construction and start operations.2The impossibility of restricting capital expenditures upon violation of financial covenants explains why very big infrastructure projects (like the Eurotunnel) underwent several rounds of restructuring in order to complete the construction phase. See Esty and Sesia (2004) and Blanc-Brude et al. (2006). In business practice, modelers include in the capital budgeting of the project finance deal an item covering “contingencies” that could arise during the construction phase. This additional amount (frequently between 5% and 10% of the total construction cost) is financed with a dedicated credit line by banks (the standby loan) and a commitment from project sponsors to inject additional amount of equity (equity standby agreement). Furthermore, cost overrun and time delays which are not the responsibility of the contractor are covered with a detailed and pervasive set of insurance policies.2Coming to the second and third motivation for our paper, the study of covenants and covenants breach in project finance is very limited. To the best of our knowledge, the only papers published on the subject refer to the study of the probability of default and recovery ratios of project finance transactions issued by Rating Agencies. No academic paper has focused on this topic except Gatti et al. (2007), who simply introduces a theoretical framework to capture project finance default in his work without implementing this framework in a simulation model.The available evidence on project finance default is strictly associated with the issue of covenant breach. Esty (2004) report data produced by a consortium of large commercial banks active in the project finance market and illustrate the methodology used to quantify the default probability. A material breach of covenant, as defined later, together with situations where banks might make recourse to debt restructuring before the borrower fails to make payment are included in a broad definition of default. This methodology has been replicated in Standard and Poor’s (2007) and Standard and Poor’s (2010). These studies demonstrate that, out of a large sample of project finance transactions, the long term median annual default rate was very low, between 2% and 3%. The default rates for these deals were also very stable and did not seem to be dependent on general economic conditions. Furthermore, concerning ultimate recovery rates, they were concentrated in the top-end scale, between 90% and 100% (median values fell between 80% and 90%). Interestingly, recovery rates were distributed in a “barbell” way, with larger numbers of defaults concentrated in the extreme ranges of recovery rates (from 0% to 10% and above 90%). Project finance transactions performed relatively well in the period between 2007 and 2009, even as economic conditions worsened and corporate defaults accelerated. While it is difficult to draw conclusions for an entire sector from such limited data, the average recovery rate from Standard and Poor’s sample was about 72%, which was significantly higher than the historical discounted corporate recovery rate of 50% for all corporate defaulted bonds and 57% for secured bonds. This important result is due to the extreme risk ring fencing of project finance transactions where credit agreement covenants play a pivotal role. In a recent report by Moody’s (Davison et al., 2010), the authors consider 2639 projects which account for some 45% of all project finance transactions originated globally during a period from 1 January 1983 to 31 December 2008. Of these, about 8% went bankrupt; the recovery rate was around 76%, in line with the finding of S&P. Our paper focuses on this 8% of cases, providing a method for analyzing these distressed situations in detail.A standard categorization of covenants is not available in the existing literature. However, most authors agree on the broader categories of positive, negative, and financial covenants Rosenbaum and Pearl (2009) and Smith (1993). In the financial covenants category, Demerjian (2007) and Nini et al. (2009) distinguish between cover ratios, current ratios/liquidity ratios, leverage ratios, gearing ratios, and net worth ratios. Demerjian (2007) indicates that in highly leveraged transactions (like project finance), higher relevance is given to cover ratios and leverage. Demiroglu and James (2010), instead, classify financial covenants as either incurrence or maintenance covenants. Incurrence covenants are designed to increase the recovery ratios of lenders in case of borrower default and to impose restrictions on borrower behavior. Maintenance covenants, instead, must be satisfied on an ongoing basis as a wealth-increasing measure for lenders and are linked to mandatory, positive actions by the borrower.We base our analysis on the market practice that sees banks proposing a set of conditions (spread, leverage and a set of covenants) to project sponsors, once sponsors have set up the contractual network of the deal. Very frequently, the financial conditions for bank loans are set on comparable transactions (Esty, 2001). However, we are aware that Project finance is by nature characterized by endogeneity problems, as is any other contract-based economic decision. In fact, in the initial stage of deal structuring, SPV directors manage a large set of variables simultaneously. In this sense, we treat the contractual structure as exogeneous. However, if in principle it is reasonable to think that banks may not tell the sponsors how to organize the network of SPV contracts to attain a given level of spread, debt to equity ratio or level of financial covenants, it is also true that sponsors choose the contractual structure anticipating how the lenders will react to it in terms of loan pricing/required D/E ratio and covenant levels.3In this sense, Cumming (2008) and Cumming and Johan (2008) clearly demonstrate that covenant design can affect investment outcomes for the case of exit strategies in venture capital deals. In our paper, we use the market practice of imposing standard DSCR and Loan Life Cover Ratio (LLCR) to PF deals, so we do not model how a changed design of the covenant may modify the output of a project.3This behavior may add an element of endogeneity to the negotiation process.Among the various financial covenants that can be included in a credit agreement, one is particularly relevant to our work: the Debt Service Cover Ratio (DSCR). The only academic paper available on the default measure in project finance (Gatti et al., 2007) builds up a model of default based precisely on this cover ratio. This is why in the following pages we use this ratio to develop the simulation model that applies the intuition behind this paper.4Gatti et al. (2007) propose a model where a second cover ratio, the Loan Life Cover Ratio (LLCR), is used in conjunction with DSCR. LLCR measures project repayment capacity as the present value of operating cash flows plus the existing reserve accounts. The LLCR provides the investor with a measure of the number of times the unlevered free cash flows plus cash trapped in the SPV can be used to repay the outstanding debt balance (Ot) over the scheduled life of the loan.4The DSCR for period t (DSCRt) is defined as the ratio between the cash available before debt repayment at time t and the total amount of debt to be repaid in the same period. Formally, let the loan repayment run from period 1 to TL, let Itand Ptdenote the interest and the principal repaid at time t, and FCFtis the free cash flow for period t. Then(1)DSCRt=FCFtPt+It,t=1,2,…,TLDSCRt provides lenders with a measure of the project’s capability to repay the loan debt service, and quantifies a safety buffer creditors can count on in order to have their loan repaid in a timely manner. In fact, this ratio is required to be greater than unity throughout the loan life.In addition to DSCRt, lenders are also interested in knowing the minimum DSCR in all periods. This quantity is denoted here as(2)minDSCR=mint=1⋯TLDSCRtIf we subtract unity from minDSCR−1, we obtain the level of the safety buffer against default. Lenders set the buffer based on their risk perception of the project (Gatti, 2012). Once the buffer is established, then lenders set the debt-to-equity ratio that ensures that this buffer becomes the base case. From the decision-making viewpoint, an iterative negotiation process with shareholders starts, in which they normally ask for higher leverage (meaning lower equity contribution given the total investment cost).A typical project finance loan contract usually includes two sets of values for this financial covenant. The first indicates the minimum threshold below which lenders can require an accelerated repayment of the loan; the second, which is lower than the first, triggers the resolution of the credit agreement and represents the material breach of covenant. The joint consideration of the two sets of values generates a range of values for DSCR associated with a technical default that is frequently waived by means of a renegotiation of the loan repayment terms. This renegotiation is always available until DSCR reaches the lower bound when the breach of covenants becomes material, forcing the project into bankruptcy.5In a recent PF loan in the renewable energy sector, the group of lenders set a minimum debt service cover ratio of 1.45×. If in any year, the actual DSCR was between 1.45× and 1.05× lenders forced sponsors to use the excess cash to repay the loan (i.e. cash sweep), considering repaid the last of the instalments. Below 1.05×, no renegotiation of the loan terms was allowed and the loan agreement was subject to resolution.5In practice, observed levels of cover ratios depend on the deal. For instance, Mariano and Tribó (2010) report an average DSCR of 1.53× for a large sample of 1352 lending non-project finance agreements. Gatti (2012) reports average DSCR values between 2× and 2.25× for merchant power plants, and between 1.2× and 1.3× for water and sanitation projects. The material breach of covenants is frequently associated with DSCR close to 1.03×–1.05×.The term “risk analysis” originates in the seminal works of Hillier (1963), Hertz (1964), Hillier (1965), Van Horne (1966), and Wagle (1967). These authors propose the use of the Monte Carlo simulation to obtain the distribution of an NPV or IRR. This has become best practice in the analysis of industrial investments and business planning see Carmichael and Balatbat (2008). More recently, the term “probabilistic sensitivity” has also come into use as a synonym for risk analysis Hazen and Huang (2006).Let Z represent the valuation criterion. In professional practice, Z is assessed as a result of complex financial calculations that take into account technical, operational, fiscal, and accounting aspects of the investment project. These calculations are implemented in a financial model validated by expert opinion. As the valuation of the investment progresses from the due diligence to the negotiation phases, the model becomes the central tool for negotiations between shareholders and lenders (Borgonovo et al., 2010). Let us write the relationship between the decision-support criterion of interest andωas Z (ω), where ω is a vector of exogenous variables.Z (ω) is determined ifωis known. However, this is seldom the case in practice, asωusually consists of several uncertain random variables. Analysts, when performing data analysis, request forecasts from specialized institutions and information from consultants (Gatti et al., 2007). These data make it possible to assess distributions forω. By propagating the uncertainty inωthrough the Monte Carlo simulation, we obtain the distribution of Z (ω). The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of Z (ω) is called the risk profile Smith (1998). This is the first step in risk analysis.Formally, given a probability space (Ω,B(Ω),P), we let the application Z:Ω→Rrepresent a generic loss or profit function. The function FZ(z)=Pr (Z⩽z) is the cumulative distribution function of Z, also called the risk profile. From FZ(z) an analyst obtains a wide range of insights about the investment viability and infers risk measures Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002). Generally speaking, a risk measure is a function of Z, ρ:Z→R; ρ becomes a coherent measure of risk if it satisfies the axioms of translational invariance (Axiom T), subadditivity (Axiom S), positive homogeneity (Axiom PH), monotonicity (Axiom M), and relevance (Axiom R) of Artzner et al. (1999). The most widely utilized risk measures in the practice of industrial investment, and consequently our main interest in this work, are the value at risk and conditional value at risk (CVaR).VaRαis defined as follows. Given α∈(0,1) Gourieroux et al. (2000) and Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002):(3)VaRα≔inf{z∈R:Pr(Z⩾z)⩽1-α}In probabilistic terms, VaRαis the quantile corresponding to the upper bound of the α-tail of the distribution of Z. Alternatively, VaRαcan be seen as the loss, which is exceeded only in α% of the cases.VaRαis widely used as a risk management tool Alexander and Baptista (2004). According to Berkowitz et al. (2011) [p. 2–3], VaRαis associated with three major fields of application: portfolio choice, risk controls and regulatory uses. It is probably in these last two areas, however, where some limitations of VaRαhave become apparent see Artzner et al. (1999).To address these limitations, authors have pursued two lines of research. One approach addresses changes in axiomatization and conditioning of VaRαGarcia et al. (2007). The other modifies the definition of VaRα, transforming it into a coherent measure of risk. The most relevant measure for this work – is CVaR, introduced by Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) as follows:(4)CVaRα≔E[Z|Z>VaRα]CVaRαis both a coherent risk measure and a natural risk statistic Hong and Liu (2009, p. 281). Since its introduction, CVaR has been intensively studied, especially in comparison to VaR. Benati (2003) addresses portfolio selection with coherent risk measure constraints. Alexander and Baptista (2004) compare results for portfolio optimization in the presence of VaR and CVaR constraints. Szego (2004) offers a comprehensive overview of risk measures, presenting a critical comparison of the conceptual aspects of VaR and CVaR. Optimization in portfolio selection with coherent risk measures is discussed in Miller and Ruszczyn’ski (2008). Robust optimization in CVaR portfolio selection is presented in Huang et al. (2010). CVaR is also utilized as a risk measure in fields outside finance. Ahmed et al. (2007) and Gotoh and Takano (2007) detail applications in inventory management.This work studies if and how these risk measures are affected by a covenant breach (technical or material). The dual perspective of sponsors and lenders is considered in the next section.Before introducing the model, let us state some notation conventions. We consider an investment project that develops over T periods. For simplicity of notation, the construction phase is assumed to be in period t=0, while operation takes place from periods 1 to T. We let A0 denote the investment cost and Idcrepresent the interest capitalized during construction. The investment is financed through equity and debt, with ℓ denoting the debt proportion to A0. The symbols FCFt, It, Ptand TLremain as defined in Section 3.Letting τ be the income tax rate, and δ the depreciation rate, the expression of FCFtis:(5)FCFt=(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τ·[δ·(A0+Idc)+max(0,TL-t)It]t=1,2,…,TCorrespondingly, the free cash flow to equity at period t (FCFEt) is:(6)FCFEt=(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τ·[δ·(A0+Idc)+max(0,TL-t)It]-max(0,TL-t)(It+Pt)From a sponsor/shareholder’s perspective, this leads to the shareholder’s NPV (ShNPV) given by(7)ShNPV=-(1-ℓ)A0+∑t=1TFCFEt(1+kE)twhere kEis the cost of equity chosen by the shareholders to discount the free cash flows to equity.The loan agreement includes a standard clause on minDSCR. By Eq. (1), for DSCRt, we have:(8)DSCRt=(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τ[δ(A0+Idc)+It]Pt+Itif1<t<TLand(9)minDSCR=mint=1,…,TL(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τ[δ(A0+Idc)+It]Pt+ItLet R=[R1,R2,…,RT], OE=[OE1,OE2,…,OET] denote the vectors of revenues and operating expenses respectively. Usually, R, OE, A0, Idccannot be determined with certainty (henceforth, bolded fonts indicate vectors). Thus,ω=(R,OE,A0,Idc), correspondingly, FCFt=Z1(ω), FCFEt=Z2(ω) and minDSCR=Z3(ω) become random variables.As we will see, assessing the distribution of minDSCR provides analysts with a range of important insights concerning project risk, both for shareholders and lenders. In this respect, we observe that financial models equip analysts with all indicators concerning the breach of financial covenants. However, in professional practice, such indicators are usually not included as part of a standard risk analysis. (Put another way, analysts do not look at the distribution of these indicators.) Instead, these indicators are assessed at base case first and then subjected to stress testing that produces the values that correspond to pre-determined scenarios. Yet scenarios do not provide any information about the probability of covenant breach.Furthermore, no additional modeling of the consequences of default accompanies traditional risk analysis. Thus, one cannot quantitatively assess the effects of covenant breach. The modeling of these effects from the dual perspective of shareholders and lenders is discussed in the following two sections.When a covenant breach happens, lenders and shareholders (better still, their respective legal advisors) must assess the severity of the breach. In most cases, lenders favor waiving the covenant breach and enforcing the cash sweep. The waiver allows shareholders to continue managing the project. The cash sweep redirects the project’s entire free cash flow produced in the period of technical breach to lenders. Because the debt outstanding is correspondingly reduced more than initially planned and the remaining debt is repaid over the subsequent periods, the effect of a cash sweep is a reduction of the lender’s own exposure by acceleration of the debt repayment by the borrower. Let LoanNPVTBdenote the lenders’ NPV in a scenario of technical breach, LoanNPV and E[LoanNPV] denote the LoanNPV in a generic scenario and the expected LoanNPV, respectively; the expectation averages over all scenarios in accordance with the distribution ofω. A similar convention will hold also for other symbols) and let tTBdenote the period at which the breach occurs. Then, for this scenario, we have(10)LoanNPVTB=∑t=1tTB-1Pt+It(1+kd)t+∑t=tTBTLPt′+It′(1+kd)twherePt′andIt′are the newly scheduled principal and interest repayment flows in the scenario of technical breach.In the case of material breach, instead, the situation for lenders is different. Shareholders are, in principle, excluded from the project and lenders now face the decision of what to do. A first possibility, denoted as a workout by Davison et al. (2010), is to ensure the project’s operational phase continues. In fact, a material breach does not necessarily correspond to a situation of insolvency and the project is potentially capable of producing enough cash to repay the loan. Thus, lenders work out a restructuring of the SPV, which involves revising the contractual package and frequently having new shareholders step in. Of the 213 projects studied by Davison et al. (2010) that underwent a material breach, 116 went through a workout with creditors. In these cases, the ultimate recovery rate on the loan was 76%. In the remaining cases, bankruptcy was declared and lenders recovered the outstanding amount on the loan only through distressed sales. In these circumstances, the average ultimate recovery rate on the outstanding amount was only 48%.Formally, letOtMBdenote the value of the outstanding debt at tMB, with pWorkoutthe probability of a workout, and (1−pWorkout) the probability of a fire sale, the expected recovery for lenders equals:(11)E[WLenders]=pworkout·λworkoutE[OtMB]+(1-pworkout)·λdistressedE[OtMB]=[pworkout(λworkout-λdistressed)+λdistressed]E[OtMB]where λworkoutand λdistressedare the recovery rates on the loan in the case of workout and distressed sales, respectively. According to Eq. (11), we can also determine the percentage of the expected recovery rate:(12)wLenders=E[RLenders]E[OtMB]=pworkout(λworkout-λdistressed)+λdistressedEqs. (10) and (11) provide indications about the expected recovery for lenders given material breach. In particular, only if λworkout>λdistressedand pworkoutare strictly non-null, lenders have the possibility of recovering more through workout than they would otherwise through distressed sales. As discussed in Davison et al. (2010), when a material breach occurs, in a realistic application, decision-making and negotiation aspects become the key concerns for realizing such a proposition (i.e., the ability to lead the transaction to a successful recovery).By Eqs. (6) and (7) we find the shareholders NPV in a given scenario given by:(13)ShNPV=-(1-ℓ)A0+∑t=1T(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τ[δ·(A0+Idc)+χtIt]-max(0,TL-t)(Pt+It)(1+kE)t.The corresponding E[ShNPV] is found by averaging Eq. (13) over all scenarios, but Eq. (13) does not account for the consequences of covenant breach.However, if we wish to account for covenant breach (either technical or material) Eq. (13) is no longer valid. If covenant breach is deemed technical by lenders, they enforce the cash sweep. Let tTBdenote the period in which the technical breach occurs. For t<tTB, debt cash flows are unaltered. At t=tTBthe equity cash flows are null because of the cash sweep called for by lenders. For tTB+1⩽t⩽TL, FCFEtis modified by the accelerated repayment schedule. Denoting by ShNPVTBthe shareholder NPV in a scenario of technical breach, and withPt′andIt′the principal and interest repayments following acceleration, by Eq. (13)(14)ShNPVTB=-(1-ℓ)A0+∑t=1tTB-1(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τ[δ(A0+Idc)+max(0,TL-t)It]-(Pt+It)·max(0,TL-t)(1+kE)t+∑t=tTB+1T(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τδ(A0+Idc)+max(0,TL-t)It′-Pt′+It′·max(0,TL-t)(1+kE)tThe difference ShNPV−ShNPVTBquantifies the loss incurred by shareholders following a covenant breach.If the materiality test is positive, and the covenant violation is deemed material, the security package implies that the pledged shares of the SPV fall into the hands of lenders. Then, the present value of equity cash flows from the moment of default to the project end is taken away from sponsors and redirected to lenders. Let tMBrepresent the time at which a material breach happens. Because shareholders receive cash flows up to the period preceding tMB, ShNPV becomes(15)ShNPVMB=-(1-ℓ)A0+∑t=1tMB-1(1-τ)(Rt-OEt)+τ[δ(A0+Idc)+max(0,TL-t)It]-(Pt+It)·max(0,TL-t)(1+kE)tThe corresponding loss incurred by shareholders is the present value of the cash flows from tMBto T. We write(16)NPVLoss|MB=∑tMBTFCFEt(1+kE)tIn Eq. (16), NPVLoss∣MB denotes conditioning on material breach. NPVLoss∣MB represents the loss incurred by shareholders in a given scenario in which material breach occurs. The expectation of Eq. (16) represents the expected loss for shareholders conditional on material breach, with the expectation taken over all scenarios in which material breach happens.Finally we come to how to nest the modeling of the consequences of default described above in the context of the Monte Carlo simulation. In this section, we outline how our conceptual model can be turned into a simulation procedure. The first step consists of running a probabilistic simulation of the financial model registering the values of both lenders and shareholders’ criteria at the end of each simulation (Fig. 1). Then, the examination of covenant breach at scenarios n=1, 2, …, N starts. For each scenario, we analyse the value of the covenant indicators produced by the model, and check the materiality test (Step 2 in Fig. 1). If no covenant breach is registered, then the value of the valuation criterion obtained in the probabilistic simulation is registered as final value of scenario n.Conversely, we have to simulate the consequences of material breach from the shareholders’ and lenders’ perspectives. If the covenant breach is technical, we need to estimate the new FCFt and FCFEt. We obtain the value of ShNPV to be stored in scenario n from Eq. (14). If the breach is material, Eq. (15) applies. Simultaneously, we can utilize Eqs. (10) and/or (11) to assess consequences for lenders.By comparing the NPV distributions [risk profiles in Smith (1998)] obtained with and without modeling default, we can assess the consequence of covenant breaches for the given transaction. To quantitatively establish whether the effect is significant, several statistical tests are available. If the test provides a negative answer (that is, the separation is not significant), then the information on the original distribution (the one obtained without explicitly modeling the consequences of default) can be maintained in further project evaluation. Conversely, if the answer is positive, contractual default has an impact and the new risk profile has to be utilized to assess risk measures for the project.The above procedure can also be applied if we are evaluating the model through a scenario analysis rather than a Monte Carlo simulation, observing that one Monte Carlo run can be interpreted as a possible scenario. Both techniques are well known and widely illustrated in the literature, and it is not within the scope of this work to present a detailed description. In either case, the procedures available in the literature allow us to build distributions or scenarios reflective of the decision maker’s state of knowledge with respect to the uncertain quantities: through distribution assignment in Monte Carlo simulation Apostolakis (1990) and Glasserman (2004) or through future states of the world in scenario analysis Jungermann and Thuring (1988), Tietje (2005).From the simulation procedure, we can infer several additional insights about the project risk with and without inclusion of covenant breach. The first is the probability of covenant breach. While in practice, it is most often the DSCR covenant to be monitored by lenders and sponsors, we set up our analysis in a more general way. Let Q represent the number of covenants in the contract whose violation can trigger default. Let CB(q), TB(q) and MB(q) denote the event “covenant q is breached”, “covenant q is breached technically” and “covenant q is breached materially” respectively. Since, in a given scenario, the breach of covenant q is either material or technical, it is CB(q)=TB(q)⋃MB(q) with TB(q)⋂MB(q)=∅. Then, let the respective probabilities be denoted by(17)νCBq=Pr(CB(q)),(18)νTB(q)=Pr(TB(q))andνMB(q)=Pr(MB(q))Because the sets TB (q) and MB (q) are disjoint, we have(19)νCB(q)=νMB(q)+νTB(q)Then, let CB and TB (MB) denote the events “we register a covenant breach of any covenant”, and “we register a technical (material) breach of any covenant”, in a given scenario. The following quantities(20)νCB=Pr⋃q=1QCB(q),νTB=Pr⋃q=1QTB(q)andνMB=Pr⋃q=1QMB(q)represent the probabilities of covenant breach, technical and material breach, respectively, without reference to a specific covenant. Because in a given scenario one or more covenants might be simultaneously breached, we have νCB=νMB+νTB−Pr (MB∩TB).Elsinger et al. (2006) (p. 1310) observe that the relative frequency of default across scenarios is then interpreted as a default probability. Let N be the number of Monte Carlo runs. Then, let nTBand nMBdenote the number of Monte Carlo runs at which covenant breach and contractual default are registered, respectively. Then, by constructing a Monte Carlo simulation (see, for instance, Glasserman (2004)), we have:(21)νTB(q)=limN→∞nTB(q)(N)N,νMB(q)=limN→∞nMB(q)(N)NHence, at any sample size N we obtain an estimate of νTB(q) and νMB(q), that we denote asνˆTB(q)andνˆMB(q), respectively. A procedure for readily automating the calculation of these two variables in a Monte Carlo simulation is the following. Let us consider TB (q) for instance. For each Monte Carlo run, we can introduce the auxiliary Boolean indicator(22)UTB(q)(n)=1ifTB(q)0ifnoTB(q)Then, we getnTB(q)(N)=∑n=1NUTB(q)(n). By∑n=1NUTB(q)(n)/N, we obtainνˆTB(q)estimate at sample size N. Applying a similar reasoning, we obtain estimators of νMB(q). Then we obtainνˆCB(q)=νˆMB(q)+νˆTB(q).Estimators of νTB, νMBand νCBcan be defined in a similar way, with the caveat thatνˆCB≠νˆMB+νˆTB.We now come to the estimation of pworkout. In Eq. (11), we can chose the value of pworkoutthat best matches the geographic location and industrial sector of the project at hand, resorting to the data published by rating agencies, for example. However, a workout probability can be endogenously generated by our Monte Carlo simulation. This has the advantage of utilizing transaction-specific data, instead of relying on a dataset of possibily similar transactions. The procedure is as follows. We consider scenario “s” in which a material default happens. We assume that lenders will be able to continue the project operations and find a new project sponsor if the following two conditions are met: (a) φ⩽minDSCR<1.051 and (b) the equity NPV of the outstanding cash flows is positive. Condition (a) is about the severity of the breach. In our simulation, we impose φ=1, which corresponds to cases where the project is not bankrupt although it is in material breach. However, there might be cases in which lenders attempt to rescue the project even if minDSCR is less than but close to 1. Of course, φ can then be modified in the simulation. This information can be extracted from a Monte Carlo simulation.Operationally, we define the indicator(23)UWO(n)=1ifworkoutconditionsmet0ifworkoutconditionsnotmetWhich leads to the following Monte Carlo estimate of the workout probability:(24)νˆWorkout=∑n=1NUWO(n)NIt is also interesting to consider the conditional frequency of workout given material breach. This can be estimated by simply normalizing∑n=1NUWO(n)over the scenarios in which material breach has occurred:(25)νˆWorkout|MB=∑n=1NUWO(n)∑n=1NUMB(n)Finally, based on our knowledge of the risk profile, we can estimate risk measures in the presence and absence of contractual breaches. In this paper, we focus on CVaR in Eq. (4). The Monte Carlo estimation of these indicators is widely discussed and, therefore, we refer to related literature Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002), Ruszczy’nski and Shapiro (2005), and Jin and Zhang (2006).In mid 2007, Bonollo Distilleries,one of the most renowned high-end liquor producers in Italy, started studying the project of a biomass plant to be annexed to its already existing distillery. According to Bonollo Distilleries’ management, the plant was needed to reduce both energy costs and polluting emissions and to diversify the energy sources currently employed by the factory.At that time, Bonollo Distilleries already used some biomass energy to cover approximately 30% of its heat energy needs and 40% of its electrical energy needs. The remaining part of its requirements was covered with methane gas and electrical energy from the national electricity grid. The new plant was expected to provide the Distillery with 10MW of clean heat and electrical energy. This represented 97% of heat energy needs and 100% of electrical energy needs. The energy surplus of 57MWh per year would be sold to the electricity distribution network.Another key feature of the biomass plant was that it would enable the Distillery to reduce its emissions from a total of 513,779kg/year to less than 403,260. Furthermore, biomass combustion did not increase the level of CO2 present in the atmosphere and therefore represented a clean and environmentally friendly energy source.In addition to these advantages for Bonollo Distilleries, another consideration that prompted management to embark on the project in question was the possibility to use the byproducts of the distillation process as base feedstock for the power plant. The waste byproducts would be sold to the biomass plant by Bonollo Distilleries under a long term raw material supply agreement. Finally, the ashes deriving from combusted biomasses could be used as fertilizers in the company’s plantations, resulting in minimal waste and further cost reduction.The contractual structure underpinning the project is as follows. The biomass plant was incorporated in a new entity (SPV), Bonollo Energia Spa, which was granted the rights to build and operate the biomass plant. The SPV had to be financed with a debt/equity ratio of 4/1 with equity provided in equal parts by the sponsors Bonollo Distilleries and Alerion Clean Power. Alerion is a company listed on the Milan Stock Exchange specialized in managing and operating renewable power plants in Italy and Central and Eastern Europe.Debt was provided by a pool of banks headed by General Electric (GE)-Interbanca. Interbanca was appointed as Mandated Lead Arranger (MLA) of the bank syndicate in July 2008 and started working with project sponsors on project contracts and loan syndication during the third and fourth quarter of 2008. The financial close took place in February 2009 with a syndicate composed by General Electric-Interbanca as MLA, GE Interbanca, MPS Capital Services, Banca Popolare dell’Etruria and Centrobanca as underwriters. GE-Interbanca also acted as hedging bank, agent bank and depository bank.Plant construction was regulated by an EPC (engineering, procurement and construction) contract signed with STC Group as general contractor. STC was a leader in the construction of industrial plants for power generation on the Italian market. The construction contract was signed on a fixed-price turnkey basis and was supplemented by quarantees provided to the SPV by the general contractor (timing of delivery and minimum performance standards). Furthermore, the contractor was required to provide performance bonds and warranty bonds for 2years after construction. Construction was expected to start at the beginning of 2009 and last a total of 24months, with an additional 6-month testing and start-up phase.The two project sponsors played key roles in the contractual network of the project finance deal. Bonollo Distilleries was the seller of approximately 142,000tons/year of base feedstock (biomass) under a long term raw material supply agreement of 16.5years. Furthermore, Bonollo Distilleries would purchase around 116,000tons of steam per annum and 13,000MWh per annum of biomass-produced energy under a long term power purchase agreement.Alerion contributed to the project in two roles. First, a joint venture was created by the two sponsors in order to carry out O&M (operations and maintenance) services for the SPV. Second, Alerion had to enter a service agreement with the SPV for the sale of power and green certificates on the market.Finally, as mentioned, the energy surplus produced by the plant had to be sold on the Italian electricity market based on market spot contracts. The sale of this surplus was carried out by Alerion Clean Power pursuant the service agreement with the SPV.As previously mentioned, the agreement between sponsors and lenders required the project to be financed with a senior debt/equity ratio of about 4/1, in line with standard market practice at the time of the deal. The total investment cost was expected to be around 64mil euro, including among others about 48mil euro of EPC cost, 6mil euro capitalized interest and 9mil of VAT under construction.GE-Interbanca and the other banks of the syndicate organized the loan facilities in two tranches:1.A base facility of 41mil euro with duration of 15years and a grace period of 3years at the beginning of the operational phase when only interest payment was due.A VAT loan of about 9mil euro, to be repaid during the operational phase using the cash corresponding to the VAT on Energy and steam sales. Duration: construction period plus 2year repayment.The two facilities were supplemented by the typical project finance security package. Minimum DSCR was set at 1.4× with a DSCR triggering default (material breach) at 1.05×.The financial model developed to value the transaction was made available to the authors by one of the sponsors of the project. The model was developed by the Mandated Lead Arranger Bank and realistically simulates the investment’s financial performance over its life span reproducing the SPV income statement, cash flow statement, and balance sheet through a complex dovetail of Excel worksheets. All valuation criteria used by sponsors and lenders for decision-making are estimated by the model that also provides information about the occurrence of covenant breach.We use the financial model and the data of the Bonollo Energia case to perform a series of numerical experiments to investigate the conditions under which covenants impact the transaction and the extent of this impact. Each experiment is a risk analysis performed in accordance with the procedure presented in Section 6, with varying levels of percentage of debt financing ℓ (which is kept at ℓ=0.8 in the base case) and cost of debt kd(7.5% at base case) (see Table 1).In this respect, we adopted the point of view of the project shareholders before the deal closing, in an attempt to investigate what conditions the lenders are most likely to set down in covenants, based on the project’s financial performance.Table 1 also reports the remaining parameters. Following Step 1 of the procedure, we conducted a set of 10,000 Monte Carlo simulations through the original model, to produce the unconditional risk profile and the values of the random variables in Eqs. (8)–(15), namelyR,OE, A0, Idc. With these values in hand, we can replicate the results of the present simulation. The dataset containingR,OE, A0, Idcis available upon request.6Our choice of extractingR,OE, A0, Idcfrom the financial model and inserting them in Eqs. (8)–(15), is motivated by transparency. An alternative option would have been to directly perform the simulation creating a Visual-Basic Macro on the original model. However, we could not have made the model publicly available.6We start by presenting the results of a standard risk analysis (i.e., without simulation of covenant breaches) we performed on the project. Fig. 2presents the distributions of R and OE.Fig. 2 shows that the project is operationally sound, with a 4/1 to 3/1 ratio between revenues and operating expenses. Such a high operating margin enables the project to sustain high percentages of debt financing l, in line with the typical characteristics of project-financed initiatives (Esty, 2003). For the sake of confidentiality, in Fig. 2 and in the remainder of this section, all data are rescaled by the mean value of the revenues in Year 2, which is assumed equal to 10MEUR.A correlation analysis for the behavior of R ad OE across scenarios leads to the following results. Computing the correlation coefficients between Rtand Rj(t, j=1,2,…,16 t≠j), we register a positive and high correlation level. A similar result is obtained computing the correlation coefficients between OEtand OEj. The correlation between for the realizations of R=[R1,R2,…,R16] and OE=[OE1,OE2,…,OE16] at each of the 10,000 scenarios is, instead, weakly negative.The results of the Monte Carlo simulation on the equity cash flows for the base case ℓ=0.8 and kd=7.5% are as follows: E[ShNPV]=11.2MEUR This suggests that the investment is economically convenient for project sponsors. We also obtain νNPV=Pr (NPV⩽0)=0.026, CVaR0.05≅−0.44 and VaR0.05≅1.3MEURThese values indicate that the likelihood of incurring losses for shareholders is small and confirm that we are dealing with a very sound project, one that is attractive from a shareholder’s perspective, as expected from the high operating margin.Let us next examine the distribution of minDSCR as obtained by our simulation (Fig. 3). From this distribution, we are able to infer the probabilities of covenant breach, both technical and material.Fig. 3 suggests thatνˆCB≅0.72,νˆTB=0.68, andνˆMB=0.04. In fact, minDSCR is smaller than 1.4 in 7191 out of the 10,000 scenarios, signalling either a default or a material breach. Of these breaches, 6821 are technical, 370 material.Analysing the timing of covenant violations shows that around 95% of technical breaches occur at year 1, with 5% happening at year 13. For material breaches, 90% take place at year 1, around 10% at year 13 and 2 events of material breach occur at year 12. To understand this result, one must examine the distributions of DSCRt(Fig. 4).Fig. 4 shows that minDSCRt always occurs at either Year 1 or 13. In the first year, DSCR1 is systematically lower than in the subsequent years. This result clearly indicates that the SPV is in a position of financial difficulty in the first operational year of the project. There are three reasons for this. First, during the early operational years, an SPV typically accumulates working capital and usually 6months up to 2years are necessary to fill reserve accounts. The second reason, specific to this project, is that the VAT facility, in addition to the senior loan, must be repaid. Thus, less cash is available for repayment of principal and interest on the main debt facility. Third, there are operational reasons connected to the technical setup of the bio-mass energy production plant, which reaches full capacity only in the second semester of Year 1. Fig. 4 also shows us defaults at Years 12 and 13, which are due to the DSCR decrease provoked by the forecasted slight decline in revenues and increase in operational expenses (Fig. 2).Let us now analyse the consequences of technical and material breach for sponsors and lenders. The first scenario at which technical breach occurs is scenario n=1. In this scenario, we have NPV (1)=1.6MEUR. Because the breach occurs at t=1, FCF1 is diverted to creditors to repay a higher value of principal, with no cash distribution to shareholders at Year 1, in accordance with the cash sweep clause. Thus, shareholders incur an equity NPV loss due to the impossibility to receive dividends in the first year. The loss equals 821kEUR. On the lender’s side, we observe that the interest due in period 1 is repaid entirely and the remaining portion of FCF1 goes into the repayment of principal. Then, the outstanding loan amount is reduced more than forecasted by the original loan schedule. The newPt′andIt′are scheduled so thatNPVTBLoan(n)=NPVLoan=0. They are lower than the original values, insuring an increase in the project’s cover ratio in the following years.The 370 events of material breach happen either at t=1 (in 321 scenarios), t=12 (in 2 scenarios), or t=13 (47 scenarios); 260 breaches occur in scenarios in which ShNPV is negative, the remaining 110 in scenarios of positive NPV. The first case of material breach takes place in scenario 4 at tMB=1. According to contractual clauses, shareholders lose the right to cash flows from tMB=1 to the final year of the operational life of the project.7This effect is due to the fact that, as explained in the introduction, upon material breach creditors force the deal into bankruptcy, expropriate shareholders’ control rights and become the real owners of the remaining cash flows generated by the project either in case of continued operations or liquidation/distressed sale.7The associated loss on ShNPV is a significant 6.0MEUR. Consequences of material breach for lenders are the following. The outstanding loan amount[OtMB]is equal to nearly the entire facility (41MEUR) when tMB=1 and around 3.15MEUR when tMB=13, resulting inE[OtMB]=28.76. The recovery rate (wLenders) when computed exogenously is equal to approximately 71%, using pworkout=0.84, λworkout=0.76 and λdistressed=0.48, in line with the data reported by Davison et al. (2010). When computed endogenously, i.e. by the simulation using Eq. (24), we obtainνˆWorkout=1.1%. The reason for this is that the recovery condition in Eq. (23) is met only in 110 of the 10,000 scenarios. Thus, the conditional recovery probability, Eq. (25), is approximately 1/3 in this case. This result also proves that material breaches do not necessarily occur in scenarios with negative ShNPV. Conversely, ShNPV is positive in around 1/3 of the scenarios in which material breach is registered.Fig. 5 reports the risk profiles with and without consideration of covenant breach.In the two risk profiles in Fig. 5, the estimate of the probability of negative ShNPV increases to 4%, and CVaR0.01 drops from −0.4MEUR to −1.6MEUR.We are now ready to answer the question of whether the risk profiles (with and without modeling covenant breach) differ in a statistically significant way. We use the two-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) see Massey (1951, for a review) and the Anderson Darling (AD) Scholz and Stephens (1987) tests. The reason for the joint utilization of these two tests is as follows. The KS test is one of the most widely employed. Nonetheless, the literature has highlighted that the metric in the KS test is more sensitive to deviations around the median than around the tail of the distribution (see Crnkovic and Drachman, 1996). Anderson and Darling (1952) propose a modification of the KS metric that makes it more sensitive to deviations in the tails. Thus, the AD test turns out to be more powerful than the KS test. Fig. 5 shows that the largest deviations are, indeed, in the left tail of the distribution. Thus, using the two tests jointly provides us with the following information. From a theoretical viewpoint, if the risk profiles (with and without the modeling of covenant breach) are deemed statistically significant with the KS test, then we know that the AD test will produce the same result. Thus, using the KS test is a conservative way to ascertain whether the statement holds that covenant breach is immaterial for shareholders. If the KS test deems the two risk profiles as not statistically different, while the AD does, we know that the differences lie in the tail of the distribution. If both tests agree on the fact that the difference is statistically insignificant, then we have two options. Either we conclude that covenants have negligible effect for the transaction at hand or we utilize another test (e.g., Cramer Von Mises).Table 2reports the results for the analysis of the risk profiles in Fig. 5 for a series of additional experiments at different levels of leverage (ℓ) and cost of debt (kd). These results are consistently obtained with both the AD and the KS tests.The null hypothesis (to be tested) is: the risk profiles with and without covenant breach come from the same distribution, with h=0 denoting acceptance of the null hypothesis, and h=1 rejection. The significance level is 0.01. Thus, the null hypothesis is rejected if the p-value of the two tests is lower than 0.01. At kd=7.5% and ℓ=80%, our base case, the risk profiles with and without covenant breach are deemed different in a statistical sense for both tests. In particular, the p-values are 6.56E−5 and 2.4E−4 using the KS-test (MATLAB subroutine) and the AD-test [R-package associated with Scholz and Stephens (1987)]. Both tests deem the risk profiles significantly different. Thus, while covenants do not affect the operational life of the special purpose company (i.e., its ability to produce cash), their violations do affect the investors’ risk profile.Table 2 shows that at ℓ=0.7 covenant breach is statistically insignificant for all values of kdconsidered. The breaches become statistically significant at ℓ=0.8 and ℓ=0.9. The reason is that as l increases, material breaches become more likely. As we have discussed, the consequences of material breach are severe for shareholders and significantly impact the risk profile.For further understanding this result, we investigating the behavior ofνˆCB,νˆTBandνˆMBand P (ShNPV<0) as a function of kdand l. Tables 3 and 4report the values ofνˆCB,νˆTBandνˆMBand P (ShNPV<0) extracted from simulations at increasing values of kdand l, respectively. Table 3 shows thatνˆCB,νˆTBandνˆMBand P (ShNPV<0) systematically increase with kd(we let ℓ=80%). Similar behavior is registered in a sensitivity to ℓ, while keeping kd=7.5% (Table 4). We observe that the impact of covenant breach becomes significant once the probability of material breach is non-negligible, in keeping with intuition and our previous discussion.Let us now turn to the investigation of results for risk measures (Table 5).Table 5 reveals a systematic fattening of the left-tail of the risk profile, as kd and/or ℓ=0.7 increase. To quantify the impact of covenant breach on the risk measures, let us assess the percentage change in the value of the risk measures, namely|ΔCVaR0.01||CVaR0.01|, where ΔCVaR0.01 is the difference between the values of the risk measure with consideration of covenant breach and without. Table 5 shows percentage changes in CVaR0.01 that vary from a low 30% at kd=0.075 and ℓ=0.7, to a maximum of 1011% at kd=0.095 and ℓ=0.8. Observe that the case kd=0.095 and ℓ=0.8 is the base case. Thus, this result confirms that including the effect of covenant breach in the simulation significantly impacts the risk measures.Finally, let us address the decision-making implications of these findings. Covenants are the subject of extensive negotiations between lenders and shareholders. Our analysis offers a way to uncover the consequences of default. For instance, in our project, without the Monte Carlo simulation we would not realize the frequency of default. Then, the question is: Is this frequency acceptable for lenders? If so, then the current level of DSCR (or other covenants) is acceptable. If this is not the case, the lender should impose a new threshold for this covenant, or introduce additional covenants or even start a new round of negotiation with sponsors to find a different mix of financial resources. For shareholders, there is a similar question: Is the current exposition to material breach acceptable? Are they willing to trade lower leverage (which means a reduced default probability) for a decrease in NPV? Our methodology allows the parties involved to answer these questions in a quantitative way.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We investigated the consequences of including covenant breach in the risk analysis of large industrial projects, and provided an objective view on their effect and significance. We have analyzed both theoretical and managerial implications of the violation of financial covenants included in debt contracts. To achieve our objective, we developed both a conceptual model and a simulation procedure. The model accounts for the different perspectives of sponsors and lenders and distinguishes the consequences of technical and material breaches. The simulation procedure enriches the insights of a traditional Monte Carlo simulation through the estimation of covenant breach frequency and the quantification of the effect of covenant breach on risk measures. Empirical experiments have shown that failing to adequately acknowledge the consequences of covenant breach can lead seriously underestimating the risks associated with an investment project.