@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimizing the re-profiling strategy of metro wheels based on a data-driven wear model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A data-driven wear model of metro wheels is built.A (SdP, SdR) re-profiling strategy is proposed for re-profiling of metro wheels.The re-profiling strategy is simulated, and its optimal decisions are given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance,Metro wheel wear,Data-driven model,Re-profiling strategy,Simulation and optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The wheels are one of the most worn components on a train. When the wear is unacceptable, the re-profiling can restore the shape of the wheel flange with the cost of decreasing the wheel diameter. The decision of re-profiling has serious implications for the life span of wheels. In this paper, based on the analysis of the wear and re-profiling characteristics of metro wheels, a data-driven model of the relationship between the wheel diameter, the flange thickness, their wear rates, and the re-profiling gain is built for the wheels of Guangzhou Metro Line One. A (SdP, SdR) re-profiling strategy is proposed, where SdP is the wheel flange thickness threshold to trigger a preventive re-profiling and SdR is the wheel flange thickness after the preventive re-profiling. Then the Monte Carlo simulation model of the re-profiling strategy is described in this paper. To find out when a re-profiling should be performed in terms of the flange wear-out level and what values of the flange thickness should be brought to by re-profiling, the simulation results for optimizing the decision variables (SdP, SdR) of the re-profiling strategy are given in this paper. Those having longer life spans are listed as the preferred re-profiling strategies. The study in this paper reveals that the wear rate of the flange thickness is correlated with the flange thickness, while the diameter wear rate could be considered independent of the flange thickness in terms of the wheels of Guangzhou Metro Line One. On the other hand, based on the observation and analysis of an available sample set from Guangzhou Metro Line One, the re-profiling gain is dependent on the flange thickness before or after re-profiling. The preferred re-profiling strategies suggested by this study can increase the life span comparing with the existing re-profiling strategies based on the simulation. The models and methods presented in this paper could benefit both city metro companies and inter-city rail companies by prolonging the life span of rolling stock wheels.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
From the very beginning of the 21st century, the railway construction of China has entered a new stage of rapid development. According to the Mid-and-long Term Plan of Railway Network given by the State Council of China in 2008, the mileage of railways in operation will reach over 120,000 kilometers in 2020. Additionally, the urban railways of more than 40 cities in China are being or are yet to be built with a total investment of over RMB 600 billion Yuan (about 96.3 billion dollars). Such rapid growth of rail transportation will require more maintenance optimization techniques of railway systems.The wheels are one of the most worn components on a train in metro companies (Lu, 2001). The flange and tread deterioration of wheels has serious implications for the safety and comfort of train operation, as well as the life span of rail (Enblom and Berg, 2005; Jendel, 2002). The failure modes of metro wheels include flange wear, tread wear, tread peeling, and tread flats, etc. The maintenance activities of wheels include re-profiling and replacement. Re-profiling can restore the wheel flange thickness when the flange wear is unacceptable with the cost of decreasing the diameter of wheels. Due to the continuous wear, maintenance managers have to inspect wheels frequently and re-profile or replace them if necessary. Thus, the acceptable profiles and diameters of the wheels could be ensured. The maintenance cost of wheels plays a key role in the maintenance expenditure of rail transport (De Arizon et al., 2007). However, a large part of the expenditure in terms of rail wheel maintenance could be avoided. Jiang (2006) concluded that about RMB 319 million Yuan (about 51.2 million dollars) had been wasted due to over re-profiling activities of rail wheels in China in 2006. Therefore, selecting optimal wheel maintenance strategies will not only improve the safety levels of the rail transportation, but also reduce the maintenance cost.However, little attention has been paid to maintenance strategies of rail wheels in the literature. A few related papers focus on qualitative discussion of optimizing wheel maintenance strategies based on maintenance engineers’ experience. Zhang et al. (2013) presented a new approach in order to optimize re-profiling decisions of worn wheels with the consideration of the relationship between the features of vehicle dynamics and the wheel profile parameters. By simulating the wear of R8T wheels of an ETR500 high speed train with ORES 1002 profiles in Italy, Braghin et al. (2006) found that the useful life of the considered wheels can be doubled if they are re-profiled when the operational mileage reaches 200,000 kilometers. Yuan et al. (2006) proposed the method called Class Lathing for both economical and technical purposes associated with metro wheel maintenance. After analyzing over 1000 wheels of 67 cars in the Northwest corridor of USA, Pascual and Macros (2004) concluded that Talgo wheels should be brought up to 30.5 millimeters when the flange thickness is worn down to 27.5 millimeters in order to minimize the total wheel maintenance cost. These papers mentioned above discussed the optimization problem of wheel maintenance strategies. However, few quantitative modeling and optimization methods have been developed to address this optimization problem. In recent years, the authors made two studies for optimizing re-profiling strategies of the rail wheels based on the wear data-driven models (Wang et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2010). Unfortunately, the diameter difference rules among the different wheels when making re-profiling decisions are neglected in these two studies, which are important considerations in maintenance of rail wheels.There has been increasing interest in the area of optimizing maintenance strategies over the past decades, e.g. Mercier and Pham (2012),Taghipour and Banjevic (2012). However, although hundreds of papers on maintenance strategies have been published, few application cases have been reported (Frangopol et al., 2004; Pham and Wang, 1996; Scarf, 1997; Wang, 2007a). The main shortcomings of existing maintenance strategies in the literature include two aspects. One is that most existing maintenance strategies focus on single-unit deteriorating systems and time-based preventive maintenance (Wang, 2007a). In practice, the vast majority of manufacturing or transportation systems consist of multiple components that have different deterioration processes. On the other hand, a large proportion of developed optimal maintenance strategies given by operation or statistics researchers are often based on oversimplified assumptions (Dekker, 1996; Dekker and Scarf, 1998; Scarf, 1997). As a result, the application scope of these maintenance strategies is limited.The aim of this paper is threefold:(1)Based on the wheel wear data provided by Guangzhou Metro Line One in China, develop a data-driven model to formulate the relationship between the wheel diameter, the flange thickness, their wear rates, and the re-profiling gain. The data-driven model presented in this paper is an improved version based on the study results of the authors published before in Chinese (see the references of Wang et al. (2011) and Xu et al. (2010)).Considering eight wheels of one rolling stock, propose a control limit policy for the wheel re-profiling decision, i.e. the (SdP, SdR) strategy, where SdP is the wheel flange thickness threshold of a preventive re-profiling, and SdR is the wheel flange thickness after the preventive re-profiling. Based on the Monte Carlo simulation, the proposed re-profiling strategy of metro wheels is optimized and the preferred re-profiling strategies are listed.Illustrate the applicability and necessity of maintenance strategies developed under a case-oriented scheme.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The measured data of wheel wear and the wheel re-profiling are analyzed in Section 2. In Section 3, the data-driven model of the relation between the wheel diameter, the flange thickness, their wear rates, and the re-profiling gain is developed. Section 4 describes the re-profiling strategy of metro wheels and its optimization by using Monte Carlo simulation. In Section 5, the simulation results are given. Conclusions are made finally.The wear of flange and tread is the most important failure mode of metro wheels due to wheel-rail contact. The usage of brake shoes against the tread is another cause that influences the wear of rail wheels, especially the metro wheels that suffer from frequent stops. Usually, the wear of flange and tread is gradual. For example, the average wear rate of the wheel flange thickness on Shanghai Metro Line Three is 0.211 millimeters/10,000 kilometers (Wang, 2007b). As shown in Fig. 1, the diameter of wheels is usually denoted as D, and the flange thickness is denoted as Sd(Ansari and Ashtiyani, 2006). The parameters L1, L2, and L3 are given by the standard of wheel profiles. In normal conditions of rail wheels in most metro or railway companies, the wear rate of the flange thickness is higher than that of the diameter. Both the flange thickness and the diameter decrease in theory during normal use if re-profiling is not implemented. If D is less than a certain threshold, the corresponding wheel has to be replaced. If Sd is less than its minimum allowable value, the wheel should be re-profiled as soon as possible. After re-profiling, the wheel profile should be kept standard. Therefore, the wheel diameter is decreased while the flange thickness is increased by re-profiling, as shown in Fig. 2. Other parameters of rail wheel profile are the flange height Sh and the flange gradient Qr besides D and Sd(Ansari and Ashtiyani, 2006), as given in Fig. 1. As described in the study of Zeng (2005), the decrease of the flange thickness Sd and the diameter D due to wear, as well as the decrease of diameter D due to re-profiling, is critical for the life span of a metro wheel. For the sake of safety and comfort, railway or metro companies have strict rules to limit the parameters of wheel profiles. For example, the rules of the Guangzhou Metro Line One include the followings:•26millimeters≤Sd≤32millimeters;770millimeters≤D≤840millimeters;0 ≤ ∣▵D2∣ ≤ 2 millimeters;0 ≤ ∣▵D4∣ ≤ 4 millimeters;0 ≤ ∣▵D8∣ ≤ 7 millimeters.where:▵D2 is the diameter difference between two wheels on the same axle;▵D4 is the diameter difference among four wheels on the same bogie;▵D8 is the diameter difference among eight wheels belonging to the same rolling stock.Wheel wear is affected by several factors, such as operation lines, speed, load, environment, lubrication, and rail condition. Consequently, although the measured data sequences of Sd and D show a decreasing trend generally, they are non-monotonic with random fluctuations, shown in Figs. 3and 4 as examples. Based on the maintenance workers’ experiences of Guangzhou Metro Line One, wheel diameters and flange thicknesses are measured at irregular intervals using the wheel wear measuring gauges. As shown in these two figures, it could be found that the flange thickness Sd and the diameter D of wheels generally decrease during use in the case that re-profiling is not implemented. In theory, Sd and D should decrease continuously because of continuous wear during wheel use if no replacement or re-profiling is implemented. However, the measured diameter D or the flange thickness Sd may increase between two consecutive inspections without re-profiling and replacements of wheels, as shown in Figs. 3and 4. The reason for this phenomenon is that the measured diameter D and the flange thickness Sd are not real dimension values, which could be explained as follows:(1)D=Dt¯+RD+ɛD(2)Sd=Sd¯+RSd+ɛSdwhere:Dt¯andSd¯are the mean diameter and the mean flange thickness of different cross sections regarding the wheel, respectively, decreasing monotonically over the wheel life span;RDandRSdare the out-of-roundness errors of diameters and flange thicknesses, respectively;ɛDandɛSdare the artificial measurement errors of diameters and flange thicknesses, respectively.Because of the existing errors (RD,RSd,ɛD, andɛSd), the observed data D and Sd do not decrease monotonically. These errors are difficult or impossible to estimate based on the available information. Thus, in the following sections of this paper, the flange thicknessSdand the diameter D refer to the available measured data of metro wheels, which include the out-of-roundness errors and the artificial measurement errors. The “wear rate” of metro wheels, which is calculated from the measured data described in the following paragraphs, is not the real wear rate exactly. It could be called the pseudo wear rate, which may be positive or negative (see Figs. 3 and 4) . For convenience, the pseudo wear rate is directly simplified as the wear rate in the following.Fig. 5describes the effect of re-profiling and replacements on the wheel diameter and the flange thickness. By re-profiling, the flange thickness Sd increases, but with the loss of the diameter D. After the replacement, the diameter D increases. In this paper, the re-profiling gain k, also called the turning gain (Pascual and Macros, 2004), is defined as follows:(3)k=▵D▵Sd=D−−D+Sd+−Sd−where:▵D > 0 is the wheel diameter to be cut off in order to restore the flange thickness in a re-profiling activity;▵Sd > 0 is the flange thickness gain in the corresponding re-profiling (as shown in Figs. 2 and 5);D− and D+ are the diameter of the wheel before and after the re-profiling, respectively;Sd−andSd+are the flange thickness of the wheel before and after the re-profiling, respectively. The denominator (Sd+−Sd−) could be called the flange thickness gain by re-profiling.Consequently, there always exists k > 0.The decisions of wheel re-profiling should balance the recovery of the flange thickness against the loss of the diameter. The thicker the flange after re-profiling, the deeper the tread will need to be cut, and the earlier the wheel will have to be replaced due to the rule of the minimum diameter. On the other hand, the thinner the flange after re-profiling, the earlier the next re-profiling should be conducted. As a result, the number and the cost of re-profiling will increase. Thus, it is demanded to find the optimal decisions to minimize the related maintenance cost or to maximize the wheel life.As concluded in some literature, the wear rate of rail wheels may be related to their flange thickness. After analyzing the wear rates of over 1000 rail wheels of passenger trains in USA, Pascual and Macros (2004) concluded that the wear of flange is faster when the flange is thicker. On the contrary, based on the numerical simulation and the analysis of the measured data from Tehran Metro, it is reported that the wheel wear rate is increased with the reduction of the flange thickness in the study of Ansari and Ashtiyani (2006). The latter conclusion is in agreement with the empirical observation of Guangzhou Metro maintenance engineers, i.e. the flange wear is faster when the flange is thinner. Thus, it could be found that the relation between the wheel wear rate and the flange thickness is different for different rolling stocks of rail transit. This result is due to the different factors affecting wheel wear including wheel types, load, operation lines, and environment, etc.As stated above, a standard profile should be kept after a re-profiling for metro wheels. This means that the wheel profiles are independent of diameters D. Therefore, we could consider that wear rates of diameters and flange thicknesses are uncorrelated with diameters D. On the other hand, in the research regarding relationships between wheel wear rates and wheel dimensions, Ansari and Ashtiyani (2006) and Pascual and Macros (2004) did not conclude the dependence of wear rates on wheel diameters. As a result, only the relationship between flange thicknesses and wear rates of wheels is modeled in this paper.The wheel diameter and the flange thickness are not measured periodically in Guangzhou Metro Line One. Most inspection intervals are from one month to three months. Therefore, 30 days are defined as one time unit in this paper. To calculate the wear rates, the followings could be derived:(4)vSd=Sd,i+1−Sd,iti+1−ti·30(5)vD=Di+1−Diti+1−ti·30wherevSd(resp. vD) is an estimate of the wear amount of flange thickness (resp. the diameter) during one unit time, called the wear rate of the flange thickness (resp. the diameter); tiand ti + 1 (days) are the time values of two consecutive measurements without re-profiling; Sd, i(resp. Sd, i + 1) is the flange thickness measured at the time ti(resp. ti + 1); Di(resp. Di + 1) is the diameter measured at the time ti(resp. ti + 1).To analyze the relationship between the flange thickness Sd and the wear rate of wheels,vSdand vD in Eqs. (4) and (5) are considered as the wear rates corresponding to the flange thickness (Sd, i+ Sd, i + 1)/2. Consequently, over 2100 wear rates of flange thicknesses or diameters could be calculated. Meanwhile, their corresponding flange thickness values are also obtained. Fig. 6(resp. Fig. 7) is the scatter plot of vD vs. Sd (resp.vSdvs. Sd). As shown in these two figures, most of the wear rates vD orvSdare negative. It indicates that the wheel diameters or the flange thicknesses generally decrease when the wheels are in use.Based on these over 2100 wear rates, the computation results show that the correlation coefficient between vD and Sd (resp.vSdand Sd) is − 0.05 (resp. 0.1108). Thus, the wear rate of the flange thicknessvSdis correlated with the flange thickness Sd. The correlation between vD and Sd is relatively small. Based on the critical value table of significance levels, the critical correlation coefficient is 0.050763 when the significance level is 0.02. Therefore, it is considered thatvSdis correlated with Sd, and vD is independent of Sd in this paper.Additionally, the diameter wear rates vD and the flange thickness wear ratesvSdfor the same wheel in the same time period are calculated in order to analyze their correlation, as shown in Fig. 8. Based on more than 600 samples of vD with the corresponding results ofvSd,the correlation coefficient between vD andvSdis 0.0067, which is very small. Thus, we consider that vD is independent ofvSd.Fig. 9is the histogram of the diameter wear rate vD. Being independent of Sd, vD could be considered a random variable. Based on this histogram, the normal distribution could be used to describe the distribution of vD. Furthermore, the assumption is verified after testing the normality with the application of the matlab function “lillietest ()”. That is to mean, we could assume that the increments of wheel diameters during one unit time (i.e. 30 days) follow the normal distribution. The PDF of the normal distribution is:(6)fμ,σ(d)=e−(d−μ)22σ2σ2πwhere d is the random variable of diameters D; μ is the mean; and σ is the standard deviation. By using the method called Maximum Likelihood Estimates (MLE), the parameters of the normal distribution could be calculated as μ = −0.1777, σ = 0.4828. Thus, the mean wear rate of wheel diameter is − 0.177 millimeters/30 days.The wear rate of the flange thicknessvSdis dependent on the flange thickness Sd according to the above analysis of their correlation. From Fig. 7, it is difficult to find the correlation trend betweenvSdand Sd directly. Because the flange thickness and the diameter are measured with an accuracy of 0.1 millimeters, the interval 26 millimeters ≤ Sd ≤ 32 millimeters is divided into the 60 smaller intervals with the equal length 0.1 millimeters, such as 25.95millimeters ≤ Sd ≤ 26.05millimeters, 26.05 millimeters ≤ Sd ≤ 26.15 millimeters, ..., 31.95 millimeters ≤ Sd ≤ 32.05 millimeters. Considering the available 2100 samples ofvSd,the mean values of the flange thickness wear ratesvSdin each smaller interval are calculated and shown in Fig. 10. In Fig. 10, the counts ofvSdsamples are also accumulated in each smaller interval. From Fig. 10, it could be found that the wear rates of the flange thicknessvSdare smaller relatively when the flange thickness values Sd are near 29 millimeters. Furthermore, the flange thickness wear is faster when the flange thickness Sd is less than 28 millimeters or larger than 31 millimeters. On the other hand, a higher count means more confidence of the meanvSdvalue for each smaller interval. Consequently, the quadratic curve fitting method based on weighted least square is utilized for modeling the relation between the mean flange thickness wear rates of each smaller interval and the corresponding flange thicknesses. As shown in Fig. 10, the fitting curve obtained by the Matlab toolbox ‘cftool’ is as follows:(7)vSd¯=−0.02606·Sd2+1.538·Sd−22.75wherevSd¯is the fitted result ofvSd.In Figs. 7 and 10, the samples of the flange thickness wear rates vSd distribute randomly on the two sides of the fitting curve. If the error between a sample ofvSdand the fitting model is denoted as EVSd (i.e.EVSd=vSd−vSd¯), its histogram can be given in Fig. 11. Based on this histogram, the normal distribution could be selected for fitting the distribution of EVSd. Then, the following is derived based on Eq. (7):(8)vSd=−0.02606·Sd2+1.538·Sd−22.75+EVSdwhere EVSd ∼ N(0, 0.3056), and 0.3056 is the standard deviation calculated based on the MLE method. The normality assumption of EVSd is also verified based on the matlab function “lillietest ( )”.Eq. (3) can be rewritten as(9)kj=Dj−−Dj+Sd,j+−Sd,j−where:kjis the re-profiling gain of the jth re-profiling during the wheel life cycle, satisfying k > 0;Dj−andDj+are the diameters of the wheel before and after the jth re-profiling during its life cycle respectively, satisfyingDj−>Dj+;Sd,j−andSd,j+are the flange thicknesses of the wheel before and after the jth re-profiling during its life cycle respectively, satisfyingSd,j+>Sd,j−.Based on the wear and maintenance data of metro wheels, the 51 samples of the re-profiling gain k are derived, along with their corresponding flange thicknesses before or after re-profiling. It is computed that the correlation coefficient between k andSd−(resp. k andSd+) is 0.2755 (resp. 0.3629). Thus, it is concluded that the re-profiling gain k is dependent on the flange thickness before/after re-profiling.In order to show their relationship clearly, the re-profiling gain samples k and their corresponding flange thicknesses before re-profilingSd−are plotted in Fig. 12, whereSd+are marked using the different shapes. From Fig. 12, it is found that the re-profiling gain k generally increases with the increasing of the flange thicknesses before re-profilingSd−. On the other hand, the re-profiling gain samples k and the corresponding flange thickness gain (Sd+−Sd−) are given in Fig. 13. It could be concluded that k decreases with the increasing of the flange thickness gain (Sd+−Sd−), especially whenSd+−Sd−≥1.According to the two findings above, the relation model between k,Sd−andSd+are formulated as follows:(10)k=km(1−β)where β is the random ratio of fitting error to the analytical model value, and km is the value of the analytical fitting model presented as follows:(11)km=a1·(Sd−)b1+c1(Sd+−Sd−)b2+c2where a1, b1, c1, b2, and c2 are the constant coefficients.Utilizing the matlab toolbox of genetic algorithm ‘gatool’, these coefficients are derived when minimizing the square error sum associated with the 51 samples of re-profiling gains k and the fitting model described above. They are a1 = 0.01999, b1 = 19.19725, c1 = −30.27031, b2 = 11.70899, c2 = 13.03884.Based on Eq. (10), the following could be derived:(12)β=km−kkmThen, the ratios β in terms of the 51 re-profiling gain samples are calculated after the analytical model of km is determined. Their histogram is given in Fig. 14. According to the shape of this histogram, it is supposed that the random value β satisfies the normal distribution. The PDF of the normal distribution is(13)fμ′,σ′(β)=e−(β−μ′)22σ′2σ′2πwhere μ′ = −0.0012 is the mean, and σ′ = 0.08 is the standard deviation, which are obtained by using the MLE method. Additionally, the matlab function “lillietest()” is used to implement the normality test for the random ratio β. The result shows that the hypothesis of its normal distribution cannot be rejected at the 5 percent significance level.It should be kept in mind that the proposed data-driven model is different from the analytic wheel wear models in the studies of Ansari et al. (2008),Braghin et al. (2002),Braghin et al. (2006),Chang et al. (2008),De Arizon et al. (2007),Enblom and Berg (2005),Ignesti et al. (2012),Magel et al. (2005), and Rovira et al. (2011), which addressed the deterministic and analytic relationship among load, speed, material and wear rates of wheels. Furthermore, as stated in Section 2, the data-driven model is not the modeling of real wear processes for metro wheels. It is only the description of the measured data of wheel diameters and flange thicknesses, which include out-of-roundness errors and artificial measurement errors. On the other hand, it is well known that the rail wheel wear is strongly dependent on the tracks and more especially on their curvatures. Consequently, the calculated model parameters, the derived relationship model between the wheel diameter, the flange thickness, their wear rates, and the re-profiling gain above are possibly applied only to Guangzhou Metro Line One. However, the proposed modeling and analyzing method in this section is useful for wheels of other metro lines.As described previously, the optimal decisions need to be made when wheels should be re-profiled and what values of the flange thickness should be brought up to by re-profiling. On the other hand, the limit rule of diameter differences also need to be considered for metro wheel maintenance, as given in Section 2.The proposed re-profiling strategy, which is called the (SdP, SdR) re-profiling strategy, is a control limit policy. Additionally, SdP is the flange thickness threshold of preventive re-profiling; and SdR is the flange thickness value after the preventive re-profiling, as shown in Fig. 5. They satisfy 26 millimeters ≤ SdP < SdR ≤ 32 millimeters, which need to be optimized in the re-profiling strategy.The related assumptions and the possible decisions of the proposed re-profiling strategy for eight wheels of a rolling stock are given as follows:(1)Each wheel is only subject to two deteriorating processes: the flange wear and the diameter wear. Moreover, the eight wheels are identical and s-independent.The eight wheels are inspected periodically at the discrete time tj= j · ▵t, wherej∈Nand ▵t is the time unit (i.e. 30 days). The flange thickness Sd, j, iand the diameter Dj, i(i = 1,2, ..., 8) of the ith wheel are measured at the time tj. The 1st wheel and the 2nd wheel (or the 3rd and the 4th, or the 5th and 6th, or the 7th and 8th) are on the same axle. The 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th wheels (or the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th) are on the same bogie.The optional maintenance actions for the wheels are the re-profiling and the replacement. A re-profiling should be implemented if any flange thickness of the eight wheels Sd, jis less than or equal to the wheel flange thickness threshold of preventive re-profiling SdP, j = 1, 2, …, 8. The flange thickness is increased by re-profiling, as depicted in Section 2, but with the loss of the diameter. The flange thicknesses and the diameters of the eight wheels before the re-profiling are denoted asSd,j,1−Sd,j,2−,...,Sd,j,8−,andDj,1−,Dj,2−Dj,8−,and the ones after re-profiling are denoted asSd,j,1+,Sd,j,2+,...,Sd,j,8+,andDj,1+,Dj,2+Dj,8+. Additionally, the eight wheels will be replaced together by new ones if any wheel diameter found by inspections is less than 770 millimeters.It is assumed that the measured data Sd, j, 1Sd, j, 2, ..., Sd, j, 8, and Dj, 1, Dj, 2, ..., Dj, 8 could be described by the data-driven model given in Section 3.The Genetic Algorithm is used to decide the flange thicknesses and the diameters after the re-profiling. The constraints are:(1)0≤∣Dj,u+−Dj,w+∣≤2millimeters,0≤∣Dj,d+−Dj,f+∣≤4millimeters,0≤∣Dj,g+−Dj,h+∣≤7millimeters, where (u, w) ∈ {(1, 2), (3, 4), (5, 6), (7, 8)}, d, f ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} or d, f ∈ {5, 6, 7, 8}, d ≠ f, and g, h ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}, g ≠ h26millimeters≤Sd,j,k+≤32millimeters, and770millimeters≤Dj,k+≤840millimeters,k = 1, 2, …, 8The logic limits:Sd,j,i+≥Sd,j,i−andDj,k+<Dj,k−,i, k = 1, 2, …, 8The optimization objective is(14)min[∑i=18wSd·|Sd,j,i+−SdR|+∑k=18wD·(Dj,k−−Dj,k+)]wherewSdand wDare the weights set by maintenance engineers, satisfyingwSd+wD=1.The items are considered as the constraints when optimizing Eq. (14). The Genetic Algorithm with penalty functions is selected for this optimization problem. If a re-profiling is decided, then theDj,k+andSd,j,i+,i, k = 1, 2, …, 8, should be decided with the application of the GA with penalty functions, where the re-profiling gains are generated based on Eqs. (10) and (11).As described previously, in order to balance the gain of flange thicknesses against the loss of diameters and maximize the life span of metro wheels, maintenance engineers in metro companies have to choose appropriate values of SdP and SdR. If the average life cycle EL∞ is represented as a function of SdP and SdR, i.e. fEL(SdP, SdR), the optimization of the proposed re-profiling strategy could be defined as a constrained optimization problem:(15)maxEL∞=maxfEL(SdP,SdR)subject to26millimeters≤SdP<SdR≤32millimetersConsidering the complexity of the re-profiling strategy, it is difficult to deduce the analytical formulation of fEL(SdP, SdR). Consequently, the Monte Carlo simulation is applied to evaluate the average life cycle length of wheels, which could be represented as:(16)EL∞=∑j=1NLCLjNLC=tj,totalNLCwhere Ljis the length of each simulated life cycle for metro wheels, tj, total is the simulated total time unit, and NLCis the simulated number of life cycles. Similarly, the average re-profiling number EN∞ is:(17)EN∞=∑i=18∑j=1NLCNr,j,i8·NLCwhere Nr, j, iis the re-profiling number of the ith wheel during its jth life cycle.For the further description of the Monte Carlo simulation, the flow diagram for the simulation program of the wheel re-profiling strategy is given in Fig. 15. The first step “Initialize the parameters” is to input the parameters j = 0, Sd, j, i= 32 millimeters, Dj, k= 840 millimeters, i, k = 1, 2, …, 8, NRep = 0, NLC = 0, and we set NCLtotal = 50, which is large enough for evaluating the approximative value of the expected wheel life length. Furthermore, when optimizing the decision of one re-profiling for the eight wheels based on Eq. (14) in the simulation,wSd=1and wD= 0 are selected for considering the importance of the flange thickness. The simulation time step is one unit time as shown in Fig. 15, i.e. 30 days.The re-profiling strategy above is proposed for the wheels of Guangzhou Metro Line One, the flange thickness and the diameter of which decrease generally if the re-profiling is not implemented. However, the trend of wheel wear could be very different in some other rail lines. For example, a wheel wear study of vehicles operating on the commuter rail network in Stockholm (Jendel, 2002) shows that the flange thickness seems to be constant after 100 thousand kilometers. In such a case, the proposed re-profiling strategy is not suitable.Based on the data-driven model, the (SdP, SdR) re-profiling strategy with the different decision variables could be simulated by using the Monte Carlo method. The results are shown in Fig. 16. In Fig. 16, the expected life lengths and the expected re-profiling numbers are given for the 78 different (SdP, SdR) re-profiling strategies. The expected re-profiling numbers in Fig. 16(c) may be not integral, indicating the mean number of re-profiling for each re-profiling strategy in a statistically significant way.In Fig. 16(a), the decision variables SdP and SdR satisfy 26 millimeters ≤ SdP < SdR ≤ 32 millimeters and SdP, SdR ∈ {26, 26.5, 27, 27.5, 28, 28.5, 29, 29.5, 30, 30.5, 31, 31.5, 32 millimeters}. Considering the requirement of analyzing different re-profiling strategies with different combinations of SdP and SdR, these discrete alternatives are enough. Meanwhile, the computational complexity of the MC simulation is acceptable. In Table 1, the preferred re-profiling strategies of metro wheels are also described. Their expected life length are larger comparatively. Zeng (2005) concluded that the real total life length of wheels in Guangzhou Metro Line One would be 67 time units (15,000 kilometers per unit time) approximately if the existing strategy is used always. Therefore, we also calculate the increasing of life length when comparing the preferred re-profiling strategies with the existing strategy, shown as the last column in Table 1.As seen in Table 1, the preferred re-profiling strategies suggested by this study can increase the life length at least 9 percent. From Fig. 16 and Table 1, it could be found that the best re-profiling strategy is the (SdP = 26 millimeters, SdR = 30 millimeters) strategy with the longest expected life length of 85.46 time units. When SdP ≥ 28.5 millimeters, the corresponding expected life length decreases.Although the flange wear rates are smaller when 28 millimeters ≤ Sd ≤ 31 millimeters as seen in Fig. 10, the preferred re-profiling strategies do not include the (SdP = 28 millimeters, SdR = 31 millimeters) strategy. The reason of this phenomenon lies in the fact that the re-profiling gains are larger if 28 millimeters ≤ Sd ≤ 31 millimeters according to the analytical model of the wheel re-profiling gain as Eqs. (10) and (11). It could be concluded that both the wear rates and the re-profiling gain can affect the optimal re-profiling strategy. This finding indicates that the control of re-profiling gains plays a key role in prolonging life length of metro wheels in maintenance activities of rolling stocks.On the other hand, the result in Fig. 16 shows that the re-profiling numbers are smaller when the flange thickness gains (SdR − SdP) of the corresponding strategies are larger, keeping with the intuition. A bigger re-profiling number decreases the availability of rolling stocks and increases maintenance costs, which may be unacceptable in a busy metro line. The re-profiling numbers of the preferred re-profiling strategies listed in Table 1 are not large. This is good for applying these strategies by maintenance engineers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
