@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Beyond price mechanisms: How much can service help manage the competition from gray markets?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze price and service decisions in the presence of parallel importation.We investigate the value of service in managing the competition from gray markets.We examine the effects of service and competition intensity on optimal policy.We explore the value of strategic decisions when facing parallel importation.We also analyze the effects of service control in a decentralized supply chain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Gray market,Parallel imports,Demand enhancing services,Uniform pricing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Companies operating global supply chains in various industries struggle with parallel importers diverting goods from authorized channels to gray markets. While the existing gray market literature mainly focuses on pricing, in this paper we develop a model to examine the role of demand enhancing services as non-price mechanisms for coping with gray markets. We consider a manufacturer that sells a product in two markets and a parallel importer that transfers the product from the low-price market to the high-price market and competes with the manufacturer on price and service. We show that parallel importation forces the manufacturer to provide more service in both markets. We explore the value of service and the effects of competition intensity and market responsiveness to service on the manufacturer’s policy. We find that a little service can go a long way in boosting the profit of the manufacturer. Investing in service enables the manufacturer to differentiate herself from the parallel importer and to achieve the ideal price discrimination. In addition, service increases the value of strategic price discrimination when facing parallel importation. We also analyze the case when the manufacturer sells through a retailer in the high price market and can delegate service provision to the retailer or provide service herself. We find that delegating service to the retailer reduces double marginalization and can simultaneously benefit the manufacturer and the retailer, even if the retailer is not as efficient as the manufacturer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Companies in various industries are increasingly challenged by the diversion of their products to unauthorized distribution channels known as gray markets which resell genuine products legally purchased from authorized distributors. Gray markets are mainly the product of regional price differentials arising from supply chains that promote geographic pricing aimed at expanding commerce. Regional price differentials combined with diminishing trade barriers all but ensure gray market trade, also known as parallel importation, by which products purchased cheaply in one region are imported by individuals or enterprises to undercut higher pricing in another region.Globalization and on-line sales feed gray markets, which in 2008 cost the U.S. IT industry alone approximately $58 billion and accounted for as much as 30 percent of total sales, according to a study by international auditing firm KPMG (2008). A 2009 Deloitte study found that gray market imports annually cost U.S. manufacturers upwards of $63 billion in sales (Bloomberg, 2009). Gray markets trade in a broad set of products including electronics, pharmaceuticals, college textbooks, beverages, cigarettes, automobile parts, luxury watches, jewelry, chocolates, and perfumes (Schonfeld, 2010).Most gray market sales are legal under the first sale doctrine, which allows purchasers to resell, display, or dispose of legally acquired items. Moreover, because gray market goods are genuine—unlike black market counterfeit products—companies are limited as to the legal strategies available to fight them. Although gray markets generate a new stream of demand, manufacturers generally consider gray markets harmful because products diverted to gray markets end up competing with those sold by authorized distributors and brand value may erode as products become available to segments that the manufacturer deliberately avoided. Gray markets also free ride on advertising and other manufacturer efforts to increase sales (Gallini & Hollis, 1999).Since price differentials drive gray markets, brand owner efforts tend to focus mostly on pricing mechanisms. Some luxury brands, TAG Heuer and Christian Dior for example, have gone so far as to forgo the advantages of geographic pricing altogether. They have instituted uniform pricing policies, charging the same amount for their products worldwide (Antia, Dutta, & Bergen, 2004). Strategies like uniform pricing, price reduction, and price matching can lower the pressure from gray markets, but there is a limit to the amount brand owners can compromise on what they charge. Price manipulation can reduce brand equity by confusing consumers, damaging the brand reputation, and lowering profit margins.One promising alternative for controlling gray markets is boosting authorized channel demand by investing in demand enhancing activities commonly referred to as “service” or sales effort in the marketing and operations literature (e.g. Iyer, 1998; Krishnan, Kapuscinski, & Butz, 2004; Taylor, 2002; Tsay & Agrawal, 2000; Winter, 1993; Xia & Gilbert, 2007). Service broadly represents all marketing efforts to increase product demand such as merchandising, advertising, promotions, attractive in-store demonstration, after-sales support and service offerings, and providing information and guidance to consumers. As a non-price mechanism, value adding services significantly help companies to increase their revenue, enhance customer satisfaction, and promote repeat business. The contribution of service to profits has substantially grown in many industries. In 2011, Deloitte Research reported that after-sales services contributed 19 percent–47 percent to revenues across various industries (Kumar & Sailesh, 2011).Service can play a major role in encouraging consumers to buy products from authorized channels instead of gray markets. The ubiquity and rapid growth of gray markets in recent years and the limitations of price mechanisms have drawn the attention of many companies to demand enhancing services. In 2011, Mercedes-Benz reported that the percentage of Benzes sold in Thailand that were supplied by the gray market had risen from 13 percent in 2008 to 51 percent. In response to this rapid growth of the gray market, Mercedes-Benz cut the prices of seven models by between 2 and 5 percent and offered more leasing alternatives to induce demand. In addition, the company announced that it would no longer honor after sales services to gray market vehicles to protect its brand image, unless owners of such vehicles paid a one-time fee and register the vehicle with official Mercedes-Benz dealers (Bangkok Post, 2011a; 2011b). BMW also confronted a burgeoning gray market in Thailand and decided to deny service to gray market vehicles (Harman, 2010).Automotive giant Hyundai wrestled with the same parallel importation problem as Mercedes-Benz in the Philippines. By 2002, gray market Starex vans were pouring into the country via unauthorized channels, and their owners were requesting Hyundai service. Hyundai responded by lowering its prices several times, but the parallel importers immediately slashed theirs as well. Eventually, the auto maker offered a three-year, 100,000-kilometer warranty which was an aggressive service package for deterring parallel importers (Ocampo, 2003).In addition to offering post-sale services, providing services before and during the sale can greatly boost demand for authorized channels. Nike and Apple are among reputable brands that invest heavily on creating a pleasant shopping experience for customers in their retail stores by educating customers about the brand and providing information about products that address customers’ needs (Quinn, 2013). In a study of gray markets, Galstian (2000) states that point-of-purchase service dimensions such as attractive in-store product demonstrations are highly effective in building a strong brand image to infuse emotion into products, elicit the emotional and social dimensions of shopping, and deter gray markets.The entities that develop and engage in gray market activities are not limited to unknown individuals who buy one unit of a product and then resell it on the internet. Nowadays many parallel importers are well-established companies with a centralized planning system that buy large quantities of products from authorized dealers and resell them to customers. For example, Amazon, eBay, Kmart, and Costco are among the famous retailers known to have sold gray goods (Bucklin, 1993; Schonfeld, 2010). Although these gray market retailers primarily compete with authorized channels on price, they also invest in different types of services to promote their products. Other examples of such gray marketers are Authenticwatches.com, Jomashop.com, and Prestigetime.com that sell genuine luxury watches, B&H Photo, Video & Pro Audio that sells electronics, audio and video equipment, and professional cameras, and New Zealand’s big retailer, The Warehouse (Krause, 2012). These companies provide services to their customers.Motivated by these observations in practice, in this paper we analyze the impacts and effectiveness of value adding services in controlling the competition from gray markets. To our best knowledge, our paper is the first quantitative analysis of service mechanisms in the context of parallel importation. We expand the existing framework for analyzing parallel importation (e.g., Ahmadi & Yang, 2000; Xiao, Palekar, & Liu, 2011) by incorporating service competition between a manufacturer selling a product in two markets and a parallel importer. The manufacturer determines her11We use ‘she’ for the manufacturer and ‘he’ for the parallel importer and the retailer in Section 4.price and service in each market. If the price differential between the markets is sufficiently large, the parallel importer may buy a quantity of the product in the low-price market and resell it in the high-price market. The parallel importer behaves strategically, maximizing his total profit by way of quantity, resale price, and service offerings. We formulate the competition between the manufacturer and the parallel importer using a Stackelberg game and explore the following:1.Manufacturer’s decisions:We show that parallel importation compels the manufacturer to provide more service in the high-price market to combat the competition from the parallel importer and to increase the amount of service in the low-price market to make up for raising the price in that market.Manufacturer’s policy and the value of service: We find that a little investment in service can significantly help the manufacturer to curb the competition from the gray market and increase her profit. Demand enhancing services enable the manufacturer to differentiate herself from the parallel importer, especially when the gap between consumers’ perception of the parallel import channel and their perception of the authorized channel shrinks.Moreover, we examine the simultaneous effects of consumers’ responsiveness to service and the strength of competition between the authorized and gray market channels on the manufacturer’s policy (allow or block) towards the parallel importer. We find that the manufacturer is better off allowing parallel imports when competition is moderate and is better off blocking parallel imports when the level of competition is either low or very high. More importantly, whereas companies that only use price to manage gray market activities have very limited ability to achieve their ideal price discrimination policy, companies that take advantage of service mechanisms have more power to implement a perfect price discrimination policy, even if the gray market is a mild or strong competitor for the authorized channel.We also compare the manufacturer’s optimal profit to her profit when she adopts a uniform pricing policy. We find that choosing prices and services strategically is significantly more valuable than following a myopic uniform pricing policy. In addition, the value of strategic decision–making in the presence of parallel importation generally increases when service plays a bigger role in enhancing demand.Effects of service control in decentralized supply chain: We study a decentralized supply chain in which the manufacturer sells the product through a retailer in the high price market. We explore the impacts of service control (by manufacturer or retailer) on service investment, gray market volume, and supply chain profits. Manufacturers may delegate services to a retailer if service activities such as in-store product demonstrations and providing a high-quality shopping experience have a strong influence on consumers. Manufacturers may also delegate services to a retailer if the retailer can penetrate the market and communicate with consumers more effectively. On the other hand, a manufacturer may retain control of the service decision and only delegate the pricing decision to the retailer. The automobile industry is an example for the first scenario while the consumer electronics industry provides examples for both scenarios (Xia & Gilbert, 2007). We also observe both scenarios in Best Buy. Efforts for promoting sales of Apple products in Best Buy are managed by Best Buy salespeople, whereas Samsung recently partnered with Best Buy to open 500 Samsung Experience Shops within Best Buy stores. These shops are operated by Samsung salespeople who provide assistance to customers (Gara, 2013).Interestingly, we find that delegating service to the retailer can benefit both the manufacturer and the retailer, even if the retailer is not more efficient in providing service than the manufacturer. Therefore, entrusting the retailer with service can lead to a win-win situation. In our experiments, we observed an average profit increase of approximately 6 percent for the manufacturer and 13 percent for the retailer. This provides insights into managing demand enhancing services for managers that operate decentralized supply chains and face gray markets. To our best knowledge, we are the first to analyze the effects of service control in a supply chain that faces competition from gray markets.This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature. In Section 3, we formulate and solve the Stackelberg game model, and describe the impact of service and parallel importation on decisions. We also explore the effects of service responsiveness and competition intensity on the manufacturer’s policy, and examine the added value of strategic price and service decisions in the presence of parallel importation. Section 4 explores the effects of service control when the supply chain is decentralized in the high price market. Section 5 summarizes the results and concludes with future research directions. The Appendix contains all proofs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
