@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fenced in? Stochastic and deterministic planning models in a time-fenced, rolling-horizon scheduling system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze a time-fenced planning system with penalized expediting and canceling.We formulate deterministic and stochastic dynamic programs and develop bounds.Allowing both expediting and canceling lowered costs 28% versus 11% for expediting only.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Stochastic versus deterministic inventory models,Linear programming,Scheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We analyze a time-fenced planning system where both expediting and canceling are allowed inside the time fence, but only with a penalty. Previous research has allowed only for the case of expediting inside the time fence and has overlooked the opportunity for additional improvement by also allowing for cancelations. Some researchers also have found that for traditional time-fenced models, the choice of the more complex stochastic linear programming approach versus the simpler deterministic approach is not justified. We formulate both the deterministic and stochastic problems as dynamic programs and develop analytic bounds that limit the search space (and reduce the complexity) of the stochastic approach. We run extensive simulations and numerical experiments to understand better the benefit of adding cancelation and to compare the performance of the stochastic model with the more common deterministic model when they are employed as heuristics in a rolling-horizon setting. Across all experiments, we find that allowing expediting (but not canceling) lowered costs by 11.3% using the deterministic approach, but costs were reduced by 27.8% if both expediting and canceling are allowed. We find that the benefit of using the stochastic model versus the deterministic model varies widely across demand distributions and levels of recourse—the ratio of stochastic average costs to deterministic average costs ranged from 43.3% to 78.5%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A significant challenge for production scheduling models is the dynamic nature of the schedule—today's schedule becomes obsolete and must be modified into a new schedule tomorrow; this is the rolling-horizon production scheduling problem. The complexity of rolling-horizon models necessitates heuristic modeling approaches that generally ignore the “rolling” aspect of the problem and optimize the multi-period schedule assuming that it will not be rolled forward. In practice, as time advances and the schedule is rolled forward, the planned production for each period must be revised to account for the realization of stochastic demand from the prior period.To reduce the number of near-term schedule changes as the schedule rolls forward, many firms enforce (through their scheduling systems) a “time fence”—a period within which changes are restricted. The time fence covers a set number of periods, for example four weeks, and is rolled forward along with the schedule. As the schedule is rolled forward, schedule changes outside the time fence are not constrained. In contrast, within the time fence expediting and cancelation activities incur a penalty (if they are permitted at all).The rolling-horizon scheduling problem traditionally is addressed heuristically through a linear programming (LP) approach (Salomon, 1991), where future demand is assumed to equal its expected value, and the fact that the schedule will be rolled forward is ignored. We refer to this heuristic approach as deterministic linear programming (DetLP): demand is treated as deterministic in the LP solution process—disregarding the fact that actual demand is stochastic, and ignoring the implications of a rolling schedule. At the beginning of each period, the DetLP produces a new production schedule, accounting for the realized demand as well as the previous period's production plan, the current inventory position, and time-fencing constraints.If there is no time fence, rolling the schedule forward generates a new production plan (in the DetLP process) that updates production in the upcoming period to compensate for the difference between the expected demand that was used to create the incumbent plan and the realization of stochastic demand for the previous period. The consideration of a time fence changes and complicates the analysis. In particular, an inviolable time fence prevents any expediting and cancelation inside the time fence. In cases where changes to the schedule are permitted inside the time fence (at a cost), the expediting and cancelation costs incurred can lead to a lower overall cost (compared to the inviolable time fence) since the solution space is expanded with the relaxation of the (inviolable) time-fence constraint.In contrast to the more common deterministic approach to production scheduling problems described above, a few existing works have examined the value of a stochastic linear programming solution (StoLP), which accounts for demand variability as schedules are developed. The StoLP is an optimal approach (rather than heuristic) if it considers demand to the end of the horizon. In practice, the StoLP does not scale well across long time horizons (since it has to consider all possible demand convolutions across all periods) and so the StoLP is typically formulated as a heuristic that considers the randomness only for a few periods out (rather than for the entire horizon). To evaluate the relative merits of the deterministic and stochastic approaches over a rolling horizon, researchers have employed simulation, and have found that the stochastic approach offers advantages only in limited situations.Specifically, we build on Brandimarte (2006), which extends the DetLP model to examine the use of StoLP (as a heuristic) to reflect the variability of demand in a rolling production schedule. Brandimarte does not consider time fences per se, but rather considers that when capacity is “tightly constrained,” the ability to secure additional “reactive capacity” can be more valuable than producing safety stock and consequently the benefit of using a stochastic model—in which safety stock is used as a hedging mechanism along with extra capacity—is of little value. In this case, Brandimarte notes that while StoLP results in a lower cost than that of a DetLP formulation, the difference between the two often does not justify the added computational complexity of the stochastic formulation. The model that Brandimarte considers is equivalent to a time fence model where expediting (i.e., the use of reactive capacity) is allowed (at a cost). We test a similar comparison between stochastic and deterministic models and find that the stochastic model can be more attractive when there is the opportunity for both expediting and cancelation.Allowing both cancelation and expediting activities enables the StoLP model to benefit from hedging opportunities. In particular, with both activities available it may be advantageous to schedule additional production because there is opportunity to reduce the schedule (via cancelation) if actual demand is low or to increase the schedule (via expediting) if actual demand is high. Allowing only one adjustment strategy (either expediting or cancelation) may be of limited use depending upon the realized demand, while the two strategies employed together ensure recourse across a broader range of possible outcomes. In addition, having the ability to cancel orders can be more beneficial than having the ability to expedite because of the nature of recourse outside the time fence. In particular, even without expediting, production can be increased outside the time fence (essentially with no limits) when there is a large shortfall. In contrast, if there is a large surplus and demand falls off dramatically, production can be decreased outside the time fence, but only to zero. This means that the surplus could last a long time, if not indefinitely.The option of cancelations inside the time fence reflects reality for many manufacturers and their customers. As the global economy has suffered through downturns, many businesses, governments, and individuals have responded by reigning in both spending and commitments. In many cases, this has included the cancelation of planned production and/or purchases. However, cancelation of committed orders can come with significant consequences; changes to plans inside the time fence can result in supplier-assessed penalties as the manufacturers seek to recoup some of their costs. Some manufacturers even provide a scale of cancellation fees depending on how far into the manufacturing period the order is. ScintiTech, Inc. specifies on its website that if “25% of the manufacture[sic] period has passed, a 20% order cancellation fee will be assessed.” This cancellation fee is increased to 30% for orders 50% into the manufacturing period, 70% for orders 75% in and 100% for orders 90% in.11http://www.scintitech.com/Support.aspx?MenuId=26&MainId=5, accessed 3/18/2015.While examples such as this are not particularly unusual in times of economic duress, existing operations management literature does not adequately address the effects of order cancelations in either production or purchasing systems in a rolling-horizon setting.In the next section, we review the relevant literature covering production planning problems. We then formulate a multi-period model and develop analytical results for upper and lower bounds and for special cases of the problem. Next, through a numeric experiment and simulations, we compare the performance of the stochastic model with the more common deterministic model under varying conditions. We are interested in three aspects of this problem. First, is the benefit to adding cancelation along with expediting such that it allows a significantly higher level of performance than is realized with the expediting-only policy? Second, considering the increased computational complexity, is the magnitude of solution improvement between DetLP and StoLP significant? Third, under what conditions does the benefit from the opportunity to cancel or expedite depend upon the solution methodology (DetLP versus StoLP)?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Previous literature has studied the value of expediting in a rolling-horizon model and has overlooked the opportunity for additional improvement by also allowing for cancelation. In this study, we examine the production scheduling problem with both expediting and cancelation recourse options, and conduct both mathematical and simulation analyses of a rolling-horizon problem. We find that the addition of cancelation to an existing expediting option broadens the appeal of both the deterministic and the stochastic approaches.Our simulation results suggest that both cancelation and expediting are key additions to both the stochastic and deterministic approaches and that the benefits of expanding the solution space by adding either expediting or cancelation appears to be additive in some cases. Interestingly, the benefit to having both options available is most pronounced for the DetLP model. This suggests that firms using a DetLP model have a greater incentive to consider the ability to cancel inside the time fence.In our experiments, the stochastic model outperforms the deterministic model—use of the stochastic model led to reductions in average costs ranging from 28% to over 50% when compared to the deterministic model. Although the stochastic model is significantly more complex, this level of performance improvement is highly appealing. Furthermore, the value of the stochastic solution is consistently apparent across a variety of demand distributions (i.e. skewed and symmetric, high and low variability).Under the StoLP model, cancelation shows more promise when holding costs are high while expediting is more impactful when backorder costs are high. However, cancelation appears more likely to capture the full value of recourse without the need to include expediting as an option than vice versa. In contrast, the deterministic model is equally likely to benefit from canceling or expediting, but benefits to a higher degree from having both options available.Our analysis of the multi-period case provides some insight into the value of both the stochastic linear programming planning approach and the conditions which are most likely to benefit from the ability to expedite and/or cancel orders. In particular, we find that stochastic planning techniques are beneficial across a range of demand distributions. In addition, it appears that deterministic models benefit more from full-recourse options (both expediting and cancelation), which are more likely to improve the solution in the deterministic model than in the better-performing stochastic model. From our experiments, we find that the more computationally complex stochastic model returns significant benefits over the simpler deterministic model. Our analytical results provide guidance which can significantly accelerate solution processes by identifying conditions which allow an analyst to simplify the stochastic model. Finally, our findings indicate that cancelation is a more valuable option when holding costs are relatively high, while expediting is more appealing when backorder costs are high.