@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The value of real time yield information in multi-stage inventory systems – Exact and heuristic approaches

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Consider random yield inventory system with real-time yield information.Develop optimal solution approach for small to medium sized problems.Develop heuristics to solve large problems.Conduct numerical experiments to test the performances of the approaches.Provide an estimate for value of using real time yield information.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inventory management,Random yield,Value of information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a random yield inventory system, where a company has access to real time information about the actual yield realizations. To contribute to a better understanding of the value of this information, we develop a mathematical model of the inventory system and derive structural properties. We build on these properties to develop an optimal solution approach that can be used to solve small to medium sized problems. To solve large problems, we develop two heuristics. We conduct numerical experiments to test the performances of our approaches and to identify conditions under which real time yield information is particularly beneficial. Our research provides the approaches that are necessary to implement inventory control policies that utilize real time yield information. The results can also be used to estimate the cost savings that can be achieved by using real time yield information. The cost savings can then be compared against the required investments to decide if such an investment is profitable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We consider an inventory system, where replenishment orders are subject to random yield. Random yields are an important issue in many procurement, production, and assembly processes (Yano & Lee, 1995). In the food or chemical cold chain, for instance, products are shipped over long distances in refrigerated containers. If the temperature of the product leaves a certain range, the product is spoiled and must be re-ordered. Another example is the semiconductor industry, where production steps are subject to random yield (Wang, 2009).Recently, technologies have been developed that collect and transmit data about the state of a product in the order pipeline. In cold chains, smart sensors are used to monitor the temperature of products and to inform customers immediately if the temperature leaves a pre-defined range (Zacharewicz, Deschamps, & Francois, 2011). White and Cheong (2012), for instance, consider a food supply chain that requires this type of supply chain visibility. They quantify the benefit of observing the quality of a perishable product that is processed in multiple steps from origin to destination. At each step during the journey the decision has to be made whether or not to inspect the quality of the product at a certain cost and whether or not to continue the transport. More application examples of technologies that enable real time yield information sharing in this context can be found in Hsueh and Chang (2010).Real time yield information is also relevant in production processes. Consider a supplier that manufactures a product in several production steps, where each step has random yields. The customer of the supplier considers this risk when placing orders with the supplier and therefore determines the input quantity for the supplier’s first production step. The supplier holds no inventory (except work in progress) and shares yield information after each production step with the customer. Gavirneni (2004), Inderfurth and Vogelgesang (2013), and Wang (2009) provide details of such a process in the semiconductor industry. Choi, Blocher, and Gavirneni (2008), for instance, consider real time yield information sharing in such a context. However, collecting and transmitting real time yield information requires investments in information technology. To decide whether or not such investments are profitable, the value of using real time yield information must be quantified and we address this topic in this paper.Research on random yield inventory models can be traced back to Karlin (1958). Karlin (1958) considers a single period inventory system where the yield of an order is a random variable with a known distribution and where order decisions are binary. The structure of the optimal random yield policy for inventory systems with zero lead time has been derived by Gerchack, Vickson, and Parlar (1988) and Henig and Gerchak (1990). Gerchack et al. (1988) analyze a finite horizon periodic review problem and show that the optimal policy is complex and not myopic. They determine the optimal solution by dynamic programming. Henig and Gerchak (1990) derive structural results for the finite and infinite horizon problems and show that there exists a threshold for each period, such that an order is placed if and only if the on-hand inventory is below the threshold value. They show that the threshold is higher under stochastic yield than under deterministic yield. An overview of periodic review systems with random yield can be found in Yano and Lee (1995).Because large problems cannot be solved optimally in reasonable time, research has also addressed the development of random yield heuristics. Many of these heuristics rely on myopic linear inflation policies (Huh & Nagarajan, 2010). These policies use an order threshold and an inflation factor: If the inventory level is below the order threshold, then the difference between the order threshold and the inventory level multiplied by an inflation factor is ordered. A seminal article in this area is by Bollapragada and Morton (1999). They develop three myopic heuristics that are based on the solution of a newsvendor model with random yield. For a discounted cost model, Li, Xu, and Zheng (2008) develop upper and lower bounds for the optimal order threshold and the order quantity. They use these bounds in a heuristic that outperforms the heuristics of Bollapragada and Morton (1999). Huh and Nagarajan (2010) show how the optimal order threshold of a linear inflation policy can be computed for a given inflation factor.The existing literature on optimal and heuristic solutions considers models with zero lead time, an assumption under which real time yield information sharing is not an issue. In inventory systems with positive lead times, real time yield information sharing can improve performance. To our best knowledge, Choi et al. (2008) is the only article that analyzes the value of real time yield information sharing in settings with positive lead times. They consider a supply chain with a single supplier and a single manufacturer. The supplier uses a manufacturing process with two processing steps with random yields. Translated to a supply chain setting, their model corresponds to an inventory model with a lead time of three periods, where the first two periods are subject to random yield. To solve the model, Choi et al. (2008) modify one of the heuristics of Bollapragada and Morton (1999).We also consider a model with positive lead time and allow for an arbitrarily long lead time. Unlike previous research, we derive structural properties of the objective function and prove the existence of a stationary optimal policy for the infinite horizon problem. We show that the objective function is convex and build on this property to optimally solve small and medium sized problems. To solve large problems, we develop two heuristic solution approaches based on linear inflation policies. The first heuristic builds on the MULT-heuristic that was first proposed by Ehrhardt and Taube (1987). The second heuristic is based on the work of Huh and Nagarajan (2010). We provide numerical results that indicate that our heuristics perform well in a variety of settings and we identify conditions under which real time yield information is particularly beneficial.Related to our research is the research on RFID. For a comprehensive literature review we refer to Lee and Özer (2007), Ngai, Moon, Riggins, and Yi (2008), and Sarac, Absi, and Dauzère-Pérès (2010). For a literature review on applications of RFID technology we refer to Zhu, Mukhopadhyay, and Kurata (2012). To analyze the value of increased supply chain transparency few analytical models have been developed. Our paper derives an analytical model and quantifies the value of real time yield information and we contribute to the filling of the frequently cited credibility gap of the value of RFID (Lee & Özer, 2007; Sari, 2010).The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we develop a dynamic program for a periodic review inventory system with random yields. In Section 3, we discretize the state space and use a Markov decision process to compute the optimal solution. In Section 4, we develop heuristic solution approaches. In Section 5, we provide numerical results. In Section 6, we discuss the value of real time yield information in detail. In Section 7, we extend our analysis for the case where fixed order cost is charged. In Section 8, we conclude. All proofs can be found in the appendix.We first consider a supply chain with real time yield information sharing (Section 2.1) and analyze the finite horizon version (Section 2.1.1) and the infinite horizon version (Section 2.1.2) of the problem. We consider both versions of the problem, because each version has properties beneficial in our analyses. For the finite horizon version, we prove the convexity of the value function. We build upon this property to derive the stationary optimal policy for the infinite horizon version, which allows us to compute the optimal expected cost with arbitrary accuracy. One of our objectives is to analyze the value of using real time yield information, which requires us to compare the cost of a supply chain that utilizes real time yield information with the cost of a supply chain that does not utilize this information. Therefore, we also analyze a supply chain without real time yield information (Section 2.2), again for both the finite horizon version and the infinite horizon version of the problem.Consider a single manufacturer who places orders with a single supplier. The demand dtof the product is stochastic and i.i.d. across periods. We denote the order quantity in period t by Otand orders arrive after a lead time of λ periods. In each lead time period, orders are subject to random yields. The yield rate of lead time period r (r=1,…,λ) in period t is ur,t. Order Ot−λplaced in period t−λ experiences λ random yields and the replenishment quantity Qt−λin period t is Qt−λ=uλ,t−1uλ−1,t−2⋯u1,t−λOt−λ. The yield rates ur,tare i.i.d. over time and can be arbitrarily distributed. For ease of presentation, we will drop the index t in ur,twhenever it is appropriate. This yield model is commonly used to analyze the random yield inventory problem, e.g. Choi et al. (2008), Ehrhardt and Taube (1987), and Gerchack et al. (1988).The sequence of events in each period is as follows: First, the manufacturer observes the current state of the inventory system zt=(ILt,Qt−λ,…,Qt−1), which consists of the inventory level ILtand the current yield of the λ outstanding orders (Fig. 1). Then, the manufacturer decides on the order quantity of the current period and orders, Ot. Next, the manufacturer receives the order that was placed λ periods ago, Qt−λ. The manufacturer satisfies demand and backorders excess demand. Based on the net inventory ILt+1 at the end of period t, backorder or inventory holding costs are charged. With this sequence of events, there are λ+1 state variables. The intricate dynamics make it impossible to reduce the state to a single variable. All notation is summarized in Appendix A.We formulate the finite horizon version of the optimization problem as a dynamic program. Given the current state zt, the objective is to determine the order quantities for the current and all future periods, such that the sum of expected inventory holding and backorder costs is minimized:(1)Vt(zt)=minOt⩾0Ht(zt,Ot),withHt(zt,Ot)=Edt[C(ILt+Qt-λ-dt)]+γEu1,t⋯Euλ,tEdt[Vt+1(zt+1)].γdenotes the discount factor. Without loss of generality, we assume that VT+1(zT+1)=0. The total cost function Ht(zt, Ot) is the sum of the expected cost of the current periodEdt[C(ILt+Qt-λ-dt)]and the minimum expected cost from periods t+1 to T,Eu1,t⋯Euλ,tEdt[Vt+1(zt+1)]. The cost of the current period is C(x)=h[x]++b[−x]+, with [x]+=max(0,x). BecauseEdt[C(ILt+Qt-λ-dt)]is not affected by the current order decision, the dynamic program can be written as(2)Vt(zt)=Edt[C(ILt+Qt-λ-dt)]+minOt⩾0γEu1,t⋯Euλ,tEdt[Vt+1(zt+1)].The transition function is(3)zt+1=fz(zt,Ot,dt,u1,t,…,uλ,t)=(ILt+Qt-λ-dt,uλ,tQt+1-λ,…,u1,tOt).Theorem 1 states that the total cost function Ht(zt, Ot) and the minimal cost function Vt(zt) are convex. The proof is by induction and can be found in Appendix B.Theorem 1Ht(ILt, Qt−λ,…,Qt−1,Ot) is convex in ILt, Qt−r, r=1,…,λ, and Ot. Vt(ILt,Qt−λ,…,Qt−1) is convex in ILtand Qt−r, r=1,…,λ.In the next subsection, we use the results of Theorem 1 to show that there exists a stationary optimal policy for the infinite horizon model and we utilize the convexity in the solution algorithm.We analyze the infinite horizon model by analyzing the finite horizon problem for T→∞. For the infinite horizon model, the state variable is defined as z=(IL,Q−λ,…,Q−1), where Q−iis the current yield of the order placed i periods ago. The recursive cost function V(z) is the limiting function of Eq. (1) as T→∞. V(z) is defined as(4)V(z)=V(IL,Q-λ,…,Q-1)=minO⩾0{Ed[C(IL+Q-λ-d)]+γEu1⋯EuλEd[V(IL+Q-λ-d,uλQ-λ+1,…,u1O)]}.We next show in Lemma 1 that for each z∈Z, Vt(z) converges to V(z) as T→∞. Building on this result, we prove in Theorem 2 that the limit function is the unique solution of Eq. (4).Lemma 1For each z∈Z there exists a limit function V(z)=limT→∞Vt(z).To prove the existence of an optimal stationary policy in Theorem 3, we require the limit function of Lemma 1 to solve the functional equation of the dynamic program. This is proven in Theorem 2.Theorem 2For each z∈Z the limit function V(z)=limT→∞Vt(z) satisfies Eq. (4).For each z∈Z there exists an optimal stationary policy O∗(z)=limT→∞Ot(z) and V(z) is its return function.We have shown that a stationary optimal policy exists and in Section 3 we demonstrate how it can be computed. Because of the stochastic nature of the demand and the yield rate distribution, the structure of the optimal policy is too complex to obtain further analytical results.Without real time yield information, the manufacturer observes in period t the current inventory level ILtand the open order quantities Ot−λ,…,Ot−1. We denote the state by st=(ILt,Ot−λ,…,Ot−1). The objective function of the finite horizon model is(5)Vt(st)=minOt⩾0Ht(st,Ot)=minOt⩾0{Eu1⋯λ,tEdt[C(ILt+u1⋯λ,tOt-λ-dt)]+γEu1⋯λ,tEdt[Vt+1(st+1)]},where u1⋯λ,tdenotes the yield rate over the lead time that is observed in period t with p.d.f. v(u1⋯λ). We assume that VT+1(sT+1)=0.The transition function is(6)st+1=fs(st,Ot,dt,u1⋯λ,t)=(ILt+u1⋯λ,tOt-λ-dt,Ot+1-λ,…,Ot).For the infinite horizon model, the state is s=(IL,O−λ,…,O−1), where O−iis the order placed i periods ago. Then,(7)V(s)=V(IL,O-λ,…,O-1)=minO⩾0{Eu1⋯λEd[C(IL+u1⋯λO-λ-d)]+γEu1⋯λEd[V(IL+u1⋯λO-λ-d,O-λ+1,…,O)]}.The results of Lemma 1 and Theorems 1–3 also hold for the model without real time yield information, because it features the same structure as the model with real time yield information. The proofs are very similar and therefore omitted. We note that this model derives the optimal policy for the setting without real time yield information. If the decision maker chooses a conservative approach and takes an expectation over the yield rates conditionally, for example over the 95th percentile of the yield rates to hedge against the uncertainty in the yield rates, this would result in increased order quantities and inventory holding costs and reduced backorder costs. However, it would increase expected total cost.To obtain the optimal policy and minimal expected cost for the infinite horizon model, we model the system as a discounted Markov decision process. Because Lemma 1 and Theorems 2 and 3 also hold for finite state spaces (Heyman & Sobel, 1984, Proposition 8-2), we can determine the optimal policy and the minimal expected cost for each state via value iteration combined with MacQueen extrapolation (MacQueen, 1966).We next show how the optimal solution can be computed for the model that utilizes real time yield information (Section 3.1). The approach is very similar for the model without real time yield information and we will only describe the differences between the solution approaches in Section 3.2.Let the state space of the Markov decision process be defined by Z with truncated inventory level (ILmin⩽IL⩽ILmax) and order quantity (0⩽O⩽Omax). Z has(ILmax-ILmin+1)(Omax+1)λstates. The action space is A={0,1,2,…,Omax}.Given state z∈Z, we compute for every order decision O the transition probabilities from z toz̃∊Z,pz,z̃(O). For state z, letQzrbe the current yield of an order after lead time period r, with r=0,…,λ andQz0≡O. The transition probability fromz=(ILz,Qzλ,…,Qz1)toz̃=(ILz̃,Qz̃λ,…,Qz̃1)is(8)pz,z̃(O)=P(z̃|z,O)=PD=ILz+Qzλ-ILz̃·∏r=1λg(Qzr-1),withg(Qzr-1)=1,forQzr-1=0andQz̃r=0,Pur=Qz̃r/Qzr-1,forQzr-1>0,0,forQzr-1=0andQz̃r≠0.The value iteration algorithm can be found in Appendix F. It can be used to calculate the optimal policy with and without real time yield information and provides the minimal expected cost V(z) and the optimal order decision O(z) for each state.Using the optimal policy O(z), we calculate the steady state distribution and then determine the minimal expected cost. Proposition 1 states that the state probabilities have a unique stationary distribution. Define Ymin(O) as the minimal yield over lead time of order quantity O.Proposition 1For any discrete i.i.d. demand distribution with P(Dt=dt)>0 for Ymin(Omax)+1⩾dt⩾0 and any λ discrete i.i.d yield distributions, the finite state space Z has a unique essential class and therefore has a unique stationary distribution.The steady state probabilities p(z) can be calculated using power iteration. The minimal expected cost for the infinite horizon model is∑zp(z)V(z).Without real time yield information, the transition probabilities differ and the expected one period cost is calculated according to Eq. (5). Other than these differences, the approach described above can be used. To calculate the transition probability from s∈S to states̃∈S, it is sufficient to know the probability distribution of demand and of the yield rate over the lead time v(u1⋯λ). The state variable s contains the information about the orderOsλplaced λ periods ago. This order quantity is used to calculate a set of potential replenishment quantities Q and their probabilitiespQ=P(u1⋯λ=Q/Osλ). Given the order quantity O, the transition probabilities are calculated as(9)ps,s̃(O)=P(s̃|s,O)=P(D=ILs+Q-ILs̃)·pQ,forOs̃r=Osr-1withr=1,…,λ,0,else.The optimal solution approaches can be used to solve small and medium sized problems. To solve large problems, heuristics can be used. We introduce two heuristics in the next section.Heuristics that belong to the class of linear inflation policies have proven to perform well for solving problems such as the one that we consider (Bollapragada & Morton, 1999; Hsueh & Chang, 2010; Inderfurth & Transchel, 2007; Li et al., 2008; Zipkin, 2000). These policies require the specification of two parameters, θ and β. θ is the order threshold value that triggers an order as soon as the inventory position is below θ. β is an inflation factor by which the difference between the order threshold and the inventory position (θ−IPt) is multiplied.The resulting order quantity is(10)Ot(IPt)=βθ-IPt,forIPt<θ,0,else.Because not all yield realizations are known when the order quantity is determined, the inventory position must be estimated as the sum of the current inventory level ILtand the expected replenishment quantities.With real time yield information,the expected inventory position is estimated by(11)E[IPt(zt)]=ILt+Qt-λ+u¯λQt+1-λ+u¯λu¯λ-1Qt+2-λ+⋯+∏r=2λu¯r·Qt-1,whereu¯rdenotes the expected yield rate for lead time period r.Without real time yield information, the current inventory position IPt(st) cannot be estimated as accurately as with real time yield information, because the estimates for the expected replenishment quantities are based solely on expected yield rates rather than on a mix of expected and observed yield rates. Therefore the expected inventory position is estimated by(12)E[IPt(st)]=ILt+(Ot-λ+⋯+Ot-1)∏r=1λu¯r=ILt+(Ot-λ+⋯+Ot-1)u¯1⋯λ.Next, we introduce two heuristics that differ by how they determine the inflation factor β and the order threshold θ. The first heuristic is the MULT-heuristic. This heuristic is most often applied in practice. The idea for this heuristic was first mentioned in Ehrhardt and Taube (1987). The second heuristic is the OPT-heuristic. This heuristic is based on the work of Huh and Nagarajan (2010) and currently one of the best performing heuristics for the random yield problem. We modify the Huh and Nagarajan (2010) approach to allow for non-zero lead times and different yield rate distributions in different lead time periods.The MULT-heuristic assumes perfect yield and calculates the order threshold value θ as(13)θ=Fλ+1-1(b/(b+h)),whereFλ+1-1denotes the inverse cumulative probability distribution of the demand over λ+1 periods. β is set equal to the reciprocal of the total expected yield rate:(14)β=1∏r=1λu¯r=1u¯1⋯λ.Huh and Nagarajan (2010) show how an optimal order threshold θ∗(β) can be computed for a given inflation factor β. Consequently, the choice of β defines the performance of the heuristic. Huh and Nagarajan (2010) test several choices of β for an inventory system with zero lead time and show that the approach outperforms existing linear inflation policies.We propose a heuristic that allows for non-zero lead times. We set(15)β=121u¯1⋯λ+supn:Eu1⋯λ·I1n⩽u1⋯λ⩽bb+hu¯1⋯λ.The first term corresponds to the choice of β for the MULT-heuristic and ignores yield variability. It is the best choice when the yield rate is deterministic. Then, the first term has the same value as the second term. The second term considers the yield rate distribution over lead time and the ratio of b and h. It is motivated by the fact, that for the single period random yield problem with deterministic demand and zero lead time, the optimal order quantity is determined by max{n(D−IL), 0} (Huh & Nagarajan, 2010, Proposition 4), when n is computed according to the second term of Eq. (15). Huh and Nagarajan (2010) show that β, computed according to Eq. (15), delivers better results than other choices of β under the zero lead time assumption and over a wide range of parameter settings.θ∗(β) can be computed by minimizing the cost function C(θ, β) for a given β. It is difficult to calculate θ∗(β) analytically, because an analytic expression for the cost function is not available. However, θ∗(β) can be computed efficiently by first simulating the system over T periods for θ=0 and then computing θ∗(β) as (Huh & Nagarajan, 2010)(16)θ∗(β)=infθ:1T∑t=1TPILt+10,β+θ⩽0⩽hb+h,whereILt+1(0,β)denote the simulated inventory levels.In Section 5.1, we use the optimal solution approach from Section 3 and provide numerical results on the value of real time yield information for small and medium sized problems. In Section 5.2, we analyze the heuristics. In Section 5.2.1, we use the MULT- and the OPT-heuristic to solve the same test cases that we solved by the optimal solution approach. The main purpose is to analyze the performance gap between optimal and heuristic solutions. In Section 5.2.2, we apply the MULT- and the OPT-heuristic to larger problems to analyze the difference in performance for a wider range of parameter settings.For our numerical analysis of the optimal solutions, we use Poisson distributed demand with a mean of 2, Geometric distributed demand with a mean of 2 and a variance of 6, and Binomial distributed demand with a mean of 12 and variance of 6 (Table 1). We use lead times of λ=1, 2, 3, and 4 periods and a Bernoulli distributed yield rate with expected yields of u=0.9, 0.94, and 0.98. Unless stated otherwise, only the first lead time period has random yield. We vary the lead time period with random yield and discuss the effects in Section 6. Without loss of generality, we set unit inventory holding cost to h=1 and choose unit backorder costs b that result in critical ratios (CR=b/(b+h)) of 0.85, 0.90, 0.95, and 0.99. We use a discount factor γ of 0.9. This results in 288 test cases. The value iteration is conducted with an accuracy of ε=0.001.We truncate demand at 6, 12, and 18, for Poisson, Geometric, and Binomial distributions, respectively. The truncated probability mass is at most 0.5%. For Poisson and Geometric distributed demand we limit inventory levels to ±50 and order quantities to 15, limits that are essentially never binding. This creates a state space with 101·16λstates. For Binomial distributed demand we set the limit to ±120 for the inventory level and 36 for the order quantity, creating a state space of 241·37λstates.All algorithms were implemented in C++ and all experiments were conducted on a PC with eight Intel 3.06gigahertz processors and 8gigabytes of RAM. Table 2shows average run times using all eight processors. Run times increase exponentially in lead time, because the state space increases exponentially in lead time, which limits the applicability of the optimal solution approach to small and medium size problems.The costs of the solutions are shown in Table 3. The column labeled as value of real time yield information shows the relative cost difference of a system with real time yield information vs. a system without real time yield information. The results show that substantial savings can be achieved if yield information can be utilized. Over all test cases, yield information reduces cost by 6.8% for Poisson demands, 2.8% for Geometric demands, and 22.9% for Binomial demands. The results indicate that savings are particularly high when yield variability is high, demand variability is low, and lead time is long. When average demand and, as a consequence average order quantity are high, yield information is particularly beneficial, because yield variability increases over-proportionally in the order quantity. Because we consider small, discrete problems, some values in Table 3 do not follow a monotone trend. We discuss the effect of the parameters on the value of real time yield information in more detail in Section 6.The heuristic solutions have negligible run times and can be used to solve large problems. However, they are not necessarily optimal. The performance and the effect of real time yield information on this performance are analyzed in Section 5.2.1. Section 5.2.2 focuses on the performance comparison of the MULT- and the OPT-heuristics when applied to large problems.We evaluate the accuracy of the MULT- and the OPT-heuristic by applying them to the same problems that we solved optimally. For both heuristics, we compute β according to Eq. (14), because for Bernoulli distributed yield rates the second term of Eq. (15) is not meaningful. The threshold θ for the MULT-heuristic is calculated by Eq. (13). To compute the threshold θ∗(β) for the OPT-heuristic, we follow Huh and Nagarajan (2010) and simulate the inventory system over T=7000 periods (with an initial transient of T0=2000 periods) and replicate the simulation N=2000 times. We select the threshold value θ∗(β) according to Eq. (16) using 10 million simulated inventory levels. We compute the expected cost of the heuristics, using the same approach as for the optimal solution: We first calculate the order quantities O(z) for every state and then use the order quantities to calculate the steady state probabilities and expected cost for every state using power iteration.Table 4reports the accuracy of the heuristics and shows the percentage error of the heuristics vs. the optimal solution. On average, the error of the OPT-heuristic is 1.6% for treatments without real time yield information and 0.03% for treatments with real time yield information. The corresponding errors of the MULT-heuristic are 14.8% and 4.3%. As mentioned in Section 4.1, the MULT-heuristic ignores yield variability and therefore performs worse for larger order quantities under Binomial demand with a mean of 12, due to the fact that yield variability increases quadratic in order quantity. In these cases yield information is particularly beneficial.We have compared the performances of the heuristics with the optimal solution for small and medium sized problems and discrete demand distributions, for which we know the optimal solution. Real time yield information largely improves the accuracy of heuristics. For the relatively small test problems analyzed so far the OPT-heuristic clearly outperforms the MULT-heuristic. For larger problems, the optimal solution is not known, but we can still compare the performances of the heuristics.Our test cases are based on Bollapragada and Morton (1999), Huh and Nagarajan (2010), and Inderfurth and Transchel (2007). Demand and yield rates are both Normal distributed. We use demand distributions with mean 20 and coefficients of variation ρD=0.2 and 0.4. The left tail of the demand distribution is truncated below 0, which slightly increases the mean and slightly decreases the standard deviation. For the yield rate distributions, we use a mean of 0.5 and coefficients of variation of ρu=0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4. We limit the yield rates, such that they are in the range between 0 and 1. The set of critical ratios is 0.85, 0.9, 0.95, and 0.99. We analyze lead times of λ=1, 5, 10, and 30 periods. This results in 128 test cases for the heuristics. We use both heuristics to determine order thresholds and inflation factors. Then, we use the threshold levels and inflation factors and determine the actual cost of this solution using the same approaches as Huh and Nagarajan (2010, p. 248) and Choi et al. (2008, p. 619). The numerical results are calculated with T=7000 and T0=2000 and averaged over all N=2000 simulation runs. The average half-width of the 95% confidence interval over all simulations is 0.3% with a maximum at 2%. Optimal solutions are not available for these large problems.Results are shown in Table 5. They show that the OPT-heuristic clearly outperforms the MULT-heuristic. In 122 of 128 cases with real time yield information and in all 128 cases without real time yield information, the OPT-heuristic has lower cost than the MULT-heuristic. However, real time yield information largely reduces the distance between the heuristics and therefore the disadvantage of using less sophisticated heuristics, like the MULT-heuristic, which is often applied in practice.Both results are as expected. Note, that both heuristics would be optimal solutions if the yield rate would be deterministic. As discussed in Section 4, the OPT-heuristic considers yield randomness far more efficient than the MULT-heuristic which explains the better performance. However, real time yield information mitigates the effects of improper consideration of random yield. Over all test cases without real time yield information the MULT-heuristic has 12.7% higher cost than the OPT-heuristic. With real time yield information the cost difference is reduced to 2.6%. Real time yield information reduces the yield risk and therefore the negative effect of ignoring yield variability for the MULT-heuristic. The OPT-heuristic still performs better than the MULT-heuristic, because real time yield information does not completely mitigate the yield risk.One of the key objectives of our research is to quantify the monetary benefits that can be achieved by utilizing real time yield information as opposed to relying on average yield rates. We are also interested in identifying conditions under which real time yield information is particularly beneficial. In this section, we use the OPT-heuristic to address these issues. We use the same test cases as in Section 5.2.2 and add test cases for ρD=0.1 and ρD=0.3 to cover a wider range of parameter values.Fig. 2shows how the value of real time yield information (VRTYI) depends on the key problem parameters. The results show that substantial savings can be achieved for most parameter settings, but that the magnitude of the savings depends on the values of the parameters: The value of real time yield information is increasing in yield variability (ρu), decreasing in demand variability (ρd), increasing in the lead time (λ), and increasing in the critical ratio (CR).Yield variability. The left graph of Fig. 2 shows how the value of real time yield information is increasing in yield variability ρu. This result is intuitive, because real time yield information reduces uncertainty about the state of the open orders more if yield variability is high than if it is low.Fig. 3provides more details and shows the effect of yield variability on the inflation factor (β), the order threshold (θ), the average inventory level (IL), the average backorder level (BO), and the average cost per period for the test case λ=10, CR=0.9, and ρd=0.2. The results are similar to the other test cases that we analyzed.With and without real time yield information, the inflation factor β is increasing in yield uncertainty (see Eq. (15)). For a given inflation factor β, the OPT-heuristic computes the optimal threshold value θ. With real time yield information, increases in the inflation factor β are sufficient to compensate increases in yield uncertainty and the order threshold θ is essentially unaffected by yield uncertainty. However, without real time yield information, increasing yield variability is not sufficiently compensated by an increase in the inflation factor β, and an increase in the order threshold θ is required.With real time yield information, the actual state of the inventory system can be more accurately evaluated and supply can be better matched with demand than without real time yield information. Consequently, average inventory levels, average backorder levels, and average cost increase less in yield variability and are lower with real time yield information than without real time yield information.Demand variability. The graphs of Fig. 2 show that the value of real time yield information decreases as demand variability increases. At a first glance, this result might seem surprising, but it can be explained by risk pooling. In our model, inventory is used for hedging against demand uncertainty and against yield uncertainty. The inventory used for hedging against yield uncertainty is higher without real time yield information than with real time yield information. If demand uncertainty increases, there is a larger pool of existing inventory available to hedge against the increased uncertainty in an inventory system without real time yield information than in an inventory system with real time yield information. Therefore, inventory increases less in demand uncertainty in an inventory system without real time yield information than in an inventory system with real time yield information.Fig. 4provides details for the same test case that we used for Fig. 3 for ρu=0.2. Obviously the inflation factor β is unaffected by demand uncertainty and increases in demand uncertainty are compensated by increases in the order threshold θ. Inventory and backorder levels are also increasing in demand uncertainty and consequently expected costs are increasing in demand uncertainty. The increase in the performance measures is higher with real time yield information than without.Lead time. The center graph of Fig. 2 shows that the value of real time yield information is increasing in the lead time. Without real time yield information, longer lead time results in higher transit stock and consequently in higher uncertainty about the state of the open orders. Therefore, the value of resolving this uncertainty by using real time yield information is higher for longer lead time than for shorter.In our main numerical experiments, only the first lead time period is exposed to yield uncertainty and the remaining periods have no yield uncertainty. Fig. 5shows numerical results for our test case (λ=10), where we shifted the yield risk to later lead time periods. The figure shows that the closer the yield risk is to the delivery period, the lower is the value of real time yield information.If the yield uncertainty is in lead time period 1, then the risk materializes in the first period after an order has been placed. If an order is placed to compensate a yield loss, this order arrives only one period later than the original order. Additionally, at the time an order is placed, all previous orders have passed the yield risk and their final yield is known. Therefore, real time yield information is very valuable. In our example, the expected cost is 25.0 with real time yield information and 34.6 without real time yield information.If the yield uncertainty is in yield risk period 10, then the risk materializes one period before the order arrives. If an order is placed to compensate a yield loss, this order arrives only one period faster than the regular lead time. In addition, at the time an order is placed, only one order has passed the yield risk and revealed its final yield and the final yields of all other orders are unknown. Therefore, real time yield information is not very valuable. In our example, the expected cost is 33.4 with real time yield information and 34.6 without real time yield information.Our analyses show that the value of real time yield information is substantial for a wide range of parameter values, but that it is particularly high in settings with high yield uncertainty, long lead times with yield risk in early periods and low demand variability. We note that our model can also be used to analyze production systems, where different production stages have different production times and different yield rates and where the yield realization can only be observed at the end of production stage. For production systems with two production stages, the yield risk period of Fig. 5 corresponds to the duration of the first production stage. Other production settings can be analyzed analogously. For instance, assume we have a three stage production system with production times of 1, 2, and 3 periods (total production time of 6 periods) and Bernoulli distributed yield rates with expected yields of 0.80, 0.90, and 0.95. Using our test case we set λ=6, u1=0.80, u3=0.90, and u6=0.95. For this example, we obtain expected cost per period of 96.5 without real time yield information and of 67.2 with real time yield information, which results in a value of real time yield information of 30.4%.In this section we extend our analysis for the case where fixed order cost is charged independent of the order size. From Scarf (1960) and Iglehart (1963), we know that an (s, S) policy is optimal under the perfect yield assumption. An order of S−IP is placed whenever IP⩽s. The optimal determination of the reorder point s and the order-up-to level S is by dynamic programming and many approximately optimal policies have been discussed in the literature (e.g. Schneider & Ringuest, 1990; Tijms & Groenevelt, 1984; Zied Babai, Syntetos, & Teunter, 2010). A heuristic that performs quite well is the Modified Continuous Review (MRC)-heuristic introduced by Porteus (1985). The MCR-heuristic is a modification of the continuous review method of Hadley and Whitin (1963). Through approximations it avoids iteration and adapts the parameters to the periodic review inventory model.To analyze periodic review inventory systems with random yield and fixed order cost, we introduce the MCR-MULT-heuristic that combines the MCR-heuristic and the MULT-heuristic. The parameters s and S are determined by the MCR-heuristic, assuming perfect yield. The order quantity is calculated as(17)OtIPt=βS-IPt,forIPt⩽s,0,else,where the inflation factor β is set equal to the reciprocal of the total expected yield rate (Eq. (14)).To analyze the effect of fixed order cost, we use the simulation approach described in Section 5.2.2 and apply the MCR-MULT-heuristic to test cases with Normal distributed demand, (mean=20, ρD=0.2) and Normal distributed yield rates (mean=0.5, ρu=0.3). We set λ=1, h=1, b=19, and fixed order cost k=50, 75, 100, 125, and 150.The left graph in Fig. 6shows the effect of fixed order cost on the value of real time yield information. It shows that the value of real time information is decreasing in fixed order cost. Real time yield information leads to a quantifiable benefit if it results in an action before the order arrives. After the order arrived the advantage of early information is elapsed. The right graph in Fig. 6 shows the percentage of periods for which real time yield information caused a different action than without real time yield information. If order cost and thus order quantities are large and sufficient for filling the demand of various periods it is less likely that yield rates are so low that their observation has an immediate effect. Potential future stock outs can often be avoided by placing an order after the current order has arrived. Real time yield information allows for faster responses to observed yield realizations, but its value is smaller if order quantities are large than if they are small.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
