@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal investment plan for dynamic thermal rating using benders decomposition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an investment plan for dynamic ratings in electric transmission systems.We use mixed integer programming and benders decomposition to solve the problem.Sensitivity tests show that investment is robust to uncertain load and line-rating.Experimental results show promising cost reduction, up to 30 percent on the 118-bus system.We study the computation time of our decomposition algorithm in different setups.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic thermal rating,Power generation dispatch and economics,Transmission switching,Mixed integer linear programming,Benders decomposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The dynamic thermal rating is a new technology that utilizes the capacity of power transmission lines based on the ambient factors and the line condition. It usually offers higher thermal capacity than the traditional static rating. We propose a multi-stage mixed integer programming model and find the optimal investment plan for the dynamic ratings using benders decomposition. The investment plan includes when and which line should be upgraded to dynamic rating and which line should be switched out of service. The problem is decomposed into a master problem and three sub-problems. The master problem explores the candidate lines for both the investment plan and the switching plan, throughout the planning horizon. The sub-problems evaluate the proposed plans in terms of unmet demand and generation cost. Generation and transmission contingencies are also included in the model. We use our model on Garver’s system and IEEE 118-bus power systems to demonstrate our solution approach. We conduct sensitivity analyses and study the uncertainty in real-time thermal ratings, loads, and the discounting rate. Our studies show that the utilization of the dynamic ratings and the practice of transmission switching are complementary and can reduce the cost on the 118-bus system up to 30 percent.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The electric transmission network is a complex infrastructure and constrained to thermal limits that should not be exceeded. Normally thermal limits for lines are determined by static ratings which are calculated based on conservative weather conditions (Callahan & Douglass, 1988). In the static rating model, the worst-case weather conditions are considered (a low conductor emissivity, a low wind speed, and the highest expected ambient temperature). This results in underestimating the line potential in power transfer during climatic conditions that are far from the worst-case. Therefore, the static rating model does not reflect the true transmission capability of lines and leads to less utilization of transmission elements (Davis, 1977). The dynamic thermal rating (DTR), on the other hand, calculates the thermal capacity of lines based on the real-time line condition and surrounding ambient factors. Considering the real time ambient conditions results in better utilization of the transmission elements during the times in which the weather conditions match the long term averages.The thermal rating of overhead lines is governed by a series of factors including the conductor size and its resistance, the current flowing in the conductor, and the ambient weather conditions (House & Tuttle, 1958; IEEE Std 738-2006, 2007; Transmission Conductors Thermal Ratings, 1968). Under steady-state conditions, the heat balance of a conductor is described in Eq. (1). In these equations, the qcdenotes the convected-heat loss due to the wind speed and its direction, qris the radiated-heat loss, I is the conductor current, R(Tc) is the AC resistance of the conductor in temperature Tc, and qsis the amount of heat gained from the solar radiation and the ambient temperature.(1)qc+qr=I2R(Tc)+qs⇒I=qc+qr−qsR(Tc)The thermal rating of a transmission line can be calculated and predicted using Eq. (1). Three widely used methods for calculating overhead line capacity are published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) (IEEE Std 738-2006, 2007), the International Electrochemical Commission (IEC) (IEC Standard TR 1597, 1985), and the Council on Large Electric Systems (CIGRE) (CIGRE Working Group 22.12, 1992). In Ciniglio and Deb (2004) it has been shown that the usage of the DTR in transmission systems allows more power flow through lines without sacrificing the reliability of the system. The improvement in utilization of existing transmission capacity can significantly reduce the electricity generation cost (Ciniglio & Deb, 2004). Dynamic line rating together with phase-shifting transformers is studied in FP7 Project TWENTIES (2013) in order to increase the efficiency of the grid. It is shown in Schell, Lambin, Godard, Nguyen, and Lilien (2011) that utilizing the dynamic line rating also minimizes curtailment of wind power plants connected to rural networks.Transmission switching (TS) is proposed as another approach to improve the economy of the electric power generation and dispatch (Fisher, O’Neill, & Ferris, 2008; Hedman, Ferris, O’Neill, Fisher, & Oren, 2010; Hedman, O’Neill, Fisher, & Oren, 2009). In the TS approach the detected lines are temporarily switched out of service to increase the power flow from buses with low marginal cost to buses with high marginal cost. Using optimal transmission switching for the cost reduction was first introduced in Fisher et al. (2008). The optimal TS problem is extended in Hedman et al. (2009) to includeN−1reliability requirements. Constraining the transmission switching toN−1requirements ensures that the line on and off plan meets the demand requirements when any of the generation units or transmission lines is subject to the single contingency. A transmission switching model that includes unit commitment andN−1constraints has been proposed in Hedman et al. (2010). All these studies have reported noticeable savings in power generation costs when using transmission switching. Transmission switching is also used in transmission expansion problem (Khodaei, Shahidehpour, & Kamalinia, 2010; Villumsen & Philpott, 2012). Although hourly transmission switching shows great potential in cost savings, in practice transmission switching is done mostly for periodic maintenance and planning issues. A periodic transmission switching model is proposed in Jabarnejad, Wang, and Valenzuela (2015) where the transmission switching occurs at the beginning of a time period (season) and remains unchanged during that period.Currently, most of transmission systems use static ratings. There are challenges on the way of transmission systems to effectively utilize the dynamic ratings. First, new investments are required on the DTR equipment. It is necessary to develop optimal plans for the gradual integration of the DTR system into the transmission network. Second, monitoring the real-time factors is naturally difficult to be conducted for a high number of transmission lines. Therefore, the DTR system should be targeted toward a few but the most suitable lines. Another challenge is how to coordinate the transmission switching operations with the DTR lines to form a reliable and economic transmission grid. In this paper, we develop a mixed integer model to find new investment solutions for the gradual integration of the DTR technology into power systems. Our developed model is multi-stage in which lines can be invested during any time period in the planning horizon. We develop a decomposition algorithm that solves the problem efficiently. The proposed model is unique in terms of the optimal investment planning for the real-time line rating system. To our best knowledge, this problem has not been studied in the literature. We also consider the transmission switching operation with the dynamic rating system. This is the first time both the DTR and TS practices are studied together and their simultaneous economic effects on the power generation and dispatch are investigated.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the notations used in this paper. Section 3 describes the proposed mathematical programming model. A benders decomposition is developed and described in Section 4. Section 5 is the numerical experiments where the proposed model and the solution approach are demonstrated on two test power systems. Section 6 gives the conclusions.Indicesktransmission linegeneratorbusorigin bus for line kdestination bus for line ktime periodload blockcontingency (r > 0) or non-contingency (r=0) scenario for power system elementsset of lines consuming power from bus bset of lines injecting power to bus bset of lines connected to bus bset of generators at bus bnumber of transmission linesnumber of generatorsnumber of busesnumber of time periodsoperational cost of generator ninvestment cost for line kcapital dynamic rating investmentdiscount rateelectricity demand at bus b at time period t at load block lnumber of hours at load block lelectrical susceptance of transmission line kmin and max capacity for generator nmax phase angle difference between origin and destination buses for line kstatic thermal rating for transmission line kconservative additional thermal rating for transmission line k at time period tmax number of lines that can be invested at time period tmax number of lines that can be out of service at time period t at load block lstate of line k under scenario rstate of generator n under scenario rinvestment state of line k at time period tswitching state of line k at time period t at load block lpower generated by generator n under scenario r at time period t at load block lphase angle at bus b under scenario r at time period t at load block lreal power flow transmitted by line k under scenario r at time period t at load block lobjective function of the master problemenergy shortage and excess at bus b under scenario r at time period t at load block llogical variable for line k under scenario r at time period t at load block lIn this section, we develop a mixed integer linear model for the investment on the dynamic thermal rating and its coordination with the transmission switching. Our model is an extension of the DCOPF model where the thermal capacity of lines are expandable and the transmission topology is switchable. We include contingency scenarios and the variability of loads in different times. Since our proposed model is for multi-period planning purposes, we ignore the temporal constraints for the power generation units such as ramping limits. Generally the power flow must be limited to small-disturbance angle stability limits and transient stability limits. Although stability limits can be more restrictive than thermal limits, especially for very long transmission lines, stability limits are not considered in this paper. The focus of this paper is the long-term planning for the dynamic thermal rating and to find a few but the best lines for the investment. Although many factors can affect the real-time dynamic ratings of the lines (see Eq. (1)), the real time thermal capacities of lines in the long term are usually higher than the traditional static ratings (Dynamic Circuit Thermal Line Rating, 1999; Malkin & Hsieh, 2013). Therefore, we assume that if any line is equipped with the DTR technology, then its dynamic thermal capacity will be conservatively and constantly higher than its traditional static ratings. This way of simplification results in a computationally tractable model which, at the same time, enables us to detect the most suitable lines for the DTR utilization. Moreover, in the experiments at Section 5.2 (Study 1) we will show that the uncertainties in electricity demand and in the real-time capacity of lines actually do not change the identity of the most suitable lines for the DTR investment. The model is described by (2a) to (2o). The brackets next to constraints (2h) to (2o) include corresponding dual variables when the binary decision variables are set to fixed values.(2a)min∑t∑kCkdxtk(1+i)t−1+∑t∑l∑nHlCnggtl0n(1+i)t−1(2b)Subjectto∑txtk≤1∀k(2c)∑kxtk≤Xtmax∀t(2d)∑t∑kCkdxtk(1+i)t−1≤Id(2e)∑k(1−ztlk)≤Ztlmax∀t,l(2f)xtk,ztlk∈{0,1}∀t,l,k(2g)∑n∈ηbgtlrn+∑k∈Φb+ftlrk−∑k∈Φb−ftlrk=Dtlb∀t,l,r,b[αtlrb](2h)ftlrk−RrkEk(θtlrak−θtlrbk)≥−(1−ztlk)Mk∀t,l,r,k[βtlrk](2i)ftlrk−RrkEk(θtlrak−θtlrbk)≤(1−ztlk)Mk∀t,l,r,k[γtlrk](2j)−Θkmax≤θtlrak−θtlrbk≤Θkmax∀t,l,r,k[μtlrk,ωtlrk](2k)ftlrk≥−Rrk(Fksztlk+ytlrk)∀t,l,r,k[δtlrk](2l)ftlrk≤Rrk(Fksztlk+ytlrk)∀t,l,r,k[πtlrk](2m)GnminRrn′≤gtlrn≤GnmaxRrn′∀t,l,r,n[υtlrn,λtlrn](2n)0≤ytlrk≤ΔFtk+∑j=1txjk∀t,l,r,k[ρtlrk](2o)ytlrk≤ΔFtk+ztlk∀t,l,r,k[τtlrk]The objective function (2a) minimizes the total cost which is comprised of the investment cost on the DTR equipment and the electricity generation cost with no contingency. In the objective function (2a) the electricity generation cost at all hours is calculated as the generation cost of the load blocks multiplied by their durations in terms of number of hours (H). Constraints (2b) ensure that for each line only one-time investment is considered. The constraints (2c) and (2d) enforce the limitations in number of lines to be upgraded and in the investment capital in beginning of the project, respectively. Constraints (2e) limit the number of switched lines at each period to the desired values. Meeting all loads over the planning period is satisfied by constraints (2g). In the power balance constraints (2g), a net load D (i.e. the forcasted load minus the forecasted wind/solar) is considered. The physical relation between the phase angles of connected buses and the power flow in connecting lines are represented by constraints (2h) and (2i). The bounds on the phase angle differences of connected buses are enforced by constraints (2j) and the transmission thermal limits are enforced by constraints (2k) and (2l). The state of binary variable z denotes that a line is in service (z=1) or out of service (z=0). The generators capacity are represented by constraints (2m). Constraints (2n) ensure that dynamic ratings are exploited only on lines with the DTR technology installed. Similarly constraints (2o) make sure that dynamic ratings are used on lines that are in service. Therefore, in constraints (2k) and (2l) either static or dynamic thermal limits are incorporated in the model depending on the values of y and z. If a line is not invested with the DTR technology (y=0) and is in service (z=1), then inequalities (2k) and (2l) will constraint the thermal capacity of that line to its static rating Fs. Similarly, if a line is invested with the DTR technology (0≤y≤ΔF+) and is in service (z=1), then inequalities (2k) and (2l) will constraint the thermal capacity of that line to its dynamic ratingFs+ΔF+.To maintain the system reliability at single contingencies in generators or transmission lines, the binary parameters R and R′ are used in the model where(3)Rrk={0ifr=k1otherwise}∀k,rRrn′={0ifr=K+n1otherwise}∀n,rA value ofRrk=0means that line k is under contingency and therefore it is not working. Similarly, a value ofRrn′=0means generator n is not working. Note that one can consider contingencies with simultaneous failure of multiple elements (e.g.N−2or others) by removing the condition (3) from the model and defining the desired scenarios. Constraints (2h) and (2i) include the disjunctive parameter M. By setting the value of this parameter to a sufficiently large number, the inequality constraints (2h) and (2i) will be redundant when the corresponding line is switched out of service. However, a lower value for this parameter results in a stronger linear programing relaxation and is, therefore, desirable. In Fisher et al. (2008) a value ofEkΘkmaxis used for the disjunctive parameter. This value can result in significant increase in solution time especially in transmission systems with lines having high electrical susceptance. Tuning the disjunctive parameter for the transmission expansion problem is discussed in Binato, Pereira, and Granville (2001). In their method, a shortest or longest path problem is solved for every line to find the minimum value for the disjunctive parameter. This method can be computationally demanding when the size of the transmission network is large (see Binato et al., 2001). In this paper we propose to use the value of(4)Mk=max{∑l∈(Φak±∪Φbk±)(Fks+ΔFtk+)}for the disjunctive parameter for transmission switching. Use of the value (4) results in faster convergence to the optimal solution when compared to the value used in Fisher et al. (2008) and is also easy to calculate. Exploring the effective values for the disjunctive parameter M is beyond the scope of this paper and requires more research for new techniques and evaluation of tuning methods, especially in transmission switching and other similar problems.The problem (2) includes binary decision variables x and z which creates four decision possibilities for every line. If we ignore the casex=1andz=0,then for a power system with N transmission lines and one period of operation there are 3Nalternate topologies. As there are multiple time periods andN−1reliability constraints, directly solving the problem (2) using a commercial solver is difficult for small power systems and impossible for larger systems because of time and memory inefficiency. To overcome this challenge we develop a benders decomposition approach illustrated in Fig. 1. We decompose the problem (2) into a master problem and three subproblems. The goal of the master problem is to find an optimal plan for the investment in the dynamic rating system and also for the transmission switching all through the planning horizon. The solution of the master problem provides a lower bound for the optimal solution. The master problem is formulated by (5a) to (5b).(5a)MasterProblem:MinP(5b)SubjecttoConstraints(2b)--(2f)The variable P represents the objective function of the master problem. At the beginning of the decomposition algorithmP=−∞as it is unrestricted. When the algorithm progresses, the optimality cuts (defined in the following) are gradually added to the master problem which restrict P to positive values. When the master problem is solved, its proposed investment and switching plan (solutions x and z) are passed to the subproblems. Therefore the subproblems are linear and continuous problems. The first subproblem is the feasibility subproblem and is formulated as (6a) to (6d). The variabless+ands−in master problem (5) represent the amounts of the energy shortage and excess, respectively.(6a)Feasibilitysubproblem:Min∑t∑l∑r∑b(stlrb++stlrb−)(6b)Subjectto∑n∈ηbgtlrn+∑k∈Φb+ftlrk−∑k∈Φb−ftlrk+stlrb+−stlrb−=Dtlb∀t,l,r,b[αtlrb′](6c)Constraints(2h)--(2o)(6d)stlrb+,stlrb−≥0∀t,l,r,bThe feasibility subproblem has at least one feasible solution. This is because if we set the value of variables f, θ, and y to 0 and g toGmin,it results in a feasible energy balance of∑n∈ηbGmin+0−0+stlrb+−stlrb−=Dtlbwhere all other constraints are satisfied. Therefore, the dual of the feasibility subproblem is bounded and has an optimal solution. This property enables us to directly use the solution of the feasibility subproblem to evaluate the security of the proposed plan by the master problem. To check whether the proposed plan satisfies all the operation constraints, the feasibility subproblem calculates the amount of the energy mismatches and minimizes them. This way, the feasibility subproblem preserves the power balance at every bus under both non-contingency and contingency scenarios at all time periods. In the case of energy mismatch (shortage or excess), the feasibility cut (7) is calculated using the dual solutions of the feasibility subproblem and is added to the master problem.(7)∑t∑l∑r(∑bαtlrb′Dtlb−∑kβtlrk(1−ztlk)Mk+∑kγtlrk(1−ztlk)Mk−∑kμtlrkΘkmax+∑kωtlrkΘkmax−∑kδtlrkRrkFksztlk+∑kπtlrkRrkFksztlk+∑nυtlrnGnminRrn′+∑nλtlrnGnmaxRrn′+∑k∑j=1tρtlrkΔFtk+xjk+∑kτtlrkΔFtk+ztlk)≤0An energy mismatch (shortage or excess) means a positive objective function value for the feasibility subproblem (6). Because of the strong duality theory, the left hand side of the feasibility cut (7) is equal to the objective function of the feasibility subproblem (6). If the proposed plan (solutions x and z) result in the energy mismatch, then they are cut off from the solution space of the master problem by restricting the left hand side of the feasibility cut (7) to non-positivity and adding it to the master problem. In the feasibility cut (7), the parameters α′ are the dual values of power balance constraints (6b). The β and γ are the dual values of power flow constraints (2h) and (2i), respectively. Parameters μ and ω represent the dual values of the min and max phase angle differences (2j), respectively, and δ and π as the dual values of min thermal capacity (2k) and max thermal capacity (2l) constraints, respectively. Theυand λ are the dual values of the min and max generation capacity constraints (2m), respectively, the ρ represent the dual values of the constraints (2n), and finally τ represent the dual values for the constraints (2o). If the feasibility subproblem determines that the proposed plan is feasible (zero energy mismatch), then the feasibility cut (7) is not added to the master problem. Instead, the proposed feasible plan is passed to two optimality subproblems. The first optimality subproblem is the OPF subproblem and is formulated as (8a) to (8b).(8a)OPFsubproblem:Min∑t∑lsumnHlCnggtl0n(1+i)t−1(8b)SubjecttoConstraints(2g)--(2o)withr=0To check the optimality of the proposed plan, the OPF subproblem calculates the energy generation cost only for the non-contingency scenario and minimizes it. The total energy generation cost of the OPF subproblem along with the total DTR investment cost are used to calculate the upper bound of the optimal solution. After the OPF subproblem is solved, its dual solutions are used to form benders optimality cut (9) which is added to the master problem.(9)P≥∑t∑kCkdxtk(1+i)t−1+∑t∑l∑r(∑bαtlrbDtlb−∑kβtlrk(1−ztlk)Mk+∑kγtlrk(1−ztlk)Mk−∑kμtlrkΘkmax+∑kωtlrkΘkmax−∑kδtlrkRrkFksztlk+∑kπtlrkRrkFksztlk+∑nυtlrnGnminRrn′+∑nλtlrnGnmaxRrn′+∑k∑j=1tρtlrkΔFtk+xjk+∑kτtlrkΔFtk+ztlk)In the optimality cut (9), parameters α are the dual values of power balance constraints (2g). The remaining parameters β, γ, μ, ω, δ, π,υ,λ, ρ, and τ are defined in the same way they were defined at the feasibility cut (7). The right hand side of the optimality cut (9) is the summation of total investment cost in the dynamic rating system and total electricity generation cost. The solution time for the decomposition algorithm can be improved by generating more optimality cuts. A second optimality subproblem is defined to provide extra optimality cuts to the master problem and accelerate the convergence to the optimal plan. The second subproblem is obtained from the OPF subproblem by relaxing the constraints (2h) to (2j) and is called the relaxed OPF subproblem (ROPF). The ROPF subproblem is formulated as (10a) to (10b).(10a)ROPFSubproblem:Min∑t∑l∑nHlCnggtl0n(1+i)t−1(10b)SubjecttoConstraints(2g)and(2k)--(2o)allwithr=0The optimality cut (11) is constructed using the dual solutions of the ROPF subproblem and is added to the master problem. In the optimality cut (11), parameters α are again the dual values of power balance constraints (2g). The parameters δ, π,υ,λ, ρ, and τ are defined in the same way they were defined at the feasibility cut (7). As the ROPF subproblem does not include the disjunctive parameter, its optimality cut (11) further narrows down the search space of the master problem. The relaxed subproblems are also used in the transmission expansion problem (see Binato et al., 2001).(11)P≥∑t∑kCkdxtk(1+i)t−1+∑t∑l∑r(∑bαtlrbDtlb−∑kδtlrkRrkFksztlk+∑kπtlrkRrkFksztlk+∑nυtlrnGnminRrn′+∑nλtlrnGnmaxRrn′+∑k∑j=1txjkρtlrkΔFtk++∑kτtlrkΔFtk+ztlk)Our solution approach for the optimal planning is summarized as the following procedure.1.Set the lower and upper bound of the problem to minus and plus infinity, respectively. Solve the master problem and calculate the dynamic rating and switching plan. Update the lower bound of the problem to the objective value of the master problem. Pass the proposed plan to the feasibility subproblem.Solve the feasibility subproblem and calculate the energy mismatch for the proposed plan. If the proposed plan is secure, pass the feasible plan to the optimality subproblems and proceed to the next step. Otherwise, add the feasibility cut to the master problem and go to step 1.Solve the OPF subproblem and add its optimal power generation cost to the investment cost for the proposed dynamic rating plan. Consider the total cost as the updated upper bound of the problem.If the difference between the upper bound and the lower bound is larger than the pre-specified threshold, add the optimality cuts of the OPF and ROPF subproblems to the master problem and return to the step 1. Otherwise, consider the current proposed plan as optimal.Note that the developed decomposition algorithm is an accelerated version of benders partitioning procedure (Benders, 1962) for solving the mixed integer problem (2). The master problem (5) is actually a relaxed version of the problem (2). Because the master problem (5) is a pure integer linear program, its optimal solution is one of the vertices in its convex hull and can be found in finite number of steps using the branch and bound or any other discrete optimization algorithm. The subproblems (6), (8), (10) are bounded linear programs with convex solution spaces . At each iteration of the decomposition algorithm, one vertex of the feasibility or optimality subproblem is used to form a feasibility or optimality cut. The formed cut is a linear constraint with integer variables x and z added to the master problem. Therefore, the convex hull of the master problem may shrink to a smaller convex hull which contains an updated optimal solution to the master problem. As there are finite number of vertices at the solution spaces of both the master problem and the subproblems, therefore the decomposition algorithm will converge to the global optimal solution in finite number of iterations.The investment model is studied on two test power systems: the Garver’s system and the IEEE 118-bus system. In all studies, a value of ±1.2 radians is considered for minimum/maximum phase angle differences. The DTR equipment prices collected in Sanna Uski-Joutsenvuo (2013) are used to estimate the investment costs. The installation, maintenance, and transmission switching costs are ignored. As the installation time for the DTR equipment is short (ONCOR West Texas Dynamic Line Rating (DLR) Project, 2013), the outage time for lines under the equipment installation is not considered. The PJM hourly load data (PJM Hourly Load Data, n.d.) for sub-zone PN for year 2011 is normalized by scaling between 0 and 1 and then the normalized data is multiplied by the system load to generate demand in different hours of the year. A load growth rate is used to estimate the future loads. To reduce the size of the problem, a year is divided to four quarters and each quarter is divided to three load blocks of low, average, and high. The profile of loads is provided in Table 1. The number of loads falling in each load block is considered as the duration of that load block and is used in the cost weight vector H. An unlimited budget for the capital dynamic rating investment is assumed. All recurring costs, including operational and investment, are assumed to be the same in future time periods. The decomposition algorithm is coded in C++ and Gurobi is used to solve LPs and MIPs. We use a computer model with Intel(R) Celeron(R) CPU 1005M @ 1.90 gigahertz and 4 gigabytes of RAM memory to calculate the results.In a study in California (Dynamic Circuit Thermal Line Rating, 1999) is reported that, in times, the dynamic rating can be 150 percent more than the static rating. The study indicates that, in overall and for the specific monitored transmission lines, real-time line ratings provide 40–80 percent more capacity than the static transmission line ratings. In a case study conducted in Southeast France (Malkin & Hsieh, 2013) it is concluded that setting the maximum thermal capacity to 30 percent above static ratings resulted in considerable utilization of the dynamic rating system where in 92.1 percent of the time the predicted DTRs were either correct providing increased capacity for the grid or not correct but requiring no mitigation. In another project conducted in Europe (FP7 Project TWENTIES, 2013), it is reported that the dynamic line rating enables an average increase of 10–15 percent in the usable transmission capacity of overhead lines. For the investment plan calculations we consider conservative increases of 20 percent and 30 percent in transmission capacity of lines that are equipped with the DTR technology. Depending on the forecasted ambient conditions surrounding the lines, the amount of increase in the transmission capacity can be readjusted.The Garver’s system in Garver (1970) is modified in this study and is illustrated in Fig. 2. In the modified system we combine the generators in each bus into one generation unit and change the loads which are provided in Table 2a. To connect bus 6 to the network, we assume lines 2–6 and 4–6 are already constructed and available for operations. The data for the transmission lines is provided in Table 2b. For the modified Garver’s system, it is assumed thatE=50/X. Also an investment cost of $50,000 is considered for every line. The lines 1–5, 2–3, 2–6, and 4–6 are considered as candidate lines for the DTR investment. For each invested line, 130 percent of the static rating is utilized. Lines 1–2, 1–4, 2–3, and 2–4 are considered switchable.Following studies are conducted:•Study 1: Sensitivity of the investment plan to uncertainties in discount and load growth rates is investigated.Study 2: An investment plan for 3 years is calculated and results are analyzed.Study 3: Contributions of the TS and the DTR to the economy of the power dispatch is analyzed.The studies are provided in the following.In the sensitivityanalysis, 1 year (4 quarters) planning horizon is considered. The discounting rate and the load growth rate are selected as the changing input factors. The total investment and electricity generation cost, the amount of the cost reduction (saving), number of lines invested, and number of lines switched over 1 year of operation (4 quarters) are considered as the output factors. The base values of 8 percent for the discounting rate (compounded quarterly) and 2 percent for the load growth rate are considered and then they are increased/decreased by ±10 percent of their base value. When changing the value of one input factor, the other input factor is fixed to its base value. Sensitivity plots are provided in Fig. 3. As Fig. 3(a) shows, the total cost is negatively sensitive to changes in the discounting rate. This is true as by increasing the value of the discounting rate, the present worth of costs incurring in later quarters decline. The cost is positively sensitive to changes in the load growth rate as it requires more usage of generators’ capacity. The percentage of reduction in cost (saving) is sensitive to the load growth rate but not much to the discounting rate (Fig. 3(b)). Totally the increase of the load growth rate from 1.6 percent (20 percent below 2 percent) to 2.4 percent (20 percent above 2 percent) results in 0.32 percent increase in the saving. This can be explained by the increase in the usage of lines’ total capacity when the demand for the electricity increases. This results in more supply of the electricity from cheaper sources of the energy generation. The investment plan is not sensitive to the changes in the discounting and load growth rates. Fig. 3(c) shows that in all considered sensitivity scenarios, two lines are invested and equipped with the dynamic rating technology. The switching plan changes in almost every sensitivity scenario for the load growth rate and in some scenarios for the discount rate (Fig. 3(d)). The lowest number of switches occurs in−30 percent, and−20 percent of the base discount rate and also in 10 percent of the base load growth rate where totally 8 lines are switched out of service in 12 load blocks. The highest case occurs in−10 percent of the base load growth rate with totally 16 lines removed from service in different load blocks.In this case study, a 3-year planning horizon is considered. An annual discounting rate of 8 percent and an annual load growth rate of 2 percent is considered. The discounting rate is compounded quarterly. The load growth in first year is assumed to be 0. If no investment is made on the dynamic rating and no transmission switching is practiced, total electricity generation cost over 3 years of operation is $21,895,228 to supply the demand. With investing on the DTR and with practicing TS, total cost decreases to $20,238,167. This is a $1,657,061 reduction in cost which accounts for 7.57 percent saving. This saving is significant especially for a very small power system like Garver’s system and can be bigger for larger power systems. The investment solutions are provided in Table 3a and the switching solutions in Table 3b. Totally $150,000 is invested on the DTR equipment for 3 lines. At the beginning of the investment plan, lines 2–6 and 4–6 are equipped with the DTR technology to transmit more power flow from the cheapest generating unit (unit at bus 6) to supply loads at buses 2 and 4 and others. In the first quarter the other lines do not reach their static thermal limits and no further investment is made. Starting from quarter 2 at all high load blocks, extra transmission capacity is required for line 2–3 to maintain the system reliability atN−1contingencies. Therefore, the DTR technology is installed on this line in second quarter to protect the system reliability while the load is high.The “usability” of the dynamic ratings on invested lines are also analyzed in Table 3a. We define “usability” as the average percentage of the conservative additional thermal capacityΔFtk+,provided by the dynamic rating, that is actually used in the power dispatch operation. In normal operations and on average, the conservative additional thermal capacity for line 2–6 is used the most when compared to other lines (47.1 percent of 20 megawatt), and in 33.3 percent of times it is fully exploited. In terms of the usability of the conservative additional capacity in normal operations, line 4–6 is ranked second. In the operations without contingency the conservative additional capacity for line 2–3 is never used. However 0.32 percent of the conservative additional capacity for line 2–3 is used in contingency conditions to avoid unmet demand. Line 2–3 plays more critical role than lines 2–6 and 4–6 in contingency scenarios. In summary, line 2–6 has the most usability in operations with contingency and line 2–3 in operations without contingencies. From 1st to 12th quarter, totally 27 transmission switching is planned for 4 lines to relieve the congestion. Line 1–2 is switched out of service at every quarter. Line 2–3 is the only line that is part of both the investment plan and the switching plan. The number of switches for 1st, 2nd and 3rd years are 10, 8, and 9 switches respectively. As was the case in Study 1, there is no stable decrease or increase in number of switches when the electricity demand slightly grows.In this study the contributions of DTR and TS approaches on the cost reduction are investigated. The Garver’s system becomes infeasible for the annual load growth rates beyond 4 percent. Therefore for the cost reduction analysis, a load growth range of 0–4 percent with 1 percent increments is considered. At each experiment, 1 year of operation (4 quarters) is simulated and cost-related data under four following cases are collected: no DTR and no TS, TS but no DTR, DTR but no TS, both DTR and TS. The same discounting rate of 8 percent is used. The collected data are summarized in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) shows that the electricity generation cost is the lowest when the DTR approach is integrated with TS approach. If the DTR is considered but not TS, then there is an increase in cost through all load growth rates. Conversely, if TS is practiced without using the DTR, there is even higher increase in costs. The worst case is when none of the DTR and TS approaches are exercised. In this experiment transmission switching does not reduce costs as much as the dynamic rating, however it complements the savings. This is specifically shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c). The best contribution of TS in cost savings occurs in the experiment with 3 percent load growth. In that experiment the DTR without TS saves 6.36 percent. When the DTR is integrated with TS, the saving reaches to 6.96 percent.Data for the IEEE 118-bus power system is downloaded from Power Systems Test Case Archive (n.d.) where generators’ capacity, generation costs, transmission network and line characteristics are taken from Fisher et al. (2008). The system is summarized in Table 4a. Without using the dynamic rating system and transmission switching, the 118-bus system is not reliable to the single contingency scenarios if one of the generators or lines in Table 4b is lost. To make the system survive inN−1scenarios and therefore be able to calculate the generation costs, the generators and transmission lines listed in Table 4b are removed from theN−1contingency list. The generation costs for the 118-bus system are on the order of 50 to 100 times smaller than typical generator costs. We use these costs to be consistent with the results and developed models published in the literature. Therefore, for this power system we consider a lower DTR investment cost of $1000 for every line.All lines are considered as candidate lines for the DTR investment. Following studies are conducted :•Study 1: Sensitivities of a 3-year investment plan to uncertainties in real-time thermal ratings and electricity demand are investigated.Study 2: The amount of the hourly cost reduction achieved by using the dynamic rating system with and without transmission switching is studied and contributions of both approaches to the economy of the power dispatch are analyzed.Study 3: A 5-year investment plan for the dynamic rating system, combined with transmission switching, is calculated and results are analyzed.Study 4: The computation times for solving the decomposed problem and the compact problem are compared and different factors affecting the computation times are analyzed.The studies are provided in the following.The goal of the sensitivity analysis in this study is to investigate the effects of the uncertainty in dynamic thermal ratings and electricity demand (as the input factors) on the candidacy of lines for investment, investment timing, number of invested lines, and the total cost (output factors). In our sensitivity analyses transmission switching is not allowed and maximum two lines per quarter are allowed for investment in the dynamic rating system. The 2160, 2184, 2208, and 2208 hours of operations (load-block durations) are considered for 1st, 2d, 3rd, and 4th quarters, respectively. Three years of operation (totally 12 quarters) is considered for the planning horizon. The discounting rate is fixed to 8 percent compounded quarterly and the annual load growth rate is set to 2 percent. First we conduct the sensitivity analysis on the dynamic thermal rating. For each DTR line at each period, 140 percent of the static rating is considered as the base for the uncertain dynamic rating and is increased/decreased by ±10 percent increments. The results for the sensitivity analysis on uncertain dynamic rating are summarized in the sensitivity plots in Fig. 5.The results in Fig. 5(a) shows that the investment plan for the utilization of the dynamic ratings is not much sensitive to changes in dynamic ratings and is composed of a few certain lines. Totally 8 transmission lines are invested in different scenarios when the predicted dynamic ratings are increasing from 110 percent to 170 percent of the static ratings. Lines 116, 134, and 154 are invested at all scenarios. Lines 141 and 142 are part of the investment plan in all cases except in 110 percent scenario. Lines 42 and 113 are invested at 5 scenarios and line 120 only at 170 percent scenario. Fig. 5(b) explores the changes in investment timings for three most invested lines 116, 134, and 154. Under all scenarios, the investment time for line 134 is set to first quarter. Line 154 is always invested at second quarter except under 150 percent scenario. The investment plan for line 116 is sensitive to changes in dynamic ratings. For instance, as the line rating scenarios increase to 150 percent or beyond, the investment time for line 116 is advanced from fifth quarter to first quarter. In other scenarios, the investment times for line 116 are oscillating between first to sixth quarters. Fig. 5(c) and (d) indicate that the number of invested lines increases from 3 lines to 7 lines and total cost deceases from $30,423,627 to $27,716,595 when the line ratings become higher. These changes are expected as the amount of cost savings resulting from higher dynamic ratings gradually justify the initial investment costs in the DTR system. Also the load growth factor creates more power demand in second and third years which in return requires investment in more lines’ dynamic capacity at early quarters.Next we conduct the sensitivity analysis on the electricity demand. For each DTR line at each period, 140 percent of the static rating is considered as the fixed dynamic rating level. The high load blocks in Table 1 are considered as the base for uncertain quarterly demands for electricity and are increased/decreased by ±10 percent increments. The results of the sensitivity analysis for changes in the electricity demand are provided in Fig. 6. The results in Fig. 6(a) shows that the investment plan for the utilization of the dynamic ratings is not much sensitive to changes in electricity demand. Totally 8 transmission lines are invested in different scenarios when the predicted electricity demands are increasing from 85 percent to 115 percent of high load blocks. Surprisingly, these lines are the same lines discovered in previous sensitivity analysis (Fig. 5(a)) except that line 120 is replaced here with line 51. Therefore, almost same set of lines are targeted for the investment, when different values are considered for either the dynamic rating or electricity demand. In sensitivity analysis for electricity demand, line 134 is invested at all 7 scenarios and lines 116 and 141 are invested in 6 scenarios. Again, these results shown in Fig. 6(a) are very similar to the results in Fig. 5(a). Fig. 6(b) explores the changes in investment timings for three most invested lines 116, 134, and 141. Line 134 is invested at first quarter in all scenarios except for 85 percent scenario in which it is invested at second quarter. The investment time plans for lines 116 and 141 are sensitive to changes in electricity demands. Line 141 is invested at first quarter under 95 percent, 100 percent, and 110 percent scenarios, and at second quarter at other scenarios. The investment times for line 116 are changing between second, third, and fifth quarters. Fig. 6(c) and (d) indicate that the number of invested lines increases from 1 line to 6 or 7 lines and total cost increases from $19,895,301 to $46,551,473 when the demand for electricity grows. These changes are expected as the amount of electricity production increases to satisfy the growth in demand.In the second study, we do not consider the investment cost and only focus on the power generation cost. The purpose of this study is to see how much operational cost in one hour with system load can be reduced by utilizing the dynamic rating system and by integrating the DTR with TS. For each DTR line the 120 percent of the static ratings are considered to be utilized. Different scenarios for the number of lines equipped with the dynamic rating system (NDTR) and number of switched lines (NTS) are considered and the resulting costs are summarized in Table 5. If dynamic ratings are not utilized and transmission switching is not practiced, total electricity generation cost to supply one hour system load is $2054. If the dynamic rating system is used for line 154, it results in the $188/hour reduction in the cost which is 9.13 percent saving per hour. Utilizing the DTRs in lines 134 and 154 results in a higher saving of 20.25 percent per hour. If three or four lines are considered for the DTR, the amount of savings increase slightly. However, when five lines are considered, then total cost decreases to $1535/hour. This is a $519/hour reduction in the cost which accounts for 25.31 percent saving per hour. The total cost slightly decreases to $1533/hour ($2 more reduction) when 7 lines are considered. There is no more improvement in the cost reductions when the dynamic ratings are utilized on more than 7 lines (see Fig. 7).The studies in Fisher et al. (2008), Barrows and Blumsack (2012) show that the majority of the cost savings resulting from transmission switching comes from switching a few lines. To improve the computational efficiency, the switchable transmission lines are limited to lines 38, 62, 64, 78, 118, 132, 133, 143, 153, and 170. In the next analysis, the DTR is integrated with the TS and the results are summarized in 3rd to 5th columns of Table 5. The electricity generation cost decreases more when the DTR system is integrated with TS. When line 132 is switched out of service along with utilization of the DTR in line 154, the electricity generation cost reduces from $1867 to $1683. In experiments with only the dynamic rating system, the lowest obtained cost is $1533 which is achieved by utilizing the DTR of 7 lines. The same cost can be achieved by utilizing the DTR of 2 or 3 lines while 2 or 3 lines are switched out of service (see Table 5 whereNDTR=NTS=2andNDTR=NTS=3). The lowest cost of $1438 per hour occurs in the experiment with 5 lines using the dynamic rating system while 8 lines are switched out of service. This is a 30 percent reduction in the electricity generation cost in one hour. This study indicates three results on the 118-bus system: (1) the utilization of the dynamic rating system significantly decreases the electricity generation costs; (2) transmission switching complements the reductions in the costs obtained by the dynamic rating system; (3) practicing transmission switching reduces the number of lines to be invested for utilization of the dynamic rating system (see Fig. 7).In this study, the potential of the dynamic rating system in transferring power from free and environmentally desirable sources of energy to other areas is examined. We add two 450 megawatt new generation units (NGU1 and NGU2) to buses 1 and 50, respectively, where both units have zero generation costs (like wind or solar). The new generation units NGU1 and NGU2 are excluded from theN−1contingency list. To obtain the investment plan in a reasonable time, a planning horizon of 5 successive years (20 quarters) is selected with an annual discounting rate of 10 percent, compounded quarterly. First, the investment plan for first year is calculated and the invested lines are recorded. Then, for second year, a continuing investment plan is calculated where the invested lines in year 1 are not reinvested (as they are already invested in year 1). The same process is applied for following years 3, 4, and 5. The 110 percent of the average load blocks in Table 1 are used as the quarterly demand profiles with durations 2160, 2184, 2208, and 2208 for 1st, 2d, 3rd, and 4th quarters, respectively. For remaining quarters 5th, 6th, ..., 20th (years 2, 3, 4, 5), an annual load growth rate of 5 percent is applied. For each invested line, 130 percent of the static ratings are utilized. In each quarter, up to 2 lines are allowed for the DTR investment and lines 38, 78, 132, 133, and 143 are considered switchable. The optimality gap for the decomposition algorithm is set to 1 percent. The detail of the calculated investment and switching plans are summarized in Table 6.In the optimal plan totally $15,000 is invested on the DTR equipment for lines 2, 14, 38, 78, 80, 112, 113, 116, 120, 132, 133, 134, 141, 142, and 143. With investing on the DTR of those lines and with practicing TS on lines 38, 78, 132, 133, and 143, the total electricity generation cost to supply the demand over 5 years is $25,505,402. If no investment is made on the dynamic rating and no transmission switching is practiced, then total cost increases to $26,156,858. The investment plan results in an annual $604,456 reduction in costs (2.31 percent saving). Line 80 connects bus 49 to bus 50 and the investment on this line at the first quarter allows NGU2 to inject free and more power to the network during all years 1 to 5. Line 2 is also invested early in quarter 2 which connects bus 1 to bus 3. As the NGU1 is located at bus 1, expanding the transmission limit of line 2 at quarter 2 allows NGU1 to commit more to the power generation at quarters 2 through 20. Most of the DTR investment is made at quarters 1 through 9 except quarter 8. There is no investment at quarter 10 and its following quarters except at quarter 17 in which line 142 is invested.In this study, first the computation times for solving the decomposed version of the problem and for solving the compact version (Problem 2) are analyzed. Similar to previous study, we add two 450 megawatt new generation units (NGU1 and NGU2) to buses 1 and 50, respectively, where both units have zero generation costs. A planning horizon of 1 year (4 quarters) is selected. The 110 percent of the average load blocks in Table 1 are used as the quarterly demand profiles with durations 2160, 2184, 2208, and 2208 for 1st, 2d, 3rd, and 4th quarters, respectively. For each invested line, 130 percent of the static ratings are utilized. In each quarter, up to 2 lines are allowed for the DTR investment and lines 38, 78, 132, 133, and 143 are considered switchable. The optimality gap for the decomposition algorithm is set to 1 percent. The resulting run-times are provided in Fig. 8. The decomposition algorithm finds a good solution (with 1.5 percent optimality gap) in 2 hours and reaches to 1 percent optimality gap in less than 7 hours. When the compact problem is solved, Gurobi finds a solution with the cost $4,737,500 after 25 minutes. The same solution is found by the decomposition algorithm after 53 seconds. The Gurobi gets out of memory after 39 minutes of running time when it tries to solve the compact problem.In the next step in this study, the computation time for the decomposition algorithm is studied for different scenarios for max number of invested lines per quarter (with no switching and with 110 percent of the average load blocks), for max number of switched lines per quarter (with 10 invested lines and with 110 percent of the average load blocks), and for the level of the load block (with 10 invested lines and no switching). Again the optimality gap for the decomposition algorithm is set to 1 percent. The results are provided in Fig. 9. As the max number of DTR invested lines per quarter increases from 0 to 10 by 2 increments, the computation time does not increases much (Fig. 9(a)). For instance, when max number of DTR invested lines per quarter is set to 0 (no investment case), it takes the decomposition algorithm 56 seconds to solve the problem. With max 10 lines per quarter for the DTR investment, the computation time increases to 71 seconds (only 15 seconds increase). Despite the fact that the increase in max number of DTR investment per quarter can significantly reduce the electricity generation costs (Study 2), it does not require much extra time for the computation. This is not the case with max number of transmission switching per quarter. The solution time required by the decomposition algorithm is significantly affected by the max number of switched lines per quarter (Fig. 9(b)). For instance, with no transmission switching and with 10 lines per quarter for max number of line investments, it takes 71 seconds to solve the problem. However, with the max number of transmission switching set to 1 line per quarter, the computation time increases to 176 (more than 3 times increase), and with the max number of transmission switching set to 2 lines per quarter, the computation time drastically increases to 1794 (more than 32 times increase). Therefore, transmission switching has the highest impact on the computation time required by the decomposition algorithm, although it does not contribute to the cost reductions as much as the dynamic rating. Finally, the effects of increase in the electricity demand on the computation time of decomposition algorithm is investigated in Fig. 9(c). As this figure indicates, the increase in electricity demand moderately increases the computation time as well. The decomposition algorithm solves the problem in 65 seconds when the demand for the electricity is equal to average load blocks in Table 1. The computation time increases to 112 seconds (172 percent increase in time) when the demand for electricity increases to one and half of the average load blocks. In summary, the transmission switching has the most impact on the computation time, the level of electricity demand has a moderate impact, and the max number of the line investment on the DTR has the least impact on the computation time required by the decomposition algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a mathematical programming model was developed to facilitate the gradual integration of the dynamic ratings into electric transmission systems where the utilization of the dynamic ratings were also coordinated with the transmission switching operations. To solve the problem, we decomposed the model into a master problem and three subproblems. The master problem proposed potential optimal plans for the line investment and the line switching in each time period with the goal of minimizing total investment and operation costs in the planning horizon. The subproblems evaluated the feasibility and optimality of the proposed plan in terms of the energy security and energy generation costs and reduced the search space of the master problem accordingly. We should emphasize that the developed decomposition algorithm in this paper along with the tuning method for the disjunctive parameter can also be effectively used to solve the optimal transmission switching problem.The solutions of our model found the optimal investment time and the best candidate lines to be invested. To study the effect of the dynamic rating uncertainty on the investment plan, we conducted a sensitivity analysis on the 118-bus system. We realized that the best candidate lines for the dynamic rating investment were not sensitive to volatilities in predicted ratings. Also as another favorable finding, the calculated investment plans included a low number of transmission lines compared to the total number of lines in the system. New transmission lines are expensive assets in terms of construction and installation, land usage, and environmental impact. The results of this paper indicates the investments in the dynamic rating systems as an alternative to delay or possibly cancel the transmission expansion plans. More research is required to explore the relationships between our proposed dynamic rating expansion and the developed transmission expansion problems (Khodaei et al., 2010; Ruiz & Conejo, 2015; Villumsen & Philpott, 2012). We also tested the utilization of two sample free generation units in presence of the dynamic ratings. The test results indicated that the dynamic ratings can play a key role in extending wind and solar farms and any other renewable sources of energy with free or low operational cost. We used the forecasted capacities for the thermal ratings and also for the test renewable sources in our long-term planning model. Developing stochastic short-term models for the daily operations is another research problem and requires further studies.