@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
FLAS: Fuzzy lung allocation system for US-based transplantations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A fuzzy lung allocation system (FLAS) for US-based transplantation is developed.This proposed analytical decision process allows for better human understanding.FLAS utilizes the UNOS dataset and well mimics the decision making of physicians.FLAS provides significantly better results than other studies in literature.It is flexible in being simply applied to other organ allocation processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lung transplantation,Organ allocation,Fuzzy logic,Decision processes,Analytics,OR in health services,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a fuzzy lung allocation system (FLAS) in order to determine which potential recipients would receive a lung for transplantation when it becomes available in the USA. The developed system deals with the vagueness and fuzziness of the decision making of the medical experts in order to achieve accurate lung allocation processes in terms of transplant survival time and functional status after transplantation. The proposed approach is based on a real data set from the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) to investigate how well it mimics the experience of transplant physicians in the field of lung allocation. The results are very promising in terms of both prediction accuracy (with an R2value of 83.2 percent and an overall accuracy of 82.1 percent) along with better interpretation capabilities and hence are superior to the existing techniques in literature. Furthermore, the proposed decision process provides a more effective (i.e. accurate), time-efficient, and systematic decision support tool for this problem with two criteria being considered i.e. graft survival time and functional status after transplantation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For patients with the end-stage lung disease (ESLD), one of the only options for recovery is complete lung transplantation. Over the last years, a steady increase in the proportion of both adult and pediatric sensitized lung patients awaiting transplantation has been observed. Under the waiting list strategy in which lungs are allocated to transplant candidates based on their waiting time, the number of deaths on the waiting list increased dramatically although approximately 1000 lung transplants were performed annually (Egan et al., 2006).The strategy for lung transplantation in the United States was reviewed and modified by the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) (Levine et al., 2005). The lung allocation score (LAS) system was designed by OPTN, which took into account scientific and demographic data about lung transplantation and considered previous experience of different patients with lung diseases. Thus, lung transplants were delivered to potential candidates according to their demographic data and medical history instead of their waiting time on the list. Consequently, candidates who had the highest urgency of transplant (referring to equity principle) (Stewart, French, & Rios, 2013) and had the highest quality of life after transplantation (referring to utility principle) (Jimenez, Mateos, & Rios-Insua, 2009; Ross, 1995) should be served lungs. Similarly, the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) continuously uses new information to improve organ transplantation strategies. The current UNOS strategy depends on patients’ characteristics that are related to their ages, blood type, and the distance between the candidates and the location of the lung donor.Fuzzy logic would hypothetically be one of the best tools to deal with such a problem. In particular, the aim of this study is to propose a fuzzy decision making approach to effectively (i.e. accurately) and efficiently (i.e. computationally non-intensive) mimic the way that medical experts make a decision about lung allocation for transplantation. Besides the fact that a fuzzy logic system well replicates physicians’ intuitive thinking, it also avoids inconsistency and emotional biases. Herein, fuzzy set theory was introduced to model the uncertainty of human judgments, since the expert knowledge were taken into account as decision rules (Dembczynski, Greco, & Slowinski, 2009) or “IF-THEN” statements representing the knowledge in a few number of rules (Beynon, Peel, & Tang, 2004). Fuzzy logic was first proposed by Zadeh, 1965 to model the uncertainty in human reasoning. It is a typical method to deal with imprecision and vagueness due to the problems many practical applications have with imprecise data. Therefore, it has been widely implemented to various domains e.g. from business management (Sevkli, Oztekin, Uysal, Torlak, Turkyilmaz, & Delen, 2012) to multi-criteria decision making (Yayla, Oztekin, Gumus, & Gunasekaran, 2015).The main objective of this research is to investigate whether or not a fuzzy logic-based expert system for lung transplantation could better represent the medical doctors’ decision making process compared to other existing algorithms. What follows next are the dedicated section for related works; general framework describing the dataset and the proposed system; specific framework explaining the proposed fuzzy logic model along with its inputs and outputs clarifying the fuzzy rule base system with some examples; experimental setup; and finally, the conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, fuzzy logic was utilized to model lung allocation process with a reasonable degree of accuracy and to define logical rules so as to compute the degree of success in lung allocation processes in terms of GTime and Fun-Stat-Trf.The results showed that the deployment of fuzzy rules allows for better human understanding as well as a much lower computational time requirement compared to the other approaches, which render the proposed FLAS both effective and efficient. It was proven to be fairly capable of predicting the GTime value considering its high predictive with a10-fold cross-validated R2value of 83.2 percent. Moreover, the FLAS presents potential to reasonably predict the quality of life (QoL) of the candidate after transplantation with a10-fold cross-validated accuracy rate of 82.1 percent. Most importantly, the FLAS is flexible than the published studies since the proposed system has the capability to be extended to easily handle further new input variables. Furthermore, the performance of the proposed FLAS method might be enhanced by including more terms into the input variables. Moreover, the proposed generic method can be deployed for other organ transplantation domains such as liver, kidney, and heart.As none of the studies are, this study is not free of limitations. The fundamental limitation of the FLAS is that it was designed to mimic real cases based on the UNOS data set. In other words, it was designed to replicate how the medical experts of lung transplantation think and make decisions in this context. FLAS is suggested to serve as an automated version of what is actually occurring at UNOS about lung transplants. Therefore, future research directions reside in improving the developed approach to adopt new cases in an adaptive and intelligent way, which could hypothetically go above and beyond the existing medical experts’ decision capability and hence save more lives. Another future research stream of study is to create a decision making system equipped with a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI). Based on that, while dealing with voluminous data, FLAS could be equipped to help transplant experts make decisions in a more efficient and effective manner.It is known that “analytics” has three main domains: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analysis. This study was particularly focused on the predictive analytics perspective in which medical doctors’ experiential methodology is mimicked and verified with high accuracy rates. Therefore, FLAS is validated to be used in place of medical doctors, which will make the decision making processes much more efficient and effective along with the automated computerized system implementation. The knowledge base of UNOS medical doctors have accumulated enough information to replicate the decision making process in such a way. On the other hand, an interesting future study could be focused on the prescriptive analytics part of this domain problem, in which conflicting performance criteria can be optimized via such techniques as multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) (Fernández, Martínez, Hervás, & Gutiérrez, 2010). However, it is beyond the scope of this current study.