@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Clustering Search metaheuristic for the Point-Feature Cartographic Label Placement Problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new improved metaheuristic for the Cartographic Label Placement Problem.We propose a Clustering Search metaheuristic for solving the Point-Feature Cartographic Label Placement Problem.CS found equal or better solutions for practically all considered instances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metaheuristics,Combinatorial optimization,Clustering Search,Point-Feature Cartographic Label Placement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Point-Feature Cartographic Label Placement (PFCLP) problem consists of placing text labels to point features on a map avoiding overlaps to improve map visualization. This paper presents a Clustering Search (CS) metaheuristic as a new alternative to solve the PFCLP problem. Computational experiments were performed over sets of instances with up to 13,206 points. These instances are the same used in several recent and important researches about the PFCLP problem. The results enhance the potential of CS by finding optimal solutions (proven in previous works) and improving the best-known solutions for instances whose optimal solutions are unknown so far.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Point-Feature Cartographic Label Placement (PFCLP) problem has a great importance for applications which use computational resources to generate maps, as for example, georeferencing systems, web applications, etc.The PFCLP problem is classified in the literature as NP – Hard (Marks & Shieber, 1991) and according to Ribeiro and Lorena (2008b), it consists in organizing points on maps avoiding overlaps of labels and providing clarity in viewing and understanding of the map. The labels contain information of objects to be displayed in cartographic maps, networks, graphs or diagrams (Wolff, 1999).Fig. 1shows a map of São Paulo State (Brazil) with districts and roadways. The labels indicate the name of the districts and the gray districts indicate that their labels are overlapped.One way to improve the map view is moving the labels to specific positions close to their respective points which are known as “candidate positions”. The candidate positions represent the possible locations where the label of a point can be placed, respecting a cartographic pattern.Fig. 2illustrates the cartographic pattern proposed by Christensen, Marks, and Shieber (1995). This pattern is one of the most known and used in the literature. The regions 1–8 indicate the candidate positions for labeling the point. Each position has a number indicating its cartographic preference, and position 1 is the most suitable, i.e. the smallest number indicates the best position. Starting from this pattern, the point-labeling problem can be defined as a combinatorial problem which must select candidate positions to label the points.In the PFCLP problem, overlapping labels may be accepted or not. When overlaps are not accepted, we can keep the size of the labels and label the greatest number of points without overlapping. In this case, the PFCLP problem is a special case of the traditional Maximum Independent Set Problem (Ribeiro, Mauri, & Lorena, 2011; Strijk, Verweij, & Aardal, 2000; Zoraster, 1990). We also may decrease the size of the labels such that all of them fit without overlap. Here, the objective is to find the maximum scale factor for the label size such that a labeling without conflict is generated (Klau & Mutzel, 2003).Overlaps are allowed in several papers about the PFCLP problem, and so, all points must necessarily be labeled. Consequently, two approaches are identified: minimize the number of conflicts (Ribeiro & Lorena, 2008a, 2008b) and maximize the number of conflict-free labels (Alvim & Taillard, 2009; Mauri, Ribeiro, & Lorena, 2010). In this paper, we consider that last approach for which a mathematical model is available in Mauri et al. (2010).This paper aims to present a new alternative to solve the PFCLP problem. A Clustering Search (CS) metaheuristic is proposed using a Simulated Annealing algorithm as part of its structure.The CS was chosen because it has been presenting good results for different types of combinatorial optimization problems and it was not used to solve the PFCLP problem.Our results are compared with those obtained by several methods presented in recent researches found in the literature. The CS performance is highlighted by finding equal or better solutions for practically all instances.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Previous approaches to PFCLP problem are reviewed in Section 2. The proposed CS is described in Section 3 and computational results are reported in Section 4. Our conclusions are summarized in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have noted that applying the hybrid metaheuristic Clustering Search (CS) to solve the Point-Feature Cartographic Label Placement (PFCLP) problem is an efficient alternative. The CS metaheuristic has provided identical solutions to those reported by the best methods found in the literature for the instances with 25, 100, 250, 500 and 750 points (all optimal solutions in all experiments). For the instances with 1000 and 13,206 points, the results of the CS were superior to those known hitherto in the literature.With the implementation of CS we can found a significant improvement for the solutions of the instances with 1000 and 13,206 points, i.e. CS can find a greater number of labels without overlaps (conflict-free labels), resulting in a map with a clearer view of the points and their respective labels.Thus, CS can be considered as a new alternative to solve the PFCLP problem, showing a good performance when compared against different methods proposed in the main works about the problem.