@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A system dynamics model for determining the waste disposal charging fee in construction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the construction waste disposal charging fee (WDCF) with a system dynamics approach.Major factors and their dynamic feedback loops were analyzed with the model proposed.An appropriate WDCF can be effectively determined by using the model, which enhances construction waste minimization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
System dynamics,Decision making,Waste disposal charging fee (WDCF),Waste management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The waste disposal charging fee (WDCF) has long been adopted for stimulating major project stakeholders’ (particularly project clients and contractors) incentives to minimize solid waste and increase the recovery of wasted materials in the construction industry. However, the present WDCFs applied in many regions of China are mostly determined based on a rule of thumb. Consequently the effectiveness of implementing these WDCFs is very limited. This study aims at addressing this research gap through developing a system dynamics based model to determine an appropriate WDCF in the construction sector. The data used to test and validate the model was collected from Shenzhen of south China. By using the model established, two types of simulations were carried out. One is the base run simulation to investigate the status quo of waste generation in Shenzhen; the other is policy analysis simulation, with which an appropriate WDCF could be determined to reduce waste generation and landfilling, maximize waste recycling, and minimize the waste dumped inappropriately. The model developed can function as a tool to effectively determine an appropriate WDCF in Shenzhen. Further, it can also be used by other regions intending to stimulate construction waste minimization and recycling through implementing an optimal WDCF.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is widely reported that a large amount of construction and demolition (C&D) waste is generated every year due to numerous construction activities worldwide (Yuan & Shen, 2011). The generated C&D waste has exerted great adverse impacts on both society and the total environment. To address the problems caused by C&D waste, a great deal of research effort has been made over the last two decades aiming at investigating C&D waste management issues and ultimately reducing its amount (Faniran & Caban, 1998; Yuan & Shen, 2011). This is also in line with a critical principle of industrial ecology, which emphasizes on creation of economic systems where material flows are reused and/or recycled rather than becoming waste (Allenby, 1999). The research endeavor has of course led to a variety of management measures that can be potentially applied to minimize C&D waste. The proposed management measures cover a wide range of aspects including building design, on-site construction management, construction material handling and storage, C&D waste transportation, waste recycling, and waste final disposal. For example, Ekanayake and Ofori (2004) developed a model for assessing building design based on a survey of project design-related waste sources among large Singapore contractors. To help improve the efficiency of on-site waste management, Wang, Yuan, Kang, and Lu (2010) identified major factors affecting implementation of on-site waste management in the context of China. As found by Chen, Li, and Wong (2002), the disorder of construction site layout, including inappropriate construction material storage and usage methods, would largely influence the amount of C&D waste generated on sites. By carrying out a dynamic material flow analysis of Beijing’s urban housing system, Hu, Voet, and Huppes (2010) found that recycling should be important for sustainable C&D waste management from a systematic perspective. Furthermore, a study by Hao, Hills, and Tam (2008) showed that the waste disposal charging scheme in Hong Kong is effective in reducing C&D waste, particularly in reducing waste by approximately 60% in landfills, by approximately 23% in public fills and by about 65% in total C&D waste between 2005 and 2006.Among the C&D waste management measures as presented by previous studies, a notable one that is capable of greatly minimizing C&D waste at source is to implement a waste disposal charging fee (WDCF) (also called a waste tax in some countries), through which major waste producers could be encouraged to collect, sort, reduce, reuse and recycle C&D waste to the maximum extent so that disposal costs could be minimized and the lifespan of landfills prolonged (Hao et al., 2008; Martin & Scott, 2003). Despite of various C&D waste management practices, evidence from several countries and regions has demonstrated the effectiveness of implementing a WDCF in minimizing the waste. From 1987 to 1993, the waste tax issued in Denmark resulted in a C&D waste reduction of 64% (Anderson, 1998). The landfill tax in the Netherlands was introduced in 1995 and it was reported that during the period of 1995 and 2003, the amount of landfilled waste in the Netherlands decreased from 8.215kilotonnes to 2.735kilotonnes (Bartelings, Buekering, Kuik, Linderhof, & Oosterhuis, 2005). According to Kautto and Melanen (2004), the waste tax as one of economic instruments adopted by surveyed companies stimulated them to increase the recovery of waste. Moreover, as introduced previously, the waste disposal charging scheme promulgated in 2005 contributed positively to minimizing C&D waste handled by Hong Kong landfills (Hao et al., 2008).Although the WDCF is found to be effective in reducing C&D waste, the Chinese construction industry seems relatively slow to embrace the practice. The WDCF in China is currently applied for dealing with municipal solid waste (such as household waste) management, while very limited attention is paid to the promotion of waste reduction in the construction sector through adoption of a WDCF. The first specific regulation regarding C&D WDCF at the national level is the ‘C&D Waste Management Ordinance’ which was issued by the Ministry of Housing and Urban–Rural Development of the People’s Republic of China (MOHURD) in 2005. But it is found that the regional government department cannot follow the ordinance precisely to collect the WDCF, as there is a lack of detailed quota on the disposal charging fee. Also, a practical mechanism for how to execute the ordinance effectively is absent. Subsequently, the territorial government introduces various C&D WDCF related regulations for regulating C&D waste disposal activities in line with the particular context of each region. A thorough examination on related literature and governmental reports indicates that the WDCF varies greatly from region to region, ranging from around 2yuan/tonne (6.35yuan=1 USD) in Beijing and Shanghai to 70yuan/tonne in Jiangxi and Hubei province. The wide fluctuation in the WDCF is largely due to the fact that current WDCFs are mostly determined based on a rule of thumb, rather than on findings of scientific investigations. Meanwhile, regulated WDCFs in some regions (such as in Changsha city of Hunan province) have been frequently altered without any convincing justifications. Basically, the core role of a waste disposal charging scheme is to stimulate major project stakeholders’ incentives to minimize C&D waste, as the stakeholders have to be levied with an additional charge on waste disposal in landfills. Nevertheless, the overall effectiveness of implementing a waste disposal charging scheme can be greatly influenced by the WDCF. Based on simulation results, Yuan, Shen, Hao, and Lu (2011) found that a low WDCF would be ineffective in activating project stakeholders’ waste reduction behavior because they could easily bear the additional cost associated with waste disposal. Similarly, a high WDCF would induce higher costs for waste disposal and consequently cause more illegal waste dumping activities. It is thus important to present a waste disposal charging scheme with an appropriate WDCF so that the role of the WDCF in reducing C&D waste can be maximized.In line with the discussions above, there is an imperative need to ascertain an appropriate WDCF that can be used to effectively enhance C&D waste reduction, reuse and recycling in the Chinese construction sector. This study is therefore carried out to develop a model to determine the WDCF. The model is constructed by using a system dynamics (SD) approach. The model’s novelty mainly lies in two aspects: one is that in the model, the dynamics nature of the C&D waste charging system, which is an important characteristic of the system but neglected by most previous studies (Yuan et al., 2011), will be well envisaged; the other is that the interdependence of elements within the C&D waste charging system will be considered and examined. It is anticipated that the consideration about the two aspects above would result in a more reasonable and effective model for determining the C&D WDCF.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the system dynamics approach adopted to develop the model is briefly introduced. Section 3 details the process and results of model development. Section 4 tests and validates the SD model, and conducts a series of analyses and discussions based on simulation results. Section 5 concludes the paper.The model proposed in this study is constructed in line with the principle of system dynamics, which is a method originated by Jay Forrester in the 1960s to deal with large-scale systems of high complexities. It is particularly useful for examining the dynamics characteristic of systems and in the meanwhile for investigating the overall behavior of those systems through analyzing interactions between elements involved. The interactions between elements are depicted by feedback loops (i.e. positive or negative feedback loops), with which how a change in any specific element will influence the overall behavior of the system can be clearly traced and demonstrated. However, in many cases when the system under study is of high complexity, detailing comprehensive feedback loops in the system with SD approach may overwhelm the intended readers, because they cannot focus their attention on major feedback loops and interactions which are dominant in affecting the system behavior (Wong, Morra, Wu, Caesar, & Abrams, 2012). The modeler therefore should build SD models by only abstracting the most pivotal elements that can represent the reality. Typically there are two major steps of developing SD models. The first step is to present a conceptual model which describes the real system from a qualitative point of view. The second step is to build a formal SD model that is formulated based on the conceptual model by using professional software package; the formal model enables modelers to quantitatively simulate the model and subsequently analyze the simulation results.Over the past two decades, the application of SD has been prevalent in studies focusing on dealing with economic, managerial, environmental and societal systems of great complexity. Particularly, its application covers a wide array of disciplines such as business system modeling (Sterman, 2000), environmental sustainability in agricultural and residential development projects (Kunsch & Springael, 2008; Saysel, Barlas, & Yenigun, 2002), sustainability performance assessment of construction projects (Shen, Wu, Chan, & Hao, 2005), and municipal solid waste management (Dyson & Chang, 2005). In the discipline of C&D waste management, Hao, Hills, and Huang (2007) facilitated a better understanding of the dynamic interactions of key areas of the C&D waste management process through developing a SD model. Furthermore, with the approach, a dynamic model for analyzing the economic feasibility of C&D waste management systems (Yuan et al., 2011) and a method for selecting the alternative of C&D waste recycling center (Zhao, Ren, & Rotter, 2011) were presented. Based on conclusions of the above studies, there is a consensus that SD is capable of better examining the dynamic behavior of systems from a holistic perspective, with particular focus on interactions between elements in the systems.The system for determining the C&D WDCF is affected by many variables which are related to various waste management processes including C&D waste generation, waste reuse and recycling, waste landfilling, and illegal waste dumping. Variables belonging to each of the processes and their interrelations are depicted based on a comprehensive review of existing literature. In particular, their interrelations are depicted through a set of feedback loops, either positive or negative, in the conceptual model. The causal loop diagram for determining the C&D WDCF is illustrated in Fig. 1. As shown in the Figure, each of the arrows represents a cause-effect relationship between the two variables concerned. The + and − symbols indicate the direction of causality. The + sign indicates that the arrow-tail variable can increase the result to the arrow-head variable. While the − symbol means that the arrow-tail variable can decrease the result to the arrow-head variable. For example, an increase in waste increasing rate can increase C&D waste generation, while an increase in waste recycling cost can lead to a decrease in ratio of recycled waste.According to the principles of SD, it is stated that there are four feedback loops (see Fig. 2) in the causal loop diagram, among which three are negative and one is positive. The detailed interacting mechanism of variables in each feedback loop is expatiated as follows.Loop 1 is a negative feedback loop. In this loop, an increase in the amount of landfilled C&D waste will raise the constraints of waste landfilling; and subsequently the efficiency of compliance with regulations increases, which leads to increases in incentive to reduce waste. Then greater incentive of waste reduction will speed up the waste decreasing rate, which results in less C&D waste generation. Finally, less amount of C&D waste generation will lead to a decreased amount of landfilled waste. Therefore, the variable C&D waste landfilld affects itself through the chain effects in a negative way.Loop 2 is a negative feedback loop as well. Suppose there is an increase in the amount of C&D waste generated, then the efficiency of compliance with regulations and the incentive of waste reduction would increase accordingly. The proceeding changes will accelerate the waste decreasing rate, which decreases the amount of C&D waste generated consequently. It is obvious that the variable C&D waste generation can affect itself negatively through the chain effects involved in the feedback loop.Loop 3 is a positive feedback, in which any variable can affect itself positively. If the amount of recycled waste increases, this will then contribute to the waste recycling driving factors. Effects of the waste recycling driving factors are enhanced mainly because the larger amount of recycled waste will lead more construction materials to be salvaged, resulting in less costs for waste disposal in landfills. This can gradually improve the efficiency of compliance with regulations and help cultivate a better waste recycling market for trading wasted materials. The better waste recycling market will to some extent diminish the cost of waste recycling activities. Subsequently, decreased waste recycling cost will lead to a higher ratio of recycled waste. Eventually, the higher ratio of recycled waste will cause more C&D waste to be recycled.In the loop 4, as the amount of waste that is dumped in inappropriate areas increases, it will result in more constraints aiming at regulating illegal waste dumping behavior, and subsequently promote the efficiency of compliance with regulations. A stricter regulatory environment indicates that illegal waste dumping behavior will have a higher probability to be amerced, which means a higher cost of violation of regulations. The higher cost of violation of regulations will then reduce the ratio of illegally dumped waste and consequently decrease the amount of C&D waste to be dumped improperly.Before proceeding to the formal model (also known as the stock-flow diagram) to determine the C&D WDCF, it is critical to explain the assumptions underlying the model so that the robustness and applicability of the model can be enhanced. We mainly put forward three assumptions that are described exhaustively as follows:•Decision making associated with C&D waste management is assumed to be based on cost minimization. This assumption is of reasonability as currently decision-makers in C&D waste management activities in China are mostly profit-oriented, indicating that the decisions on C&D waste management highly depend on the outcomes of cost minimization or profit optimization. This assumption is also in line with the statement raised by Zhao et al. (2011), who asserted that decisions of the waste producer are based on cost minimization opportunities.It is also assumed that practitioners in C&D waste management have sufficient access to the information in terms of C&D waste landfilling cost, reuse and recycling cost and cost of waste illegal dumping.The third assumption is that a WDCF will be introduced to the construction industry in 2012; meanwhile, the model will run during a time frame from 2005 to 2030.Based on the formulated causal loop diagram and the assumptions, some specific details are added to the causal loop diagram to build the stock-flow diagram for furthering understanding of the interacting mechanism among variables and enabling quantitative simulation and analysis. In this study, the stock-flow diagram, as shown in Fig. 3, is developed through the Vensim® software package.To facilitate a better understanding of the interrelations between variables in the stock-flow diagram, a detailed list of major variables, the type and dimension of the variables, and equations describing interrelations between the variables is tabulated in the Appendix.To simulate the model developed and carry out quantitative analysis, the waste management practices in the construction industry of Shenzhen city, south China is investigated. The surveyed practitioners include 2 government department staff, 4 project contractors, 3 project engineers and 3 senior researchers on C&D waste management. The government department staff are from the Shenzhen Construction Bureau and in charge of construction waste planning and management in the region. The construction contractors and engineers surveyed have all participated in on-site construction management activities (including C&D waste management) directly for more than 6years and thus they are familiar with the construction waste practices in Shenzhen. The surveyed researchers from a local university concentrate their attention on C&D waste management research for several years and therefore are knowledgeable about this issue. The data collected is quantified through various methods. We describe the quantification of some major variables in the model in the following section.•In 2005, the total amount of C&D waste generation in Shenzhen is around 4.1millionmeter3. If the density of the generated waste is 1.5tonnes/meter3, then the initial value of amount of generated waste will be 6milliontonnes. Meanwhile, the ratio of C&D waste recycling is reported to be 8%, and the rest of C&D waste generated is processed via landfilling or illegal dumping activities. It is assumed in this study that the ratio of waste illegal dumping in 2005 is 1%; therefore, the initial values of amount of C&D waste landfilled and amount of illegally dumped waste are 5.46milliontonnes and 60thousand tonnes, respectively.As discussed previously, the effectiveness of regulation execution depends on the completeness of regulations, effectiveness of supervision, and regulation enforceability. According to viewpoints of surveyed practitioners, it is found that regulation enforceability is the most important variable affecting the effectiveness of regulation execution. Thus, the three variables (i.e. regulation enforceability, completeness of regulations, and effectiveness of supervision) are assigned weightings of 0.5, 0.25 and 0.25, respectively in the study.Currently, it is acknowledged that the completeness of C&D waste management related regulations and the effectiveness of supervision of regulation execution are still at a low level. But it is argued by the practitioners that the situation will improve gradually because sustainable construction has been a pressing requirement to be considered in construction projects in the future. In this regard, the two variables in the model (i.e. completeness of regulations, effectiveness of supervision) can range from 0 to 1, with 0 indicating the worst situation and 1 meaning the best situation. The detailed values of the two variables are listed in the Appendix.According to a survey carried out by Kang (2005) for investigating the effect of raising the C&D WDCF on project contractors’ incentive to reduce waste, it is found that increasing the WDCF could significantly enhance contractors’ incentives of waste reduction. In the present study, the WDCF can affect the effectiveness of regulation execution and subsequently influence contractors’ incentive of waste reduction. It is assumed that the incentive of waste reduction can range from 0 to 1, with 0 indicating the least incentive and 1 meaning the greatest incentive. The relationship between effectiveness of regulation execution and the incentive of waste reduction is provided in the Appendix.One probable outcome of raising the C&D WDCF is that more and more generated C&D waste will be recycled, which is a precondition of fostering and developing a mature waste recycling market to trade recycled construction materials. As can be seen from the model, the effectiveness of regulation execution could affect the maturation of waste recycling market. Therefore, the relationship between effectiveness of regulation execution and maturation of waste recycling market is listed in the Appendix.According to findings of Kang (2005), the current per capital cost of dealing with C&D waste is around 40yuan/tonne. It is also found that the cost of C&D waste recycling will decrease gradually when the recycling activity achieves the scale effect. A matured C&D waste recycling market is expected to be formulated by then. The relationship between maturation of waste recycling market and cost of C&D waste recycling is described in the Appendix.It is generally recognized that there is a negative correlation between ratio of waste landfilled and cost of waste landfilling. The cost of waste landfilling in Shenzhen in 2005 is around 5yuan/tonne, which results in a corresponding landfilled waste ratio of 91%. It is believed that increasing the cost of waste landfilling will diminish the ratio of waste to be landfilled. The relationship between the two variables is explained in the Appendix as well.Before quantitative simulation and analysis, it is critical to check the validity of the SD model through a set of tests as outlined in Sterman (2000). Major testing rules include: (1) the causal loop diagram used to depict major variables influencing effects of implementing a WDCF must correspond to the statement of the research problem, (2) the equations in the stock-flow diagram must correspond to the causal loop diagram, (3) the SD model must be dimensionally consistent, and finally, the model should pass the extreme condition test. Although these tests are by no means exhaustive, they comprise the core of battery of tests for SD models (Qudrat-Ullah & Seong, 2010). Therefore, the above-mentioned tests are applied to the SD model developed to enhance its robustness and reliability.The test 1 concerns whether the model contains all important variables that correspond to the research purpose. Also, this test helps assure variables irrelevant to the research question are excluded. It is performed by checking all the variables that have been embodied in the causal loop diagram (see Fig. 1). Eventually, it is found that each of the variables is closely related to the research purpose which is to investigate the WDCF in the construction sector. The test 2 helps assure that the fundamental structure of the model is logical. This structural validation is conducted by referring back to the causal loop diagrams. It is obvious that all cause-and-effect chains and feedback loops in the diagram are based on acknowledged knowledge and viewpoints. The test 3 requires that measurement units of all variables in the SD model are consistent in dimension. This is performed through the ‘units check’ function of the Vensim software after measurement units of all variables are confirmed. In the extreme condition test, the behavior of the model is investigated under extreme conditions. Generally, extreme values are assigned to specific variables and then the generated system behavior is compared to the real system behavior as understood. Considering that it is not practical to demonstrate the entire testing process due to limited space of the paper, the variable ‘amount of recycled waste’ is taken herein as a typical example for illustration. The main purpose is to investigate how ‘amount of recycled waste’ will change when extreme values are assigned to WDCF. The testing results are shown in Fig. 4. In the model, both WDCF and amount of recycled waste should receive values greater than 0. In the test, three scenarios are designed and simulated, including scenario 1 (WDCF=0yuan/tonne, this is the first extreme condition test), scenario 2 (WDCF=5yuan/tonne, this is the base run) and scenario 3 (WDCF=100yuan/tonne, this is the second extreme condition test). It is clear from Fig. 4 that if Shenzhen does not implement a construction waste disposal charging scheme, the accumulated amount of recycled waste grows slowly over the simulation period. This is due to that construction contractors will not conduct construction waste recycling actively if there is no economical or regulatory incentive. In the base run, the amount of recycled waste exhibits a very similar trend to the first extreme condition test. This is probably because that the effect of adopting a WDCF at the level of 5yuan/tonne in Shenzhen is not obvious, indicating that the present WDCF needs to be ameliorated. If the WDCF is hypothesized to be 100yuan/tonne, the amount of recycled waste will increase significantly, implying that a higher WDCF can greatly contribute to construction waste recycling in Shenzhen. The testing outcomes above are reasonable because they are by-and-large in consistent with the empirical findings in Kang (2005), who found that if the WDCF is less than 20yuan/tonne, there is only 3.92% of construction contractors willing to recycle construction waste in the construction projects, whereas if a much higher WDCF (i.e. 100yuan/tonne) is applied, more than 90% construction contractors would recycle construction waste to avoid higher costs of handling the waste. Based on the above testing results, it can be concluded that the SD model is robust and thus can be used for in-depth simulation and analysis.Having tested and validated the model, it can be adopted for simulation and quantitative analysis. The present model is set to run over the period of 2005--2030. In this study, two clusters of simulations are conducted. The first cluster of simulation aims to demonstrate results of base run simulation, with which the status-quo C&D waste management in Shenzhen is informed. The next type of simulation can be perceived as policy analysis, which focuses on testing effects of various WDCFs on C&D waste reduction. The C&D WDCF as proposed in this study is therefore formulated based on outcomes of the latter simulation.In the base run simulation, the C&D WDCF is set at the level of 5yuan/tonne. It can be seen from Fig. 5that over the simulation period, the amount of generated C&D waste, landfilled waste, recycled waste and illegally dumped waste all increase significantly. In particular, the annual C&D waste generation in Shenzhen in 2030 will amount to 8.81milliontonnes. From 2005 to 2030, there will be 163milliontonnes of C&D waste to be handled by landfills. On the other hand, there is only 25.05milliontonnes of waste to be recycled, indicating a relatively low waste recycling rate (approximately 15%). The simulation results also show that around 1.68milliontonnes of C&D waste is dumped at inappropriate areas.It is widely accepted that the destination of C&D waste is highly related to the per-capital cost of waste handling methods. The simulation results shown in Fig. 6demonstrate that over the simulation period, the per-capital cost of waste recycling decreases gradually, the per-capital cost of waste landfilling remains the level of 12yuan/tonne, while the per-capital cost of violation of regulations increases significantly. Apparently, the per-capital cost of waste landfilling is the lowest among the three waste handling manners, resulting in a high proportion of generated C&D waste disposed of at landfills. Before 2020, the cost of violation of regulations is obviously lower than the cost of waste recycling, which is a main reason for project contractors to dump C&D waste at inappropriate areas rather than to recycle the waste. The results imply that the per-capital cost of various C&D waste handling methods have an important role to play in determining the method that is suitable for handling C&D waste.The main purpose of policy analysis simulation is to test how the amounts of waste will respond to the changes in the WDCF; thus the independent variable in the simulation is the WDCF. As mentioned previously, the WDCF in the base run is set at the level of 5yuan/tonne. In the policy analysis, six additional alternatives are designed and simulated, in which the WDCF is 20, 60, 80, 100, and 120yuan/tonne respectively (see Fig. 7).It can be seen from Fig. 7(a) that although the absolute amount of C&D waste generated increases year-by-year during the simulation period, there is a general tendency of obvious decline in the amount of C&D waste generation when the WDCF is raised. Particularly, when the WDCF is 5yuan/tonne, the amount of generated C&D waste in 2030 will be 8.81million tonnes (Curve 1), but when the WDCF is increased to 120yuan/tonne, the amount of C&D waste generation is predicted to be approximately 7.5million tonnes (Curve 7). It is also evident by the results that among the simulated alternatives, the least amount of generated C&D waste in 2030 is achieved when the WDCF is 80yuan/tonne. This indicates clearly that from the perspective of C&D waste reduction, the C&D WDCF should not surpass 80yuan/tonne.As shown in Fig. 7(b), when the WDCF increases, the effect of reducing the amount of C&D waste disposed of at landfills increases. However, the marginal utility of raising the WDCF on minimizing the C&D waste to be landfilled declines sharply when the WDCF is higher than 80yuan/tonne. This to a large extent indicates that the optimal WDCF should be around 80yuan/tonne from the viewpoint of reducing the amount of landfilled C&D waste.Fig. 7(c) exhibits the effects of enhancing C&D waste recycling through the measure of raising the WDCF. It is found that when the WDCF is increased to 20yuan/tonne from the present 5yuan/tonne, the effect on promoting C&D waste recycling is not significant. This is probably due to the fact that the per-capital cost of waste recycling is yet higher than the per-capital cost of waste landfilling, thereby limiting the incentive to recycle C&D waste. When the WDCF is increased to the range between 60 and 80yuan/tonne, the effect of waste recycling through raising the WDCF will be maximized. In this regard, the ideal WDCF scatters over the range of 60–80yuan/tonne for promoting C&D waste recycling.From Fig. 7(d), it is obvious that when the WDCF is less than 80yuan/tonne, promoting the C&D WDCF will reduce the amount of waste dumped at inappropriate areas. Nevertheless, when the WDCF is higher than 80yuan/tonne, promoting the C&D WDCF will increase the amount of waste to be illegally dumped. This is partially inconsistent with the general understanding that increasing WDCF will decrease the amount of C&D waste to be illegally dumped. This is probably attributable to that when the WDCF is raised to an over-high level (i.e. more than 80yuan/tonne in this case), project contractors will take a risk of dumping the generated C&D waste at inappropriate areas, rather than disposing of them at regulated landfills. Therefore, for the sake of minimizing illegally dumped waste, the optimum WDCF should not exceed 80yuan/tonne.Based on the discussions above, it is obvious that the appropriate C&D WDCF as reported in this case should approximate to 80yuan/tonne, but should be not higher than 80yuan/tonne. This can result in the best outcomes in terms of reducing C&D waste, diminishing landfilled waste, maximizing C&D waste recycling, and minimizing C&D waste to be inappropriately dumped.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The WDCF has been increasingly adopted by the government worldwide as an effective tool to tackle the large amount of C&D waste generation and to increase the recovery of wasted materials. However, it is found that the quotas on WDCF in the Chinese regions are mostly based on a rule of thumb, rather than determined based on scientific evidence. This has been a probable reason resulting in the limited effectiveness in implementing the present WDCFs. Therefore, there is an imperative need to propose an appropriate WDCF in the Chinese construction industry, in order to alleviate the C&D waste generation problems.In this study, we develop a model to determine the C&D WDCF in a scientific way. The model is established by using the SD approach, in which the dynamics nature of the C&D waste charging system is well examined and the interactions among major variables in the system are considered as well. The results of simulations show that the C&D waste generation in Shenzhen in 2030 will amount to 8.81milliontonnes. During the period of 2005 and 2030, the amounts of landfilled waste, recycled waste and illegally dumped waste will be 163milliontonnes, 25.05milliontonnes and 1.68milliontonnes respectively. It is also demonstrated that the per-capital costs of different C&D waste handling methods play an important role in determining which method is better for handling the waste. The findings of policy analysis simulations suggest that the C&D WDCF amounting to around 80yuan/tonne will be the optimum to achieve both waste reduction and high proportion of waste recovery in the region.The model is the first attempt to determine an appropriate C&D WDCF by investigating the dynamic interactions of major variables involved in the C&D waste management system. Further research can be directed toward encompassing more variables in the system to increase its credibility. Meanwhile, more practical cases can be used to test the model for enhancing its robustness and reliability.