@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Preference-inspired co-evolutionary algorithms using weight vectors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new decomposition based algorithm PICEA-w is proposed.PICEA-w adaptively varies the weights.Adaptive weights bring robustness to different problem geometries.PICEA-w outperforms other leading decomposition based algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolutionary algorithms,Multi-objective optimisation,Many-objective,Co-evolution,Weights,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Decomposition based algorithms perform well when a suitable set of weights are provided; however determining a good set of weights a priori for real-world problems is usually not straightforward due to a lack of knowledge about the geometry of the problem. This study proposes a novel algorithm called preference-inspired co-evolutionary algorithm using weights (PICEA-w) in which weights are co-evolved with candidate solutions during the search process. The co-evolution enables suitable weights to be constructed adaptively during the optimisation process, thus guiding candidate solutions towards the Pareto optimal front effectively. The benefits of co-evolution are demonstrated by comparing PICEA-w against other leading decomposition based algorithms that use random, evenly distributed and adaptive weights on a set of problems encompassing the range of problem geometries likely to be seen in practice, including simultaneous optimisation of up to seven conflicting objectives. Experimental results show that PICEA-w outperforms the comparison algorithms for most of the problems and is less sensitive to the problem geometry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-objective optimisation problems (MOPs) arise in many real-world applications, where multiple conflicting objectives must be simultaneously satisfied. Typically, the optimal solution set of MOPs is not a single solution but comprises of a set of trade-off solutions. Multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) are well suited for solving MOPs since (i) their population-based nature leads naturally to the generation of an approximate trade-off surface in a single run and (ii) they tend to be robust to underlying cost function characteristics (Coello, Lamont, & Van Veldhuizen, 2007, pp. 5–7).Over the last two decades, a variety of MOEA approaches have been proposed. Most of these approaches are based on the concept of Pareto-dominance and niching technique suggested by Goldberg (1989): for example, MOGA (Fonseca & Fleming, 1993), NSGA-II (Deb, Pratap, Agarwal, & Meyarivan, 2002) and SPEA2 (Zitzler, Laumanns, & Thiele, 2002). It is accepted that Pareto-dominance based MOEAs perform well on MOPs with 2 and 3 objectives. However, their search capability often degrades significantly as the number of objectives increase (Ishibuchi, Tsukamoto, & Nojima, 2008). This is because that the proportion of non-dominated objective vectors in the population grows large when MOPs have more than 3 objectives, i.e., so-called many-objective problems (Purshouse & Fleming, 2003). As a result, insufficient selection pressure can be generated towards the Pareto front (Purshouse & Fleming, 2007).In addition to the Pareto-dominance based approaches, there has been considerable effort invested in other types of MOEAs. One of the most promising alternatives11There are also other types of MOEAs such as indicator based MOEAs (Zitzler & Künzli, 2004), e.g., SMS-EMOA (Emmerich, Beume, & Naujoks, 2005) and HypE (Bader & Zitzler, 2011); and modified dominance based MOEAs, e.g., ɛ-EMOA (Deb, Mohan, & Mishra, 2005).is to use a decomposition approach (Hughes, 2003; Zhang & Li, 2007), denoted as D-MOEA in this study. Note that in some studies decomposition based methods are also called aggregation based or scalarising function based methods (Hughes, 2003; Ishibuchi, Sakane, Tsukamoto, & Nojima, 2010). Decomposition based MOEAs transfer a MOP into a set of single objective problems by means of scalarising functions with different weights. Compared with Pareto-dominance based approaches, decomposition based approaches have a number of advantages such as high search ability for combinatorial optimisation, computational efficiency on fitness evaluation and high compatibility with local search (Zhang & Li, 2007; Ishibuchi et al., 2010). The seminal decomposition based MOEA, i.e., MOEA/D, that popularised this method, has been used in many real-world applications.22Professor Qingfu Zhang maintains a website which records the related research and applications of MOEA/D: http://dces.essex.ac.uk/staff/zhang/webofmoead.htm.Its modified version, i.e., MOEA/D-DRA (Zhang, Liu, & Li, 2009) won the “Unconstrained multi-objective evolutionary algorithm” competition at the 2009 Congress on Evolutionary Computation.Despite these advantages, more recent studies have identified that decomposition based algorithms, e.g., MOEA/D, (i) face difficulties on problems having a complex Pareto front geometry33Pareto front geometry and problem geometry are used interchangeably in this paper.(Gu, Liu, & Tan, 2012) and (ii) though performing well on bi-objective problems, are not particularly useful for many-objective problems due to a loss of solution diversity (Wang, Purshouse, & Fleming, 2013). These issues are likely to arise from an inappropriate specification of search directions (which are determined by the weights) a priori, itself arising from a general lack of problem knowledge. In other words the choice of the scalarising functions’ underlying search directions is typically problem-dependent and therefore is difficult if no information about the problem characteristics is known before the search proceeds. For example, evenly distributed search directions are good for problems having a linear Pareto optimal front, see Fig. 1(a): however, they are not suitable for problems with complex Pareto optimal fronts, e.g., disconnected, see Fig. 1(b).Our interest remains in a posteriori decision-making, that is, providing decision-makers with both a proximal and diverse representation of the entire Pareto optimal front. This study then proposes a novel strategy to adaptively modify the search directions (i.e., weights) on line for decomposition based MOEAs so as to obtain a good approximation of the Pareto optimal front for problems having different geometries.This new strategy adopts the concept of preference-inspired co-evolution (Purshouse, Jalbaˇ, & Fleming, 2011; Wang et al., 2013), that is, candidate solutions are co-evolved with weight vectors (used as preferences) during the search. The usefulness of weights is maintained by being evaluated using the current population of candidates solutions. It is hypothesised that via co-evolution suitable weights can be constructed on the fly and thus leading decomposition based algorithms to be less sensitive to problem geometries and also to scale up well on many-objective problems.The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 introduces some related work to this study which contains an introduction to decomposition based MOEAs and their issues as well as a brief review of some representative decomposition based MOEAs. Section 3 elaborates the proposed co-evolution based weights adaptation strategy and the associated algorithm: preference-inspired co-evolutionary algorithms using weights (PICEA-w). Section 4 describes the experiment setup. Section 5 presents the experiment results. A further discussion of the algorithm PICEA-w is provided in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
