@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation-optimization approaches for water pump scheduling and pipe replacement problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose new approaches for water pump scheduling and pipe replacement problems.Optimization models are developed for both problems.EPANET simulator is used to enforce hydraulic feasibility.Numerical testing is conducted on two real water networks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pump scheduling,Pipe replacement,Water networks,Integer programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Network operation and rehabilitation are major concerns for water utilities due to their impact on providing a reliable and efficient service. Solving the optimization problems that arise in water networks is challenging mainly due to the nonlinearities inherent in the physics and the often binary nature of decisions. In this paper, we consider the operational problem of pump scheduling and the design problem of leaky pipe replacement. New approaches for these problems based on simulation-optimization are proposed as solution methodologies. For the pump scheduling problem, a novel decomposition technique uses solutions from a simulation-based sub-problem to guide the search. For the leaky pipe replacement problem a knapsack-based heuristic is applied. The proposed solution algorithms are tested and detailed results for two networks from the literature are provided.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The aging infrastructure of water networks is a growing concern for water utilities which are continuously facing complex decisions related to the optimal investment and operation of the water systems. As pipe networks reach the end of their useable life, operational costs increase due to inefficiencies and to water leaks in the network. For instance, in 2011 the city of Houston reported that 18 billion gallons of water were lost due to water leakages in the network with an estimated cost of over 10 million dollars (Horswell, 2011). Thus, maintaining a reliable infrastructure within sustainable costs is a major challenge given the increasing demand for water which is expected to double by the year 2035 (National Geographic, 2013).The research literature is rich with approaches to optimize investment and operational decisions on water networks. These problems are challenging because of the need to model the physics of water flow and because many of the decisions considered have a binary character which leads to mixed integer programming models that are hard to solve to optimality. Problems have been addressed in reliability (Sherali, Smith, & Kim, 1996), network operations (Nitivattananon, Sadowski, & Quimpo, 1996), and network design which includes pipe sizing (Bragalli, D’Ambrosio, Lee, Lodi, & Toth, 2012; Eiger, Shamir, & Ben-Tal, 1994) and network expansion (Sherali, Subramanian, & Loganathan, 2001). As reviewed later, a wide variety of solution approaches have been proposed including exact algorithms for optimally solving nonlinear models, heuristic approaches to obtain feasible solutions without optimality guarantees, and hybrid methods.In this paper, we consider two challenging problems in water networks that involve binary decisions. First, we consider the operational problem of scheduling pumps to minimize energy cost. In finding on/off pump schedules, we take into account temporal variations in water demand and electricity costs. Secondly, we consider the design problem of deciding which leaky pipes to replace in order to minimize pressure driven leakage within a given budget. While both optimization problems are challenging to solve due to the binary decisions and underlying nonlinearity, simulation can be easily applied to evaluate a particular network setup in terms of feasibility and associated cost.Many methods which couple an optimization method (especially heuristics) with a simulator have been reported in the literature. In comparison to existing approaches the contributions of the present work are (a) a novel decomposition technique for the pump scheduling problem, and (b) a knapsack-based heuristic applied to the leaky pipe replacement problem.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review of prior research on optimizing water networks. The proposed simulation-optimization approaches for the pump scheduling and pipe replacement problems are presented in Section 3. Computational results are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 summarizes our findings and illustrates future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
