@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Durable goods leasing in the presence of exporting used products to an international secondary market

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An international market for export stimulates domestic leasing of new products.High quality of used products reinforces the stimulating effect.Imposing a penalty for used products at home market has undesired side effects.Agent structure distorts export quantity and result of government stimulus.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Durable goods,Product leasing,International secondary market,Vertical differentiation,Channel structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the rapid growth of global trade, used durable goods from wealthy countries increasingly find their way into the secondary market of less wealthy countries. Exporting used products to a physically separate market not only removes cannibalization for new products at home, but also fetches additional revenue.In this paper, we investigate the implications of exporting used products to international secondary markets in the durable goods industry. We find that such a practice may significantly stimulate new product lease on the home market, an effect in which the market attractiveness and product quality are mutually reinforcing. We discover that removing cannibalization pressure is more of a priority than generating additional revenue while exporting used products.If the export is carried out by an agent, who exports used products bought from OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturer), we observe the disadvantage of double marginalization in a channel structure, which slows down export and causes quantity distortion, and also reduces the effectiveness of government stimulus. However, if the agent and OEM set export price based supply and demand equilibrium, this reduces the quantity distortion.One special characteristic of used products trade across borders is the involvement of governments on both sides of the border. The government measures include penalties imposed on aging durable goods and trade barriers. We find that legislation of penalizing used products on the domestic market can stimulate export, but it does not have an intended effect of stimulating new products produced at home. The channel structure worsens the problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As one of the countries worst hit by recent financial crisis, Hungary saw new car sales plummet from 153,346 in 2008 to 60,189 in 2009 and further to 43,396 in 2010. For such a small country with only 10 million people, this sharp decline has immediate and visible consequences on the country's fleet: the average age of cars in Hungary has increased from 10.45 years in 2008 to 12.43 in 2012, and there is a sharp decline in number of used cars available for sale on the used car market since the new cars sold in 2008–2010 became used cars today. Simultaneously, the demand for used cars in Hungary has increased since fewer people can now afford to buy new cars as the economy slowly recovers. The simultaneous increase in demand and fall in domestic supply of used cars have given rise to an import of used cars from foreign countries into Hungary, which increased from 17,000 in 2010 to 70,000 in 2013. Unsurprisingly, the majority of them are from Germany, a prosperous neighbor and also the leading automobile manufacturer and market in Europe. German Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) have taken a very proactive role in this cross-border transaction of used cars. For example, BMW leases new cars to its employees and car rental companies in Germany; the leased cars with low mileage (less than 15,000 kilometers) and young age (less than one year) are then exported outside Germany to emerging markets of Eastern Europe, such as Hungary, through the BMW Premium Selection program (www.bmw.hu/premiumselection). Similar programs also exist for other German OEMs, such as the Weltauto program of Volkswagen group (Audi, VW, Skoda) and Jahreswagen program of Mercedes-Benz.The cross-border trade of used cars can be seen in many parts of the world, although details vary from case-to-case due to different local conditions. Used cars from Japan can be found in almost all parts of the world, and the Toyota Hilux pick-up truck with a machine gun on top is commonly seen in military conflicts in the Middle East. Many used Japanese cars enter the neighboring Far Eastern part of Russia, where 60 percent of cars on the street of Vladivostok are right-handed and the car import business provides employment for tens of thousands of locals. The used car trade between Japan and Russia is very different from the one between Germany and Hungary in two important aspects. First, related legislation of both governments play an important role in the trade. In Japan, drivers are required by law to submit three-year-old cars to strict road tests costing at least $1250 – with subsequent tests every two years. It is equally expensive to dispose of them too. This makes aging cars worth very little, and owners normally relinquish ownership before it gets too expensive. This essentially pushes used cars out of Japan. The Russian government also introduced an ever-increasing tariff to curb the inflow of used Japanese car imports, largely to protect local automobile manufacturers, such as Lada. Second, unlike their German counterparts, OEMs in Japan are not directly involved in the exporting business. Instead, there are thousands of agents specialized in the cross-border trade of used cars, such as JAA, JU Group, TAA, USS, and ZIP, who would collect used cars from OEMs mostly through the method of auctions and then export the cars to foreign countries.The cross-border trade of used cars has rather important implications for management. First, removing used products from the home market makes cannibalization between new and used products less of a concern, which has been a central theme in the durable goods literature. Second, since new products are needed as the source of used products, the additional demand from the foreign market for used cars provide a new stimulus for new product production. Third, there are multiple actors involved in the cross-border trade, such as the governments on both sides of the border and import/export agents as middlemen; their presence makes the story much more interesting.In this paper, we seek to answer 3 questions:1.With an active international secondary market to export used products returned after lease, how should the firm adjust its production and pricing?With additional players, such as export agents, how would the additional complexity of channel structure change the problem?If legislators wish to achieve a certain social goal, such as to simulate production or protect local industry in the presence of this cross-border trade, what are the most effective and efficient tools?The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related literature. Section 3 introduces the model set-up. Section 4 analyzes the monopoly case. Section 5 studies impact of third party collectors. Section 6 concludes the paper.Durable goods have received ongoing attention in marketing, economics and operations management literature. Mantena, Tilson, and Zheng (2012) provide a comprehensive review of the vast durable goods literature. Therefore, we focus only on those papers most relevant to our research in this section. Our paper employs a model of vertical differentiation over infinite time horizon, which borrows from the literature. Among the most influential papers, Desai and Purohit (1998) first develop a model of vertical differentiation over two periods to study the concurrent leasing and selling of durable goods. An important contribution is that in this particular model setting leasing and selling become identical when they both lead to identical depreciation rates, a result we use to help justify why we focus on pure leasing. The work has been extended to investigate the impact of competition (Desai & Purohit, 1999). Desai, Koenigsberg, and Purohit (2004) extend the model setup to a channel case in which distribution of used durables is carried out by an agent. The most important finding is that despite the presence of double marginalization the channel structure can actually increase a manufacturer's profits. Remanufacturing literature has thematic parallels to the durable goods literature because the remanufactured products are also used products with lower quality than new products. Several important papers in this area use a model of vertical differentiation over infinite time horizon (Agrawal, Ferguson, Toktay, & Thomas, 2012; Debo, Toktay, & Van Wassenhove, 2005). The remanufacturing papers with infinite time horizon model most focus on stable equilibrium with constant product quantities to derive insights, a practice which we also follow in our paper. We develop our model similar to the setup of vertical differentiation in the literature but add an element of international secondary market which was separated from the home market by a transportation cost.The international secondary market plays an essential role in our model. How to deal with used products has always been a central theme in durable goods industry, and many important papers have focused on the role of secondary market and associated transaction cost. One ongoing debate is about whether secondary market is harmful or should be eliminated altogether under various setting (Chen, Esteban, & Shum, 2013; Rust, 1986). Anderson and Ginsburgh (1994) investigate the impact of transaction cost and product quality in the context of secondary market. They show that contrary to common belief a low transaction cost of secondary market is not always helpful and that if quality of used products can be manipulated it should be either zero or identical to new products, both scenarios essentially eliminating cannibalization threat posed by a lower quality product. Hendel and Lizzeri (1999) analyze durability issue in the context of secondary market. While in a different context, this paper is similar to ours in that it shows the benefits of a well-functioning secondary market, especially if the monopolist actively interferes to make it in line with other choices made regarding durables such as manipulating the transaction cost of secondary market. Later work allows product upgrade and obsolescence across generations of durables. Purohit (1992) investigates secondary market with potential for product obsolescence. The results suggest that contrary to common belief introducing a new product version can make used products of old version worth more if the upgrade is not well perceived by the market. Levinthal and Purohit (1989) explicitly discuss the problem of decreasing willingness to pay for old version due to introduction of new version, and propose different mechanisms such as limiting sales volume, buying back used products of older versions or announcing forthcoming new version. Yin, Ray, Gurnani, and Animesh (2010) investigate the impact of multiple used goods markets, retail and P2P, in a channel structure on product upgrade and price of used products. They establish that overall such markets result in less frequent product upgrades and lower prices. This paper is particularly of interests to us because we also have used products traded on two markets. Tilson, Wang, and Wei (2009) develop an interesting model in which new products are offered on two markets but used products are offered on only one market, while in our paper and Yin et al. (2010) it is the opposite situation. One of the results in Tilson et al. (2009) particularly relevant to us is that transaction cost of used products raises price and decreases leasing quantities. Gavazza, Lizzeri, and Roketskiy (2014) and Stolyarov (2002) find a similar result in different settings. Huang, Yang, and Anderson (2001) have a more general model while incorporating indefinite time horizon, concurrent selling and leasing, heterogeneous consumers, and so on into an active secondary market with transaction cost. They show that transaction cost has significant impact on market segmentation and that a monopolist makes different scrappage decisions in different settings, both of which are relevant for our research. Another very relevant result of this paper is that the price for used products is based on demand and supply equilibrium. Esteban and Shum (2007) analyzed an active decentralized secondary market in an oligopoly setting. With some restrictive assumptions of no transaction costs and limited consumer heterogeneity, they obtain the equilibrium in duopoly competition. An important empirical contribution is that they provide estimate of some parameters with industry data, which provides important measure on the competitive importance of the secondary market. Chen et al. (2013) extend the study to include product durability. Porter and Sattler (1999) propose in their analysis and also provide empirical evidence that trading of used products on secondary markets increases with higher depreciation rate, a result that we reverse in our model setting.Our main difference with the literature is that in addition to the secondary home market where used products are traded there is one international market which was separated from the home market. This change leads to a different cannibalization mechanism and new insights: instead of viewing secondary market as a threat, we examine it as an opportunity.In this paper, we build a model of vertical differentiation over an indefinite time horizon. This type of model has been used extensively in the literature on durable goods (Agrawal et al., 2012; Dhebar, 1994). A monopolist firm operates over an indefinite number of discreet periods, consumers make their decisions based on their utility in each period, and any product launched in any period will last for two periods.A monopolist firm introduces a durable good over an indefinite number of discreet periods. The durable itself lasts for two periods; we call it a car for convenience. A car newly introduced has a qualityλN=1, the next period it becomes a used car with qualityλU=δ(δ < 1), in which quality is a parameter and not a decision variable and1−δis the depreciation rate. The unit cost of the product is a constant c. In each period, the firm introduces a certain quantity of new cars and deals with the used cars that were introduced in the previous period. Therefore, they are only two types of products on the market in each period.In this model, departing from the literature of durable goods, we assume that the firm only leases products and does not engage in selling. We make this assumption for several reasons. First of all, it is no longer necessarily true that leased cars will be returned to the firm and sold cars will not be. In most European markets, such as France, a leasing contract carries the option to buy, and consumers who bought cars are encouraged to give back their cars in exchange for new cars (at additional cost). Therefore, there is little difference between leasing and buying in terms of ease to return cars. Second, our model is based on Desai and Purohit (1998). They show that in this particular model setting buying and selling would become identical if buying and selling both lead to the same depreciation rate. In practice, the concept that “using it as if it is hired” will lead to higher depreciation rate if leased is outdated. In Europe, there are now very specific conditions under which a car can be returned. In France, when one of the authors returned leased cars to Citroen on several occasions, the conditions of the cars are thoroughly examined and even a tiny Cola spill on the seat is billed to the client. We can hardly imagine that in such an environment clients will be using a car less carefully only because it is leased. In our model, when leasing and buying carries the same depreciation rate, it will collapse into a purely leasing model. The focus of our paper is to study the stimulating effect of international market. A model with concurrent leasing and selling will not change the insights provided in this paper and, by unnecessarily complicating the analysis, lead to fewer results.The market space consists of a home market and an international secondary market, both of which are vertically differentiated. Quality evaluation of the home market θ is uniformly distributed in [0, 1], and that of the international secondary market [0, v], where v < 1 to signify a less-wealthy market. Note that the mean and median of quality evaluation of the international market is less than the home market, which signals a poorer market, but not every single consumer at international market is poorer than anyone at home market. It costs μ to ship one unit of used goods from the home market to the secondary market. In each period, consumers on both markets make their purchase decision based on their per-period utility derived from leasing cars, old or new, available on the market. The per-period utility is defined asU=θ·λ−pwhen a consumer with quality evaluation θ uses a car with quality λ for one period and pays an associated rental price p. This per-period utility has been widely used in leasing literature (Agrawal et al., 2012; Desai & Purohit, 1998). In each period, consumers decide whether to lease a new or used or not to lease based on the per-period utility. Note that the same utility functionU=θ·λ−pis also used in most models of vertical differentiation including durable goods literature in general (both selling and leasing). However, if this utility function is used to express per period utility when leasing, then the utility from buying a product will be deducted accordingly and become a different one (Desai & Purohit, 1998 provides detailed deduction).In each period indexed as t, the OEM introducesqtNunits of new cars to the home market and charges a price ofptNfor leasing one car for current period; from theqt−1Nunits of cars introduced in the previous period, it exportsqtUFto the international market for a unit price ofptUFand leases the restqtUD=qt−1N−qtUFon domestic market for a unit price ofptUD.The profit function for period t can be written as:Πt=(ptN−c)·qtN+ptUD·(qt−1N−qtUF)+(ptUF−μ)qtUFThe parameters and decision variables are summarized in Tables 1and 2.The market segmentation of period t, as illustrated in Graph 1, is consistent with the literature that employs continuous vertical differentiation model (Desai, 1998; Tirole, 1988; Moorthy, 1984). At the home market, there are two types of products available: new products with a higher quality qualityλN=1and a higher price tagptNand used products with a lower qualityλU=1−δand a lower price tagptUD. Recall that the utility function of the home market isU=θ·λ−p, therefore, according to the properties of the vertical market space, there are two marginal consumers. θ1tis the consumer who is indifferent between new car and used car:1·θ1t−ptN=δ·θ1t−ptUD. θ2tis the consumer who is indifferent between used car and non-consumption:θ2t·δ−ptUD=0. These two types of marginal consumers segment home market into three parts: consumers between θ1tand 1 purchase new products (numberedqtN), consumers between θ1tand θ2tpurchase used products (numberedqt−1N−qtUF), and consumers below θ2tdo not purchase. Therefore, we haveqtN=1−θ1t,qtUD=qt−1N−qtUF=θ1t−θ2t. At the international market, only used products with qualityλU=δand price tagptUFare available. Since the utility function of the international market is alsoU=θ·λ−p, there is one type of marginal consumer: θ3tis the consumer who is indifferent between used car and non-consumption:θ3t·δ−ptUF=0. θ3tsegment the international market is segmented into two parts: consumers between θ3tand v purchase used products (numberedqtUF), and consumers below θ3tdo not purchase. Therefore,qtUF=v−θ3tTherefore, the two sets of equations from above summarize the segmentation:qtN=1−θ1t,qt−1N−qtUF=θ1t−θ2t,qtUF=v−θ3t1·θ1t−ptN=δ·θ1t−ptUD,θ2t·δ−ptUD=0,θ3t·δ−ptUF=0Note that in the above equations quality evaluations and depreciation rate are system parameters, while price and quantity are decision variables. Therefore, the range of parameter values defines the feasible range of decision variables.With simple algebra of the equations above, we obtain prices as a function of quantities:ptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUDptUD=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF)ptUF=δ(v−qtUF)Note that list all variables for clarity and ease of reference. However, not all variables are independent; rather they are connected through the equations which illustrate the market segmentation. In other words, once the qualities are known, the prices are also known.In this section, we analyze the case in which a monopoly firm exports directly into a foreign market. Consistent with existing literature on durable goods over an indefinite time horizon, we focus our attention on the steady state equilibrium in which quantities of each period do not vary from period to period. While there might be stable equilibrium in which quantities change over time, we do not divert our attention because it is justified in the literature that prices do not change over time and OEM prefers to lever production (Tilson et al., 2009). In addition, the insights obtained in this paper are mainly on the stimulating effects of international market and will remain valid even if quantities change over time (Graph 2).Recall that the profit function of the monopoly firm for period t can be written as:Πt=(ptN−c)·qtN+ptUD·(qt−1N−qtUF)+(ptUF−μ)qtUFSubject to:ptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUDptUD=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF)ptUF=δ(v−qtUF)In the steady state equilibrium in which quantities do not change over time, we take out the notation t in quantity decisions.Lemma 1The optimal price and quality are as follows:qN=1−c−μ+v·δ2(1+δ)qUF=(v+3δv+D+2δ−2)4·(1+δ)−μ(1+3δ)4·(δ+δ2)pN=2(2+c)−(1−δ)·(1−μ+v)−(1−δ)2(1−v)4(1+δ)pUD=2(2+c)−(1−δ)·(7+μ+2c−v)+(1−δ)2(3−v)4(1+δ)pUF=μ(1+3δ)−δ·(1−δ−2c−3v−δv)4(1+δ)Proofs of all lemmas and propositions are provided inAppendices A–J.First of all, the fundamental question is how the presence of an international market for used cars would impact the OEM's decision in terms of quantity, price and market coverage. In our model, the international market is characterized by the market wealth v, which represents its willingness to pay for used cars.Proposition 1As the international market becomes wealthier, export of used cars and production of new cars both increase, used cars remaining at domestic market decrease, and prices for new cars and used cars all increase.This proposition illustrates the basic stimulating effect of the market, as shown in Graph 2. As can be expected, a wealthier foreign market increases export of used cars from the home market. The quantity of new cars increases for two reasons. First, because new cars are the sources of used cars, an increase in demand for used cars will lead new car quantity to increase. Second, used cars and new cars are substitutes; as more used cars are taken out of the market and the used cars quantity decreases, more new cars will be needed to take their place. Note that the export of used cars increases faster than production of new cars so used products at home decrease and reache zero at one point. In addition, the price of used cars domestically increases, and market coverage decreases. This also results in a younger fleet as new car number increases and used car number decreases. The consumers overseas are not necessarily wealthier than those at home market. However, serving them has no cannibalization concerns. Therefore, they are served with priority when it comes to used cars. In fact, the export price is less than the domestic price and essentially the firm is exporting at a loss (we can obtain from Lemma 1 thatpUD−pUF=12·(−1+v)δ−12μ<0). According to our analysis, a profit maximizing monopolist should use the international market more as a stimulus tool to export more units and less as a profit generator because the reduced cannibalization at home allows for higher profit from new products.An equally important component of the system is the link between the home market and the international market. The transportation cost μ illustrates the barrier for used cars to enter the international market (Graph 3). This barrier can be geographical distance to transport it, or tariff to be paid, or conversion cost to get the used car suitable for international market (for example, from left-hand to right-hand steering).Proposition 2As the transportation cost increases, export of used cars and new car production both decrease, used cars remaining at domestic market increase, and prices for new cars and used cars all increase.An increasing μ represents a poorer connection between home market and international market, as shown in Graph 3. Unsurprisingly, the export of used cars decreases, which leads to a decrease in the production of new cars. In Russian Far East, a higher tariff has led to a dramatic increase in price and decrease in quantity, which triggered even social unrest (Financial Times December 21, 2008). A decreasing μ represents a better connection between two markets and stimulates both used car export and new car production.Apart from market characteristics, such as v and μ, the product characteristic is also an important component in the system. The quality of the used product interacts with market characteristics to impact the whole mechanism. Recall thatλU=δProposition 3High quality of used cars reinforces the stimulating effect of wealthier international market, and increases the prices difference of used products at home and abroad.The positive second order derivative∂2qUF∂λU∂v>0states that export of used cars with higher quality rises faster when the market wealth increases than that of lower quality. In other words, used cars with higher quality, for example used Japanese cars with low mileage, benefit more from international trade. In addition, as product quality goes up, cannibalization pressure also goes up. Therefore, the firm is more willing to export at a loss, resulting in a bigger difference between price of used cars remaining at home and those exported.Apart from market force, the export of used cars is very much influenced by legislation on the home market. For example, as mentioned in Section 1, in Japan legislation concerning used cars makes aging cars worth very little, and owners normally relinquish ownership before it gets too expensive. This stringent control for used cars in Japan is effectively pushing them out of Japan. What is the impact of such legislation on the system? We define w as the penalty when leasing used cars at home market.Proposition 4w stimulates used cars export but has no impact on new car production.The traditional wisdom is that taking out used cars will allow for more new cars. It may seem logical that imposing a penalty on used cars would motivate consumers to dispose them and then get a new one, thus stimulating new car production. However, examining the details of the operation reveals a more subtle mechanism. It is true that penalizing ownership of used cars pushes them out of the home market. However, at the same time, it also reduces the number of consumers in the home market that would lease used cars. In other words, some consumers who would lease a used car, now due to the new penalty, refrain from leasing at all. Therefore, this type of stimulus is not effective to stimulate new car production and should be used carefully or, at least with the right expectations.Shipping used cars from Germany to Hungary is only several hours of drive, but such a trip by ship from Japan to Africa could take months. It is not always the best idea for OEMs to export directly to international markets for various reasons. In such scenarios, normally it is those agents specializing in cross-border trade of used cars that would collect used cars, through auctions or other mechanisms, and then export them to international markets. Since these agents make quantity and price decisions to maximize their own profit, this causes an interesting interaction with the OEMs and alters the mechanism of the system. One interesting issue is how the price is fixed. In some cases, the price may also be set by the large OEMs and agents are price takers. In other cases, the price is set based on supply and demand equilibrium. In this section, we analyze the case in which a monopoly firm exports to the international market through an agent. Again, we focus our attention on the steady state equilibrium in which quantities do not vary from period to period.The graphical illustration in Graph 1 continues to hold. In the home market, market segmentation remains the same as direct case. Therefore, the first two constraints, which describe segmentation of home market, are same as in direct case. The profit function of OEM also remains the same, except that the transportation cost is now paid by the agent (this assumption has no impact on the results, it matches the reality better since agent indeed takes care of the transportation, which is one of their core competencies).The profit of the OEM can be written asΠt=(ptN−c)·qtN+ptUD·(qt−1N−qtUF)+ptUFqtUFSubject to:ptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUDptUD=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF)At international market, the agent decides the price charged to the customer based on the export price from the OEM. The profit is margin multiplied by quantity. The constraint, which defines relationship of quantity and price, is set based on price set by the agentpta.The profit of the agent can be written asπa=(pta−ptUF−μ)·qtUFSubject to:qtUF=v−ptaδWhen agent is a price taker, the export price is a decision by the OEM. The agent will choose a price to maximize its profit based on the export price accordingly.Lemma 2When agent is a price taker, the optimal quantities are as follows:qtN′=−3+2μ−δ+3c−2δv2(3+5δ),qtUF′=δ·(v+3δv+1−δ−2c)−μ(1+3δ)2δ(3+5δ)In another scenario, the export price is not set by OEM; rather it is set by market force of supply and demand. Consistent with economics literature, we define the equilibrium price as the price when demand will be equal to supply,Lemma 3When price is set by market force of supply and demand, the optimal quantities are as follows:qtN*=1−μ−c+δv2(1+δ),qtUF*=δ·(v+3δv+1−δ−2c)−μ(1+3δ)4(1+δ)δ.In the previous section, we showed that an increased willingness to pay on the international market stimulates the export of used cars and also the production of new cars. How would the stimulating effect change in face of channel structure?Proposition 5The channel structure makes the stimulating effect of international secondary market v less effective, but a more balanced power structure mitigates the negative impact of channel structure.The analysis of this proposition shows that the derivatives of both export and new car production with respect to v with agent as the price taker are less than those in the direct case. Yet, the derivative when export price is set by market force is greater than derivative when OEM sets the price. This shows that the familiar double marginalization problem in channel structure manifest itself in this model setting as a barrier to stimulating effect of the international secondary market and that impact of the barrier is influenced by the relative bargaining power of OEM and agent regarding price.In the previous section, we showed that a better connection between home market and international market stimulates export of used cars and production of new cars. How would the stimulating effect change in face of channel structure?Proposition 6The channel structure causes the firm to be more sensitive to transportation change, and a more balanced power makes the effect even stronger.According to this proposition, the derivatives of both export and new car production with respect to μ are less than those in the direct case. That is, both export of used cars and new car production decrease at a magnitude greater than in direct case. A more balanced power structure causes the quantity to be even more sensitive to transportation cost increase. This is consistent with the case of Japan in which the agent and OEM determine price with market force and the export quantity is very sensitive to change in tariff. Comparing Propositions 5 and 6, we can see that impact of v and μ behave differently in the channel structure. With v, the channel structure makes the whole system less sensitive to parameter change, or, in other words, absorbs part of the shock to the system. With μ, the channel structure makes the system more sensitive to parameter change, or amplifies the impact of parameter change.In the previous section, we showed that imposing a penalty on used cars pushes more cars out of the home market but does not have the intended effect of stimulating new car production. How would the effect of penalty change in face of channel structure?Proposition 7The channel structure with agent as price taker reduces the effectiveness of penalty in stimulating export and causes it to backfire more.According to this proposition, for the same amount of penalty, the export increase with agent as a price taker is less than that of direct case, but new car production decrease is greater than that direct case.The cross-border trade of used cars has been on the rise as the trend of globalization continues. If managed properly, the cross-border export of used cars can be a very effective tool to improve operations. In durable goods industries, managing the cannibalization between new products and used products is always a challenging issue. Some companies go as far as destroying used products to avoid cannibalization, causing huge losses to the company and to society. Exporting used products to a physically separate market makes cannibalization much less of a concern. In addition, since new products provide a source for used products, the additional demand from foreign markets for used products provides a new stimulus for new product production. However, with multiple parties involved in the cross-border trade, such as the governments on both sides of the border, or import/export agents as the middlemen, a firm needs to carefully manage the operation in order to exploit the advantage of the international market. In this paper, we build on existing literature and construct a model of two interconnected vertically differentiated markets to examine how the presence of an international market may impact management practices concerning durable goods. Our main results are as follows:1.A higher willingness to pay on the international market stimulates production of new products.A better connection between international market and home market stimulates domestic production of new products.High quality of used products reinforces the stimulating effect of the international market.Imposing a penalty on used products indeed pushes them out of the market and stimulates export, but such a measure does not have the intended consequence of stimulating production of new products.If the OEM relies on agents to export used cars, this causes the system to behave differently. The stimulating effect of the international market is very much reduced. Export quantity is more vulnerable to tariff change than in direct case. The government stimulus also becomes less effective.Our paper has several limitations, which we wish to overcome in future research. First, we assume that product quality is given and not a decision variable. In practice, the firm may well adjust its quality or even technology choice when there is an international market available for export. Second, we assume that the OEM is a monopoly and there is no strategic reaction from competitors. In practice, strategic competition, either at home or abroad, plays an important role in the choice of export and production.From the constraints, we obtain:ptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUD,ptUD=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF),ptUF=δ(v−qtUF)Substituting them into the profit functionΠt=(ptN−c)·qtN+ptUD·(qt−1N−qtUF)+(ptUF−μ)qtUFwe obtain a function of quantities:−2δqtUF2−qtN2+δ(1−qt−1N)qt−1N−qtN(−1+c+2qt−1N−2δqt−1N)+qtUF(−c+δ(−1+2qtN+2qt−1N+v))Since we are only interested in stable equilibrium in whichqt−1N=qtN, the profit function becomes−2δqtUF2+qtN(1+δ−c−4qtN+3δqtN)+qtUF(−c+δ(−1+4qtN+v))Since all quantities and prices are obtained in stable equilibrium, we take out the notation t. We solve the first order conditions and obtain the only interior solution:qN=1−c−μ+v·δ2(1+δ),qUF=(v+3δv+D+2δ−2)4·(1+δ)−μ(1+3δ)4·(δ+δ2)We check the second order conditions:∂2π∂qN2=−8+6δ,∂2π∂qUF2=−4+4δ,∂2π∂qN∂qUF=4−4δ.Therefore, the Hessian is semi-definitive and it is the optimal solution.Substitute quantities back to price expressions, we obtain price expressions:pN=2(2+c)−(1−δ)·(1−μ+v)−(1−δ)2(1−v)4(1+δ)pUD=2(2+c)−(1−δ)·(7+μ+2c−v)+(1−δ)2(3−v)4(1+δ)pUF=μ(1+3δ)−δ·(1−δ−2c−3v−δv)4(1+δ)Note that signs of the derivatives are obtained with δ < 1 in all proofs.The derivatives of quantities (obtained in Lemma 1) with respect to v can be seen as follows:∂qN∂v=δ2+2δ>0,∂qUF∂v=1+3δ7+δ>0,∂qUD∂v=−14<0The derivatives of prices (obtained in Lemma 1) with respect to v can be seen as follows:∂pN∂v=δ−δ24(1+δ)>0,∂pUD∂v=δ−δ24(1+δ)>0,∂pUF∂v=δ·(3+δ)4(1+δ)>0The results above can be interpreted into Proposition 1.The derivatives of quantities with respect to μ can be seen as follows:∂qN∂μ=1−2−2δ<0,∂qUF∂μ=−1−3δ4(1+δ)δ<0,∂qUD∂μ=14δ>0The derivatives of prices with respect to μ can be seen as follows:∂pN∂μ=1−δ4(1+δ)>0,∂pUD∂μ=1−δ4(1+δ)>0,∂pUF∂μ=1+3δ4(1+δ)>0The results above can be interpreted into Proposition 2.The derivatives with respect to v is given by∂qN∂v=δ2+2δ>0,∂qUF∂v=1+3δ7+δ>0SubstitutingλU=δand take derivatives with respect to λU, we obtain∂2qUF∂λU∂v>0Recall thatpUD−pUF=12·(−1+v)δ−12μ<0. We can obtain∂(pUD−pUF)∂λU<0When a penalty is imposed, the consumer at home market will payptUD+wto lease a used product. To obtain the optimal solution when penalty is present, the process remains the same as in Lemma 1 exceptptUDis replaced byptUD+win the price expressionptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUD+w,ptUD+w=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF),ptUF=δ(v−qtUF)We obtain the only interior solutionqN=1−μ−c+v·δ2(1+δ),qUF=−2c+4v+(1−δ)2(−1+3v)+(1−δ)(1+2c−7v−w)+2w−μ(1+3δ)4·(δ+δ2)We check the second order condition, and the Hessian is semi definitive and it is the optimal solution. We take first order derivative with respect to penalty, and obtain the results∂qUF∂w>0,∂qN∂w=0The profit of the OEM is the same as in direct case, and can be written asΠt=(ptN′−c)·qtN′+ptUD′·(qt−1N′−qtUF′)+ptUF′qtUF′Subject to:ptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUD,ptUD=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF)The profit of the agent can be written asπa=(pta−ptUF′−μ)·qtUF′Subject to:qtUF′=v−ptaδWhen OEM sets export price, the agent chooses price to maximize her own profit.πa=(pta−ptUF−μ)·(v−ptaδ). Therefore the optimal agent price ispa=v+μ+ptUF2. The export quantity isqtUF=v−ptaδ=δv−μ−ptUF2δ. After a simple transformation, it becomesptUF=δv−μ−2δqtUF.Therefore we have expressions of all pricesptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUDptUD=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF)ptUF=δv−μ−2δqtUFSubstituting the prices back into the profit expression of OEM and setting quantity constant across different periodsqt−1N=qtN, the, we obtainqN(1+δ−c−4qN+3(1−δ)qN)+qUF(δ(4qN+v−1)−μ)−3δqUF2We obtain only interior solution:qtN′=−3+2μ−δ+3c−2δv2(3+5δ),qtUF′=δ·(v+3δv+1−δ−2c)−μ(1+3δ)2δ(3+5δ)We check the second order condition of the interior solution:∂2π∂qN2=−2−6δ,∂2π∂qUF2=−6δ,∂2π∂qNqUF=4δTherefore, the Hessian is semi-definitive and it is the optimal solution.At international market, the agent decides the price charged to the customer based on the export price from the OEM. The profit is margin multiplied by quantity. The constraint, which defines relationship of quantity and price, is set based on price set by the agent.Recall that the profit of the OEM is written asΠt=(ptN−c)·qtN+ptUD·(qt−1N−qtUF)+ptUFqtUFSubject to:ptN=(1−δ)(1−qtN)+ptUD,ptUD=δ(1−qtN)−δ(qt−1N−qtUF)Substituting price into the profit function and setting quantity constant across different periodsqt−1N=qtN, it becomesqN(1+δ−c−qN−3δqN)+qUF(−δ+4δqN+pUF)−δqUF2We obtain only one interior solutionqN*=1−δ+2pUF−c2(1−δ),qUF*=δ−δ2−2c+2cD+pUF+3δpUF2(1−δ)δSince the Hessian is semi-definitive, therefore it is the only optimum. The export quantity above is the quantity that the firm is willing to supply for a given export price it can charge.The profit function of agent isπa=(pta−ptUF−μ)·(v−ptaδ). Therefore the optimal agent price ispa=δv+μ+ptUF2. The optimal quantity isqtUF=v−ptaδ=δv−μ−ptUF2δ. This is the demand of the agent for used products given an export price it has to payWe set demand equal supply, and the equilibrium price is given bypUF=2c+(1−δ)(v−1−μ−2c)+(1−δ)2(1−v)2(1+δ)Substituting the equilibrium price back, we obtainqtN*=1−μ−c+δv2(1+δ),qtUF*=δ·(v+3δv+1−δ−2c)−μ(1+3δ)4(1+δ)δFrom the calculation in Lemmas 1–3, we calculated the derivative with respect to v, simple algebra reveals that0<∂qN′∂v<∂qN*∂v=∂qN∂v,0<∂qN′∂v<∂qN*∂v=∂qN∂v.From the calculation in Lemmas 1–3, we calculated the derivative with respect to μ, simple algebra reveals that∂qN*∂μ<∂qN′∂μ<∂qN∂μ<0,∂qUF*∂μ<∂qUF′∂μ<∂qUF∂μ<0.When a penalty is imposed, the consumer at home market will payptUD+wto lease a used product. To obtain the optimal solution when penalty is present, the process remains the same as in Lemmas 2 and 3, exceptptUDis replaced byptUD+win the price expression. We obtain the only interior solution. We check the second order condition, and the Hessian is semi-definitive and it is the optimal solution. We take first order derivative with respect to penalty, and obtain the results∂qN′∂w<∂qN*∂w=∂qN∂w=0,0<∂qUF′∂w<∂qUF*∂w=∂qUF∂w.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
