@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A generalized multiplicative directional distance function for efficiency measurement in DEA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A generalized multiplicative directional distance function (GMDDF) is developed to measure technical efficiency (TE).GMDDF serves as a comprehensive measure of TE by accounting for all types of slacks.GMDDF satisfies several desirable properties of an ideal efficiency measure.GMDDF encompasses the existing multiplicative measures of TE as special cases.To demonstrate the ready aptness of GMDDF for measuring TE, an illustrative empirical analysis is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Multiplicative directional distance function,Generalized multiplicative directional distance function,Log-convexity,Piece-wise log-linear technology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For measuring technical efficiency relative to a log-linear technology, a generalized multiplicative directional distance function (GMDDF) is developed using the framework of multiplicative directional distance function (MDDF). Furthermore, a computational procedure is suggested for its estimation. The GMDDF serves as a comprehensive measure of efficiency in revealing Pareto-efficient targets as it accounts for all possible input and output slacks. This measure satisfies several desirable properties of an ideal efficiency measure such as strong monotonicity, unit invariance, translation invariance, and positive affine transformation invariance. This measure can be easily implemented in any standard DEA software and provides the decision makers with the option of specifying preferable direction vectors for incorporating their decision-making preferences. Finally, to demonstrate the ready applicability of our proposed measure, an illustrative empirical analysis is conducted based on real-life data set of 20 hardware computer companies in India.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA), introduced by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978) and Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1979) and extended by Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (1984), is a linear programming (LP) based non-parametric methodology for measuring the relative efficiency of a set of homogenous decision making units (DMUs) with multiple inputs and outputs. DEA is used to construct a reference technology relative to which the efficiency of individual DMUs can be estimated. The frontier of the reference technology provides a conservative inner (empirical) approximation of a true but unobserved production function.Based on the axiomatic approach and the types of convexity postulate, two different characterizations of a technology structure – piece-wise linear and piece-wise log-linear – are suggested for estimating the relative efficiency in the DEA literature. The piece-wise linear technology is constructed based on normal convexity postulate (Banker et al., 1984), which requires the marginal products of factor inputs to be non-increasing. The piece-wise log-linear technology is, however, constructed based on geometric convexity (log-convexity) postulate (Banker & Maindiratta, 1986). The motivation for introducing the log-linear technology is that, unlike the linear one, it allows for increasing, constant and decreasing marginal productivities along the production frontier. More precisely, this technology structure is flexible enough to simultaneously capture the three production features – convexity, linearity, and concavity – of a production function.The piece-wise log-linear technology pertains to a class of DEA models, known as the multiplicative models, which were developed by Charnes, Cooper, Seiford, and Stutz (1982) based on the log-linear envelopment principle introduced by Banker, Charnes, Cooper, and Schinnar (1981) (For more details about the multiplicative models, see e.g., Chang & Guh (1994), Seiford & Zhu (1998), & Sueyoshi & Chang (1989), among others).The directional distance function (DDF) of Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1996), Chambers, Chung, and Färe (1998) is a useful generalization of the Shephard’s (1970) distance functions. Using the concept of DDF, Peyrache and Coelli (2009) recently introduced the concept of multiplicative directional distance function (MDDF), which completely characterizes the technology, and serves as a measure of technical efficiency (TE). The MDDF also encompasses the hyperbolic, the modified hyperbolic (Cuesta, Lovell, & Zofio, 2009), and the Shephard’s input and output distance functions as special cases. However, if slacks are considered to be additional sources of inefficiency, then the MDDF is unable to yield a comprehensive measure of TE in the sense of Pareto–Koopmans (Koopmans, 1951); and hence, as a result, it is not strongly monotonic.In this paper, first, we demonstrate the capability of the MDDF for evaluating the TE of DMUs operating on the non-concave and non-convex frontier regions of the technology by redefining the MDDF relative to the log-linear technology. We also propose a DEA formulation for the MDDF, and a computational method for its estimation. Considering slacks as the additional sources of inefficiency, we then extend the MDDF to a generalized multiplicative directional distance function (GMDDF), which provides a complete characterization of the technology. This GMDDF yields a comprehensive measure of TE as it satisfies several desirable properties of an ideal efficiency measure such as strong monotonicity, unit invariance, translation invariance, and positive affine transformation invariance.The GMDDF-based TE measure yields a straightforward interpretation – it is the product of the geometric means of the input and output efficiencies. As regards the practical advantages of our proposed TE measure, first, due to the flexibility in computer programming, the computations of TE scores and the projections of inefficient observations towards different facets of the efficient frontier can be easily provided in any standard DEA software. Second, it allows for the incorporation of decision makers’ preferences into efficiency assessment, which will generate a more realistic TE measure by assigning weights for individual inputs and outputs that are more consistent with the underlying objectives of decision makers.While the GMDDF-based TE measure is non-radial in nature, the MDDF-based measure is radial. On comparison between the two measures, one can argue that the former is to be preferred to the latter, on the ground that the MDDF does not encapsulate all sources of inefficiency as it suffers from the problem of slacks, and the GMDDF has the flexibility to enable itself to better reflect the trade-offs between the inputs and/or outputs in its efficiency measures. However, purely on the axiomatic ground of efficiency measurement, the MDDF-based measure can be favored, given its economic interpretation for the class of log-convex monotonic technologies. Furthermore, from a purely practical point of view, the proportional interpretation of the radial MDDF measure facilitates the use of its benchmarking results in managerial contexts. For more details on the debate as to the choice of radial vis-a-vis non-radial measures, see Mahlberg and Sahoo (2011), Sahoo and Acharya (2010), Sahoo and Acharya (2012), Sahoo, Luptacik, and Mahlberg (2011), Sahoo and Tone (2009a), and Sahoo and Tone (2009b), among others.The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 deals in detail with the description of technology in an analytical framework, followed by an introduction of the MDDF-based TE measure. Section 3, first, develops the GMDDF-based measure of TE that accounts for all types of slacks; second, it describes a computational method for the practical execution of this measure, and finally, it presents a discussion of its properties. Section 4 deals with an illustrative empirical application on real-life data set of hardware computer companies in India for the period 2001–2010. Section 5 presents the conclusion with some observations and remarks.Let us consider a technology involving n observed DMUs; each uses m inputs to produce s outputs. Letxj=(x1j,…,xmj)T∈R⩾0mandyj=(y1j,…,ysj)T∈R⩾0sbe, respectively, the input and output vectors of DMUj, j∈J={1,…,n}. The superscript T stands for a vector transpose. We further consider o as the index of the DMU under evaluation.A production technology transforming an input vectorx∈R⩾0minto an output vectory∈R⩾0scan be characterized by the technology setT⊂R⩾0m×R⩾0s, defined as(1)T={(x,y)∈R⩾0m+s|xcanproducey}.We assume that T satisfies the following three postulates:A.1(Closure). T is a closed set.(Boundedness). The set A(x)={(u,y)∈T∣u⩽x} is bounded for eachx∈R⩾0m.(Free disposability). T satisfies strong (free) disposability for all the inputs and outputs, i.e., if (x,y)∈T and (x,−y)⩽(x′,−y′), then (x′,y′)∈T.For details of these assumptions and the resulting properties, see Banker et al. (1984), Färe, Grosskopf, and Lovell (1985), and Shephard (1974).In addition, we consider the convexity postulate for T in two alternative forms:C.1(Normal convexity). If (x1,y1)∈T and (x2,y2)∈T, then (λx1+(1−λ)x2, λy1+(1−λ)y2)∈T for any λ∈[0,1].(Geometric convexity or log-convexity). If (x1,y1)∈T and (x2,y2)∈T, thenx1λx2(1-λ),y1λy2(1-λ)∈Tfor any λ∈[0,1].To further clarify the definition of C.2, we define the log form of T as(2)logT≔{(logx,logy)|(x,y)∈T},where log x=(log x1,…,log xm) and log y=(log y1,…,log ys). The strict monotonicity property of the logarithmic transformation establishes a one-to-one correspondence between log T and T. This acknowledges that the log-convexity of T is equivalent to the normal convexity of log T. Formally, T is log-convex if and only if(3)(λlogx1+(1-λ)logx2,λlogy1+(1-λ)logy2)∈logTholds for any (log x1,log y1), (log x2,log y2)∈log T and any λ∈[0,1].Following Banker et al. (1984) and Banker and Maindiratta (1986), we now formulate two different non-parametric representations of T as follows:(i)Assuming the inputs and outputs to be non-negative, we define the piece-wise linear technology set T1 that is constructed from the observed DMUs under Postulates A.1–A.3 and C.1.Assuming the inputs and outputs to be strictly positive, we define the piece-wise log-linear technology T2 that is constructed from the observed DMUs under Postulates A.1–A.3 and C.2.Since assuming log-convexity for T is tantamount to assuming convexity for log T, log T will be piece-wise linear provided T is log-convex, and as a result, T2 is called piece-wise log-linear.The explicit DEA-based representations of T1 and T2 in variable returns to scale (VRS) environment are, respectively, given as(4)T1=(x,y)∈R⩾0m+sxi⩾∑j∈Jλjxij,yr⩽∑j∈Jλjyrj,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s,λ∈Λ,(5)T2=(x,y)∈R>0m+sxi⩾∏j∈Jxijλj,yr⩽∏j∈Jyrjλj,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s,λ∈Λ,where(6)Λ=∑j∈Jλj=1,λj⩾0,j∈J.While T1 requires the marginal products of factor inputs to be non-increasing; T2 is free from this restriction, and allows for increasing, constant and decreasing marginal products (see Example).We now turn to elaborate on the technological structures of T1, T2 and log T2 with the help of an example. Let us consider a single-input–single-output technology comprising six DMUs whose data are all exhibited in Table 1. The empirical technological structures of T2, log T2 and T1 are, respectively, depicted in Fig. 1(a)–(c).As can be seen in Fig. 1(a), the frontier of T2 is not everywhere concave and comprises three distinct parts:(i)The first part is a convex parabola y=e−1x2 connecting DMU1 to DMU2 (represented with red color) where the marginal product is increasing.The second part is a straight line y=x joining DMU2 and DMU3 (represented with green color) where the marginal product is constant.The third part is a concave curvey=e0.75xconnecting DMU3 to DMU4 (represented with blue color) where the marginal product is decreasing.T2 allows for all possible types of production structures – convexity, linearity, and concavity – thus capturing all the three types of variation – increasing, constant, and decreasing – in the marginal product of its factor input, which are the natural consequences of the log-convexity property of T2.Fig. 1(b) exhibits log T2. As mentioned earlier, there exists a one-to-one correspondence between T2 and log T2, including the frontier points. The frontier segments of both log T2 and T2 are marked with the same colors. For example, the red line segment log y=2 log x−1 joining logDMU1 and logDMU2 in the set log T2 in Fig. 1(b) corresponds to the red parabola y=e−1x2 connecting DMU1 to DMU2 through DMU5 in T2 in Fig. 1(a). One can observe from Fig. 1(b) that the frontier of log T2 is a concave function, which follows from the fact that it admits normal convexity postulate.Extending the concept of DDF, Peyrache and Coelli (2009) developed the concept of MDDF to measure the TE. This MDDF encompasses the hyperbolic, the modified hyperbolic, and the Shephard’s input and output distance functions as special cases. Since the MDDF is based on the convex technology T1, it yields a non-linear programming (NLP) problem that is hard to solve with standard linear programming technique. Therefore, it is imperative to reformulate the MDDF based on the log-convex technology T2 so that it can be easily converted into an LP program. Moreover, this reformulation is useful in revealing the correct TE scores of DMUs operating on the non-concave and non-convex frontier regions of the technology.Following Peyrache and Coelli (2009), we present the definition of MDDF.Definition 2.2.1Let(x,y)∈R+m×R+sbe an input–output vector andg=(-g-,g+)∈-R+m×R+sbe a user-specified direction vector. Then, the function(7)M→(x,y;-g-,g+)=Sup{β|(β-g-x,βg+y)∈T2}is called the multiplicative directional distance function.Seeking for both expansion in the outputs and contraction in the inputs, the MDDF, with a given g, projects (x,y) onto the frontier of T2 at(β∗-g-x,β∗g+y), whereβ∗=M→(·). The properties ofM→(·)are similar to those of the MDDF developed by Peyrache and Coelli (2009), which is based on the convex technology. See Peyrache and Coelli (2009) for more details on these properties.From the strict monotonicity property of log function, it follows that(8)logM→(x,y;-g-,g+)=log(Sup{β|(β-g-x,βg+y)∈T2})=Sup{logβ|(β-g-x,βg+y)∈T2}=Sup{logβ|(log(β-g-x),log(βg+y))∈logT2}=Sup{logβ|(logx-g-logβ,logy+g+logβ)∈logT2}=Sup{logβ|(logx,logy)+glogβ∈logT2}.Or, equivalently,(9)M→(x,y;-g-,g+)=exp(Sup{logβ|(logx,logy)+glogβ∈logT2}).The Eq. (9) indicates that the pre-assigned direction vector g inM→(·)specifies the direction along which the vector (log x,log y) is projected onto the frontier of log T2 at (log x−g−log β∗, log y+g+log β∗), whereβ∗=M→(·)(see Fig. 2).For any pre-determined direction vector g,M→(·)can be computed for DMUoby solving the following NLP problem:(10)M→(xo,yo;-g-,g+)=Maxβs.t.∏j∈Jxijλj⩽β-gi-xio,i=1,…,m,∏j∈Jyrjλj⩾βgr+yro,r=1,…,s,λ∈Λ.In order to solve the NLP (10), using the natural logarithmic transformation, we transform it into the following equivalent LP problem:(11)logM→(xo,yo;-g-,g+)=Maxlogβs.t.∑j∈Jλjlogxij⩽logxio-gi-logβ,i=1,…,m,∑j∈Jλjlogxrj⩾logyro+gr+logβ,r=1,…,s,λ∈Λ.From the strict monotonicity properties of log and exp functions, it follows that the constraints of (10) and (11) are equivalent, i.e.,(β′,λj′,∀j∈J)is a feasible solution to the NLP (10)if and only if(logβ′,λj′,∀j∈J)is a feasible solution to the LP (11).Let(logβ∗,λj∗,j∈J)is an optimal solution to (11). Then, since the constraints of (10) and (11) are equivalent,β∗,λj∗,j∈Jis an optimal solution to (10); otherwise, the optimality of(logβ∗,λj∗,j∈J)would be violated. Thus, an optimal solution for (11) can be easily transformed into an optimal solution for (10).We now turn to show howM→(·)can be adopted as a measure of TE. Because (β=1, λo=1, λj=0, j≠o) is a feasible solution to the NLP (10), the optimal objective value, then, becomesM→(·)⩾1. Full technical efficiency is attained whenM→(·)=1, otherwiseM→(·)>1. Since the value ofM→(·)in its current form cannot be considered a measure of TE, we use its multiplicative inverse as the measure of TE,3This felicitous reformulation was suggested by an anonymous referee.3i.e.,(12)Eo(g)≔1M→(xo,yo;-g-,g+).One can now observe that 0<Eo(g)⩽1, and hence, Eo(g) satisfies the property of efficiency requirement (Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2009).Definition 2.2.2DMUois MDDF-efficient (weakly log-efficient) if and only if Eo(g)=1.It is worth noting that the output-oriented multiplicative model developed by Banker and Maindiratta (1986) can be obtained from the MDDF, by using the following direction vector:(13)gi-=0,gr+=1,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s.Note that the MDDF fails to account for the additional sources of inefficiency caused by the non-zero exponential slacks:expsi-,i=1,…,m, andexpsr+,r=1,…,s. So, from the closedness property of T2, it follows that DMUois MDDF-efficient if and only if it belongs to the weakly efficient frontier of T2 defined by(14)∂W(T2)={(x,y)∈T2|(x′,-y′)<(x,-y)⇒(x′,y′)∉T2}.As a result, Eo(g) does not reflect full efficiency in the sense of Pareto–Koopmans (Koopmans, 1951). Thus, the MDDF overestimates the TE of those DMUs suffering from slacks. Therefore, in order for a TE measure to satisfy the Pareto–Koopmans definition of efficiency, the efficiency projection should be made onto the strongly efficient frontier of T2 defined by(15)∂S(T2)={(x,y)∈T2|(x′,-y′)⩽(x,-y)℘(x′,-y′)≠(x,-y)⇒(x′,y′)∉T2}.In order to develop such a TE measure, we now introduce in the immediately following section a generalized MDDF-based measure of TE.Consider the following definition.Definition 3.1.1Let(x,y)∈R+m×R+sbe an input–output vector andg=(-g-,g+)∈-R+m×R+sbe a user-specified direction vector. Then, the function(16)M→G(x,y;-g-,g+)=Sup∏i=1mαi1m×∏r=1sβr1sα1-g1-x1,…,αm-gm-xm,β1g1+y1,…,βsgs+ys∈T2,αi⩾1,βr⩾1,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,sis called the generalized multiplicative directional distance function (GMDDF).The GMDDF possesses the following properties:P.1 (Representation).M→G(·)completely characterizes T2, i.e.,M→G(x,y;-g-,g+)⩾1if and only if (x,y)∈T2.P.2 (Homogeneity).logM→G(x,y;-g-,g+)is homogeneous of degree minus one in the direction vector (−g−,g+), i.e.,logM→G(x,y;-φg-,φg+)=φ-1logM→G(x,y;-g-,g+), φ>0.P.3 (Almost Homogeneity or Log-Translation). The GMDDF is almost homogeneous (Cuesta et al., 2009; Cuesta & Zofio, 2005) of degree (−g−,g+,−2), i.e.,(17)M→G(μ-g-x,μg+y;-g-,g+)=μ-2M→G(x,y;-g-,g+),μ>0.This property states that if one transforms (x,y) into(μ-g-x,μg+y), then the value ofM→G(·)will be divided by the scalar μ2.P.4 (Multiplicative Concavity).M→G(·)is a multiplicative concave function on T2, i.e.,logM→G(·)is a concave function over log T2.The proofs of Properties P.1–P.4 can be found in Appendix A.For any given g,M→G(·)can be computed for DMUoby setting up the following NLP problem:(18)M→G(xo,yo;-g-,g+)=Max∏i=1mαi1m×∏r=1sβr1ss.t.∏j∈Jxijλj⩽αi-gi-xio,i=1,…,m,∏j∈Jyrjλj⩾βrgr+yro,r=1,…,s,αi⩾1,βr⩾1,∀i,∀r,λ∈Λ.Using the natural logarithmic transformation, we transform the NLP (18) into the following equivalent LP problem.(19)logM→G(xo,yo;-g-,g+)=Max1m∑i=1mlogαi+1s∑r=1slogβrs.t.∑j∈Jλjlogxij⩽logxio-gi-logαi,i=1,…,m,∑j∈Jλjlogyrj⩾logyro+gr+logβr,r=1,…,s,logαi⩾0,logβr⩾0,∀i,∀r,λ∈Λ.Letlogαi∗,logβr∗,λj∗,∀i,r,jis an optimal solution to (19). Then, since the constraints of (18) and (19) are equivalent,αi∗,βr∗,λj∗,∀i,r,jis an optimal solution to (18).Obviously, (αi=1,βr=1,∀i,r,λo=1,λj=0,j≠o) is a feasible solution to (18). This follows thatM→G(·)⩾1. Similar to the MDDF-based TE measure, we define the multiplicative inverse ofM→G(·)as the GMDDF-based TE measure, i.e.,(20)EoG(g)≔1M→G(xo,yo;-g-,g+).SinceM→G(·)⩾1, this measure satisfies the property of efficiency requirement, i.e.,0<EoG(g)⩽1.Definition 3.1.2DMUois GMDDF-efficient (strongly log-efficient) if and only ifEoG(g)=1.The GMDDF-based efficiency has a straightforward interpretation. If one expresses (20) as(21)EoG(g)=∏i=1m1αi∗1m×∏r=1s1βr∗1s,then the GMDDF-based efficiency can be interpreted as the product of the geometric means of the input and output efficiencies, respectively:EoI(g)=∏i=1m1αi∗1mandEoO(g)=∏r=1s1βr∗1s.Based on the optimal solutions of the NLP (18), we have the following proposition.Proposition 3.1.1EoG(g)=1if and only ifαi∗=1, i=1, …, m, andβr∗=1, r=1, …, s.(22)EoG(g)=1⇔logM→G(xo,yo;g-,g+)=0,in(19)⇔logαi∗=0,logβr∗=0,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s,in(19)⇔αi∗=1,βr∗=1,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s.Note that all of the input and output inequality constraints in (18) (and (19)) are satisfied at the optimality, and hence, can be replaced by equalities without affecting the optimal value.Now, we have the following theorem.Theorem 3.1.1DMUois Pareto-efficient if and only if it is GMDDF-efficient.Letαi∗,βr∗,λj∗,∀i,r,jbe an optimal solution to the NLP (18) for DMUo. According to Proposition 3.1.1, the statement is tantamount to proving that DMUois Pareto-efficient in T2if and only ifαi∗=1,i=1,…,m, andβr∗=1, r=1, …, s.We, first, prove that if DMUois Pareto-efficient in T2, thenαi∗=1,i=1,…,m, andβr∗=1, r=1, …, s. By contradiction, we assume that there exists i′ or r′ such thatαi′∗>1orβr′∗>1. We then havexˆio≔αi∗-gi-xio⩽xio, i=1, …, m, andyˆro≔βr∗gr+yro⩾yro,r=1,…,s, such that for i′ or r′, the previous inequality is strict. As mentioned earlier, all of the input and output constraints in the NLP (18) are active at the optimality. This follows that(xˆ,yˆ)∈T2. Thus,(xˆ,yˆ)dominates DMUo, thus leading to the contradiction that DMUois Pareto-efficient.We now prove that ifαi∗=1,i=1,…,m, andβr∗=1,r=1,…,s, then DMUois Pareto-efficient in T2. By contradiction, let us assume that there exists(xˆ,yˆ)∈T2with(xˆ,yˆ)≠(xo,yo)such thatxˆi⩽xio,i=1,…,m, andyˆr⩾yro,r=1,…,s. Thus, we haveδˆi≔xioxˆi⩾1,i=1,…,m, andφˆr≔yˆryro⩾1,r=1,…,s, such that there exists some i′ or r′ withδˆi>1(φˆr>1).Since(xˆ,yˆ)∈T2, there exists someλˆ∈Λ, such that∏j∈Jxijλˆj⩽xˆi,i=1,…,m, and∏j∈Jyrjλˆj⩾yˆr,r=1,…,s. Now, we defineαˆi≔exp1gi-logδˆi,i=1,…,m, andβˆr≔exp1gr+logφˆr,r=1,…,s. Then, it is easy to check that(αˆi,βˆr,λˆj,∀i,r,j)is a feasible solution to the NLP (10) for DMUo. Moreover, the value of objective function corresponding to this solution is greater than that ofαi∗,βr∗,λj∗,∀i,r,j, which is clearly a contradiction.□Theorem 3.1.1 reveals that the GMDDF declares a DMU fully efficient if and only if it operates on the strongly efficient subset of T2, ∂S(T2).UnlikeEo(g),EoG(g)is “complete” in the sense of Cooper, Park, and Pastor (1999) as it takes into account all possible non-zero exponential slacks to be the additional sources of inefficiency. Therefore, the following relationship holds:(23)EoG(g)⩽Eo(g).The inequality (23) reveals the higher discriminatory power of the GMDDF over the MDDF.It is worth noting that the NLP (18) turns to the invariant multiplicative model of Charnes et al. (1982) when both the input and output direction vectors take on unity values, i.e.,(24)gi-=1,gr+=1,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s.We now turn to investigate several useful properties of the GMDDF-based TE measure. While some of these are precisely the minimum requirement conditions for an efficiency measure (Cooper et al., 1999; Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2009; Tone, 2001), others are related to the special structure of GMDDF-based measure, and are important from both theoretical and practical viewpoints. To facilitate the discussion, we first provide a precise definition of each property and then verify whether the GMDDF-based measure of efficiency satisfies it.We provide a formal definition of the reference set dependence (Cooper, Seiford, & Tone, 2007) of an efficiency measure:Definition 3.2.1An efficiency measure is called reference set dependent if its optimal value is not dependent on the whole data set but on a subset of DMUs, known as the peers or reference set to the DMU under evaluation.Based on this definition, we findEoG(g)to be reference set dependent.We extend the definition of weak and strong monotonicity axioms by Färe and Lovell (1978) to the multiplicative DEA measures as follows:Definition 3.2.2A multiplicative DEA measure is said to be weakly monotonic if by changing, xioto δxiofor any i with δ>1, or yroto γyrofor any r with γ<1, holding all other inputs and outputs constant, the efficiency (inefficiency) score of DMUois not increased (increased).A multiplicative DEA measure is said to be strongly monotonic if by changing, xioto δxiofor any i with δ>1, or yroto γyrofor any r with γ<1, holding all other inputs and outputs constant, the efficiency (inefficiency) score of DMUois decreased (increased).We now have the following theorem.Theorem 3.2.1For any given g,EoG(g)is strongly monotonic.See Appendix A.□Now, we show that the GMDDF-based TE score is not influenced by units in which the inputs and outputs are measured, i.e., the GMDDF is units (scale) invariant (Cooper et al., 1999; Lovell & Pastor, 1995; Seiford & Zhu, 1998; Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2009). According to Seiford and Zhu (1998), the unit invariance property of a multiplicative efficiency measure in the original input–output space is equivalent to the translation invariance property of this measure in the log-transformed space, i.e., log-translation invariant, and vice versa.Theorem 3.2.2EoG(g)is unit invariant as long as the specified direction vector is not affected by the change in the units of measurement of the data.See Appendix A.□As an immediate consequence, the GMDDF-based measure is unit invariant for any fixed direction vector (e.g., g in (24)). Furthermore, it is unit invariant in the case of the following non-fixed direction vectors that satisfy Theorem 3.2.2:(25)gi-=logxio-Minj∈J{logxij},gr+=Maxj∈J{logyrj}-logyro,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s;(26)gi-=Maxj∈J{logxij}-Minj∈J{logxij},gr+=Maxj∈J{logyrj}-Minj∈J{logyrj},i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s.Similar to the translation invariance property of the traditional DEA measures (see, e.g., Ali & Seiford, 1990; Cooper et al., 1999; Lovell & Pastor, 1995; Sueyoshi & Sekitani, 2009, among others), we now introduce its analogous equivalent in the case of multiplicative DEA measures.Definition 3.2.4A multiplicative efficiency measure is said to be translation invariant if changing the original data of, the ith input, i.e., xij, i=1, …, m, toxijci, with ci>0 and the rth output, i.e., yrj, r=1, …, s, toyrjdr, with dr>0, for j∈J, will not affect the solution set or alter the value of objective function.As regards the GMDDF-based TE measure, we have the following theorem.Theorem 3.2.3Let the direction vector g be such thatgi-,i=1,…,m, andgr+,r=1,…,s, have, respectively, the same units of measurement of the ith logarithmic input and the rth logarithmic output. Then,EoG(g)is translation invariant.See Appendix A.□As an immediate consequence of Theorem 3.2.3, the translation invariance property of a multiplicative measure with respect to the original inputs and outputs implies the unit invariance property of its corresponding logarithmic based measure with respect to the logarithmic inputs and outputs, i.e., log-unit invariant, and vice versa. Thus,EoG(g)is not translation invariant for any fixed direction vector. This follows that the output-oriented multiplicative measure of Banker and Maindiratta (1986) and the invariant multiplicative measure of Charnes et al. (1982) are not translation invariant.In addition to (25) and (26), the following direction vectors satisfy Theorem 3.2.3:(27)gi-=logxio,gr+=logyro,i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s;(28)gi-=Maxj∈J{logxij},gr+=Maxj∈J{logyrj},i=1,…,m,r=1,…,s.Although the direction vector g was assumed to be strictly positive in Definitions 2.2.1 and 3.1.1, some data may take on less than unity values in any empirical application, in which case one should be careful of using the associated direction vectors. For example, consider the direction (27) or (28).Recently, Färe and Grosskopf (2013) have discussed a general data transformation while measuring the DDF-based efficiency in the VRS framework, which they call it positive, affine data transformation. We offer a similar definition in the case of multiplicative DEA measures.Definition 3.2.5A multiplicative DEA measure is said to be positive, affine invariant if changing the original data of the ith input, i.e., xij, i=1, …, m, toaixijci, with ai, ci>0, and the rth output, i.e., yrj, r=1, …, s, tobryrjdr, with br,dr>0, for j∈J will not affect the solution set or alter the value of objective function.Note thatEoG(g)is positive, affine invariant as long as the specified direction vector simultaneously satisfies the conditions of Theorems 3.2.2 and 3.2.3. For example, consider the directions (25) and (26).For an illustrative empirical illustration, we analyze sample data of 20 hardware computer companies operating in India over the period 2001–2010, which was originally used and analyzed in an earlier study by Sahoo, Kerstens, and Tone (2012). The data consists of one output, i.e., gross sales, and three inputs – manufacturing cost, overhead cost and maintenance cost.The computer hardware market comprises Indian branded players, MNC players, and assembly players. To introduce efficiency and competition, the government undertook a series of policy measures that were aimed at developing the Indian information technology (IT) industry as a major global player, and to bring benefits of IT to every walk of life. The informational contents of our efficiency estimates are not only useful to policy makers in evaluating the outcomes of their reforms, but also to regulators who need to understand and monitor the consequences of their regulations. This analysis enables us to establish a connection between these reforms and efficiency performance.We now present our discussion concerning only average TE performance of the computer hardware companies using the MDDF- and GMDDF-based measures over the years across models. However, the detailed estimates on these are available in Appendix B (Table B.1(a), Table B.1(b), Table B.2(a), Table B.2(b)). For empirical implementation of these efficiency measures, we have used the direction vectors (25) and (26). To carry out all the computations in this example, we have developed a computer program given in Appendix B, using the GAMS software.The 10-year average TE scores of companies across two models and across two direction vectors are all exhibited in Table 2. In the case of direction vector (25), while MDDF-based TE scores varies from 0.965 to 1 with a standard deviation of 1.07%, the GMDDF-based ones range from 0.774 to 1 with a standard deviation of 7.48%. This finding reveals the higher discriminatory power of the latter measure over the former one. Besides three companies that are found efficient in both the measures, the GMDDF-based measure exhibit substantially lower TE scores as compared to the MDDF-based one. This finding explains the evidence of slacks present in the latter measure.In the case of direction vector (26), the efficiency variation as measured by the standard deviation is reduced, from 1.07% to 0.58% in the case of MDDF-based measure (as TE varies from 0.981 to 1); and from 7.48% to 4.14% in the case of GMDDF-based measure (as TE ranges from 0.857 to 1). The finding of higher average TE in both of the measures holds as well at the level of individual companies. This is purely due to the choice of direction vector. One can therefore infer that no matter which direction vector is chosen, the MDDF-based measure always overestimates the TE scores of companies suffering from slacks; and the choice of direction vector plays an important role in explaining the efficiency differential in each efficiency measure, i.e., the second direction vector always yields a higher TE score than the first one.Now, we turn to present year-wise companies’ average TE across models to examine how hardware computer industry has performed over the years (see Table 3and Fig. 3). Since the MDDF-based TE estimates have upward bias in the presence of slacks, we concentrate only on the GMDDF-based estimates with respect to the direction vectors (25) and (26).From both Table 3 and Fig. 3, it can be noted that the hardware computer industry has not progressed in becoming continuously efficient over time, if a monotonically increasing time trend is taken to indicate progress. Since the industry average performance trend is one of decline and rise, there is a significant heterogeneity visible in the TE patterns not only for the industry as a whole but also for the individual companies within each of these 10years.A year-specific analysis shows that the performance pattern shows resurgence just after one year of declining performance from 2001 to 2002. Fortunately, this resurgence has continued up to 2005. The industry performance shows again a declining performance until 2007 after which the performance shows an increasing trend till the end of our study period. This continuous increase in performance in the later years seems to indicate that the policy measures recently undertaken by the government to introduce efficiency and competition, are perhaps exhibiting effective results on the ground.The analysis of efficiency relies extensively on the types of convexity postulate used in the construction of non-parametric technology. Two different characterizations of the non-parametric technology – piece-wise linear and piece-wise log-linear – are generally used to estimate the TE. While the linear technology requires normal convexity, the log-linear one uses geometric convexity. The latter technology is flexible enough to accommodate the three production structures – convexity, linearity, and concavity, which are somewhat more consistent with the empirical description of several real-life production processes.Based on the log-linear technology, two multiplicative DEA models are suggested to describe several real-life production correspondences. The first one is the MDDF of Peyrache and Coelli (2009). However, if slacks are considered important in revealing proper efficiency behavior, then this model produces an upward bias in its efficiency estimates as it does not consider the input and output slacks as the additional sources of inefficiency. The second model is our proposed GMDDF, which provides a comprehensive measure of efficiency. The GMDDF-based measure of efficiency satisfies several desirable properties of an ideal efficiency measure such as strong monotonicity, unit invariance, translation invariance, and positive affine transformation invariance.Both the MDDF- and GMDDF-based efficiency measures can be empirically applied as they can be easily implemented in any standard DEA software due to flexible computer programming, and they provide the decision makers with the option of specifying the preferable direction vectors to incorporate their decision-making preferences while evaluating the efficiency. Furthermore, they include the conventional multiplicative DEA measures as special cases.As regards the debate on the preferred choice between the MDDF- and GMDDF-based efficiency measures, we take no position. While the GMDDF-based efficiency measure is non-radial in nature, the MDDF-based measure is radial. The issue of which measure to be used in any empirical application depends on whether the slacks are viewed as the additional sources of inefficiency, in which case the GMDDF can be advantageous. However, the MDDF takes the lead if the proportional interpretation for the class of log-convex monotonic technologies that facilitates the utilization of its benchmarking results in managerial context is important.The current study points to avenue for future research in three directions. Investigation of local returns to scale is crucial in some regions: the non-concave region of production function (DMU1-DMU5-DMU2) and the non-convex region (DMU3-DMU4) in Fig. 1(a). This is because in these regions the piece-wise log-linear technology can help revealing all possible types of returns to scale as against only increasing/decreasing returns to scale by the linear technology in Fig. 1(c). Therefore, based on the work of Fukuyama (2003), extension of the prior research results on returns to scale in the multiplicative models (Banker & Maindiratta, 1986;Banker, Cooper, Thrall, Seiford, & Zhu, 2004; Zarepisheh, Khorram, & Jahanshahloo, 2010) can be made to develop an MDDF-based technique to determine local returns to scale. Second, in the spirit of Chambers et al. (1998), an investigation of the duality of the MDDF should be made to define a multiplicative profit efficiency measure, and then establishes its linkage with the MDDF. Third, in the spirit of Emrouznejad and Cabanda (2010), an attempt can be made to develop a directional multiplicative corporate performance model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
