@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Systemic cost-effectiveness analysis of food hazard reduction – Campylobacter in Danish broiler supply

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tool for analysing chain-wide cost-effectiveness of food safety interventions.Strategies emphasizing downstream interventions are relatively cost-effective.Strategies allowing chemical treatment are relatively cost-effective.Effectiveness of domestic interventions may be undermined by increased imports.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic cost-effectiveness,Food-safety,Campylobacter,Broiler supply chain,Market implications,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An integrated microbiological–economic framework for policy support is developed to determine the cost-effectiveness of alternative intervention methods and strategies to reduce the risk of Campylobacter in broilers. Four interventions at the farm level and four interventions at the processing stage are considered. Cost analyses are conducted for different risk reduction targets and for three alternative scenarios concerning the acceptable range of interventions. Results demonstrate that using a system-wide policy approach to risk reduction can be more cost-effective than a policy focusing purely on farm-level interventions. Allowing for chemical decontamination methods may enhance cost-effectiveness of intervention strategies further.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the past, a large number of different policies have been implemented to control Campylobacter in the broiler supply chain, but Campylobacter is still among the most common bacterial causes of human gastrointestinal disease infections in many countries (EFSA, 2011; Havelaar et al., 2005). The consequences of human Campylobacter infections are numerous, including human suffering and deaths, medical costs, productivity losses, reduced consumer confidence and restricted market access. It is therefore essential to identify and implement new policy strategies to further reduce the burden of human Campylobacter infections in an effective and economically efficient manner.During recent years, governments in especially western countries have tended to adopt a farm-to-table systems approach, because food safety failures often arise from problems that are systemic in nature. This is due to problems related to the provision of rights and alignment of incentives (Jensen, 2003; Unnevehr & Jensen, 2005, Chapter 6) and because contemporary food supply chains are characterized by interconnecting stages, implying that safety problems at one stage may easily spread to other parts of the supply chain and hence incur extra costs there. Thus, the analysis of food safety issues should cover all relevant actors in the broiler supply chain from stable to table (Hennessy, Roosen, & Jensen, 2002; Rosenquist, Nielsen, Sommer, Nørrung, & Christensen, 2003).Several “novel” technologies have been suggested in the literature in order to reduce the incidence of human campylobacteriosis from Campylobacter in broilers (reviewed by Keener, Bashor, Curtis, Sheldon, & Kathariou, 2004). These are based on either a reduction of the number of Campylobacter in the gut of living birds (by changed feeding or by protecting the broiler flocks against contamination from e.g. insects or wild birds), or a reduction of the number of Campylobacter on the chicken carcasses during slaughter using chemical decontamination or physical decontamination methods, such as heat (steam or dry heat) or freezing (including “crust” freezing). The process of Campylobacter spread, as well as the microbiological efficiency of many of these techniques, should be considered as stochastic by nature when it comes to e.g. the prevalence of contaminated birds and in reducing the number of colony forming units (cfu) on the broiler meat (e.g. Nauta, Jacobs-Reitsma, Evers, van Pelt, & Havelaar, 2005; Nauta, van der Ine, & Havelaar, 2005).From a systemic perspective, it is crucial not only to consider the reduction of Campylobacter risk, but also to investigate the effects of implementing new interventions on the distribution of costs among agents in the broiler supply chain. If firms cannot capture the economic benefits from new costly control measures, they lack the incentives to implement the methods in their production (Jensen, 2003). For example, Mangen, Havelaar, and Poppe (2005), Mangen, Havelaar, Nauta, de Koeijer, and de Wit (2005), Mangen, Havelaar, Bernsen, van Koningsvel, and de Wit (2005) found that the total cost for provision of extra hygiene measures, phage therapy and PCR-tests would cost Dutch broiler farms € 0.05 per bird, with considerable variation across farms. Although these costs may seem low, they are still significant in comparison with the economic margin per broiler. And despite the great importance, the stochastic features have – with few exceptions – either been neglected or poorly addressed in the economic evaluation of new intervention methods.This study develops and demonstrates a new system-based microbiological–economic modelling approach to evaluate the costs of different intervention portfolios in the broiler supply chain, and to identify cost-effective strategies to reduce the risk of Campylobacter infections when the safety risks and economic incentives for risk reductions are unequally distributed in the chain. The selection of intervention measures is based on farm level results of a Danish epidemiological risk-factor analysis (Sommer & Heuer, 2007; Sommer & Rosenquist, 2011), research concerning the prevention of Campylobacter carrying flies entering the broiler houses (Hald, 2007), literature on Campylobacter risk factors (Bouwknegt et al., 2004; Refregier-Petton, Rose, Denis, & Salvat, 2001), as well as interventions selected in dialogue with industry representatives. Consequently, four intervention methods pertaining to the broiler grow-out houses and their environment are analysed: rodent control, house quality, fly screen and feeding strategy. At the slaughter processing stage four intervention measures are considered, including two mechanical methods (steam-ultrasound treatment, crust freezing), and two chemical decontamination methods (trisodium acids, marinade). The Danish broiler supply chain is used as a case.Effectiveness and costs of alternative interventions in primary broiler production and in broiler processing are assessed, and systemic intervention strategies combining different types of interventions are developed and analysed. Cost-effectiveness analysis is adopted to compare the intervention strategies, resting on the evaluation of monetized costs relative to outcomes that are expressed in units other than money (Drummond, O’Brien, Stoddart, & Torrance, 1999). In the case of food safety, the physical benefits comprise the number of averted adverse outcomes, e.g. mortality and morbidity hazards. These outcomes are assumed to be correlated with the Campylobacter exposure in terms of the share of meat containing sufficient bacteria concentration to be infectious. Cost-effective strategies are determined using a mathematical programming model, where three scenarios are analysed: (a) only new interventions in primary broiler production are allowed, (b) new interventions are allowed in the primary as well as the processing stage of the chain, and (c) new interventions in both primary and processing stages are allowed, however excluding chemical decontamination of broiler meat in the processing stage.The rest of the paper is organised as follows: The next section presents the Danish broiler supply chain. Intervention methods and their economic evaluations at the farm and slaughterhouse stages are outlined in the subsequent section, followed by a description of the modelling approach for evaluating cost-effectiveness of strategies to reduce the incidence of Campylobacter. Model results illustrating optimal policy strategies for reduction of Campylobacter risk are presented and discussed in the following section, and some conclusions and perspectives obtained from the study are provided in the final section.For the study, we had access to primary data from 280 Danish broiler farms for 2004, the base year. The farms had a total of 4383flock rotations, representing 135.8million birds. According to DPC (2005), broilers were reared at the stocking density of 42kilograms live-weight per square meter in 2004. The average growing days were 37days, with a weight gain of 53grams per day. The mortality rate was 3.7% (DPC, 2005).Based on data from a subsample of farms representing 48% of the Danish broiler flocks and 51% of total broiler production, information on production level, as well as revenue (farm gate price), variable costs and gross margin per broiler is used to describe the economic status of farms (Table 1, left section). Due to heterogeneity of farm sizes and investment in Campylobacter intervention measures, the economic information for the primary broiler sector is divided into small (<2000square meter broiler house capacity), medium-sized (2–4000square meter) and large farms (>4000square meter), respectively.Table 1 (right section), shows the gross margin in the processing stage. During 2004, three slaughter companies with six production units had broiler supplies from the 280 primary producer farms. Apart from the basic price, payment to farmers is to a high degree governed by a number of requirements put forward by the slaughter companies (Lawson, Jensen, & Lund, 2009), including requirements for e.g. delivery weight of birds, product quality, and the welfare of birds measured by the footpad index. Food safety also plays an important role in the determination of the price paid by the slaughter companies to broiler farmers. Salmonella and food-borne livestock disease surveillance and control plans started in 1996/1997 with the associated regulation passed in 1999 (DPC, 2000). Since 2003, all Danish broiler farms should comply with a 10-point bio-security arrangement aimed at production free of food-borne diseases. Farmers are penalized in terms of lower prices, if they fail to fulfill these requirements.An essential element in evaluating the burden of Campylobacter intervention costs is the gross margin generated at the farm stage and at the slaughterhouse production unit. At the farm level, gross margin amounts to about 15% of the price (with no dramatic differences among farm sizes), and in processing, the average calculated gross margin is 25% of average sales price.In the literature, various risk analyses have been conducted to estimate or identify possible control intervention measures along the broiler supply chain (Evans & Sayers, 2000; Herman et al., 2003; Nauta, van der Ine, et al., 2005; Rosenquist et al., 2003; van de Giessen, Tilburg, Ritmeester, & van der Plas, 1998). In the following, we briefly describe the control measures analysed in the present study, in terms of their effects on Campylobacter and their cost implications (including which types of costs that are influenced by the respective measures).In general, the total cost of an intervention measure j is calculated as the sum of annualized capital costs representing long term investments and variable costs, which are directly related to the current production, and which cover feed, labour, materials (e.g. disinfectants) and miscellaneous inputs (e.g. water, energy and maintenance). For all capital investments the annuity cost per year is calculated using an annual inflation-corrected interest rate of 3%. All costs at the farm level were calculated using production information from individual broiler units expressed per broiler. This allows us to estimate the farm-level intervention costs in three farm size groups using statistical methods.Table 2summarizes the partial costs and effectiveness of the four selected intervention types at the farm level. Some of these intervention types (house quality, feeding) have more than one level of intervention. For simplicity, Table 2 only shows the maximum intervention. However, in the subsequent analyses, all intervention levels are taken into account.Rodent control is the provision and regular checks of poison boxes at selected locations around broiler grow-out houses to eliminate rodent intrusion. The study by Sommer and Rosenquist (2011) suggests lacking service of such poison boxes as a risk factor for Campylobacter. The rodent control intervention implies that farms acquire consistent services covering 6–8 annual mouse control checks provided by professional rodent control companies. Cost data associated with the professional rodent control service is provided by the industry (Absolute A/S, 2007; DLG, 2007).Sommer and Rosenquist (2011) found that Campylobacter prevalence on farms is positively correlated with the quality of broiler houses, which is in turn associated with the age of the facility, a finding that has also been supported by other studies (Evans & Sayers, 2000; van de Giessen et al., 1998). Hence, improving the house quality through renovation is expected to reduce the risk of Campylobacter infections among broiler flocks. We have estimated the cost of renovating the existing grow-out houses in terms of investment costs associated with the ante-room, floor, port, feeding inventory and lost production (Danpo, 2007), for grow-out houses aged over 29, 9 and 4years, respectively. Houses in very poor condition are assumed to require full replacement covering building, inventory and sanitation (DPC, 2005). A lifespan of 10years for renovation of grow-out houses and 20years for a new housing system was assumed. Hence, we have four age classes of houses and the investment represents the costs of upgrading from one level to a higher level.Large numbers of chimneys and other openings on grow-out houses imply higher exposure to vector-carrier flies introducing Campylobacter to broilers kept indoors (Hald, 2007; Hald, Bang, Dybdahl, & Madsen, 2004), and hence are positively correlated with the prevalence of Campylobacter in the broiler flocks (Sommer & Rosenquist, 2011). Fly-screen netting of broiler houses involves netting the openings to prevent this exposure. The cost attributed to fly-screen netting covers fixed and variable expenses, including cover water, electricity, disinfectant solution and labour for cleaning periodically after each rotation, as well as annuity costs of investment, assuming a depreciation period of 10years (Lawson et al., 2009).The standard feed plan is basically composed of concentrate and whole-grain wheat feedstuffs. However, introducing whole-grain wheat early during the grow-out period is biologically expected to dampen the growth of Campylobacter in digestive traits in the case of infection (Sommer & Rosenquist, 2011). Using partial budgeting, the costs of the required grams of whole-grain wheat are estimated as the required quantity multiplied by the difference between concentrate feed price and the whole-grain wheat prices (Lawson et al., 2009). Replacing the high percentage of concentrate feed with whole-grain wheat provides a cost saving, because whole-grain wheat has a lower price than concentrate feed.According to Table 2, Campylobacter prevalence tends to be lower in smaller broiler farms (29.3%), compared to large and medium-sized farms (34.3% and 35.5%, respectively). Upgrading rodent control from self-service to professional rodent control reduces the average prevalence by 5.97% points, at an additional cost of 0.12eurocents per broiler. Fly-screen netting and improved quality of grow-out houses tend to be the most effective farm-level interventions in terms of reducing Campylobacter prevalence, but they are also relatively costly, compared to professional rodent control and early feeding with whole-grain wheat.Steam-ultrasound decontamination is a relatively new technology combining the effect of hot steam and high-frequency ultrasound to control micro-organisms. Steam-ultrasound is generated by specially designed nozzles simultaneously supplying the right dose of steam and creating the ultrasound. It is well suited for very sensitive products that do not tolerate high temperatures (Boysen & Rosenquist, 2009; Force Technology, 2007). Steam-ultrasound decontamination involves costs in terms of capital investment, water and energy, whereas labour requirements remain unaffected.Chemical decontamination with Trisodium phosphate involves spraying the surface of the broiler carcasses with acid solution (TSP, 10% weight/volume at 25°C rinse) for 15seconds to inactivate Campylobacter, while the carcass passes through the processing line. It requires capital investments and variable expenses, including acid solution, labour, water and energy to heat the acid solution (Lawson et al., 2009).Crust freezing is the process by which e.g. fillets and whole carcasses are quickly frozen just before chilling. Afterwards, the temperature is allowed to equilibrate as the carcasses progress through the chillers (Kennedy & Miller, 2004). Capital investment for crust freezing includes purchase, installation, and re-organisational costs, whereas the method has no significant influence on variable costs.Marinating is the process by which a brine composed of water, chemicals, salt and acids, e.g. tartaric acid (6%), is used to marinate broiler fillets, etc. Marinating with these acids for 20minutes is expected to inhibit bacteria in the final product for consumption (Birk et al., 2010). Facilities to marinate are assumed to exist on abattoirs, and therefore no extra investment costs are required, whereas some variable cost is expected per broiler (mainly marinade).Table 3contains information about the estimated reductions in cfu-concentration and associated costs for each considered intervention method at the processing stage.According to Table 3, steam-ultrasound tends to be the most effective of the four post-slaughter methods to reduce Campylobacter concentration in broiler meat, with a mean reduction of 2.51log units and a standard deviation of 0.58log-units. The two chemical methods can reduce Campylobacter concentration significantly, whereas crust freezing has relatively limited effect. Mechanical decontamination methods (steam-ultrasound, crust freezing) tend to be more costly than chemical methods (TSP, marinating), but the effectiveness of the chemical methods also tend to exhibit larger variation than the mechanical methods.The effectiveness and cost parameters for different interventions outlined in the previous section provide a basis for establishing partial cost-effectiveness estimates regarding the respective individual interventions by taking the ratio between cost and effectiveness parameters. According to such estimates, early feeding with whole-grain wheat and professional rodent control are the most cost-effective farm level interventions, and TSP decontamination and marinating are the most cost-effective abattoir-level intervention methods. However, for assessing system-wide strategies for reduced Campylobacter risk, it is necessary to take into account the potential contributions of these intervention types to the reduction in overall human exposure to Campylobacter risk in chicken. The following outlines an economic mathematical programming model developed for this purpose. The model comprises three stages: domestic primary production at the farm stage, the domestic processing stage and the market stage, where both domestically produced and imported broilers are traded.As mentioned in the previous section, a microbiological risk factor study by Sommer and Rosenquist (2011) has identified a number of risk factors at the farm stage for three farm size categories. Four of these risk factors are considered modifiable via policy interventions: rodent control, house quality, fly screens and feeding. We model these four types of interventions as ordered categorical variables.–Use of professional rodent control (r): 2 categories reflecting whether professional rodent control is exercised or not (Sommer & Rosenquist, 2011):r∈{0(no),1(yes)}House quality (h): 4 mutually exclusive age level categories of houses (based on Sommer and Heuer (2007) and Sommer and Rosenquist (2011)):h∈{0(house age⩾30years),1(age:15–29years),2(age:5–15years),3(age<5years)}Fly screens (s): 2 categories reflecting whether fly screens are installed or not (based on Hald, Sommer, and Skovgård (2007)):s∈{0(no),1(yes)}Feeding strategy (f): 4 alternative and mutually exclusive strategies, representing different chicken ages at which whole-grain wheat is introduced in the chickens’ feed rations (based on Sommer and Heuer (2007) and Sommer and Rosenquist (2011)):f∈{0(bird age⩾15days),1(age:10–14days),2(age:5–9days),3(age<5days)}In total, this yields 2×4×2×4×2×2=256 combinations of risk factors for each of the three farm size categories (g∊{small,medium,large}). Based on results from the risk factor study, expected flock prevalence P for each farm type represented by these combinations,Prhsfdmg, is estimated. For example, P120110, represents the expected Campylobacter prevalence in batches from a broiler house with professional rodent control in age category 5–15years, no fly screen, introduction of whole-grain wheat in feed rations at the chicken age of 10–14days, located in a cattle-dense geographical area, and with only one broiler house on the farm. Cost analyses and cost data provide estimates of costs per broiler, C, for each of these risk factor combinations, measured as the deviation from the 0-combinations for each of the three farm size categories:Crhsfdmg-C000000g, as presented on average form for the three farm size categories in Table 2.The effects of interventions on these risk factors can now be simulated by “moving” broiler houses from one combination of risk factors to another level with lower risk (Sommer & Rosenquist, 2011). For example, the effects of a mandatory professional rodent control can be estimated by replacing all houses in each risk factor combination without professional rodent control with the most similar risk factor combination with such rodent control (for example the combination {r=0,h=2,s=0,f=1,d=1,m=0} with the combination {r=1,h=2,s=0,f=1,d=1,m=0}). Hence, the prevalence effect of mandatory rodent control in farm size category g can be calculated by weighted summation over all combinations of the other five risk factors, i.e.ΔrPg=∑h∑s∑f∑d∑mn0hsfdmgn·P1hsfdmg-P0hsfdmg, wheren0hsfdmgrepresents the number of houses in different risk factor combinations without rodent control, and n is the total number of broiler houses. Correspondingly, the cost impact of mandatory professional rodent control can be calculated asΔrCg=∑h∑s∑f∑d∑mn0hsfdmgn·C1hsfdmg-C0hsfdmg.Prevalence and cost impacts can be calculated for the other farm-level interventions in a similar manner. Assuming independence between the effects of different interventions at the farm level, the aggregate prevalence effect for a combination of farm-level interventions for farm size category g can be derived as(1)ΔPg=∑h∑s∑f∑d∑mnr→r1hsfdmgn·Pr1hsfdmg-Pr0hsfdmg+∑r∑h∑h1>h∑s∑f∑d∑mnrh→h1sfdmgn·Prh1sfdmg-Prh0sfdmg+∑r∑h∑f∑d∑mnrhs→s1fdmgn·Prhs1fdmg-Prhs0fdmg+∑r∑h∑s∑f∑f1>f∑d∑mnrhsf→f1sdmgn·Prhsf1dmg-Prhsf0dmgwith e.g.nrh→h1sfdmgrepresenting the number of broiler farms upgraded from level h to level h1 for a given level of the other risk factors r,s,f,d and m. Note that for the multilevel risk factors house quality and feeding strategy, there may be more than one level of intervention, e.g. upgrading from level 0 to level 1, 2 or 3, and summation is done over all these types of upgrades. In a similar way, the aggregate cost impact per broiler at the farm level is calculated as(2)ΔCg=∑h∑s∑f∑d∑mnr→r1hsfdmgn·Cr1hsfdmg-Cr0hsfdmg+∑r∑h∑h1>h∑s∑f∑d∑mnrh→h1sfdmgn·Crh1sfdmg-Crh0sfdmg+∑r∑h∑f∑d∑mnrhs→s1fdmgn·Crhs1fdmg-Crhs0fdmg+∑r∑h∑s∑f∑f1>f∑d∑mnrhsf→f1dmgn·Crhsf1dmg-Crhsf0dmgWe assume that Campylobacter preventing interventions are irreversible at the broiler house level, and that the associated costs can be considered as sunk costs. Thus, intervention strategies can at best lead to unchanged costs, but will normally increase costs (i.e. the farmer cannot save costs by downgrading his level of expected Campylobacter prevalence). Whereas this may be reasonable for investment costs, it might seem restrictive for e.g. feeding strategies or professional rodent control, although this is considered to be of minor importance for the results due to relatively low costs associated with these intervention types.The broiler processing stage is assumed to receive broilers from the farming stage, where the share of Campylobacter-positive broilers is represented by the flock prevalence. In positive birds entering the slaughterhouses, the concentration Q of bacteria (cfu/ml) is assumed to be described by a log normal distributionlog10Q0∼NμQ0,σQ0During processing, which involves several sub-processes (scalding, defeathering, evisceration, rinsing, chilling, etc.) the concentration is affected, and the post-slaughter distribution of the concentration is assumed to be given bylog10Q′∼NμQ′,σQ′.This post-slaughter distribution of Campylobacter concentration can be affected by additional decontamination interventions, e.g. mechanical treatment (crust freezing, steam-ultrasound) or chemical treatment (decontamination, marinade) of carcasses. It is assumed that broiler meat from the processing stage is distributed to the consumers as either chilled or frozen. As freezing hampers the concentration of Campylobacter in broiler meat, broilers for chilled distribution are selected from flocks with relatively low farm-level prevalence.The effect of intervention i on log10-concentration is described by the meanμΔlogQiand standard deviationσΔlogQiof the effect (cf. Table 3). Assuming that the effects of abattoir-level interventions are additive, the post-intervention Campylobacter concentration is given by adding the post-slaughter (but before intervention) concentration and the effect of the applied interventions, which depends on the share viof carcasses treated with the respective intervention. Using summation rules for independent stochastic variables, the distribution of log10-concentration in Campylobacter positive broilers after interventions is(3)log10Q^∼NμQ′+∑iviμΔlogQi,σQ′2+∑ivi2σΔlogQi2Hence, if an intervention exhibits a large mean reduction in concentration and a large standard deviation, the resulting concentration from introducing this intervention will have a lower mean value but a larger standard deviation than before the intervention. It should be noted that the assumption of additivity may be unrealistic because of overlaps in the effects of different decontamination methods. Hence, adding the partial effects of different intervention methods may lead to an over-estimation of the “true” effect.Assuming a total amount of broiler meat Y and an additional costcisof intervention i per unit (where superscript s refers to the slaughtering stage), and assuming further that the costs related to different abattoir-level interventions are mutually independent, the cost of these interventions can be calculated as(4)ΔCs=∑ivi·cis·YOur approach at the processing level is somewhat similar to that of Jensen (2000), although the present study has more focus on the importance of the statistical uncertainty related to the interventions’ effectiveness, as represented by theσΔlogQiterms.At the market stage, consumers buying broiler meat face a share of this meat containing Campylobacter, which is defined asPc=Pr(Q^⩾1), i.e. the probability of finding broiler meat where the concentration of Campylobacter is large enough to be detectable. This depends positively on the farm level prevalence and on Campylobacter concentration after the slaughtering and post-slaughtering processes, as well as on the temperature management during transport and storing along the way from slaughterhouse to consumer. For simplicity, we abstract from potential cross-contamination and failures in temperature management. In some of the contaminated meat, the concentration exceeds the threshold levelQ‾⩾1, where health effects are likely to occur. Given the distribution of log10-concentration, the conditional probability of a positive piece of meat exceeding this threshold can be calculated asPr(Q^⩾Q‾|Q^⩾1). Hence, consumers’ beyond-threshold exposure to Campylobacter risk from domestically produced broiler meat Rdcan be calculated as(5)Rd=Pr(Q^⩾1)·PrQ^⩾Q‾|Q^⩾1Note that the lower the mean concentration, the lower the level of risk exposure. But the larger the standard deviation of concentration, the larger the exposure, ceteris paribus, if the mean concentration is lower than the health risk threshold,Q‾.Taking into account that a share (M) of domestic broiler meat consumption is imported, the level of Campylobacter risk exposure R facing the consumers can be expressed as(6)R=M·Rm+(1-M)·Rdwhere Rmis the exogenous risk level in imported meat. The risk of human campylobacteriosis Rfis assumed to be proportional to the rate of exposure, i.e.(7)Rf=Rf(R)=β·RIn a competitive market with limited trade restrictions, the import share can be assumed to depend on the price ratio between imported and domestically produced broilers (including the costs of Campylobacter reduction measures). Specifically, the import share is assumed to be given by the expression(8)M=M0·wd+ΔCwdεwhere M0 is the initial import share, wdis the price of domestic broilers (net of Campylobacter intervention costs), ΔC=∑gΔCg+ΔCsis the increase in average cost per broiler due to interventions and ɛ is a cross-price elasticity representing the effect of a domestic price increase on broiler imports.The exposure measure in expression (6) combines exposures from flock prevalence in broiler farms, Campylobacter concentration in positive broiler carcasses and Campylobacter exposure from imported broiler meat into one composite risk measure. Hence the risk measure deviates from the approaches by Jensen and Unnevehr (2000, Chapter 3) and Malcolm, Narrod, Roberts, and Ollinger (2004), who focus on bacteria concentration in meat processing, or Vosough et al. (2006) and Van der Gaag, Saatkamp, Backus Ge, Beek, and Huirne (2004) focussing on farm-level prevalence. Mangen, Havelaar, Bernsen, et al. (2005) use the number of human cases and changes in Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY’s), which is somewhat comparable to our measure of consumer risk, but they ignore risks from imported meat.In this model setup, cost-effectiveness analysis can be conducted by minimizing the aggregate cost of the broiler supply chain ΔC=∑gΔCg+ΔCs– based on expressions (2) and (4) – subject to a (e.g. policy-determined) maximum acceptable risk exposure level in domestic production,Rd⩽R‾d– based on expressions (1), (3) and (5) – and subject to restrictions on the eligible sets of interventions in the analysed policy scenario. Solving this constrained cost minimization problem yields the cost-effective strategy under these conditions. These solutions can be compared across risk reduction goals and across policy scenarios reflecting alternative sets of acceptable intervention methods.The integrated biological-economic model framework includes several features, which distinguishes it from previous studies. Firstly, it includes the primary production stage and its close linkages with the abattoirs in the broiler supply chain, and consumers’ exposure to Campylobacter as a result of this interplay, combining farm-level prevalence and product-level concentrations which only few studies have previously done (Mangen, Havelaar, Nauta, et al., 2005; Mangen, Havelaar, et al., 2005; Van der Gaag et al., 2004; Vosough, Velthuis, Hogenveen, & Huirne, 2006). Secondly, we consider the approach to modelling interventions in primary production to be quite novel, but suitable for the purpose. Thirdly, some of the stochastic characteristics of novel interventions to combat Campylobacter are explicitly captured in the economic model. And fourthly, the model depicts the production structure in small countries with important market interactions between domestic production, consumption and foreign trade, which may have great impacts on the safety of the food that consumers buy and eat, and on producers’ economic possibilities to introduce risk-reducing interventions. It should be noted that the model does not account for contamination during transport from farm to processing, and that the applied modelling of human campylobacteriosis risk is relatively simple, as compared with more sophisticated – but more data-demanding – dose–response relationships (Teunis et al., 2005). Hence, the determination of human health risk may be somewhat uncertain. Nevertheless, the applied approach is considered to yield results of a quality that is sufficient for assessment of the cost-effectiveness of alternative intervention strategies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
