@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Specifying measurement errors for required lifetime estimation performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an inverse problem of the specification of the ME range.We analyze specification limits to distribution-related ME characteristics.Permissible ME bias and standard deviation are given for required lifetime performance.The effect of the ME on the replacement decision is analyzed.Numerical examples and case study illustrate the usefulness of theoretical results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reliability,Replacement,Lifetime,Wiener process,Measurement error,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lifetime estimation based on the measured health monitoring data has long been investigated and applied in reliability and operational management communities and practices, such as planning maintenance schedules, logistic supports, and production planning. It is known that measurement error (ME) is a source of uncertainty in the measured data considerably affecting the performance of data driven lifetime estimation. While the effect of ME on the performance of data driven lifetime estimation models has been studied recently, a reversed problem—“the specification of the ME range to achieve a desirable lifetime estimation performance” has not been addressed. This problem is related to the usability of the measured health monitoring data for estimating the lifetime. In this paper, we deal with this problem and develop guidelines regarding the formulation of specification limits to the distribution-related ME characteristics. By referring to one widely applied Wiener process-based degradation model, permissible values for the ME bias and standard deviation can be given under a specified lifetime estimation requirement. If the performance of ME does not satisfy the permissible values, the desirable performance for lifetime estimation cannot be ensured by the measured health monitoring data. We further analyze the effect of ME on an age based replacement decision, which is one of the most common and popular maintenance policies in maintenance scheduling. Numerical examples and a case study are provided to illustrate the implementation procedure and usefulness of theoretical results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Reliable and accurate lifetime estimates for key engineering assets have long been a hot research topic attracting increasing attention in reliability and operational research communities and practices. Because estimating the lifetime is important and fundamental for maintenance schedules and logistic supports of assets, which can lead to the extension of the asset life and lifecycle cost reduction (Derman et al., 1984; Bayus, 1998; Wang, 2002; Pecht, 2008; Elwany et al., 2011). In particular, accurate lifetime estimation can lead to timely and efficient maintenance and logistic planning to reduce the extra costs due to unscheduled maintenance (Scanff et al., 2007). Therefore, the effectiveness of maintenance decisions and logistic planning relies heavily on the performance of the estimated lifetime of the asset.Traditionally, if the past failure data of the assets from either fields or experiments are available, the lifetime can be estimated from the failure data by using likelihood-based inference methods (Kalbfleisch and Prentice, 2002; Lawless, 2002). However, for expensive and highly reliable assets, failure data are scarce or limited. In practice, most failures of assets arise from a degradation mechanism at work and there are measurable characteristics that can be observed to deteriorate over time, such as the drift of gyros in the inertial navigation platforms and the length of fatigue cracks in rotating bearings (Si et al., 2012). Therefore, health monitoring data for these characteristics obtained from routine condition monitoring (CM) is a feasible and low-cost alternative used for the lifetime estimation task. However, perfect measurements in practical cases are impossible and the measured health monitoring data are inevitably contaminated by the uncertainty during the measurement process (Meeker and Escobar, 1998). It is noted that, in many cases, degradation (e.g. fracture, cracks, and electronic charge trapping) cannot be directly or perfectly measured but is correlated to other measurable parameters, which may be able to reflect the degradation condition of the monitored asset (Gu et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2010; He et al., 2011; Huynh et al., 2012). Here the term “degradation” refers to the deterioration process of a certain characteristics of an asset with time. Examples can be either performance degradation (e.g. light output from an LED) or some measures of actual physical degradation (e.g., the length of a fatigue crack, the drift of a gyro, and the account of erosion), which are closely correlated with the underlying physics-of-failure of the asset. Therefore, throughout this paper, we used the term “measured data” to represent the actually measured health monitoring data which are associated with the hidden degradation of the asset.As a source of uncertainty, measurement error (ME) resulting from the noise, disturbance, non-ideal measurement instruments, etc., exists in almost all measurement processes (Kolle and O’Leary, 1998; Oxtoby et al., 2003; Dieck, 2006; Huynh et al., 2012). Hence any investigation of the lifetime estimation problem via degradation modeling must take the ME into account. From an engineering point of view, the study of ME to reveal sources contributing to its variation or the characterization of the distribution of ME has been well considered (see e.g., Whitmore, 1995; Meeker and Escobar, 1998; Peng and Tseng, 2009). A variety of literature has addressed various aspects of the relationship between the ME and parameter estimation in the degradation models and the applications of lifetime estimation in maintenance, including Lu and Meeker (1993), Upadhyaya et al. (1994), Meeker and Escobar (1998), Wang (2002), Huynh et al. (2012), etc. Recently, Peng and Tseng (2009) investigated the effect of ME on lifetime estimation based on a Wiener process with a random drift coefficient. Si et al. (2011) presented a comprehensive survey of degradation data-based methods in the context of remaining useful life estimation.The above-mentioned studies with respect to the effect of ME on performance characteristics of lifetime estimation could be the solution to the problem of “the performance of lifetime estimation due to the ME”. Here we call this problem as a forward problem which focuses on the estimation from the measured data such as parameter estimation, structure identification, reliability estimation, and lifetime estimation, while the specification of ME is fixed. However, a reversed problem of “the specification of the ME range in order to achieve a desirable lifetime estimation performance” has not been addressed in the literature. This problem is related to the usability of the measured data for estimating the lifetime and is called an inverse problem in this paper. It aims at specifying the ME characteristics to achieve the desired lifetime estimation performance. If the performance of ME does not satisfy certain requirements, the desirable performance of the estimated lifetime cannot be ensured. In other words, the inverse problem seeks to obtain the limitations to the ME in lifetime estimation under a given desired performance.As a matter of fact, the inverse problem has its practical background, and reliability practitioners or users in maintenance decision and logistic scheduling are often interested in the various facets of the inverse problem. First, a practitioner in practice may make maintenance decisions based on the specified performance characteristics of lifetime estimation. He or she would like to expect accurate lifetime estimation in order to plan maintenance and other logistic support activities in a timely and cost-effective way. As discussed earlier, the higher quality the measured data has, the better performance the lifetime estimation has. Hence if the measured data with ME are used for such lifetime estimation task, he or she may wonder how to specify the allowable limits to the distribution-related parameters (e.g. bias and standard deviation) of ME in order to avoid unacceptable deterioration in the performance of lifetime estimation. Secondly, to ensure a desired performance for lifetime estimation based on the measured data, the ME should be controlled so that the performance of lifetime estimation can be maintained. This refers to the design of the device that takes the measurements. Thirdly, when the lifetime estimated from the measured data with ME is used for maintenance decision, the practitioner may wonder what effect of ME will have on the final decision, because inaccurate lifetime estimation can lead to the increase of extra costs due to unscheduled maintenance. For example, Scanff et al. (2007) provided a business case study using Eurocopter’s data from manufactures of two standard microelectronic subsystems in commercial helicopter to predict the lifecycle cost impact of using prognostics and health management. The results indicated that modeling failure data as a Weibull distribution was cost-effective as opposed to those whose failure data are represented by an exponential distribution. This resulted from the fact that most lifetimes of assets were not exponential. Together with these discussions, it can be concluded that the inverse problem has its practical implication for engineering practices in the fields of maintenance schedules and logistic supports requiring lifetime estimation from the measured condition monitoring data, and can be regarded as the necessity analysis of ME for the required lifetime estimation performance. However, all these very practical problems are not presented and addressed in the literature.In this paper, we will consider such a reverse problem and attempt to give some initial answers based on a Wiener process-based degradation model (WPDM), commonly used for modeling degradation processes where the asset operates in time-invariant environments and thus the rate of degradation can be approximated as a constant for simplicity. We note that such rate can be time-dependent and nonlinear (e.g. Si et al., 2012), but it is not the focus of this paper. WPDMs are popular degradation models which have been widely studied and applied in a variety of contexts such as LED lights, rotating bearings, and gyros drifts, and have tractable mathematical properties (Ye, 1990; Whitmore, 1995; Tseng et al., 2003; Crowder and Lawless, 2007; Ye et al., 2012; and a review Si et al., 2011). As indicated before, we consider that the actual degradation is unobservable, but some measured data which are related to the degradation are available. Specifically, we consider a WPDM affected by the ME for lifetime analysis and develop some expressions for permissible bias and variance of the ME under required lifetime estimation performance. In order to answer the aforementioned questions, the properties of the estimated lifetime considering the effect of ME under WPDM are derived first. Then, we define some measures to characterize the difference between lifetime estimations without/with considering the ME. Through these measures, we formulate some requirements on the ME for the sake of achieving certain required performance of lifetime estimation. Based on the obtained results, we further analyze the effect of ME on an age based replacement decision, which is one of the most common and popular maintenance policies in maintenance scheduling (Barlow and Hunter, 1960), and often used as a benchmark model for demonstration. Finally, numerical examples and a case study are provided to illustrate the implementation procedure and usefulness of the theoretical results, where we also consider a comparison of condition-based replacement policy. The results indicate that, by specifying the ME range given a desirable lifetime estimation performance, it is possible to mitigate the conservativeness of maintenance decision so that the effectiveness of the replacement decision can be improved such as extending the operation cycle and reducing the long run average cost per unit time.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide the fundamental results of WPDM for lifetime estimation. In Section 3, the properties of WPDM with ME are derived. In Section 4, given the required performance characteristics for lifetime estimation, we analyze the allowable bias and standard deviation of ME. In Section 5, we analyze the effect of ME on an age based replacement decision. Numerical examples and a case study are provided in Section 6. We draw conclusions in Section 7.In this paper, let {X(t), t⩾0} denote the stochastic degradation process which is correlated with the underlying physics-of-failure of the asset. A linear WPDM is typically used for modeling degradation processes where the cumulative damage does not have a significant effect on the rate of degradation ((Christer et al., 1997). So far, this kind of degradation model has been widely adopted to characterize the degradation of a variety of assets (e.g., LED lights, rotating bearings, and gyros, automotive wheels, etc.) to estimate the lifetime (Ye, 1990; Tseng et al., 2003; Elwany and Gebraeel, 2008; Crowder and Lawless, 2007; Ye et al., 2012; Si et al., 2011). Therefore, we model the degradation process {X(t), t⩾0} as a Wiener process in this paper. In general, a Wiener-process-based degradation process {X(t), t⩾0} can be represented by(1)X(t)=λt+σBB(t),where X(t) is the actual degradation at time t, λ is the drift coefficient, σB>0 is the diffusion coefficient, and B(t) is the standard Brownian motion.We now illustrate how to estimate the lifetime based on Eq. (1). From Lee and Whitmore (2006), we use the concept of the first hitting time (FHT) to define the lifetime. Namely, when the degradation process {X(t), t⩾0} reaches a pre-set critical level w, the asset is declared to be non-usable. This critical level is known as failure threshold, which is often defined by the industrial standard such as the International Standards Organization (ISO) (e.g., the ISO 2372 and ISO 10816 for defining acceptable vibration threshold levels). Therefore, it is natural to view the event of lifetime termination as the point when the degradation process {X(t), t⩾0} crosses threshold level w for the first time. From the FHT, the lifetime T can be defined as:(2)T=inf{t:X(t)⩾w|X(0)<w}.with the probability density function (PDF) fT(t) and cumulative distribution function (CDF) FT(t).It is well-known that the FHT of the Wiener process crossing a constant threshold follows an inverse Gaussian distribution (Folks and Chhikara, 1978). Accordingly, we have the PDF of the lifetime T,(3)fT(t)=w2πt3σB2exp-(w-λt)22σB2t,and the CDF(4)FT(t)=1-Φw-λtσBt+exp2λwσB2Φ-w-λtσBt,with the mean and variance as follows(5)E(T)=wλ,var(T)=wσB2λ3.However, in practical cases, the true degradation cannot be observed directly (Gu et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2010; He et al., 2011). Such unobservability is largely due to the noise, disturbance, non-ideal measurement instruments, etc. (Kolle and O’Leary, 1998; Oxtoby et al., 2003; Dieck, 2006). In this sense, it is better to let the true degradation process be a latent process, which is continuously fluctuating but not directly observable. For example, when measuring a temperature using a thermometer, the height of the column of mercury is the observed variable, which may be linearly related to the actual unknown temperature. For the same measured variable, different measuring devices may be used. Thus infra-red-based devices may also measure the temperature, possibly with a much higher accuracy than that of the common thermometer. They therefore have different MEs, but both are driven by the latent temperature. The measurement process will, of course, in turn affect lifetime estimation. In this paper, we consider this latent degradation process with measured health monitoring data contaminated by the ME.If variable X(t) representing the degradation at time t is monitored via some measurement process, then the actual observed variable Y(t) is a function of X(t). Following the works in statistical process control (Linna and Woodall, 2001), we assume a linear relationship between them, namely,(6)Y(t)=A+BX(t)+εwhere ε is normally distributed with zero mean and standard deviation σ; A and B are parameters. Assume X(t) is the true degradation characteristics to be monitored, represented by Eq. (1). The observed quantity Y(t) is then distributed normally. It is obvious that if A=0 and B=1, no bias is introduced in measuring X(t) through Y(t), and the associated standard deviation of ME is σ. In this paper, we only consider the case that B=1 in Eq. (6) for simplicity. Together with Eq. (1), we get,(7)Y(t)=A+X(t)+ε=A+λt+σBB(t)+ε,where A and σ are considered as the bias and standard deviation of ME, respectively.From the FHT concept, the lifetime Teassociated with {Y(t), t⩾0} can be defined as(8)Te=inf{t:Y(t)⩾w|Y(0)<w}.with the PDFfTe(t)and CDFFTe(t).Obviously, the estimated lifetime Tefrom Y(t) will be different from the lifetime T. Since X(t) is not observable, and therefore in practice, only Y(t) is used to define the lifetime. In the following, based on Eq. (7) and the definition given in Eq. (8), we try to obtain the distribution of Te. The following results are presented to simplify the derivation of the distribution of Te.Lemma 1IfY∼Nμ1,σ12, then EY[Φ(Y)] can be formulated asEY[Φ(Y)]=Φμ1/σ12+1.Using the property of the conditional expectation, we directly have(9)EY[Φ(Y)]=E[E(I{Z⩽Y}|Y)|Y]=Pr(Z⩽Y)=Pr(Z-Y⩽0)=Φμ1/σ12+1,where Φ(·) denotes the standard normal CDF, I{Z⩽Y} is an indicator function, and Z is a standard normal random variable and independent of Y. Then, we haveZ-Y∼N-μ1,σ12+1. This completes the proof.□Using Lemma 1 and expectation manipulations, we obtain the following conclusions after some lengthy derivations.Lemma 2If Z∼N(μ,σ2), andw,ϑ,B,D∈R,C∈R+, then the followings hold:(1)(10)EZ[exp(ϑZ)Φ(C+DZ)]=expϑ22σ2+ϑμ·ΦC+Dμ+ϑDσ21+D2σ2,(11)EZ[(ϑ-Z)·exp(-(B-Z)2/2C)]=Cσ2+Cϑ-σ2B+μCσ2+Cexp-(B-μ)22(σ2+C).For Eq.(7)and the definition in Eq.(8), the followings hold:(1)(12)fTe(t)=λσ2+σB2(w-A)2πσ2+σB2t3exp-(w-A-λt)22σ2+σB2t.(13)FTe(t)=1-Φw-A-λtσB2t+σ2+exp2λ(w-A)σB2+2λ2σ2σB4Φ-w-λt+A-2λσ2/σB2σB2t+σ2.(14)E(Te)=w-Aλ,var(Te)=λσ2+(w-A)σB2λ3.See Appendix A.□There are three observations regarding the results in Eqs. (3)–(5) and Theorem 1. The first observation is that the measurement uncertainty can propagate into the lifetime distribution in Theorem 1, and thus we account for the uncertainties in the stochastic degradation process and its measurement process simultaneously. The second is that the results in Theorem 1 can reduce to the results in Eqs. (3)–(5) by setting A=0 and σ2=0. Last, the most commonly used properties of T and Te, i.e. mean and variance, can both be obtained in explicit forms. This can significantly facilitate the subsequent analysis. In the following section, we will present allowable bias and standard deviation for ME, given the specified process parameters and required performance characteristics for lifetime estimation.We first introduce the following definitions to measure the difference in lifetime estimations with versus without the ME. To characterize the variability existing in a random variable, there are two frequently adopted measures, i.e. variance and coefficient of variation (CV), where the variance of a random variable is often used as a measure of spread or dispersion, but the CV of a random variable is used as a measure of scale invariant dispersion since the mean of the random variable is considered in the definition of the CV while the mean is a measure of the location of the distribution of a random variable.As discussed before, the CV is often used to measure scale invariant dispersion existing in a random variable (Lovie, 2005), e.g. Z. Specifically, the CV is defined as the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean of Z. It is the inverse of the signal-to-noise ratio, formulated as:(15)CV(Z)=var(Z)|E(Z)|.Since the CV can measure the relative variability existing in any random variable, it is naturally expected that the difference between the CVs of Teand T is relatively small if the effect of ME is small. This signifies that the measurement process {Y(t), t⩾0} is accurate enough. In order to quantify their difference using the CV measure, we define the relative increase ratio Rcv(Te,T) of the CVs between Teand T as follows,(16)Rcv(Te,T)=|CV(Te)-CV(T)|CV(T).From Eq. (16), we can observe that the less Rcv(Te,T) is, the more accurate the estimated lifetime from {Y(t),t⩾0} is, and vice versa. Therefore, Rcv(Te,T) can serve as a measure to quantify the difference between Teand T. As such, it is expected that Rcv(Te,T) should be less than a given value Cm⩾0 if the ME has less influence on the estimated lifetime, i.e. 0⩽Rcv(Te,T)⩽Cm. In other words, we expect that the estimated lifetime through measurement process {Y(t),t⩾0} can approach the estimation from the error-free process {X(t),t⩾ 0} accurately enough.Similarly, we can also define the relative increase ratio Rvar(Te,T) of the variances between Teand T as follows,(17)Rvar(Te,T)=var(Te)-var(T)var(T),Similarly, it is expected that Rvar(Te,T) should satisfy vmin⩽Rvar(Te,T)⩽vmax if the ME has less influence on the lifetime estimation, where vmax⩾vmin⩾ 0 are lower and upper limits. Note that the less Rvar(Te,T) is, the more accurate the estimated lifetime from {Y(t),t⩾0} is, and vice versa. Therefore, Rcv(Te,T) can serve as the second measure to quantify the difference between Teand T.In this paper, we utilize the above measures to analyze the requirements for ME under certain performance requirements regarding lifetime estimation. Specifically, we present the allowable bias and standard deviation for ME—A and σ, given the specified process parameters (including λ and σB) and the required performance characteristics for lifetime estimation. Note that, to specify the performance requirement for ME, we should first determine the required performance characteristics, i.e. Cm, vmin, and vmax. Generally, small values of Cm, vmin, and vmax correspond to the high accuracy of the estimated lifetime, and vice versa. Therefore, these quantities can be determined according to the required accuracy for lifetime estimation and are context-specific. In the following, we investigate how to specify the performance requirement for ME given Cm, vmin and vmax, and mainly focus on the case of A⩽w, w⩾0, and λ>0 unless otherwise specified. Other cases can be analyzed in a similar manner and thus are omitted.According to the relative increase ratio Rcv(Te,T) based on the CV measure, the following theorem can be obtained to specify the requirement for ME.Theorem 2From the CV measure, if it is required 0⩽Rcv(Te,T)⩽Cm, the following conditions about A and σ should be satisfied,(18)ifλσ2+σB2A(w-A)/w⩾0,thenλσ2+σB2(w-A)1-(w-A)Cm+12w⩽0,ifλσ2+σB2A(w-A)/w<0,thenλσ2+σB2(w-A)1-(w-A)Cm+12w>0..See Appendix C.□Several observations regarding Theorem 2 need to be noted. First, given the performance requirement (i.e. Cm) and process parameters (including λ and σB), Theorem 2 can specify the feasible area of A and σ2 in a two-dimension plane. In other words, if Eq. (18) is violated for all feasible values of A and σ2, the required 0⩽Rcv(Te,T)⩽Cmcannot be achieved. Secondly, in Eq. (18), the ME variance is expressed in combination with the bias, and the bias can be expressed in terms of the ME variance, and vice versa. Therefore, given that Rcv(Te,T) should not exceed the allowable limit Cm, either A or σ2 may arbitrarily be determined as both these sets of expressions have been derived from a single equation. Thirdly, the expressions developed above involve two parameters, λ and σB, which need to be determined. We assume that these parameters are known or can be estimated from the historical degradation data. In other words, our primary focus is on how to specify the permissible ME when using degradation data-based lifetime estimation approaches.Now we consider two special cases: one is for the case of A=0 and the other is for σ2=0.Corollary 1For the case of A=0, according to the CV measure 0⩽Rcv(Te,T)⩽Cm, the following conditions about σ2should be satisfied,(19)0⩽σ2⩽σB2wCm2+2Cmλ.For the case of σ2=0, from the CV measure 0⩽Rcv(Te,T)⩽Cm, the following conditions about A should be satisfied,(20)0⩽A⩽w2Cm+Cm2Cm+12.Obviously, in the above two extreme cases, the required values of A and σ2 can be expressed in a simple and explicit manner, and thus may be very easy to apply in practice.Now suppose that we wish to determine permissible values of the bias for any desirable ME variance. Obviously, the allowable values can be derived from Eq. (18). Consequently, one can plot Eq. (18), where the horizontal axis represents the ME bias, and the vertical axis represents the corresponding permissible variance. This graph will depict the trade-off between the bias and variance of ME. Points on the curve indicate that the upper bound has been reached (i.e. Eq. (18) is maintained as equality). Conversely, points inside the area bounded by the curve represent the permissible ME bias and variance that have not reached the limiting values specified by Eq. (18). In other words, the deviation between the estimated lifetime for Teand the nominal for T is smaller than the requirement Cm. Such plot is illustrated in Fig. 1, which is related to the numerical example in Section 6.1.It is interesting to note that the permissible area of A and σ2 becomes narrower as Cmdecreases. To achieve a higher accuracy of lifetime estimation, the stricter the required performance of lifetime estimation is, the less error of the measurement process is required.From the relative increase ratio Rvar(Te,T) of the variance defined in Eq. (17), the following theorem can be obtained to specify the requirement for ME.Theorem 3From the measure using the variance, in order to satisfy vmin⩽Rvar(Te,T)⩽vmax, the following conditions about A and σ2should be satisfied,(21)ifλσ2-AσB2⩾0,thenwσB22vmin+vmin2⩽λσ2-AσB2⩽wσB22vmax+vmax2,ifλσ2-AσB2<0,thenwσB2vmax2-2vmax⩽λσ2-AσB2⩽wσB2vmin2-2vmin.See Appendix D.□Similar to Theorems 2, 3 also specifies the feasible area of parameters A and σ2 in a two-dimension plane, given the performance requirements, vmin and vmax, and process parameters λ and σB. From Theorem 3, we have the following corollaries.Corollary 3For the case of A=0, by the variance measure vmin⩽Rvar(Te,T)⩽vmax, the following conditions about σ2should be satisfied(22)wσB2λvmin2+2vmin⩽σ2⩽wσB2λvmax2+2vmax.For the case of σ2=0, by the variance measure vmin⩽Rvar(Te,T)⩽vmax, the following conditions about A should be satisfied(23)w2vmin-vmin2⩽A⩽w2vmax-vmax2,A⩾0-wvmax2+2vmax⩽A⩽-wvmin2+2vmin,A<0.Similar discussions such as those in Section4.2can be presented based on the analysis of Eqs.(21)–(23)through the variance measure, Rvar(Te,T). Also, a plot to determine the permissible ME parameters is illustrated inFig. 2, which is related to the numerical example in Section6.1. In addition, we also observe that the permissible area of A and σ2becomes narrower as vmaxdecreases in this case.It is noted that, to use Theorems 2 and 3 in practice, A and σ2 should be estimated from the measured data which are in turn affected by the precision of the measuring device as well as by the selected estimation method. To address this problem, it is better to use the confidence intervals of the estimated A and σ2 to verify whether or not Theorems 2 and 3 are satisfied, rather than only using their point estimates. We will use this method in the subsequent case study.In this section, based on the estimated lifetime distribution, we take an age based replacement policy to analyze the effect of ME on a maintenance decision. The reason for considering an age based replacement policy is that it is one of the most common and popular maintenance policies and often used as a benchmark model for demonstration (Barlow and Hunter, 1960; Ye, 1990; Wang, 2002; Chien and Sheu, 2006; Crowder and Lawless, 2007; Vagnorius et al., 2010; Ye et al., 2012). Under this policy, an asset is always replaced upon failure (the degradation hits the failure threshold for the case considered in this paper) or upon reaching a pre-determined age τ, whichever occurs first, where τ is a decision variable. After replacement, the replacement process renews. Therefore, the replacement process is a renewal process renewed by each replacement, either scheduled or unexpected. The long run average cost per unit time under this replacement policy can thus be computed based on the theory of renewal reward processes (Ross, 2007).We first consider the case without the ME and denote by Trthe corresponding time interval between two sequential replacements, also called as a replacement cycle. Then the long run average cost per unit time under the age based replacement policy can be expressed based on the renewal reward theory as(24)CR(τ)=E[C]E(Tr|w)=cpF¯T(τ)+cfFT(τ)∫0τF¯T(t)dt,where E[C] is the expected cost per cycle, E(Tr∣w) is the expected cycle length, cpis the preventive replacement cost, and cfis the failure replacement cost with cp<cf. In addition, FT(t) is the CDF of the lifetime obtained by Eq. (4) andF¯T(t)=1-FT(t). Therefore, the optimal replacement time τ∗ is the time that minimizes Eq. (24).Similarly, we further consider the case with the ME and denote by Terthe corresponding time interval between two sequential replacements. Then the long run average cost per unit time can be expressed as(25)CRe(τ)=E[Ce]E(Ter|w)=cpF¯Te(τ)+cfFTe(τ)∫0τF¯Te(t)dt,where E[Ce] is the expected cost per cycle, E(Ter∣w) is the expected cycle length, andFTe(t)is the CDF of the lifetime with the ME obtained by Eq. (13). Accordingly, the optimal replacement timeτe∗is the time that minimizes Eq. (25).In order to shed a light on the effect of ME on the replacement decision under the age based replacement policy, we present the following theorem. Its proof is given in Appendix A.Theorem 4Consider an asset whose degradation process without the ME follows a Wiener process {X(t), t⩾0} as Eq.(1)or a Wiener process affected by the ME, {Y(t), t⩾0}, as Eq.(7). The asset is replaced upon failure (the degradation hits the failure threshold w) or upon reaching a pre-determined age τ, whichever occurs first. Then the followings hold:(1)E(Tr|w)=τF¯IGτ;wλ,w2σB2+wλF¯IGw2τλ2;wλ,w2σB2, andE(Ter|w)=EA′[E(Tr|w)], whereF¯IG(t;μ,θ)=1-Φθttμ-1+exp2θμΦ-θttμ+1and A′∼N(A,σ2).If σ2=0, Teis stochastically decreasing in A; particularly T⩾stTewhen A⩾0.If σ2=0 and A⩾0, then E(Ter∣w)⩽E(Tr∣w), CRe(τ)⩾CR(τ), andCRe(τe∗)⩾CR(τ∗), where τ∗andτe∗are the solutions of minimizing Eq.(24)and Eq.(25), respectively.Theorem 4shows the effect of ME on the lifetime estimation and an age based replacement decision, including the expected cycle length, and the long run average cost per unit time. Particularly, we can find that, if σ2=0 and A⩾0, the expected cycle length will be shortened and instead a greater long run average cost per unit time will be incurred with the ME effect, compared with the case without the ME effect. This implies that the replacement decision made under the measured data with the ME effect is conservative and thus is not economically optimal. Therefore, by specifying the ME range given a desirable lifetime estimation performance, it is possible to mitigate such conservativeness and extend the operation cycle of the asset so that the effectiveness of the replacement decision is improved. For the case σ2≠0, we show the effect of ME on the replacement decision in the next section by a real case study.We first provide several numerical examples to demonstrate the main results about the required performance characteristics of ME for lifetime estimation. For illustrative purposes, we consider the parameters for the degradation process as λ=0.5, w=5 andσB2=0.04. To give an intuitive impression on the effect of ME, we here consider three special cases. The first case is that we let A=0 and increase σ2 from 0 to 0.8; the second is that we let σ2=0 and increase A from 0 to 1.6; and the third is that we consider the increases of both A and σ2. The corresponding PDFs and CDFs of the lifetime for these three cases are illustrated in Figs. 3–5, respectively.It can be observed from Fig. 3 that, when A=0, the estimated lifetime is unbiased but the variance of the estimated lifetime from the measurement process {Y(t),t⩾0} increases with σ2. This is intuitively understandable since it is assumed that the ME is independent of {B(t),t⩾0} and thus the uncertainty within the measurement process is larger than that within the degradation process {X(t),t⩾0}. At the same time, increasing σ2 first leads to the decrease of the reliability function and then leads to the increase of the reliability function. Implied by Fig. 4, when σ2=0, the estimated mean lifetime decreases and at the same time the variance of the estimated lifetime decreases as A increases (note that we limit A to be non-negative in above numerical examples). This can be well-explained since in this case increasing A makes the lifetime decrease and thus it may be not possible to have a large variance for a small lifetime. Fig. 5 illustrates the compared results when both A and σ2 increase.The above results give an intuitive picture of how the ME affects the estimated lifetime. In the following, we give an example under λ=0.5, w=5 andσB2=0.04to illustrate how to determine the permissible ME parameters according to results in Section 4. For an illustrative purpose, we assume that the required performance characteristics for lifetime estimation are Cm=0.2, vmin=0, and vmax=0.2.Firstly, based on the CV measure, when it is required that Cm=0.2, the permissible values of A and σ2 can be determined from Theorem 2, which is illustrated in Fig. 1. It can be found that decreasing Cmwill make the permissible area of A and σ2 narrower. Particularly, when A=0, it is required that 0⩽σ2⩽0.176, and when σ2=0, it is required that 0⩽A⩽1.5278. These results are calculated from Eqs. (19) and (20), respectively, and are shown in Fig. 1. Secondly, based on the variance measure, when it is required that vmin=0 and vmax=0.2, the permissible values of A and σ2 can be determined from Theorem 3 as well (see Fig. 2). It can be found that increasing vmax will make the permissible area of A and σ2 wider. Particularly, when A=0, it is required that 0⩽σ2⩽0.176. When σ2=0, we have −2.2⩽A⩽0. These results are calculated from Eqs. (22) and (23), respectively, and are shown in Fig. 2. The main results of the above cases can be summarized in the following Table 1.It is noted that, when A=0, the permissible values of σ2, determined by Rcv(Te,T) are the same as the results based on Rvar(Te,T). Because vmax=Cm, then Rcv(Te,T)=Rvar(Te,T) when A=0. Namely, the estimate is unbiased in this case.In this section, we provide a practical case study for gyros in an inertial navigation system (INS) to illustrate the application of the developed approach.As a key device of the INS in weapon systems and space equipment, an inertial platform plays an important and irreplaceable role in the INS. The sensors fixed in the inertial platform include three gyros and three accelerometers, which measure angular velocity and linear acceleration, respectively. When the inertial platform is operating, the wheels of gyros rotate at very high speeds and can lead to the rotation axis wear and finally result in gyros’ drift. In our case, the gyro fixed on the inertial platform is a mechanical structure having two degrees of freedom from the driver and sense axis. As the wear is accumulated, the bearing of the gyro’s electric motor will become deformed and such deformation leads to the drift of the gyro. The increasing drift finally results in the failure of gyro and then the inertial platform. Statistical analysis shows that almost 70% of the failures of inertial platforms result from gyros’ drift. It can be observed that the failure of the gyro and inertial platform is largely resulted from the bearings as the case of rolling element bearings which are extensively investigated in the literature. However, the difference of our case is in that we use the drift data of gyros to estimate the lifetime rather than the vibration data as rolling element bearings. In our case, we cannot obtain the vibration data since it is not allowed to fix the vibration sensors in the inertial platform. As such, the drift of gyros is often used as a performance indicator to evaluate the health condition of the inertial platform and schedule maintenance activities. For an illustrative purpose, we provide an illustration of a deformed bearing of the gyro’s electric motor (see Fig. 6), which is obtained by scanning electron microscopy S-3700N. It can be found that the maximum length of the metal flake is 155μm. Such deform is reflected by the drift data of gyros, which can be monitored and measured.In this study, we assume that the CM values of gyro’s drift reflect the performance of the inertial platform, and the larger the monitored drift is, the worse the performance is. For our monitored INS, we collected ten failure data of gyros in total, which are summarized in Table 2. For illustration, the collected monitoring data of six gyros are illustrated in Fig. 7with regular CM intervals 2.5h.In the practice of the INS health monitoring, it is usually required that the gyro’s drift measurement should not exceed 0.37 °/h, i.e. w=0.37 °/h. This threshold is pre-determined at the design stage and is strictly enforced in practice since an INS is a critical device used in the navigated weapon system.Now we use the above collected data to demonstrate theoretical results developed in this paper. First, we use the lifetime data in Table 2 and lifetime distribution in Eq. (3) to determine λ andσB2. Adopting the maximum likelihood estimation method, the estimates of λ andσB2, and their standard errors (std) and confidence intervals (CI) can be obtained, as summarized in Table 3.Based on the estimated λ andσB2, and the collected drift data of gyros as shown in Fig. 7, the parameters of the ME existing in the monitoring data can be estimated using the maximum likelihood estimation method presented in Whitmore (1995). Accordingly, the standard errors and confidence intervals can also be obtained, as summarized in Table 3. From Table 3, we can observe the uncertainty existing in the estimated parameters. To quantify the effect of the uncertainty in parameter estimations, the standard errors and 95% confidence intervals of the mean lifetime with the ME, the replacement cost and replacement time are also calculated as shown in Table 3, where the replacement cost and replacement time are obtained through minimizing Eq. (25) using the Nelder–Mead Simplex method in Matlab toolbox under cp=6000 RMB and cf=10,000 RMB, which are specified according to the purchase cost of gyro and engineering practice of gyro. From these computation results, we can find that the uncertainty in parameter estimations will have some impacts on the accuracy of the lifetime estimation and replacement decisions, and thus statistical part related to parameter estimation is an important issue. However, the issue about parameter estimation is beyond the focus of this paper and instead the goal of this paper is to specify the ME range to achieve a desirable lifetime estimation performance under the given model parameters. The details of the parameter estimation method can be found in Whitmore (1995).Considering that the INS is a critical device used in the navigated system, it is expected that the estimated lifetime from the drift data contaminated by the ME should be accurate sufficiently and hence we set the required performance characteristics for lifetime estimation as Cm=0.1, vmin=0, and vmax=0.1. Therefore, the permissible values of A and σ2 can be determined from Theorems 2 and 3, which are illustrated in Fig. 8. In Fig. 8, the asterisk denotes the maximum likelihood estimates of A and σ2, and the box corresponds to the 95% confidence intervals of the estimated A and σ2. It can be observed that the 95% confidence intervals of the estimated A and σ2 are located in the permissible ranges of A and σ2. Specifically, it is calculated that Rcv(Te,T)=0.0307 and Rvar(Te,T)=0.006 for this case study. Obviously, Rcv(Te,T)<Cmand vmin<Rvar(Te,T)<vmax. These analyses imply that the required performance for lifetime estimation can be satisfied in this case study under the given Cm, vmin, and vmax. In the subsequent comparisons, we use the maximum likelihood estimations of the parameters for illustration.To have a closer look at the effect of ME on the age based replacement decision, we compare the optimal replacement times and the corresponding long run average costs per unit time with/without the ME effect, respectively. By implementing the Nelder–Mead Simplex method in Matlab toolbox, Eqs. (24) and (25) can be minimized under the previously specified cpand cf. As a result, for the case without the ME effect, the optimal replacement time is τ∗=132.4h and the optimal long run average cost per unit time is CR(τ∗)=33.72 RMB/h. For the case with the ME effect, it is obtained thatτe∗=126.9handCReτe∗=35.37RMB/h. From these results, it is found that the optimal replacement timeτe∗is earlier than τ∗ 4.15%, and instead the corresponding optimal long run average cost per unit time is increased by 4.89%. This shows that under the age based replacement policy usingτe∗for replacement will render the earlier replacement and increase the operation cost. However, in this case study, the distribution-related parameters of ME, i.e. A and σ2, are located in their permissible ranges, as explored previously. Thus the effect of ME on the replacement decision is not significant.To further exploit the effect of ME on the replacement decision, we calculateRcv(Te,T),Rvar(Te,T),τe∗, andCReτe∗under different pairs of (A,σ2) for illustrative purposes. The main calculation results are summarized in Table 4.From Table 4, we can observe that the appearance of ME will shorten the operation cycle length and incur a greater long run average cost per unit time compared with the case without the ME effect (corresponding to the case with σ2=0 and A=0), and thus lead to unnecessary economical loss. Particularly, when σ2=0, the optimal replacement time is decreasing in A but always earlier than τ∗. At the same time, the optimal long run average cost per unit time is increasing in A but greater than CR(τ∗) always. This is consistent with the results obtained in Theorem 4. Additionally, we observe from the results in Table 4 that, when Rcv(Te,T) increases,CReτe∗has an increasing trend andτe∗has a decreasing trend. In the worst case, corresponding to Rcv(Te,T)=0.3835, the optimal replacement timeτe∗is significantly earlier than τ∗ 24.09%, and the corresponding optimal long run average cost per unit time is significantly increased by 46.46%. This contrasts sharply with the case Rcv(Te,T)=0.0307, in which both the decrease in optimal replacement time and the increase in optimal long run average cost per unit time are less than 5%. This demonstrates the necessity of specifying the ME range. Finally, it is worth noting that, though increasing Rvar(Te,T) may also makeCReτe∗increase andτe∗decrease, there is no general trending amongτe∗,CReτe∗, and Rvar(Te,T). This is due in large part to the fact that Rcv(Te,T) takes into account both the means and variances of Teand T, but only the variances of Teand T are taken into account by Rvar(Te,T).To have a further comparison, we here consider a condition-based replacement policy which can make replacement decision at each condition monitoring time, conditional on the condition monitoring data (see, e.g., Carr and Wang, 2011; Elwany and Gebraeel, 2008). Therefore, the residual life distribution is used in such condition-based replacement instead of the lifetime distribution and the cost per sampling is also considered with c=30 RMB in this case. As discussed previously, the drift of the gyro is often used as a performance degradation indicator to evaluate the health condition of the inertial platform. Thus, we use the drift data of the gyro to estimate the residual life and then determine the optimal replacement time. The specific drift data used in this case are shown in Fig. 7. Suppose that the degradation of the gyro is discretely monitored at time 0<t1<⋯<tiand let yi=Y(ti) denote the drift measurement at time ti. Then, the set of the measurements up to tiis represented byYi={y1,y2,…,yi} and the corresponding set of the underlying degradation states up to tiis represented byXi={x1,x2,…,xi}, where xi=X(ti). According to the model setting, if the ME is considered, we have yi=xi+ε; otherwise, xi=yi. Based on the condition monitoring data, the residual life can be estimated at time ti, denoted by Ri. Further, we denote the estimated residual life distribution with considering the ME asFRi|Yi(ri)and without considering the ME asFRi|Xi(ri). The specific formulations forFRi|Yi(ri)andFRi|Xi(ri)are briefly summarized in Appendix E. For an illustrating purpose, at the ith monitoring time ti, the average cost per unit time without the ME under this condition-based replacement policy can be expressed as(26)CdR(τ)=i×c+cpF¯Ri|Xi(τ-ti)+cfFRi|Xi(τ-ti)ti+∫0τ-tiF¯Ri|Xi(u)du,where τ corresponds to the decision variable representing the replacement time andF¯Ri|Xi(ri)=1-FRi|Xi(ri). Similarly, the average cost per unit time with the ME at tiis(27)CdRe(τ)=i×c+cpF¯Ri|Yi(τ-ti)+cfFRi|Yi(τ-ti)ti+∫0τ-tiF¯Ri|Yi(u)du,whereFRi|Yi(ri)is the estimated residual life distribution with considering the ME andF¯Ri|Yi(ri)=1-FRi|Yi(ri). It is noted that the underlying assumption for Eqs. (26) and (27) is that the next monitoring time is sufficiently long. Thus Eqs. (26) and (27) are used to show where the minimum is located and illustrate the results regarding the replacement times and the average costs per unit time; otherwise, the result for τ more than the next monitoring time will be recalculated after obtaining new monitoring data, since the residual life distribution is updated. The specific development and clarification for Eqs. (26) and (27) are given in Appendix F.For comparisons, we compute the optimal long run average cost per unit time and the optimal replacement time at several different monitoring times, as summarized in Table 5, where τ∗ andτe∗are the optimal replacement times by minimizing Eqs. (26) and (27), respectively.From Table 5, we can observe that the condition-based replacement policy will lead to the increase of the average cost per unit time, compared with the age-based replacement policy (corresponding to the results at ti=0), since the sampling cost is considered. However, the optimal replacement time is extended obviously and thus the operation time of the asset is extended, both in the case of considering the ME effect and the case not considering. Because the monitoring information is considered in the condition-based replacement policy and thus the estimated residual life is repeatedly updated to ensure that the most recently calculated residual life reflects the current reality of the asset. In addition, a common feature shared by the results in the condition-based replacement policy and age-based replacement policy is that the appearance of ME will shorten the length of the operation cycle and incur a greater long run average cost per unit time compared with the case without considering the ME effect. The above observed phenomenon is not surprising in that the uncertainty introduced by the ME will contribute to the uncertainty of the estimated residual life and thus affect the replacement decisions.In summary, the results in this case study imply that the replacement decision made directly using the measured data with the ME could be conservative and thus is not economically optimal. Instead, by specifying the ME range given a desirable lifetime estimation performance, it is possible to mitigate such conservativeness so that the effectiveness of the replacement decision can be improved such as extending the operation cycle of the asset and reducing the long run average cost per unit time.The analysis of the ME effect is an integral part of any data-driven lifetime analysis, where the degradation measurements are taken in order to achieve the lifetime estimation. From the literature, the existence of ME indeed affects the lifetime estimation and further the maintenance decision when the lifetime estimation is used in maintenance practices. The existing studies about the effect of ME on lifetime estimation could be the solution to the problem of “the performance characteristics of lifetime estimation due to the ME”. However, an opposite problem of “the specification of the ME range to achieve a desirable lifetime estimation performance” can be regarded as a reversed problem of the former problem. Solving this reversed problem aims at specifying the ME characteristics to achieve the required estimation performance. In this paper, we give some initial answers to the reversed problem. Using Wiener process-based degradation models, permissible values for the ME bias and standard deviation can be identified for desirable performance characteristics of the lifetime estimation. If the performance of the ME does not satisfy the permissible values, the desirable performance of the lifetime estimation cannot be ensured by the measured data. This is of value to the design of the measurement devices and processes to ensure that the satisfied lifetime estimation can be obtained from the observed measurements. We also analyze the effect of ME on an age based replacement decision. It is found that the expected cycle length is shortened and a greater long run average cost per unit time is incurred with the ME effect compared with the case without the ME effect. Numerical examples and a case study are provided to demonstrate theoretical results.The concerned problem in this paper stems from the demands of planning maintenance schedules and logistic supports based on the measured data subject to the ME, since it is related to a key problem in prognostics and health management, i.e. the lifetime estimation based on the measured data, which is the basis of subsequent maintenance and logistic decisions. Several works appeared in the OR literature regarding maintenance decisions (see, e.g., Elwany et al., 2011; Ye et al., 2012) and spare parts ordering (see, e.g., Elwany and Gebraeel, 2008; Li and Ryan, 2011) addressed a variety of decision problems based on the estimated lifetime, but we look at it from a different angle in this paper as explained previously. As a source of variability contributing to the uncertainty of the estimated lifetime, the ME is inevitable and cannot be removed completely. In this paper, we consider the reverse problem of specifying the ME range under the required lifetime estimation performance and develop some initial guidelines. The conducted case study demonstrates the necessity of specifying the ME range for the required lifetime estimation performance, and shows that the effect of ME cannot be neglected in decision making practice. Thus, this work is relevant to operational management studies related to maintenance schedules and logistics requiring lifetime estimation from the measured data. In addition, the presented method will be helpful to arouse other inverse problems and decision making problems in the fields of reliability estimation, maintenance schedules and logistic supports based on the measured data. For example, once the monitoring is costly and time-consuming, it is naturally wondered whether or not it is possible to determine the minimum number of the condition monitoring data under certain performance requirements for lifetime estimation, in either statistical or economical objectives. This problem will involve some decision makings to achieve a trade-off between the monitoring cost and performance of the lifetime estimation, and may deserve further research.There are several other directions for further studies. Firstly, in this paper, we only consider a linear case for degradation process, but for complex assets in practice, a nonlinear model may be more appropriate to describe the degradation process of the asset operating in dynamic environments. Secondly, as noted by one conspicuous referee, statistical part related to parameter estimation is important because of the impact of the estimation uncertainty on the accuracy of lifetime estimation and this is also verified by the results in the case study. Such observation leads to another interesting inverse problem of how to determine the sampling policy (e.g. sampling interval and the number of the data) to achieve a desirable lifetime estimation performance. This problem also involves some decision makings and deserves further research. Finally, it is desirable to develop new measures to quantify the difference between lifetime estimations with/without the ME.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
