@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sustainable trade credit and replenishment decisions with credit-linked demand under carbon emission constraints

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider sustainability issues on the joint trade credit and inventory decisions.We analyze the models under various environmental regulations.The effects of carbon emission parameters are performed in rigorous discussions.The influence of environmental costs on the problem is significant.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Environmental regulation,Inventory,Trade credit,Default risk,Carbon emissions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we consider issues of sustainability in the context of joint trade credit and inventory management in which the demand depends on the length of the credit period offered by the retailer to its customers. We quantify the impacts of the credit period and environmental regulations on the inventory model. Starting with some mild assumptions, we first analyze the model with generalized demand and default risk rates under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, and then we make some extensions to the model with the Carbon Offset policy. We further analytically examine the effects of carbon emission parameters on the retailer’s trade credit and replenishment strategies. Finally, a couple of numerical examples and sensitivity analysis are given to illustrate the features of the proposed model, which is followed by concluding remarks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Trade credit is a common phenomenon in the current business environment. In today’s competitive business environment, many businesses have no pricing power. To avoid lasting price competition, businesses use credit as part of the pricing strategy and provide credit terms to their customers to gain a competitive edge. We can observe that businesses often provide credit terms to allow their customers to make purchases today and pay for them at a later date without any additional charges. Since trade credit can reduce the customer’s inventory holding cost, lengthening the credit period may create reputation among potential customers and consequently gain increased market share. In recent years, a large amount of attention has been devoted to the models for inventory replenishment policies involving trade credit policy. The analysis of the effect of trade credit policy on the economic order quantity (EOQ) model began with Goyal (1985), who studied an EOQ model under the condition of permissible delay in payments. Since the deterioration of inventory items is a common phenomenon in daily life because of poor storage and preservation quality, Aggarwal and Jaggi (1995) and Hwang and Shinn (1997) extended the model of Goyal (1985) to consider the deterministic inventory model with a constant deterioration rate. Later on, Jamal, Sarker, and Wang (1997) extended Aggarwal and Jaggi’s model (1995) to allow for shortages. Since Jamal et al. (1997) did not provide a procedure to find the global minimum, Hsieh, Dye, and Ouyang (2008) complemented the shortcomings of Jamal et al. (1997) and showed that the optimal solution for each case not only exists but is unique under specific circumstances. Chang and Dye (2001) then extended this issue to the inventory model with time-varying deterioration rate and time-dependent partial backlogging. In addition, Teng (2002) amended Goyal’s (1985) model by considering the difference between unit price and unit cost, and found that it makes economic sense for the retailer to order less quantity to take advantage of the payment delay more frequently. Huang (2003) developed an EOQ model in which a supplier offers a retailer the permissible delay period M, and the retailer in turn provides the trade credit period N (with N ≤ M) to its customers. Chang, Ouyang, and Teng (2003) presented an inventory model for the items with constant demand and deterioration rates under supplier credits linked to ordering quantity. Chang and Dye (2005) investigated the effects of time-varying demand and deterioration rates in the inventory model when the credit period depends on the retailer’s ordering quantity. Recently, to accommodate more practical features of the real inventory systems, there are also many research efforts that consider trade credit in deteriorating inventory models. Sana and Chaudhuri (2008), Tsao and Sheen (2008), Tsao (2010), Geetha and Uthayakumar (2010), Ho (2011), Sarkar (2012), Chen, Teng, and Skouri (2013), Lou and Wang (2013), Tsao (2013), Chern, Chan, Teng, and Goyal (2014), and Chen and Teng (2014) are such studies.However, the above-mentioned papers mainly take the buyer’s perspective of finding the optimal ordering policies under a given credit period, but little is known about how to determine the optimal length of the credit period for the retailer. For agreement with the practical inventory situation, Jaggi, Goyal, and Goel (2008) established an inventory model to analyze the impact of credit-linked demand on retailer’s replenishment behavior. Although sales can be stimulated by trade credit, longer credit period ties up the business capital in receivables, and this affects cash flow directly and increases the probability of a customer default. Therefore, trade credit management needs to balance the trade-off between increased sales and default risk of granting credit. Recently, Teng and Lou (2012) incorporated the credit-linked demand and default risk to establish an EOQ model for the retailer in a supply chain with up-stream and down-stream trade credits. Meanwhile, Lou and Wang (2012) extended the classical EOQ model by introducing the credit-linked demand and default risks. Based on the results of Teng and Lou (2012) and Lou and Wang (2012), numerous research works, such as Wu and Chan (2014), Wang, Teng, and Lou (2014), Wu, Ouyang, Cárdenas-Barrón, and Goyal (2014) and Teng, Lou, and Wang (2013), constructed and analyzed inventory models for deteriorating items with expiration dates under different environmental scenarios and focused on how to determine the optimal credit period for the retailer. Chern, Pan, Teng, Chan, and Chen (2013) and Chern et al. (2014) discussed the vendor–buyer inventory-production models with trade credit risk in a supply chain. However, the rates of demand and default risk in the above-mentioned studies are all assumed to be specific functions of the credit period.In recent years, the greenhouse effect and global warming have gained much attention due to stronger and more frequent extreme weather events. To slow down the greenhouse effect and global warming, the so-called Kyoto Protocol was signed in 1997 as a result of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The purpose of the Kyoto Protocol was to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from industrial countries to 5.2 percent below levels in 1990 between 2008 and 2012. The protocol also introduced three flexible mechanisms—International Emissions Trading, Joint Implementation, and the Clean Development Mechanism. One of the most effective market-based mechanisms in Kyoto Protocol is Emissions Trading (also known as Cap-and-Trade) which has been broadly adopted by the United Nations system. This mechanism puts a mandatory limit on emissions to all the firms, and allows firms to buy or sell rights to emit carbon dioxide within the cap. To meet targets for the carbon emissions reduction set by the Kyoto Protocol, many countries or regions have made either voluntary or regulatory efforts to reduce their carbon emissions, e.g. the World Bank’s BioCarbon Fund, the EU Emissions Trading System, the US Chicago Climate Exchange and the Midwestern Regional Greenhouse Gas Reduction Accord etc. Since carbon is the basic element in fossil energy, cutting carbon equals to cost savings and operational efficiency. Recently, the impact of carbon emissions on operations management has drawn more academic attention. Benjaafar, Li, and Daskin (2010) first presented a series of model formulations that illustrate how carbon emission considerations can be incorporated into operational decision-making with regard to procurement, production and inventory managements. Bonney and Jaber (2011) examined some possible environmental consequences of common inventory activities and suggested that all functions within the product life cycle should be looked at from an environmental point of view. They also provided a simplified inventory model with some environmental costs to illustrate how the business could determine inventory parameters in an environmental context. Arslan and Turkay (2010), Hua, Cheng, and Wang (2011), Bouchery, Ghaffari, Jemai, and Dallery (2012) and Chen, Benjaafar, and Elomri (2013) considered single product replenishment problems with carbon emission considerations and analytically examined the impacts of carbon regulatory mechanisms on ordering decisions. Meanwhile, Song and Leng (2012) investigated the classical newsvendor problem under various carbon emissions policies. Hua, Qiao, and Jian (2011) extended the same issue to the price-sensitive demand under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy. Since transportation is a main source of carbon emission, Absi, Dauzère-Pérès, Kedad-Sidhoum, Penz, and Rapine (2013) analyzed multi-sourcing lot-sizing problem with various carbon emission constraints: Periodic, Cumulative, Rolling and Global carbon emission constraints. They also showed that the first case is solvable in polynomial time, while the three others are NP-hard. Zhang and Xu (2013) extended the multi-item newsvendor problem to the multi-item production-planning problem with finite capacity under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy. Bozorgi, Pazour, and Nazzal (2014) examined an inventory model for cold items in which the emission and costs associated with transportation are represented in the non-linear objective function. They also analyzed the trade-off between the cost function and emission function, and observed that the emission function is more sensitive to deviation from optimality than the cost function. For a detailed survey on the literature of inventory models considering carbon emissions, we refer the readers to Benjaafar et al. (2010) and the references therein for more details on the subject. However, the above mentioned papers do not take into account the effect of the deterioration on the inventory model, which plays an important role in settling a replenishment strategy.Customers prefer longer credit periods as lengthening payment period will stimulate sales growth. However, this ties up with retailer’s capital and will increase the risk of default. Furthermore, a higher demand leads to greater carbon emissions. Sustainable development is the main policy of economic development nowadays. In order to achieve the sustainable development, many countries are implementing environmental regulations to restrict the carbon emissions for public or private sectors. Since the environmental regulations will impact business decisions at any time, the joint trade credit and inventory replenishment strategies for a deteriorating product need to take into account the effect of environmental issues. The inventory system for deteriorating items with trade credit policy has been an object of study for a long time, but little is known about the effects of trade credit risk and environmental issues. In this paper, to obtain robust and general results, we extend previous knowledge of inventory control and trade credit policy by incorporating environmental considerations and exploring the impacts on the retailer’s inventory replenishment and trade credit strategies. The objective of this study is to determine the following joint decisions: (1) how long the credit period should be made and (2) inventory replenishment policy. We contribute to two streams of literature: (1) the inventory model with credit risk, and (2) the inventory model subject to environmental considerations. While the first stream of literature always assumes the demand and default risk rates to be specific functions of credit period, the second stream of literature typically ignores the deterioration of product.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first present the deteriorating inventory model with trade credit policy under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy with generalized demand and default risk rates, and then rigorously analyze the effects of carbon emission parameters on the retailer’s inventory replenishment and trade credit strategies. Using the obtained theoretical results, we make further extensions to the deteriorating inventory model under the Carbon Offset policy. In Section 3, a couple of numerical examples and sensitivity analysis are given to illustrate the features of the proposed model. Finally, the conclusions and suggestions for future research are given in Section 4. All the proofs are delegated to Appendix A.This paper studies the following optimal inventory replenishment model under various carbon emissions policies. A single product is considered sold and backorders are allowed. In addition, the goods under consideration are perishable. Let the inventory cycle represent the time interval between two consecutive orders, we assume that the demand in each inventory cycle is known with certainty and depends on the retailer’s credit period offered to the customers. The credit period means the length of time after the delivery date before a customer has to pay for the goods. The objective is to maximize the total profit after the default risk. At the beginning of each inventory cycle, there are two major decisions the retailer needs to determine simultaneously: (1) an available credit period before the start of inventory cycle; and (2) an optimal replenishment strategy to satisfy demands in each inventory cycle. Let n be the credit period offered by the retailer to its customers, the demand is given by a demand function D(n), which is assumed to be nonnegative, continuous and twice differentiable. Because credit trade allows customers to enjoy the benefits of delayed payments, lengthening the period will stimulate sales. The longer the credit period is, the higher is the demand. Hence, demand strictly increases in the credit period, that is D′(n) > 0. Meanwhile, since a longer credit period may tie up the retailer’s capital and then increase the risk of default, the rate of default risk giving the credit period n is assumed to be F(n), where F′(n) > 0.Let t1 and T respectively denote the time at which the inventory level reaches zero and length of the inventory cycle, where 0 < t1 < T. During the in-stock period, (0, t1), the product deteriorates at a time-varying rate of deterioration θ(t), 0 < θ(t) < 1, and there is no repair or replacement of deteriorated units during the inventory cycle. During the stockout period, (t1, T), customers will be informed of a waiting time; some stockouts are backlogged, whereas others become lost sales. We suppose here that the backorder rate is variable and is dependent on the length of the waiting time for the next replenishment. Therefore, the fraction of shortages backordered, denoted by β( · ), is a decreasing function of the length of waiting time, and 0 < β( · ) < 1 with β(0) = 1. For convenience, and without loss of generality, we also assume that the delivery lead-time is zero, and thus orders are delivered immediately. Given the assumptions and notation above, the behavior of the inventory system during the replenishment period [0, T) can be exhibited in Fig. 1.For notational convenience we introduce the notation to be used throughout this paper. Let K be the ordering cost per order, c be the unit purchasing cost, p (p > c) be the selling price per unit, h be the holding cost per unit per unit time, s be the backorder cost per unit per unit time. π is the goodwill cost of lost sales per unit and r is the discount rate. Furthermore, since we consider the deteriorating inventory model under different carbon emissions policies, we introduce the carbon emission parameters as follows to account for carbon emissions. Let E be the carbon price per unit emission of carbon, ϖ be the carbon cap,K^be the amount of fixed carbon emissions per order,c^be the amount of carbon emissions associated per unit purchased or produced andh^be the amount of carbon emissions per unit of inventory held per unit time.From Fig. 1, we can see that the depletion of the inventory occurs due to the combined effects of the demand and deterioration in the interval (0, t1) and the demand backordered in the interval (t1, T), respectively. Hence, the variation of the inventory level, denoted by I(t), with respect to time can be described by the following differential equation:(1)dI(t)dt={−D(n)−θ(t)I(t),0<t<t1,−D(n)β(T−t),t1<t<T,with the boundary condition I(t1) = 0. Solving the differential equation, we get the inventory level as follows:(2)I(t)={D(n)∫tt1eg(u)−g(t)du,0≤t<t1,−D(n)∫t1tβ(T−u)du,t1≤t<T,whereg(z)=∫0zθ(u)du. Hence, the ordering quantity per inventory cycle, denoted by Q, can be determined as(3)Q=initialinventoryonhand+numberofbackorders=I(0)−I(T)=D(n)[∫0t1eg(t)dt+∫t1Tβ(T−t)dt].Then the total profit without considering carbon emissions and the amount of carbon emissions per inventory cycle can be respectively calculated as follows:(4)TP(t1,T,n)={discountedsalesrevenueafterdefaultrisk−orderingcost−purchasecost−holdingcost−backordercost−opportunitycost}=pe−rnD(n)[1−F(n)][t1+∫t1Tβ(T−t)dt]−K−cD(n)[∫0t1eg(t)dt+∫t1Tβ(T−t)dt]−hD(n)∫0t1∫tt1eg(u)−g(t)dudt−sD(n)∫t1T(T−t)β(T−t)dt−πD(n)×∫t1T[1−β(T−t)]dtand(5)CE(t1,T,n)=K^+c^D(n)[∫0t1eg(t)dt+∫t1Tβ(T−t)dt]+h^D(n)∫0t1∫tt1eg(u)−g(t)dudt.In this section, we first begin with the analysis of the deteriorating inventory system under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, under which, the retailer is given an initial cap for carbon emissions and allowed to buy or sell rights to emit within the cap. If the retailer’s amount of carbon emissions exceeds its carbon cap ϖ, it has to acquire additional carbon allowances on the compliance carbon trading market to cover the excess between its actual emissions and the cap. However, if the retailer’s amount of carbon emissions is lower than its carbon cap, it will be able to sell its surplus carbon allowances to other businesses on the compliance carbon trading market. The total profit per inventory cycle, denoted by f(t1, T, n), is therefore given by(6)f(t1,T,n)=TP(t1,T,n)−E×{CE(t1,T,n)−ϖT}={pe−rn[1−F(n)]−(c+Ec^)+π}D(n)×[t1+∫t1Tβ(T−t)dt]−(K+EK^)−(c+Ec^)D(n)∫0t1[eg(t)−1]dt−(h+Eh^)D(n)×∫0t1∫tt1eg(u)−g(t)dudt−sD(n)∫t1T(T−t)β(T−t)dt−[πD(n)−Eϖ]T.Now our problem is to determine optimal credit period (i.e. n) and replenishment strategy (i.e. t1 and T) which maximize the retailer’s total profit per unit time. LetΠ(t1,T,n)≡f(t1,T,n)Tdenote the retailer’s total profit per unit time under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, the optimization problem can then be represented formally as:maxt1,T,nΠ(t1,T,n),s.t.0<t1<Tandn≥0.As we can note from (6) that if the retailer closes the system ( i.e. t1 = 0, n = 0 and T → ∞), the cost of losing all sales per unit time is πD(0). Since the retailer can sell its carbon allowances to the carbon trading market under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, the earning on the carbon trading market is ϖE. Once πD(0) ≤ ϖE, it represents that continually losing sales is more beneficial than operating an inventory system, which is not realistically feasible. Furthermore, because the inventory system should not be operated if the total profit is negative, we restrict ourselves to the case in which the retailer has finite positive total profit per unit time. More specifically, without loss of generality, we make the following assumptions on the carbon price and total profit per unit time:Assumption 1The cost of losing all sales per unit time is greater than the earning from selling its carbon allowances to the carbon trading market, i.e. πD(0) > ϖE.For any given feasible credit period n,Ω= {(t1, T): 0 < t1 < T, f(t1, T, n) ≥ 0} is a nonempty set.We now begin to analyze the model, and our first step is to show that a unique maximizer for Π(t1, T, n) exists onΩfor any given feasible credit period n. The first-order conditions for an interior solution to the problem are presented in Appendix A. For the convenience of discussion, we divideΩinto two parts,Ω1:=Ω∩{(t1,T):pe−rn[1−F(n)]−(c+Ec^)+π−s(T−t1)≤0}andΩ2:=Ω∖Ω1. We first study the behavior of Π(t1, T, n) in regionΩ1. The following two lemmas show that the optimal solution occurs at the boundary of the feasible set, and that it not only exists but is unique.Lemma 1For any given feasible n such thatΩis a nonempty set, the optimal solution of Π(t1, T, n) onΩ1occurs at the boundary of the feasible set.Next we prove that the maximum for Π(t1, T, n) in the regionΩ1 is unique by showing thatΠ(t1,t1+pe−rn[1−F(n)]−(c+Ec^)+πs,n)is strictly pseudoconcave in t1.Lemma 2For any given feasible n such thatΩis a nonempty set, the optimal solution of Π(t1, T, n) onΩ1not only exists, but is also unique.As opposed to Lemma 1 the optimal solution in the regionΩ1 occurs at its boundary, we now show that there is a unique maximizer within the interior ofΩ2.Lemma 3For any given feasible n such thatΩis a nonempty set, there is a unique interior maximizer of Π(t1, T, n) onΩ2.Combining the above lemmas, we then summarize the main result and give a formal description of the total profit per unit time in the following theorem.Theorem 1For any given feasible n such thatΩis a nonempty set, there is a unique interior maximizer for Π(t1, T, n) onΩ.From the analysis carried out so far, it follows that we have a unique interior optimal replenishment strategy for any given feasible credit period n, and thus Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) implicitly define t1 and T as functions of n. Let Π*(t1(n), T(n), n) denote the maximum value function of Π for a given feasible n, the problem then becomes maxn ≥ 0Π*(t1(n), T(n), n). Furthermore, we can observe from (6) thatd{pe−rn[1−F(n)]−(c+Ec^)+π}dn=−pe−rn{r[1−F(n)]+F′(n)}<0,so that there is a unique n, sayn¯,such thatpe−rn[1−F(n)]−(c+Ec^)+π=0. It is obvious to see that Π(t1, T, n) is always negative ifn≥n¯,and hencen¯is the upper bound for n. Therefore, we can reduce our problem as follows:max0≤n≤n¯Π*(t1(n),T(n),n). By Berge’s Maximum Theorem, since the maximum value function Π*(t1(n), T(n), n) is continuous in the closed and bounded interval[0,n¯],the Weierstrass Theorem guarantees the existence of a global maximum in the interval[0,n¯]. Further, if there exists an interior solution to this problem, by Envelope Theorem, the first-order condition for optimality of n* isdΠ*(t1(n),T(n),n)dn=∂Π(t1,T,n)∂n=0. Moreover, if Π*(t1(0), T(0), 0) > 0 anddΠ*(t1(n),T(n),n)dn|n=0>0,at least onen∈(0,n¯)exists such thatdΠ*(t1(n),T(n),n)dn=0.However, it is not easy to determine the closed-form expressions for t1, T and n due to the structure of the nonlinear system. In order to solve the problem numerically using a fairly iterative search algorithm, we prove the uniqueness of optimal credit period n to Π(t1, T, n) for any given feasible (t1, T) under somewhat weaker conditions. To prove this result, we need the following lemma.Lemma 4If D(n) and 1 − F(n) are both log-concave in n, then e−rnD(n)[1 − F(n)] is either a strictly monotone function or a constant function of n.For any given feasible (t1, T) with 0 < t1 < T, if D(n) and 1 − F(n) are both log-concave in n,(1)ifde−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn|n=0>0,then there exists a unique optimaln∈[0,n¯]such that Π(t1, T, n) is maximum.ifde−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn|n=0≤0,then the optimal value of n is 0.Theorem 2 indicates that, for any given feasible (t1, T), there exists a unique value ofn∈[0,n¯)which maximizes Π(t1, T, n). Oncede−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn|n=0≤0,since e−rnD(n)[1 − F(n)] is either a strictly monotone function or a constant function of n, it represents thatde−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn≤0and the discounted marginal revenue after default risk is less than or equal to zero. Clearly, under this circumstance, there is no benefit for the retailer to offer the customer a credit period. And thus, the retailer should shorten its credit period as much as possible. Furthermore, the following remark is trivial from Theorems 1 and 2.Remark 1Ifde−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn|n=0≤0,from Theorem 2, the optimal value of n for any given feasible (t1, T) is 0. Hence, the uniqueness of global maximizer for the problem,max0<t1<TΠ(t1,T,0),follows immediately from Theorem 1.Combining the observations proven in the aforementioned lemmas and theorems, we then give a fairly iterative search algorithm, which guarantees convergence to a stationary point (if it exists), to find the global maximum for the inventory problem under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy.Algorithm 1Step 1Computede−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn|n=0. Ifde−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn|n=0≤0,then go to Step 2; otherwise go to Step 3.Set n* = 0 and find the optimal values of t1 and T, denoted byt1*and T*, from Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2); and then go to Step 7.Start with k = 0 and choose the initial trial value n0, where0≤n0≤n¯.For a given credit period nk, find the optimal values of t1 and T, denoted by t1, kand Tk, from Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2).Use the results gained from Step 2 to determine the optimal value of n, denoted by nk + 1, from (A.3).If the difference between nk + 1 and nkis sufficiently small (e.g., |nk + 1 − nk| < 0.00005), set n* = nk, then(t1,k*,Tk*,nk*)is the optimal solution and go to Step 7. Otherwise, set k = k + 1 and return to Step 4.Stop.To begin the search, we first determine whetherde−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dnis positive or not in Step 1. In Step 2, since the total profit per unit time is non-increasing in credit period, we have n* = 0. Then the uniqueness of interior global maximizer for Π(t1, T, 0) is guaranteed from Theorem 2 and Remark 1. Next, to begin the search for the casede−rnD(n)[1−F(n)]dn>0,we might choosen0=n¯2for our initial guess in Step 3. In Step 4 where Theorem 1 is applied, there is a unique local maximum solution (t1, k, Tk) of Π(t1, T, nk) for current nk. Then the value of Π(t1, k, Tk, nk + 1) is improving in Step 5 where Theorem 2 is applied. Further, by using the results in Theorems 1 and 2, it is not difficult to see that Π(t1, k, Tk, nk + 1) > Π(t1, k, Tk, nk) and Π(t1, k, Tk, nk) > Π(t1, k − 1, Tk − 1, nk), and hence Π(t1, k, Tk, nk) = Π*(t1(nk), T(nk), nk) is a monotone increasing sequence. Since Π*(t1(n), T(n), n) is continuous on a closed bounded interval[0,n¯],Π*(t1(n), T(n), n) is bounded. By Monotone Convergence Theorem, the procedure repeating Steps 4 and 5 would converge to a local maximum (if it exists) of Π(t1, T, n). Therefore, by using several starting values of n, the algorithm can be repeated to identify the global maximum solution.After establishing the optimality of the deteriorating inventory problem under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, we explore some important properties related to the optimal credit period, carbon emissions and total profit per unit time. Recall that Theorem 1 indicates that the optimal values of t1 and T are implicit functions of the credit period n. In addition, since the optimal values of t1 and T always occur in the interior ofΩ2, soΩ1 can be excluded from further discussion. Consequently, from now on in this section, we shall always assume that t1 and T are functions of n andpe−rn[1−F(n)]−(c+Ec^)+π−s(T−t1)>0. The following proposition establishes the monotone relationship between the optimal credit period and carbon price.Proposition 1For any given feasible (t1, T) and ϖ with 0 < t1 < T and πD(0) > ϖE, if the conditions inTheorem 2are met and if f(t1, T, 0) > 0 anddf(t1,T,n)dn|n=0>0,then the optimal credit period is strictly decreasing in the carbon price.Further, Proposition 2 states the relationships among the optimal carbon emissions per unit time, total profit per unit time and carbon price.Proposition 2For any given feasible n and ϖ such thatΩis a nonempty set and πD(0) > ϖE,(1)The optimal carbon emissions per unit time is strictly decreasing in the carbon price.The optimal total profit per unit time is strictly pseudoconvex in the carbon price.The intuition behind the propositions above is simple. Since a higher carbon price causes a greater inventory operating cost, providing a shorter credit period would actually accelerate cash flow and reduce the risk of granting credit. Hence, the retailer should tighten its credit period to maximize profit as the carbon price increases. Meanwhile, because a lower demand will be induced when the retailer tightens its credit period offered to the customers, this causes directly a decrease in total profit and the carbon emissions. However, when the carbon price is high enough, since the retailer can sell its surplus allowances to earn more profit on the carbon trading market, the optimal total profit increases strictly as the carbon price increases.Finally, the following proposition characterizes the effect of carbon cap on the optimal carbon emissions and total profit per unit time.Proposition 3For any given feasible n and E such thatΩis a nonempty set and πD(0) > ϖE,(1)The optimal carbon emissions per unit time remains constant as carbon cap increases.The optimal total profit per unit time is linearly increasing in carbon cap.Proposition 3 implies that the optimal replenishment strategy is not affected by carbon cap under Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, and so that the optimal carbon emissions per unit time remains constant as the carbon cap increases. Furthermore, because the retailer can sell its surplus allowances to earn more profit on the carbon trading market, the optimal total profit per unit time increases linearly as the carbon cap increases.In this subsection, we extend the above results to analyze the model with the Carbon Offset policy. The Carbon Offset policy allows individuals and businesses to compensate for their carbon emissions by funding a project or activity around the world that reduces or stores greenhouse gases. The project might involve rolling out clean energy technologies or soaking up CO2 directly from the air through the planting of trees. Unlike the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy is a regulatory market-based mechanism for carbon emissions control, the carbon offsets are typically voluntary. Hence, the Carbon Offset policy can be referred to as project-based mechanisms (i.e. Clean Development Mechanism and Joint Implementation) under the Kyoto Protocol. Based on above brief description, we know that the retailer needs to pay for carbon emissions reductions occurring elsewhere with unit price E in order to offset its excess emissions under the Carbon Offset policy. Therefore, the retailer’s total profit per unit time, denoted by ΠCO(t1, T, n), can be then represented as(7)ΠCO(t1,T,n)=TP(t1,T,n)T−E×max{CE(t1,T,n)T−ϖ,0}.One can easily observe that the model with Carbon Offset policy is similar to the model with Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy except for the selling of surplus carbon allowances is allowed in the cap and trade system. To analyze the problem clearly, for any given feasible n, we divide the problem into two sub-problems:Case 1maxt1,TTP(t1,T,n)T,s.t.CE(t1,T,n)T−ϖ≤0andT>t1>0andCase 2maxt1,TTP(t1,T,n)T−E[CE(t1,T,n)T−ϖ],s.t.CE(t1,T,n)T−ϖ>0andT>t1>0.In Case 1, the amount of retailer’s carbon emissions is constrained to be less than or equal to the mandatory carbon emission capacity ϖ, whereas in Case 2, the retailer should pay for its exceed emissions with unit price E. Then the optimal total profit per unit time for the model under the Carbon Offset policy is to select the maximum between Case 1 and Case 2. Let ϖWC denote the corresponding optimal carbon emissions per unit time in the model without carbon constrain and ϖCT denote the corresponding optimal carbon emissions per unit time in the model with Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy for a given carbon price E. We next study the effects of carbon parameters on the optimal carbon emissions and total profit per unit time for each case, the following two propositions state and prove these results formally.Proposition 4InCase 1, for any given feasible n and ϖ such thatΩis a nonempty set and πD(0) > ϖE,(1)There exists a unique global maximum for the retailer’s total profit per unit time.The optimal carbon emissions per unit time first increases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon cap increases.The optimal total profit per unit time first increases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon cap increases.InCase 2, for any given feasible n such thatΩis a nonempty set,(1)There exists a unique global maximum for the retailer’s total profit per unit time.The optimal carbon emissions per unit time first decreases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon price increases.The optimal carbon emissions per unit time first remains constant, and then increases linearly as the carbon cap increases.The optimal total profit per unit time first decreases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon price increases.The optimal total profit per unit time first increases strictly, and then decreases strictly as the carbon cap increases.Based on the above theoretical results, we provide a criterion to determine which case shall be accepted in the following proposition.Proposition 6For any given feasible n such thatΩis a nonempty set, if ϖ > ϖCT, then the optimal replenishment strategy isCase 1; otherwise the optimal replenishment strategy isCase 2.Furthermore, the following remark is trivial consequences of Propositions 4–6.Remark 2If ϖ = 0, from (7), sinceCE(t1,T,n)Tmust be positive, the carbon price per unit emission of carbon E becomes a levy charged as a penalty for carbon emissions caused by operating the inventory system. The model with the Carbon Offset policy reduces to the model with the Carbon Tax policy, which imposes a penalty on the retailer’s carbon emission in attempt to slow down the greenhouse effect and global warming. However, if E is sufficiently large, this would send a strong signal for retailer to cut its excess carbon emissions. Hence, under this circumstance, the model with the Carbon Offset policy reduces to the model with Mandatory Carbon Emissions Capacity policy (i.e. Case 1), which prohibits the amount of retailer’s carbon emissions in excess of the mandatory carbon emission capacity ϖ.Proposition 7 , as outlined below, characterizes the effects of carbon parameters on the optimal carbon emissions and total profit per unit time under the Carbon Offset policy without proof as it follows immediately from Propositions 2–6.Proposition 7For any given feasible n such thatΩis a nonempty set, under the Carbon Offset policy, then:(1)There exists a unique global maximum for the retailer’s total profit per unit time.The optimal carbon emissions per unit time first remains constant, and then increases strictly and finally remains constant as the carbon cap increases.The optimal total profit per unit time first increases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon cap increases.If ϖ > ϖWC, then the optimal carbon emissions per unit time remains constant as the carbon price increases; otherwise the optimal carbon emissions per unit time first decreases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon price increases.If ϖ > ϖWC, then the optimal total profit per unit time remains constant as the carbon price increases; otherwise the optimal total profit per unit time first decreases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon price increases.Moreover, because the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy allows the selling of surplus carbon allowance while the Carbon Offset policy does not, the total profit under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy is obviously higher after accounting for the money earned from selling the extra carbon allowance. Therefore, we have the following trivial remark.Remark 3For any given feasible n, the optimal total profit per unit time for the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy is greater than or equal to the optimal total profit per unit time for the Carbon Offset policy.To illustrate the proposed model, two types of demand and default rates are considered. In Example 1, we adopt the exponential demand and default rates used in Teng and Lou (2012), Lou and Wang (2012), Teng et al. (2013), Chern et al. (2013), Wu and Chan (2014), Wang et al. (2014) and Chern et al. (2014). Example 2 presents a linear demand rate and a truncated logistic default rate. The algorithm is implemented on a personal computer with Intel Core i5 under Mac OS X 10.9.2 operating system using Mathematica version 9.Example 1Consider an inventory situation where D(n) = 1000e0.2n, F(n) = 1 − e−0.05n, K = 100, r = 0.025, p = 15, c = 8, h = 1, s = 2, π = 2,K^=250,c^=5,h^=2.5,E = 0.1, ϖ = 6500, β(x) = e−xand θ(t) = 0.2 + 0.1t. By applying Algorithm 1 with starting initialn0=n¯2=5.5750yieldsΠ(t1*,T*,n*)=Π(0.2235,0.2997,0.8513)=6430.36after 7 iterations, and so that the corresponding optimal carbon emissions per unit time isCE(t1*,T*,n*)T*=7061.23. In addition, based on Proposition 6, since ϖ = 6500 < 7061.23 = ϖCT, the optimal replenishment strategy for the Carbon Offset policy is the same as the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy. We can then obtain the optimal total profit per unit time and corresponding carbon emissions per unit time for the model under the Carbon Offset policy asΠCO(t1*,T*,n*)=Π(0.2235,0.2997,0.8513)=6430.36andCE(t1*,T*,n*)T*=7061.23.However, if we set ϖ = 7500, since the optimal replenishment strategy and carbon emissions per unit time remain constant under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, we obtainΠ(t1*,T*,n*)=Π(0.2235,0.2997,0.8513)=6530.36andCE(t1*,T*,n*)T*=7061.23. Further based on Proposition 6, since ϖ = 7500 > 7061.23 = ϖCT, the optimal replenishment strategy for the Carbon Offset policy is the same as the Mandatory Carbon Emissions Capacity policy. Therefore, the optimal total profit per unit time and corresponding carbon emissions per unit time for the model under the Carbon Offset policy are respectivelyΠCO(t1*,T*,n*)=ΠCO(0.2143,0.2850,1.1648)=6430.36andCE(t1*,T*,n*)T*=7500.In this example, the same data as in Example 1 are used except putting D(n) = 1000 + 250n andF(n)=1−21+en/10=en/10−11+en/10. By applying Algorithm 1 with starting initialn0=n¯2=4.8268,we obtain thatΠ(t1*,T*,n*)=Π(0.2209,0.2963,0.8550)=6557.36andCE(t1*,T*,n*)T*=7214.82,respectively. Meanwhile, using the result from Proposition 6, since ϖ = 6500 < 7214.82 = ϖCT, the optimal replenishment strategy for the Carbon Offset policy is the same as the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy. Therefore, we getΠCO(t1*,T*,n*)=ΠCO(0.2209,0.2963,0.8550)=6557.36andCE(t1*,T*,n*)T*=7214.82.Using the same arguments as in Example 1, if we set ϖ = 7500, we can obtain the optimal total profit per unit time for the model with the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy and the Carbon Offset police areΠ(t1*,T*,n*)=Π(0.2209,0.2963,0.8550)=6657.36andΠCO(t1*,T*,n*)=ΠCO(0.2136,0.2799,1.0299)=6648.55,respectively.Further, to ascertain whether the solutions for both models are the global maximum or not, we run the numerical results for Examples 1 and 2 with distinct starting values ofn0=0,n¯40,2n¯40,⋯,n¯,which are summarized in the graphical presentation. Figs. 2(a) and 3(a) reveal that the total profit per unit time for both policies are, respectively, unimodal in the credit period. Thus, the local maximum obtained here from the proposed algorithm is indeed the global maximum. Moreover, we also observe from Figs. 2(b) and 3(b) that increasing the value of the credit period results in an increase in the carbon emissions per unit time. The result is intuitive because a longer credit period makes the demand and ordering quantity increase higher, and this causes directly the retailer to emit more carbon into the atmosphere. Hence the amount of carbon emissions per unit time increases strictly in the credit period.We next perform a sensitivity analysis with respect to the carbon price and cap to observe the effects on the optimal solutions for both carbon emissions policies. In the first study, we examine the effects of carbon price on the optimal credit period, carbon emissions and total profit per unit time for both carbon emissions policies; and the computed results are shown in Figs. 4and 5. Note that EL is the value of E such thatCE(t1,T,n)T=ϖ. From Figs. 4(a) and 5(a), we observe that the optimal credit period first decreases strictly, and then remains constant as the carbon price increases for the model with the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy. This happens because a higher carbon price increases the unit inventory purchasing and holding costs; thus, providing a shorter credit period would actually accelerate cash flow and bring financial benefits. Therefore, the optimal credit period first decreases strictly as the carbon price increases. However, if the carbon price is large, since the marginal revenue increase is less than the marginal cost increase, there is no benefit for the retailer to offer the customer a credit period. Hence, the optimal credit period is zero. Moreover, because the optimal credit period decreases as the carbon price increases, this implies that the demand per unit time decreases as carbon price increases. Hence we can find from Figs. 4(b) and 5(b) that the carbon emissions per unit time decreases strictly as the carbon price increases. Finally, from Figs. 4(c) and 5(c), since the retailer can sell its surplus allowances to earn more profit from the carbon trading market, the optimal total profit per unit time first decreases strictly (i.e. E < EL), and then increases strictly (i.e. E > EL) as the carbon price increases.For the model with the Carbon Offset policy, since the shadow price is always greater than or equal to EL and it is worthwhile buying extra emission allowances until ϖ, the inventory system with the Carbon Offset policy reduces to that of the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy when E ≤ EL. Therefore, the optimal credit period, carbon emissions and total profit per unit time decrease strictly as the carbon price increases. Conversely, when E > EL, since the shadow price is less than EL and the retailer is not willing to pay for an extra allowance, the inventory system under the Carbon Offset policy reduces to that of the Mandatory Carbon Emissions Capacity policy. Under this circumstance, because the model is independent of carbon price, the optimal credit period, carbon emissions and total profit per unit time remain constant as the carbon price increases.In the second study, we investigate the effects of the carbon cap on the optimal credit period, carbon emissions and total profit per unit time. Note that ϖCT and ϖWC respectively represent the amount of optimal carbon emissions for the model under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy and the model without carbon consideration. We first observe from Figs. 6and 7that the optimal credit period and carbon emissions per unit time remain constant as the carbon cap increases. This occurs because the carbon cap under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy does not affect the optimal replenishment strategy. However since the retailer can sell its surplus allowances to earn more profit from the carbon trading market, the optimal total profit per unit time increases strictly as the carbon cap increases.For the model with the Carbon Offset policy, since the carbon emissions constraint is non-binding when ϖ ≥ ϖWC, the optimal values of the credit period, carbon emissions per unit time and total profit per unit time remain constant. On the other hand, when ϖ ≤ ϖCT, since the shadow price is always greater than or equal to E = 0.1 and it is worthwhile buying extra emission allowances until ϖ = ϖCT. Hence, the model with the Carbon Offset policy reduces to match the model under the Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy. Therefore, the optimal credit period and carbon emissions per unit time remain constant; and the optimal total profit per unit time increases strictly as the carbon cap increases. Finally, when ϖCT < ϖ < ϖWC, since the increasing of the carbon cap reduces the pressure on restricted carbon emissions, and the optimal values of the credit period, carbon emissions per unit time and total profit per unit time increase strictly as the carbon cap increases.In this paper, we study a deteriorating inventory system under various carbon emissions policies, as well as considering the impact of trade credit risk. We demonstrate how environmental regulations can be incorporated into a joint trade credit and inventory replenishment decision making problem for a deteriorating item. The key decisions are to determine the optimal credit period and inventory replenishment strategies to maximize the total profit per unit time for the retailer. Structural properties are proved about the proposed model, and several conclusions are gathered from the numerical examples and sensitivity analysis. Our work is closely related to the growing research streams on coordinated trade credit financing and inventory management subject to environmental constraints. Compare with previous works such as Teng and Lou (2012), Lou and Wang (2012), Wu and Chan (2014), Wang et al. (2014), Wu et al. (2014) and Teng et al. (2013), Chern et al. (2013) and Chern et al. (2014), we show the model can be further extended to the case with generalized demand and default risk rates, and allow for partial backlogging. Hence, the present model helps managers to take the carbon emissions constrains into consideration to make better trade credit and inventory replenishment decisions.Following our analysis we observe that the retailer can benefit from the trade credit policy. Our theoretical and experimental results further show that the retailer will tighten its credit period offered to the customer and reduce its carbon emission as the carbon price increases under both carbon emission regulatory policies. This is because a higher carbon price increases the retailer’s overall inventory operation cost, providing a smaller credit period would actually accelerate cash flow and decrease the risk of granting credit. Meanwhile, this also implies that the value of carbon price and its role in reducing carbon emissions are much more significant. Moreover, we find that the effect of the carbon cap on reducing carbon emissions is limited. For the model with Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy, since the retailer can buy or sell carbon allowances with a fixed carbon price on the compliance carbon trading market, varying the carbon cap does not have an impact on both the optimal trade credit and inventory replenishment strategies. And hence, the optimal carbon emission remains constant. On the other hand, for the model with Carbon Offset policy, since the retailer can buy additional carbon allowances from the voluntary carbon market to cover the excess between its actual emissions and the carbon cap, the optimal amount of carbon emissions is fixed at the level obtained in the model with Carbon Cap-and-Trade policy when the carbon cap is relatively low.There are several interesting extensions to this work. First, we can extend the model with a stochastic demand. Second, since carbon is the basic element in fossil energy, cutting carbon equals to cost savings and operational efficiency. Hence it is worthwhile extending the model with effective investment in low-carbon technologies to cut emissions and operating costs. Finally, the aim of the Kyoto Protocol is to reduce emissions and promote renewable energy, global carbon regulations must make carbon scarce, and thereby raise the marginal cost of using carbon. Hence it is a challenge to analyze the model with a floating price and cap on carbon level allowances.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
