@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analytical solutions to the dynamic pricing problem for time-normalized revenue

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider revenue or profit normalized per unit time.This is more relevant to products where immediate replenishment is applied.We propose a dynamic pricing model for this novel objective function.We derive the optimal price in the form of an ordinary differential equation.For exponential and power demand function we derive closed-form solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pricing,Dynamic pricing,Time-normalized revenue,Nonhomogeneous poisson process,Calculus of variations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work we consider dynamic pricing for the case of continuous replenishment. An essential ingredient in such a formulation is the use of time normalized revenue or profit function, in other words revenue or profit per unit time. This provides the incentive to sell many items in the shortest time (and of course at a high price). Moreover, for most firms what matters most is how much revenue or profit is achieved in a certain time frame, for example per year. This changes the problem qualitatively and methodologically. We develop a new dynamic pricing model for this formulation. We derive an analytical solution to the pricing problem in the form of a simple-to-solve ordinary differential equation (ODE) equation. The trajectory of this ODE gives the optimal pricing curve. Unlike many of the models existing in the literature that rely on computationally demanding dynamic programming type solutions, our model is relatively simple to solve. Also, we apply the derived equation to two commonly used price-demand functions (the exponential and the power functions), and derive closed-form pricing curves for these functions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dynamic pricing is the theory of adjusting the price of a merchandise dynamically with time in an attempt to maximize revenue (Elmaghraby & Keskinocak, 2003; Talluri & Ryzin, 2005 and den Boer, 2014). It has gained significant worldwide adoption in many industries in the last two decades. It is appealing that such an advanced science has found true application in many markets. The gains in the companies’ revenues may also ultimately pass through to the customer, because pricing would more genuinely reflect supply and demand, leading to better economic efficiency (Phillips, 2005). What helped the spread of dynamic pricing is the rapid growth of internet retail. Its online nature makes the periodic updating of the price quite manageable. Moreover, dynamic pricing is expected to catch up soon in a big way for brick and mortar stores, due to the advent of electronic price labeling devices, whose cost became economic enough for possible wide-scale deployment (Stross, 2013).Most research on dynamic pricing focuses on optimizing revenue, and sometimes profit. However, corporations consider not just these aspects. They focus on achieving the most amount of revenue or profit in the shortest time, for example achieving high annualized revenue or profit. In that sense turn-around is an important factor. In this work we propose a new dynamic pricing model that optimizes the revenue or profit per time period. This is more relevant to corporations, which typically target a specific amount of revenue by the end of their fiscal year or quarter (see Bouwens & Kroos, 2011). All numbers are either annualized, or else interpreted in an annualized way. So, the amount of revenue per year or per unit time is the relevant quantity. Moreover, having a time-normalized revenue as the objective function will likely encourage more sales in a fixed interval, thus achieving higher overall revenue in the interval.The typical set up in the literature is to consider a perishable product with a particular stock that has to be sold by a certain time horizon (see for example Gallego & van Ryzin, 1994). In this work we allow continuous restocking. Thus, when an item is sold, it can be replenished immediately or with a certain lead time. This is the essential difference between our work and many of the other works that consider a fixed inventory. In our set-up of continuous replenishment it is the use of time normalized revenue (instead of pure revenue) which creates the urgency to sell many items. This is in contrast with the typical fixed inventory formulations, whereby the existence of the fixed inventory and a fixed time horizon provides the urgency to sell many items before times is up. The continuous replenishment set-up is also suitable for just-in-time inventory systems, and service-based businesses. But, as we will show, our model is also applicable to nonperishable goods with existing inventory, and in some situations to perishable items. In previous work in the literature on pricing of nonperishable items the time element is not considered a pressing consideration, and therefore the item could even be sold at a fixed price. However, when turn-around is considered as part of the objective, then a time varying price could control both the revenue and the timing of the sale in a way to achieve optimal revenue per unit time. This basically changes the problem qualitatively.In this work we consider a continuous time formulation with stochastic demand. We assume that demand follows a Poisson process with a varying arrival rate. This is a sensible assumption, because of the random times of arrivals of the selling events. The instantaneous arrival rate varies according to the price-demand function, due to the continuous adjustment of the price. Moreover, we allow the case where the demand function varies explicitly with time (in addition to price). This is a useful case to consider, because for many products, even if nonperishable, interest wanes with time due for instance to the introduction of newer models. Most other work that considers stochastic demand led to computationally demanding solutions often involving complicated recursive relations for the value function (see Bitran & Caldentey, 2003). In contrast, our work leads to a solution for the general case in the form of an ordinary differential equation (ODE), which can be solved in a straightforward way using standard solvers such as Euler’s method or Runge Kutta’s method. Moreover, for two of the typical demand price functions, the exponential function and the power function, we derive closed form solutions for the optimal price curve (for example for the exponential demand function, the optimal price is of the form(1/α)ln[a+bexp(ct)]for some problem related constants α, b, and c).The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss related work, and review the literature. Section 3 provides a statement of the problem and defines all relevant quantities. Section 4 provides our proposed solution, including the derived ODE. In Section 5 we apply the proposed model to two candidate price elasticity functions, and derive closed form solutions. Moreover, in this section we consider examples of time demand functions with explicit time variation. We also compare the proposed methods with existing benchmarks. Last section is the conclusion of the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
