@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supply-chain performance anomalies: Fairness concerns under private cost information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conduct experiments to investigate how fairness concerns influence supply-chain decision making.We develop a behavioral model embedding fairness concerns into the utility functions.We show that the supply-chain performance anomalies are mostly due to fairness concerns under a simple wholesale contract.We illustrate that private cost information reduces fairness concerns in a decentralized supply chain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain,Behavioral operations,Fairness concerns,Private cost information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work investigates how fairness concerns influence supply-chain decision making, while examining the effect of private production-cost information and touching on issues related to bounded rationality. We conduct laboratory work utilizing a supply-chain dyad with an upstream supplier feeding a downstream retailer under a simple wholesale-price contract. We perform human–computer (H–C) experiments where human subjects play the role of the supplier paired with the computerized retailer, as well as human–human (H–H) experiments where human subjects play the role of both supplier and retailer. These experiments allow us to isolate other effects like bounded rationality from the effects of fairness concerns on supply-chain decision making. We find that, compared to standard analytical model, the bounded rationality slightly reduces overall supply chain profit without changing its distribution between the supplier and the retailer, while fairness concerns lead to greater supply-chain profits and a more balanced supply-chain profit distribution. We further illustrate that under private cost information, the retailer's fairness concern is suppressed by the lack of reciprocity from not being able to observe her rival's profit information, but that the supplier's fairness concern from altruism persists. Based on our experimental results, we modify classical supply-chain models to include utility functions that incorporate both bounded rationality and fairness concerns. The estimated other-regarding coefficients are significantly lower under private information than under public information for the H–H experiments, and we find no evidence of inequity aversion for the H–C experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Supply chain performance under various contracting mechanisms has been explored extensively in theory typically following the standard homo-economicus assumption that supply chain agents are rational and capable of making decisions to maximize their long-term financial returns. Studies in behavioral economics and marketing (Croson, 1996; Katok, 2011a) have long recognized that social interactions among business units also affect agent behaviors and, consequently, supply chain performance. One such social effect arises out of human preference for equity or fairness concern. As noted by Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1986), "The traditional assumption that fairness is irrelevant to economic analysis is questioned. Even profit-maximizing firms will have an incentive to act in a manner that is perceived as fair if the individuals with whom they deal are willing to resist unfair transactions and punish unfair firms at some cost to themselves…The rules of fairness, some of which are not obvious, help explain some anomalous market phenomena.”For decades, powerful retailers in the supply chain have been known to erode suppliers’ profits and take a bigger share of the overall channel profit. Wal-Mart is well known for using its power to squeeze supplier profits (Van Riper, 2007; Coolidge, 2015). Food suppliers in the United Kingdom have complained that they are unable to gain a sustainable margin from the retailer (Fredenburgh, 2015). Recently, stakeholders have started to realize that fairness and balance are vital in a strong retailer-supplier relationship, and can lead to better supply-chain performance. Empirical studies have shown fairness concerns have a positive influence on inter-firm relationships and mutual outcomes (Ring & Van de Ven, 1994, Arino & Ring, 2010). Such observations related to the importance of fairness concerns and equity have motivated recent behavioral operations-management (BOM) researchers to conduct various human experiments to investigate the impact of social preference over supply chain coordination (Loch & Wu, 2008; Ho and Zhang 2008; Katok & Pavlov, 2013).Unsurprisingly, the introduction of human subjects distorts the well-established modeling framework for even the simplest class of pricing contracts. Our behavioral study explores the issue of why experimental results tend to differ from traditional analytical findings in decentralized supply chains. We examine the performance of a wholesale price-only contract in a laboratory setting for the validity of three assumptions in standard models: (1) supply chain agents are fully rational; (2) agents are concerned with only their own profits; and (3) both cost and return information are public to all agents.While recent work on fairness and supply-chain coordination has generated useful new insights (Cui, Raju, & Zhang, 2007; Demirag, Chen, & Li, 2010; Katok, Olsen, & Pavlov, 2012), these existing papers do not explicitly examine how private manufacturing-cost information may affect supply-chain interactions in the presence of equity concerns. Regardless of the degree of competition and the complexity involved, it is likely that no two firms in a supply chain share the same amount and type of information (Chen, Graves, & de Kok, 2001; Kostamis & Duenyas, 2011). Scenarios involving a private cost structure are common in business. For instance, a retailer may not know the manufacturer's true costs, which prevents her from knowing whether she attains an equitable payoff in the channel. Yet in some cases, entities in the supply chain may choose to disclose private cost information. As an example, before hundreds of dairy farmers from across Europe traveled to Germany in 2013 to protest against downstream price pressures, the European Milk Board (EMB) published a report revealing production cost (Case, 2013). In the automaker industry, “Ability to Recover Material Cost” is a critical factor when suppliers rate their working relations with automakers (Ford.com, 2008). Thus, it is interesting to examine if the supply chain can be better off with private cost information and if the supplier would have an incentive to disclose cost information to the retailer. Therefore, we also explore how the fairness perception of the agent changes when only the supplier, but not the retailer, knows the manufacturing cost information.Our laboratory work utilizes a two-echelon supply chain with an upstream supplier feeding a downstream retailer. To account for the possible causes of supply-chain performance anomalies, we examine two potential explanations in this bilateral monopoly: biases related to individual bounded rationality and concerns related to the preference for equity (fairness concerns or avoiding inequity). Moreover, we examine the effect of private cost information in conjunction with fairness concerns and bounded rationality, as illustrated in the following graph:As bounded rationality and fairness concerns may be confounded in subjects' decision-making, our experimental design must distinguish these two causes. To isolate the effect of bounded rationality, we conduct human–computer (H–C) experiments with subjects in the role of the supplier to minimize biases from social preferences such as equity concerns. Our results show that other than slightly reduced supply-chain efficiency (defined as the realized supply-chain profit divided by the integrated supply-chain profit), the human supplier's decision and profit share are not significantly different from the standard model predictions (Fig. 1).Next, we examine a human–human (H–H) experimental setting where both agents are represented by human decision makers. In the H–H experiment, we find that supply-chain efficiency is higher than predicted by the standard model. Moreover, the distribution of supply chain profits between supplier and retailer becomes more balanced than predicted. We attribute this anomaly to fairness concerns of the participants’. We also consider a second treatment of our H–H experiments where the cost information is supplier's private information. Although fairness concerns appear to be at work under both public and private information cases, a closer look at our results reveals that private cost information breaks the reciprocity link (Kahneman et al., 1986) between supplier and retailer, promoting retailer's self-interest and suppressing supplier's concern for equity.Building on previous research (Heifetz, Shannon, & Spiegel, 2007; Loch & Wu, 2008), we then develop a behavioral model embedding fairness preference into the decision maker's utility functions and solve for the equilibrium. To measure the magnitudes of concerns for equity across all experimental treatments, we estimate other-regarding coefficients from our data using a maximum-likelihood method, leaving bounded rationality and other biases in the random error term. Our results indicate that withholding individual cost and benefit information weakens fairness considerations in the decentralized supply chain.The remainder of our work is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review of related work and presents the standard model as well as a fairness-minded behavioral model. Section 3 introduces our detailed experimental design and the hypotheses to test the model predictions and verify the appropriateness of its assumptions. Section 4 reports our experimental results and provides analysis. Section 5 develops the behavioral model and estimates the corresponding parameters with our experimental data. Section 6 provides conclusions and suggests possible directions for future research. Detailed lab instructions and experimental procedures are provided in the Appendix.An abundance of papers has examined supply-chain contracting mechanisms analytically (see reviews by Cachon, 2003; Li & Wang, 2007; among others). These papers usually follow the standard economic framework building on analytical models of decision makers, who are fully rational and capable of maximizing his/her monetary returns. Various types of contracting mechanisms have been examined in a simple dyadic supply chain with an upstream supplier feeding a downstream retailer. Among these contracts are the common wholesale price contract (Cachon, 2003), the two-part tariff contract (Jeuland & Shugan, 1983), the buy-back contract (Pasternack, 1985; Kandel, 1996), the retail-fixed-markup contract (Liu, Fry, & Raturi, 2009, 2012), and the revenue-sharing contract (Cachon & Lariviere, 2005).Although theory on bounded self-interest within behavioral economics has long emphasized that people care about both giving and receiving fair treatment in a range of settings (Diamond & Vartiainen, 2007), biases from this preference for equity have only recently been introduced into the context of supply-chain modeling (Cui et al., 2007; Pavlov & Katok, 2011; Katok et al., 2012). Cui et al. (2007) show analytically that when supply chain members are concerned about fairness, the manufacturer may prefer a simple wholesale price contract to a more elaborate contract for coordinating the supply chain. Pavlov and Katok (2011) and Katok et al. (2012) further develop Cui's model by considering the case when the supply chain partners’ fairness concerns are based on incomplete information. Their analysis shows that the supply-chain efficiency is strictly lower under incomplete information than when fairness preferences are common knowledge. The latter paper also provides an experimental test of their model predictions by obtaining the empirical distribution of the preferences.Our paper extends the above work and investigates how private cost information may affect the supply chain dynamics under the influence of both fairness concerns and bounded rationality. Thus, it belongs to the relatively recent but quickly growing stream of BOM literature, which includes works such as Schweitzer and Cachon (2000), Lim and Ho (2007), Bolton and Katok (2008), Gino and Pisano (2008) and others. Loch and Wu (2007) and Katok (2011a, 2011b) provide excellent reviews on using laboratory experiments for operations management study.Two main areas of BOM research using experiments to test supply chain performance are (1) research that focuses on the newsvendor model under demand uncertainty (Katok & Wu, 2009; Gavirneni & Xia, 2009; Kalkancı, Chen, & Erhun, 2011,2014; Becker-Peth, Katok, & Thonemann, 2013); (2) research that focuses on supplier–retailer interaction under a deterministic supply chain setting (Loch & Wu, 2008; Ho and Zhang 2008). Our work is most closely related to the latter area. Loch and Wu (2008) provide experimental evidence that social preferences systematically affect decision-making in supply chain transactions. By varying the salience of individual motivation in a repeated, paired pricing game, the authors show that relationship preference promotes cooperation, individual performance, and high system efficiency, whereas status preference induces tough actions and reduces both system efficiency and individual performance. Ho and Zhang (2008) experimentally test the performance of two analytically equivalent frames of the fixed-fee contract: two-part tariff and quantity discount. They find that both contracts fail to improve supply-chain efficiency relative to the wholesale price contract, but an opaque frame of the fixed fee in terms of a quantity discount significantly improves supply-chain efficiency compared to a salient frame of the fixed fee as in a two-part tariff contract. Their further analysis suggests that the behavioral tendency of loss aversion has more explanatory power than complexity aversion to account for such a difference.However, few of the previously cited papers separate the various possible causes of the supply-chain performance anomaly, where the agent decisions and pecuniary returns are significantly different from the model predictions. Katok and Wu (2009) first use H–C experiments to compare the performances of supply chain contracts while focusing on the effect of bounded rationality. We extend this line of work by using experimental treatments that attempt to separate the effects of equity from bounded rationality.The recent work by Katok and Pavlov (2013) is perhaps the most related to our work presented here. They use behavioral experiments to examine equity concerns in a decentralized supply chain. However, Katok and Pavlov focus on a specific coordinating contract known as the minimum-order-quantity (MOQ) contract and investigate incomplete information about the retailer's behavioral parameters. Their study finds that incomplete information about fairness preferences is extremely influential in diminishing the competitiveness of MOQ contracts. Here, we consider a different type of incomplete information, which is on the supplier cost. Our work instead examines how fairness concerns affect the classical double-marginalization result (caused by the wholesale price-only contract) with or without a common knowledge of the manufacturing cost information. Table 1 summarizes the position of current study with respect to representative BOM papers.The main question that we investigate is to what extent private supplier-cost information may change supply-chain interactions in the presence of human inequality aversion and bounded rationality. For a price-only contract under bilateral monopoly, we separate inequality aversion from bounded rationality by designing both H–C and H–H experiments. With the updated utility functions incorporating fairness concerns, we also measure the magnitude of the fairness concerns across all treatments from our data.We briefly present the standard economic model for a bilateral monopoly dyad, where a wholesale price-only contract induces the double marginalization in the supply chain. We consider a simple supply chain with an upstream supplier feeding a downstream retailer, who then sells directly to the market. The supplier's manufacturing cost per unit is a constant c. The retailer faces a linear price-dependent demand function,D(p)=A−βp, where p is the retail price, A is the market size, and β is the price elasticity. The supplier moves first with a fee schedule for his margin and the retailer follows with a retail price for her margin. Classic analytical models assume that all information here is public to both players and the product does not have any salvage value; hence, the quantity sold to the end market, q, is equal to quantity ordered from the supplier and solely dependent on retailer price.For an integrated supply chain where the supplier and the retailer act as a single entity, the retail price, p, maximizes the overall supply chain profit,ΠC=(p−c)q=(p−c)(A−βp). For a decentralized supply chain, we may obtain the sub-game Nash equilibrium using backward induction starting from the retailer's optimal price decision followed by solving the supplier's optimization problem. Under a wholesale price-only contract, the retailer profit isΠR(p)=(p−w)(A−βp), and the supplier profit isΠS(w)=(w−c)(A−βp*), where p* is the retailer's best response to her own profit maximization problem. The equilibrium solutions under a wholesale price-only contract yield a supply-chain efficiency of 75 percent due to double marginalization.Under the assumption that both parties have extended utilities including fairness concerns, we modify the above classical models to incorporate social fairness concerns. Following the work of other behavioral researchers, and specifically the analytical framework described in Heifetz et al. (2007) and Loch and Wu (2008), we consider the case when both the supplier and the retailer utility functions include concerns for the other party's payoffs in addition to his/her own. Due to linearity of the utility functions, they can be normalized asUS=ΠS+θSΠRfor the supplier andUR=ΠR+θRΠSfor the retailer, where θSand θRare the weights assigned to the other party's return.11Before the normalization, the original model isUS=ΠS+aSΠR+bS(ΠS−ΠR)for the supplier, andUR=ΠR+aRΠS+bR(ΠR−ΠS)for the retailer. In US, the first component, aSΠR, captures altruism that is weighted on the other party's payoff; the second component,bS(ΠS−ΠR), captures inequality seeking/avoiding that is weighted on the payoff difference. Here, aSis the altruism parameter and bSis the inequality seeking parameter.Similar to Loch and Wu (2008), we refer to θSand θRas “other-regarding coefficients” to incorporate the overall concern that one party has for the other party. Obviously, when θSor  θRis zero, the subject is purely self-interested without concerning the other party. The parameters capture the individual subject's relative perception on the fair return of the other party.We choose this formulation mainly due to its tractability. As noted by Cui et al. (2007), fairness has much more substance than a simple mathematical representation can capture. The authors also provide a complex utility function for inequity aversion that allows for different reference points and can deliver additional informative results. Next, we use the fairness-dependent extended utility functions to derive the optimal equilibrium decisions. We start with the retailer's utility maximization using backward induction22The negative sign before (w-c) is to make our estimated θRpositive, but the positive sign will work as well.:(1)UR=(p−w)(A−pβ)−(w−c)(A−pβ)θR.From the first-order condition, the retailer will choose pricep*=A+wβ−(w−c)βθR2β, given the supplier's wholesale price w. The supplier picks a wholesale price w to maximize(2)US=(w−c)(A−p*β)+(p*−w)(A−p*β)θS.The equilibrium prices of the model are therefore(3)w*=A+cβ−2cβθR−AθS+cβθR2θSβ(1−θR)(2−(1+θR)θS),and(4)p*=3A+cβ−(2A+(A+cβ)θR)θS2β(2−(1+θR)θS).All sub-game perfect equilibrium prices and profits are given in Table 2for the integrated supply chain and the decentralized supply chain with or without fairness concerns under complete information.In the next section, we test these analytical outcomes for subjects’ decisions and supply-chain performance in behavioral experiments. The design of our experiments enables us to explore two possible reasons related to human decision making that may depart from standard results: individual bounded-rationality biases (errors, heuristics), and varying individual interests (risk attitude, equity concern, and status concern). We further relax the complete information assumption by concealing the manufacturing cost value from the retailer, thus making only the supplier aware of the profit distribution in the whole supply chain.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our behavioral study establishes empirical evidence of human preference for equity in supply-chain decision making. Our H–H experiment reveals salient and sustained impact from fairness concerns, which is separable from other effects like bounded rationality as shown in the H–C experiments. Under a simple wholesale price contract, we show that fairness concerns lead to pricing decisions that deviate from the standard analytical predictions, which improves supply-chain performance in terms of increased efficiency. Both our experiments and recent analytical work (Cui et al., 2007; Katok et al., 2012) indicate that wholesale-price contract can coordinate a channel consisting of fair-minded supply chain agents.As we further explore how fairness concerns affect the channel under private production-cost information, our results support that the preference for equity is relatively invariant of other effects like bounded rationality, but sensitive to private cost information. When the retailer has no information on the supplier cost and profit, the retailer's utility for fairness is suppressed, yielding selfish retail-price responses. Under private cost information, the supplier can no longer set a “fair” wholesale price and expect the retailer to order more units in return. Therefore, the reciprocity between the supplier and retailer is likely to be suppressed. However, as demonstrated by our experiments, the supplier still exhibits certain fairness concerns that may be due to altruism and have nothing to do with the retailer's action. We then use our experimental data to estimate the other-regarding coefficients in the generalized behavioral model. These measurements of social-fairness concerns support our conclusions that the sharing of the manufacturing cost information significantly alters how equity affects supply-chain decisions and profits. Table 8summarizes the main findings of our experiments related to human equity.Our study of social fairness concerns in the presence of private cost information has several important real-world implications. First, our work provides empirical evidence that, due to fairness concerns, even the simple wholesale-price contract may coordinate a channel consisting of fair-minded supply chain agents. In conjunction with Katok and Pavlov (2013)’s work which reveals that contracts that coordinate in theory may not actually coordinate the channel in reality, we provide further explanation on why simpler, theoretically-suboptimal contracts are commonly preferred in practice. Second, our results in the private cost information case illustrate weakened social-fairness considerations when the supply-chain profit distribution is unobservable by the retailer. Therefore, our findings suggest that disclosing private cost information can incentivize cooperation between suppliers and retailers, while not disclosing cost information to the retailer changes the pricing decisions and shifts the distribution of channel profit to the supplier's advantage.One possible avenue of future work is testing the robustness of the equity effects under other coordinating contracts such as a two-part tariff or revenue sharing. Apart from a simple price-only contract, we are curious whether our conclusions still hold under contracts that are more complex. We suspect that contract complexity may result in a stronger effect from bounded rationality. Here, we refer to Kalkancı, Chen, and Erhun (2014) for further reading. In their paper, the authors find that fairness concerns tend to be weaker when the complexity of the contract is high. Our work motivates future attempts to close the gap between the supply-chain modeling and subjects’ behavioral biases.