@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new multicriteria approach for the analysis of efficiency in the Spanish olive oil sector by modelling decision maker preferences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New model for production processes with input consumption divided into sections.Efficiency scores are computed for every input and every input-consumption sections.A Multi-criteria Linear Programming model is solved by a Utility Function Approach.The approach estimates efficiency in accordance with decision makers’ preferences.The existing Linear Programming software can be used to solve this model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Productivity and competitiveness,Efficiency and production processes,Multi-criteria and Linear Programming models,Olive oil,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The efficiency in production is often analysed as technical efficiency using the production frontier function. Efficiency scores are usually based on distance computations to the frontier in an m+s-dimensional space, where m inputs produce s outputs. In addition, efficiency improvements consider the total consumption of each input. However, in many cases, the “consumption” of each input can be divided into input-consumption sections (ICSs), and trade-off among the ICSs is possible. This share framework can be used for computing efficiency. This analysis provides information about both the total optimal consumption of each input, as does data envelopment analysis, and the most efficient allocation of the “consumption” among the ICSs. This paper studies technical efficiency using this approach and applies it to the olive oil sector in Andalusia (Spain). A non-parametrical methodology is presented, and an input-oriented Multi-Criteria Linear Programming model (MLP) is proposed. The analysis is developed at global, input and ICSs levels, defining the extent of satisfaction achieved at all these levels for each company, in accordance with their own preferences. The companies’ preferences are modelled with their utility function and their set of weights. MLP offers more detailed information to assist decision makers than other models previously proposed in the literature. In addition to this application, it is concluded that there is room for improvement in the olive oil sector, particularly in the management of the skilled labour. Additionally, the solutions with two opposite scenarios indicate that the model is suitable for the intended decision making process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The efficiency in production has often been analysed in the field of technical efficiency using the production frontier function, as well as in the allocative and economic efficiency framework, with the frontier of costs or profits as the basis. Currently, the most used methodologies for efficiency estimation using the frontier function include mathematical programming by Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) (Cooper, Seiford, & Tone, 2007) and the so-called econometric frontier (Kumbhakar & Knox Lovell, 2000). The average efficiency level of the sample and the efficiency index of every company can be estimated using both methods.This paper is motivated by the current situation of the Spanish olive oil industry. Olive oil is a product of particular importance within the Mediterranean agricultural food system, and more specifically in Spain, for two main reasons: first, because olive oil is an essential component of the so-called Mediterranean diet and, second, because Spain, and Andalusia in particular, is the world’s main production area. Over the last 10years (2001–2010) approximately 39% of the olive oil produced worldwide is Spanish in origin, and over 79% of this oil comes from Andalusia (Rallo, 2010).The olive oil production industry is the core of a production chain that starts in the olive sector, the producer of olives, and ends at the olive oil packaging and marketing sector. Efficiency and productivity in the olive oil industry need to increase, and trade policies devoted to opening new competitive markets have to be put into practice to make up for the continuing decrease in support that will take place in the near future (Mili, 2009). The social, financial, and environmental importance of the olive sector in Spain, and especially in Andalusia, is a widely known and researched issue (Sánchez, Gallego, & Araque, 2011). Olive oil factories are often interested in optimising their input consumptions as to guarantee the desired levels of output production.This paper belongs to a research line started by the authors and devoted to the efficiency estimation in the olive oil factories in Andalusia. The problem has already been tackled from different viewpoints. Dios-Palomares and Martınez-Paz (2010) work with econometrical distance function methods, taking into account not only the olive oil production but also the quality of the company and the level of environmental respect. Dios-Palomares and Martınez-Paz (2011) proposed a new efficiency estimation model with quality and environmental respect as attributes, where specific efficiency index scores are computed. Recently, Dios-Palomares, Martínez-Paz, and Prieto (2013, chap. 12) introduced a new environmental DEA model with “programs”, considering the environmental impact as an undesirable output. In addition, the analysis includes non-discretionary variables from two points of view. On the one hand, the business structure (cooperative or corporation) is considered to affect the frontier (technology). This variable is included using a three-stage method. On the other hand, the relation between efficiency and other non-discretionary variables is analysed by a Tobit model estimation.All these previous approaches examine the efficiency of each company and advise on possible improvements in the consumption of every input. However, it is also interesting to study the efficiency at a more detailed level, linking the following features of the companies to their consumption of inputs.This industry produces olive oil and table olives simultaneously. This production process uses some resources that can be modelled by means of the following four inputs: unskilled labour, skilled labour, floating capital and fixed capital. All the four inputs are used in the production of the two outputs. However, for unskilled labour and floating capital, some special considerations should be taken into account. First, unskilled workers can develop many nonspecific tasks, e.g., they can receive the olives in the production process, assist in the oil extraction phase, take part in the packaging and sale of the products, or perform other nonspecific work. This is a common scenario in most production processes where inputs are shared, but unskilled labour has a very important seasonal component in this industry, and the proportion of temporary employees is very high in the olive reception stage. For this reason, managers are very interested in determining the minimum amount of unskilled labour needed for this stage. In other words, managers want to know the best allocation of the unskilled labour input among the four above-mentioned stages according to the performance of the rest of companies in the sector. On the other hand, the total consumed capital can be allocated either to production or other services. In this case, management may also consider that the amount spent on production is essential and therefore, they may want to determine the best allocation among these two sections of capital consumption.In the olive oil extraction industry, just as with other production processes that occur in real life, some subprocesses are frequently established so that one input can be used in any of them. Let us think of a production process that is split up into K subprocesses in the whole industry, and the total consumption of the input i can be distributed among the K subprocesses. The quantities consumed of input i in the subprocess k with k=1,…,K are called input-consumption sections (ICSs). Moreover, in most cases, it is important for management to control the consumption of every input in each of the subprocesses and to assign the input consumption in each subprocess in the most appropriate manner for the company. If there was information about the ICS of the input for all the companies in the sample, then it would be very interesting to conduct an efficiency analysis to determine the optimal allocation of resources at this level according to the preferences of management. In this context, given a production process where several inputs are consumed, the following may happen:1.The decision maker is interested in dividing the consumption of each input differently, orThere is no information available for the division of all inputs in the same subprocesses.For this reason, in this paper, we present a model that reflects this scenario and allows for a different division for each input i.One of the aims of this paper is to provide the olive oil companies (the decision-making units, DMUs) with detailed efficiency scores about their performance at global, input and ICS levels. In fact, the present paper proposes a new model for application to the Spanish olive oil industry. Unlike other papers, an input-oriented Multi-criteria Linear Programming (MLP) model is suggested for computing the detailed efficiency scores. When all the companies (DMUs) of the sample under consideration have the same inputs and outputs and the same division into ICS for each input, this fact is to be considered as the basis of the efficiency analysis. Like the DEA, the analysis provides information on the total optimal consumption of each input, as well as on the most efficient allocation of every input i and each ICS. This paper studies technical efficiency using this approach.Multi-Criteria Decision-Making theory is mostly based on Linear Programming and the associated algorithms. Multi-Criteria Decision theory has its own and explicit theoretical framework, which includes well-specified conceptual definitions and a systematic casual logic to assist in decision-making processes. Its goal is to generate a constrained optimisation problem (model) in which the solution would lead to the best choice for the decision maker. The model assumes the existence of the decision maker as an abstraction, enabling operational thinking (see, for example, Barba-Romero & Pomerol, 1997), and seeks to recreate (formalising and modelling) real-life situations. Multi-Criteria Linear Programming (MLP) plays an important role in the Multi-Criteria Decision theory. Important references in Multi-Criteria Decision theory include Charnes and Cooper (1961) and Romero (1983). The dominance concepts and the ideas of dominated or non-dominated points are key aspects in MLP models in the so-called objective space (see, for example, Koopmans, 1951). The non-dominated points are reference points for those that are dominated. Therefore, the control of resources in companies can be conducted using technical efficiency scores as a standard procedure. In this line, the present paper conducts a more detailed analysis (according to each DMU, input and ICS levels) than the existing ones in many DEA models. This detailed analysis is one of the main goals of this work.It is important to remark that the methodology developed in this paper is different from DEA. Like DEA, we are interested in defining and measuring efficiency scores for the DMUs. Efficiency scores in DEA are usually in the objective function of the associated Mathematical Programming problems, but in the proposed MLP model, the efficiency scores are computed after solving the corresponding Mathematical Programming problems. In addition, unlike DEA, the MLP model enables computation of efficiency scores in further detail, at global, input and ICS levels. Of course, there are some works that propose DEA models working with the internal structure of the DMUs, but they study the cases in which DMUs are divided into several decision-making subunits (DMSUs) and compute the efficiency scores related to such subunits.A classification of DEA models is given, for example, by Castelli, Pesenti, and Ukovich (2010). However, the methodology proposed here also differs from the ones classified by Castelli et al. (2010). The classification of Castelli et al. is mainly based on three assumptions related to the internal structure of the DMUs, i.e., related to the decision-making subunits (DMSUs). They categorise the models into elementary models, shared flow models, multilevel models and network models by ascertaining which of these three assumptions is verified in the model formulation. In other words, this classification considers the internal structure of the DMUs, that is, the treatment of the DMSUs. Our MLP model works differently, as it focuses on the internal structure of the use of the inputs rather than on the internal structure of the decision-making units. The MLP does not work with the subunits of the DMUs but with DMUs, inputs, outputs, and ICSs. And ICSs are related to the internal structure of the consumption of inputs, rather than the DMUs themselves.All the different available techniques that enable the evaluation of the observed or hypothetical situations intend to improve the behaviour and performance of the DMUs by comparing them to a benchmark. In the case of MLP and DEA, both techniques provide an integrated framework for the performance analysis of a set of homogeneous and independent DMUs. Both of them can be considered complementary methods belonging to the Multi-Criteria Decision Making (see, for example, Doyle & Green, 1993; Ray, 2004).DEA models do not permit incorporating decision maker’s preferences, and no additional information is needed to reach the reference point. In fact, the intensities, or weights of the different inputs and outputs are decision variables integrated into the DEA model itself. Moreover, its input/output values are considered as targets for inefficient DMUs. The fact that input and output weights are decision variables in the DEA models is sometimes the source of several problems. This is because of the fact that the flexibility of DEA models can lead to unsuitable or incoherent solutions with the practical preferences of the decision makers (DM). Consequently, a great deal of scientific research has been conducted to set the constraints to the weights, so decision maker’s preferences can be incorporated into the model. Among others, Allen, Athanassopoulos, Dyson, and Thanassoulis (1997) provide a review of the evolution, development and future research lines of the use of weights restrictions and value judgements in DEA. On the other hand, Halme, Joro, Korhonen, Salo, and Wallenius (1999) developed a procedure and the theory required to incorporate the information on preferences in the efficiency analysis of the DMUs. They suggest locating the DM’s most preferred input–output vector, called the DM’s Most Preferred Solution, directly and explicitly in the efficiency frontier. Halme and Korhonen (2000) tackled the problem of incorporating additional information on preferences into the value efficiency analysis by using the “price” information of inputs and outputs. Sarkis (2000) demonstrated that the results obtained by including the DM’s value judgements in the DEA approaches are comparable to those achieved by the “traditional” Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) approaches. Korhonen, Tainio, and Wallenius (2001) also worked on the concept of the most preferred solution proposed by Halme et al. (1999) and presented a systematic approach to analysing the academic research at universities and research institutes. Adler and Golany (2002) include principal component weights to improve discrimination in DEA. Angulo-Meza, Pereira, and Lins (2002) presented a review of methods for increasing discrimination between efficient DMUs in DEA. Sarrico and Dyson (2004) presented a reflection on the uses of virtual weights restrictions in DEA. Cooper, Seiford, and Zhu (2011, chap. 1) discuss the basic DEA models and some of their extensions, whereas Cooper, Ruiz, and Sirvent (2011, chap. 4) created a review of the literature of extensions and enhancements of the DEA basic methodology paying special attention to the choices and uses of DEA weights. More recently, Pastor and Aparicio (2010) study the relevance of DEA benchmarking information and least-distance measure, and Park, Bae, and Lim (2012) proposed a DEA-based method of stepwise benchmarking based on three criteria: preference, direction and similarity.However, the proposed MLP model is not a DEA model but a Multi-Criteria Decision Making model (MCDM). Weights are not decision variables but constant data, input data, of the problem itself. Every decision making unit (DMU) has its own set of weights that form a Utility Function. This is how the preferences of the DMUs are directly incorporated into the MLP model. There are also papers devoted to helping DMUs define their preferences appropriately, that is, choose the weights of the criteria in a Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) model. We can cite here, among others, the papers by Martel and Aouni (1990), Jahanshahloo, Zohrehbandian, and Abbasian-Naghneh (2011), and Jahanshahloo, Zohrehbandian, Alinezhad, et al. (2011). Martel and Aouni (1990) incorporated the structure of the DM’s preferences into a goal programming model to evaluate the impact of the deviations between the preferences and aspiration levels of the DM. They use the idea of a generalised criterion to build the structure of preferences. Jahanshahloo, Zohrehbandian, and Abbasian-Naghneh (2011) used some basic principles from DEA to extract the necessary information to solve a Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM) problem. They suggested a method for incorporating information on the preferences, with no need for prior judgement, by means of an interactive decision-making technique that is consistent with both DEA and multi-objective linear programming (MOLP). On the other hand, Jahanshahloo, Zohrehbandian, Alinezhad, et al. (2011) proposed an alternative approach that, using Zionts–Wallenius method, enables generation of common weights as well as the DM’s underlying value structure in relation to the objective functions.With our MLP model, the analysis is applied to every DMU. It is formulated as a situation in which each DMU has its own personalised efficient frontier, which is modelled according to its utility function. This utility function is defined by the DMU itself according to its preferences. The model is formulated to minimise the input and ICS usage. Efficiency scores at DMU, input and ICS levels are also defined. The model is applied to the olive oil sector in Andalusia, and relevant conclusions emerge from the results.The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, the problem is formulated. In Section 3, the MLP mathematical model is presented and solved by a Utility Function Approach. Section 4 applies the suggested MLP model to the olive oil sector in Andalusia. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section 5.This work deals with the analysis of technical efficiency within a particular economic sector. It aims to evaluate the efficiency of a company by comparing it with the rest of companies in the sector. A total of m inputs are used in the production process of every company (DMU) to produce s outputs.In the industry under study, the amount of consumed inputs can be split up into some ICSs, which are the sections or parts of consumption. The ICSs are allocated among the production subprocesses. This division of each input i into ICSs have to meet the following requirements:1.Total consumption of input i in the production process is the sum of the consumption taking place in all sections ICSs.In practice, it would be possible to transfer the amount Xiconsumed of input i from one section to another (ICSs) of input i.There is information available on the ICS consumption of all the sample companies.This division structure is illustrated in Fig. 1.To improve the efficiency of the production process, decision makers must be aware of the best performance options of their DMU and how to achieve it. It is also important to detect lacks and critical and weak points in the production process so as to determine where the improvements are required. Unlike other authors, we suggest a model that enables us to assess a different technical efficiency score for every ICS and input.For the above-mentioned aims of evaluation and comparison, the trend in the existing literature is to describe the activity of the company by considering its inputs and outputs. Therefore, given a list of m inputsx∈R+m, and s outputsy∈R+s, of a company or DMU, it is a common practice in economic analysis to describe the activities (x, y) that characterise the different companies using the production set of attainable levels. This production set can be defined as:(1)Ψ=(x,y)∈R+m+s/xcanproduceyAnd it is also interesting to consider the so-called input requirement set for each output vectory∈R+sas the set of inputs than can produce this output, i.e.:(2)X(y)=x∈R+m/(x,y)∈ΨTo analyse the technical efficiency of a company (DMUo), these sets will be estimated on the basis of the observed values of a sample of n DMUs from a particular industry. Obviously, these DMUs must be evaluated to estimate their efficiencies and compare them with a specific DMUo.The most used non-parametric approach to solve this problem is the Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). For example, a typical DEA model such as the so-called input-oriented CCR model can be applied for each DMUoto be evaluated. From this approach, the production possibility set (1) can be defined as follows:(3)PCCR=(x,y)∈R+m+s/x⩾Xλ,y⩽Yλ,λ⩾0whereλ∈R+nis a semi-positive vector inRn, and the sample data of the different DMUs are arranged with the matrix of inputsX∈R+m×nand the matrix of outputsY∈R+s×n, where each column j of these matrixes, of input or output data, corresponds to the DMUjof the sample data, with j=1,…,n.The model for estimating such production possibility set was initially proposed by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1978), and can also be seen in many publications and books such as Cooper et al. (2007). The solution of the input-oriented CCR model will provide us with an input-oriented technical efficiency score θ for DMUo, which is a radial measure and identical for all m inputs. These scores lead to the comparisons among DMUs, and also offer decision makers useful information to improve efficiency. Nevertheless, they do not supply an estimation of the ICS efficiency.Our model presents estimations of the global efficiency, input efficiencies and ICS efficiencies. Moreover, ICS differential ratios and input differential ratios are defined to suggest improvements to DMUs.Let us consider m inputs indexed by i=1,…,m; s outputs indexed by r=1,…,s; and n DMUs indexed by j=1,…,n. DMUs develop a process consisting of several subsets of activities. The structure of the production process is identical for all DMUs. The inputs are different according to their nature, and so is the number of ICSs into which the use of each input can be divided. This idea is included in Fig. 1, where the different nature of the inputs is represented by different grids. The consumption of a given input i, i=1,…,m, can be divided into KiICSs indexed by k=1,…,Ki. We deal with situations where all DMUs have the same inputs, the same outputs, and (for the use of each input) the same ICSs. Thus, m, s and Ki, i=1,…,m, are constants, and they do not depend on a particular DMU.Let us defineyrjas the value of output r in DMUj, r=1,…,s, j=1,…,n. In our production process, the use of inputs is split up into ICSs; hence,xikjis the value of the consumption of input i in DMUjcorresponding to ICS k, i=1,…,m, j=1,…,n, k=1,…,Ki. For a given input i, we can summarise all the ICSs of the use of the input in DMUj, and then take(4)xij=∑k=1Kixikjas the total amount of input i in DMUj, where Kiis used to denote the number of ICSs in which the consumption of input i is distributed, and i=1,…,m, j=1,…,n.In the first place, the production possibility set for the production process under study is characterised. Let PMLPdenote the production possibility set. The production possibility set is usually defined in the existing literature as stated in (1), without reaching the different ICS levels of the different inputs. In this paper, we will reach the ICS level.Letx=(xik)∈R+m×Kdenote a matrix of m×K input-ICS quantities (with K=maxi=1,…, m{Ki}, and xik=0 if k>Ki), and lety∈R+sdenote a vector of s output quantities. Let us measure the size of the company j with the value Tjas:(5)Tj=∑r=1sτryrjwith known weights τr⩾0, r=1,…,s.The set of feasible activities (x, y), where x is an input matrix and y is an output vector, is given by the production possibility set(6)PMLP=(x,y),x∈R+m×K,y∈R+s/xproduceyThe production possibility set PMLPmeets the following assumptions:Assumption 1The observed activities (x, y) belong to PMLP.(x, y) do not belong to PMLPif x=0 and y⩾0 with at least one output component strictly higher than 0. That is, it is not possible to produce any outputs with no consumption of inputs.For any activity (x, y) in PMLP, a semi-positive activity(x¯,y¯)withx¯⩾xandy¯⩽yis included in PMLP. That is, activities with an input no lower than x in any components (i.e., entry of the input matrix) and output no higher than y in any components (i.e., entry of the output vector) are feasible. That is, inputs and outputs are both strongly disposable. The production possibility set PMLPis a FDH (free disposal hull) production possibility set.For any activity (x, y) in PMLP, the ratio input/output for each input i and output r is higher or equal to the minimum ratio input/output (for the corresponding input i and output r) among all the points in PMLP. This takes place for each input i, i=1,…,m, and output r, r=1,…,s.For any activity (x, y) in PMLP, the ratio input/size for each input i and input-consumption section (ICS) k is higher or equal to the minimum ratio input/size (for the corresponding input i and ICS k) among all the points in PMLP. This takes place for each input i, i=1,…,m, and input-consumption section k, k=1,…,Ki.For any activity (x, y) in PMLP, the consumption of input i and ICS k is non-negative, that is, higher or equal to zero. And it occurs for each input i, i=1,…,m, and input-consumption section k, k=1,…,Ki.Then, our production possibility set is(7)PMLP=(x,y),x∈R+m×K,y∈R+s/(x,y)satisfiesassumptions1to6Next, Section 3.1.3 shows the MLP model suggested for estimating the production possibility set PMLP, and the feasible region of the model will be set PMLP.The boundaryPMLP∂of the production possibility set PMLPis given by:(8)PMLP∂=(xP,yP),xP∈R+m×K,yP∈R+s/atleastoneconstraintofPMLPhappenswithequalityThe boundaryPMLP∂of PMLPis the technology. The MLP model estimates the production possibility setΨ(conceptually defined and characterised in the existing literature by (1), as explained above) with PMLPas (7). In addition, we will establish optimisation criteria to go to the frontierPMLP∂given by (8) to achieve efficiency.Given the input, size and output data; for each input i, we wish to optimise the total input amount of such input i, and the partial amounts of the input consumption in all of its ICSs, and this takes place for each DMU, once. Therefore, we need n optimisations, one for each DMUjto be evaluated. Each one of these optimisations is a multi-criteria optimisation problem. As this model is an input-oriented one, the goal of these multi-criteria problems is to minimise inputs (in all ICSs), and guarantee outputs. Then, minimising inputs so that outputs are guaranteed is equivalent to minimising input/size ratios and guaranteeing outputs.Let DMUjbe denoted by DMUo, with o=1,…,n. On the other hand, Kidenotes the number of ICSs of a given input i, i=1,…,m. For this DMUo, the corresponding problem is the input-oriented Multi-criteria Linear Programming problem MLPoshowed below, where the decision variables are:(9)Xiko=desirableamountconsumptionofinputiinitsinput-consumptionsection(ICS)kofthecorrespondingprocessatdecisionmakingunitDMUo,forallinputi=1,…,m,andICSk=1,…,Ki.We can also summarise all ICSs of the consumption of each input i, in DMUo, by taking the decision variables:(10)Xio=∑k=1KiXikodesirableamountofinputiinDMUo,forallinputsi=1,…,m.And the MLPoproblem is:(11)minX1,1o,X1,2o,…,X1,K1o;X2,1o,X2,2o,…,X2,K2o;…;Xm,1o,Xm,2o,…,Xm,Kmo(12)s.t.:Xio⩾yroLBirforallinputsi=1,…,m,andoutputsr=1,…,s,(13)Tolik⩽Xikoforallinputsi=1,…,m,andICSsk=1,…,Ki,(14)0⩽Xiko,forallinputsi=1,…,m,andICSsk=1,…,Ki,where the lower bounds LBirand likare:(15)LBir=minj=1,…,nxijyrjyrj>0,∀i=1,…,m,∀r=1,…,s(16)lik=minj=1,…,nxikjTjTj>0,∀i=1,…,m,∀k=1,…,Kifor all inputs i=1,…,m, outputs r=1,…,s, and ICSs k=1,…,Ki, with Tois a measure of the size of DMUo, for o=1,…,n. For example, if there is only one output (s=1, andyro=yofor the only r=1), we can take To=yo, the output value of DMUo, o=1,…,n. If there are more outputs, Tois estimated by (5).This feasible region (12)–(14) characterises the production possibility set PMLPand its frontierPMLP∂(given by (7) and (8)).Note that, in our notation, capital “X” denote decision variables while lower case “x” denote observed input data, i.e., known constants.There are m inputs and, thus,∑i=1mKicriteria, the same number of criteria as ICSs considered. In fact, by (11) we are minimising all ICSs of the consumption of all the inputs in a multi-criteria approach. The constraints (12)–(14) estimate the production possibility set PMLP. This model (11)–(14) tries to reach the boundaryPMLP∂.The constraints(12) involve the total input/output ratios, which formulate Assumption 4, and they are related to the consumed quantity of input i in the whole process at an arbitrary actual production unit. They establish that, to be realistic and to obtain feasible activities (xo, yo), i.e., pairs of input matrix xoand output vector yo, which can be really obtained, the ratio of the required input i (adding all of its sections (ICSs) according to (4)) and output r (ratioxio/yro) must be higher or equal to the corresponding minimum ratio for this input i and output r, i=1,…,m; r=1,…,s. They reflect the fact that the total amount of each input i to produce one unit of each output r cannot be lower than the minimum amount consumed.The constraints(13) deal with the required input amount at each input-consumption-section. They formulate Assumption 5. These constraints establish that the ratio of the required input i at each ICS k and the company size (ratioxiko/To) must be higher or equal to the corresponding minimum ratio for this input i and its ICS k, i=1,…,m; k=1,…,Ki.Finally, constraints(14) mean that there are no negative input levels for each input and ICS. They formulate Assumption 6 stated above. Trivially, Assumptions 1–3 are also met by the feasible region (12)–(14). Therefore, the feasible region characterises the production possibility set PMLP.As any other Multi-criteria Linear Programming problems, we can try to solve the MLP model by three different approaches known as Utility Function Approach, Hierarchical Approach, or Pareto Optimality Approach (see, for example, Barba-Romero & Pomerol, 1997; González-Martín, 1986; Romero, 1983; Steuer, 1986; Wallenius et al., 2008; Yu, 1985; Zeleny, 1982). We implement the Utility Function Approach in this paper.To implement a Utility Function Approach, we need the utility function in the first place. Therefore, we define a utility function. We choose a weighted linear combination of the criteria (inputs) considered in (11). Note that the weights are taken in accordance with every input at each ICS, i.e., considering ICS levels, and not only the total input. These sets of weights will be characteristic of each DMU and this is how the DM’s preferences are incorporated into the MLP model. Let us denote the utility function as(17)f(Xo)=∑i=1m∑k=1KiwikoXikowhereXikois the required amount of consumption of input i in ICS k of the corresponding process in DMUo, for all inputs i=1,…,m, and ICSs k=1,…,Ki, as described in (9), that is,Xikoare the decision variables;wikois the weight or importance for input i and ICS k regarding DMUo, for all inputs i=1,…,m, and input sections k=1,…,Ki. These weights are previously agreed by the decision makers and represent their preferences;Xo=Xikom×K matrix of decision variables that characterise the solution space for DMUo, with input index i=1,…,m, and ICS index k=1,…,K, where, for notational convenience, we are taking K=maxi=1,…,m{Ki} and assuming, without loss of generality, thatXiko=xiko=0if k>Ki.Then, our Utility Function Approach consists in solving the following UF-MLPomodel:(18)minf(Xo)=∑i=1m∑k=1KiwikoXikos.t.:(12)–(14)Note that this utility function, expressed in (18), involves each DMUo, and includes weightswiko(for each input i and ICS k; i=1,…,m; k=1,…,Ki). These weights are related to decision variablesXiko, and they can differ in the different DMUs, i.e., each DMU has its own utility function. Note also that weights can be understood as the preferences of the decision-making units (DMUs), and they define the direction in which each DMU wishes to reach the frontier. The preferable direction to move towards the frontier will be the direction corresponding to the ICS with a higher weight. In this ICS, the solution will be the minimum value according to the technology.Given the problem under study, the production possibility set is defined in Section 3.1.2 and estimated in Section 3.1.3. This section is devoted to defining and computing different types of efficiency, with respect to DMUs, inputs and ICSs. These efficiencies must be computed in accordance with some reference (optimal) values, the target values. Our target values can be the optimal values of the objective functions of our Multi-criteria Linear Programming model (MLPomodel). And, taking into account that a Utility Function Approach is adopted to solve this multi-criteria model, i.e., we are working with a UF-MLPomodel, we can directly take the optimal value of the objective function of the problem as our target value to compare, define and compute efficiency. Also note that the objective function defines a direction to the frontierPMLP∂, and this direction is defined with the weightswiko, concerning DMUo.Let us denote byXiko∗, for i=1,…,m, and k=1,…,Kithe optimal values of the decision variables resulting from solving the UF-MLPoproblem (problem (18) subject to (12)–(14)) at DMUo. Even if there are alternative optimal values for problem (18) subject to (12)–(14), the optimal value of the objective function will be identical, and is denoted by(19)Zo∗=∑i=1m∑k=1KiwikoXiko∗Definition 1Global efficiency for a given DMUGiven a DMUo, with o=1,…,n, let us define the global efficiency of DMUoas:(20)θo=Zo∗∑i=1m∑k=1KiwikoxikoThis value is obviously bounded between 0 and 1, 0⩽θo⩽1. In addition, it is univocally defined with no ambiguity due to the uniqueness of Zo∗. We say DMUois (globally) efficient if its observed dataxikosatisfy θo=1. Otherwise, DMUois (globally) inefficient.Let us define now the input efficiency of a given DMUofor each input i, i=1,…,m. To this end, the best (minimum) value regarding the use of this input is computed. Thus, for the given DMUo, and for each input i, the following problem is previously considered:Problem input i – DMUo(Problem input i – UF – MLPo)(21)minZio=∑k=1KiwikoXikos.t.(12)–(14)(restrictedtoinputi).Constraints (12)–(14) restricted to input i are a subset of constraints (12)–(14). For completeness and a better understanding, this subset is formulated:(22)Xio⩾yroLBirforalloutputsr=1,…,s,(23)Tolik⩽XikoforallICSsk=1,…,Ki,(24)0⩽Xiko,forallICSsk=1,…,Ki,LetZio∗be the optimal value of the objective function of problem input i – DMUo. The uniqueness ofZio∗is guaranteed even if there are alternative optimums to this new problem input i – UF – MLPo. LetXiko-(inputi)∗(varying k=1,…,Ki) denote the coordinates of an optimal solution to the problem.Definition 2Input efficiency for a given DMU in a given input iGiven DMUo, with o=1,…,n, and an input i, i=1,…,m; let us define the input efficiency of DMUoin input i as:(25)θio=Zio∗∑k=1KiwikoxikoThis value is bounded between 0 and 1. In addition, it is univocally defined with no ambiguity due to the uniqueness ofZio∗. And this uniqueness comes from the fact thatZio∗is the optimal value of the objective function of the problem input i – UF – MLPo. We say that DMUois input efficient in a given input i if its observed dataxikosatisfyθio=1. Otherwise, DMUois input inefficient in input i.Let us prove that, by solving problem (18) subject to (12)–(14), we have automatically solved m problems (21) subject to (22)–(24) indexed in the inputs i, i=1,…,m, and vice versa. The following three Lemmas, and the Corollary 1, possess obvious proofs. Theorem 1 is proved in Appendix.Lemma 1The feasible region of problem UF-MLPois the intersection of the (imbibed) feasible regions of the problems input i – UF – MLPo, with i=1,…,m.The m problems input i – UF – MLPo, with i=1,…,m, are independent.The objective function of problem UF-MLPois exactly the sum of the objective functions of problems input i – UF – MLPo,with i=1,…,m.(a)Solving problem UF-MLPois equivalent to solving m independent problems input i – UF – MLPo,with i=1,…,m.The optimal value of the objective function of problem UF-MLPois the sum of the optimal values of the objective functions of m independent problems input i – UF – MLPo, with i=1,…,m.The set of coordinates (Xiko∗, for i=1,…,m, and k=1,…,Ki) of any optimal alternatives in respect to problem UF-MLPoconsists in the (disjoint) union of the corresponding optimal set of coordinates regarding m independent problems input i – UF – MLPo,with i=1,…,m.See Appendix. □Given a DMUo, it is (globally) efficient if, and only if, DMUis input efficient in each input i for all inputs i=1,…,m.Let us define now the ICS – efficiency of a given DMUoin an input i (i=1,…,m) for all the ICSs k (k=1,…,Ki). To this end, we need to compute the best (minimum) value with regard to the use of input i in such ICS k. Thus, for the given DMUo, for the input i, and for each ICS α, the following problem is previously considered:Problem ICS α – input i – DMUo. (Problem ICS α – input i – UF – MLPo)(26)minZiαo=wiαoXiαos.t.(12)–(14)(restricted to inputi).Constraints (12)–(14) restricted to input i are a subset of constraints (12)–(14), and this subset is defined by constraints (22)–(24). Taking into account that the weightswiαoare also known input data, this problem is equivalent to the problem:(27)minXiαos.t.(22)–(24).Note that the feasible region of this problem (about ICS α of input i) is exactly the same as the feasible region of the problem corresponding to input i, i.e., the problem input i – DMUo. Let us replace letter α with letter k. When we solve the problem ICS k – input i – DMUocorresponding to the considered ICS k, all the decision variables corresponding to all the ICSs of input i are also present in the problem. In other words, we also consider all the other decision variables related to all the ICSs of the consumption of input i, i.e., decision variablesXiρo, for all ICSs ρ=1,…,Ki. However, in the objective function there only exists the decision variable associated to the ICS k considered, variableXiko.LetXiko-(inputi,ICSk)∗be the optimal value of the (single) decision variable present in the objective function of problem ICS k – input i – DMUo. As the objective function has only one decision variable, then, even if there are several alternative optimal solutions, the optimal valueXiko-(inputi,ICSk)∗of this variable does not change. Furthermore, due to its formulation, the optimal value is always at its lowest bound, that is:(28)Xiko-(inputi,ICSk)∗=TolikDefinition 3ICS – efficiency of a given DMUoin an input i for a considered ICS kGiven a DMUo, with o=1,…,n, and an input i, i=1,…,m; let us define for any ICS k (k=1,…,Ki) the ICS – efficiency of DMUoin the considered ICS k of the consumption of the input i as:(29)θiko=Xiko-(inputi,ICSk)∗xiko=TolikxikoWe can also name it efficiency of ICS k in input i consumption in DMUo.This value is bounded between 0 and 1. Moreover, it is clear and univocally defined with no ambiguity because all optimal alternatives have the same value for the only decision variable in the objective function. This efficiency does not depend on the weightswiko. We say that DMUois ICS – efficient for a considered ICS k corresponding to a given input i if its observed dataxikosatisfyθiko=1. Otherwise, DMUois ICS – inefficient in such ICS k corresponding to the use of input i.Input efficiency and ICS efficiency definitions are based on problems that have exactly the same constraints, that is, the same feasible region. They only differ in the objective function. The objective function of the “input” problem is the weighted sum of the objective functions of the “ICS” problems. Consequently, the input problem is not separable in the ICS problems and there exists no equivalence among them. Nevertheless, a partial result can be established:Theorem 2If a particular DMUois ICS efficient for all the ICSs k of the use of input i, then that DMUois also input efficient in input i.For the direct demonstration, notice that all the problems mentioned in the Theorem statement have the same feasible region. The objective function of the input problem is a weighted sum of the objective functions of the so-called “ICS” problems. Weights are non-negative known data. Thus, if DMUois simultaneously ICS efficient in all ICSs, then, by Definition 3,xiko=Tolikforallk=1,…,Ki. This solution satisfies (22)–(24), and it is a solution of the common feasible region that (simultaneously) minimises all the summands of the sum that defines the objective function of the “input” problem. The sum of minimums is feasible and, then, this sum of minimums is the minimum of the sum. □The reciprocal demonstration is not necessarily true.Next section proposes some differential ratios that complement the efficiency scores previously defined and can help DMUs improve their performance.Given a particular DMUo, letXiko∗(with i=1,…,m; k=1,…,Ki) be an optimal solution to problem (18) subject to (12)–(14). We can define the ICS differential ratios and the input differential ratios as:ICS differential ratio for ICS k (k=1,…,Ki) of the use of input i (i=1,…,m):(30)Δiko=Xiko∗-xikoxikoforallinputsiandICSskInput differential ratio for input i (i=1,…,m):(31)Δio=Xio∗-xioxio=∑k=1KiXiko∗-∑k=1Kixiko∑k=1KixikoforallinputsiThese ratios represent the proportion of reduction or increase suggested to DMUoto turn its current (ICS k, input i) dataxikointo optimal valueXiko∗; or to change its current input i – dataxiointo optimal valueXio∗. These suggestions can help DMUoimprove its current input data values.The efficiency analysis in the olive oil sector in Andalusia (Spain) is conducted by applying the model. The following results are obtained.Two products result from the production process taking place in the olive oil industry. A great portion of the collected olives is ground and squeezed to produce olive oil. The remaining olives are not milled but seasoned and sold as table olives. Therefore, there are two outputs that are important in the efficiency analysis:OIL: Olive oil andOLIVE: Table olives.On the other hand, the four inputs are used for the production of both outputs. The first input is unskilled labour (UL). This group includes many tasks that require no specialisation. For instance, the reception and processing stages are seasonal peaks of labour demand, as olives are collected between December and January. Once the olives are in the oil-mill industry, they are stored for a short time, so they do not go bad. This is why the first production stage demands a great amount of unskilled labour, albeit mostly temporary. However, unskilled labour is also required throughout the whole process: oil extraction, table olive preparation, packaging, sale and other services provided by the company. Unskilled workers can clearly perform any of the above-mentioned tasks. However, the demand for permanent unskilled labour becomes higher during the following months. This is why management is interested in allocating this type of workforce in the most efficient way by distributing it among the different sections of the production process. Four ICSs are established:UL1 – Reception, weighting, washing and storage.UL2 – Olive oil extraction and table olive preparation.UL3 – Storage, weighting, packaging and sale of products.UL4 – Other services provided by the company.All the four sections of consumption meet the assumptions mentioned in Section 2.The second input is skilled labour (SL). This variable includes the tasks developed by skilled workers who are specialised in a particular job, from the grinding process to the company management. No ICSs are established for this input.The third input is floating capital (FL). This variable gathers all consumed floating capital. It includes the purchase of olives and other raw materials as well as all operating and maintenance expenses. One share of the floating capital is invested in the production process, and the rest is used for other processes and services, such as sales, marketing, and advice for partners. Management regards the capital spent on the production process as more important and wish to determine the most efficient way of distributing the floating capital available. Two ICSs are established for this input:FL1 – Floating capital for the production process.FL2 – Floating capital for processes other than production.The last input is fixed capital (FC). The variable includes the fixed capital corresponding to the value of the amortisations of the facilities. There are no ICSs considered for this input.Table 1shows the descriptive data of the model variables for all the 18 sample companies. The measurements correspond to the two outputs, the four inputs and the ICSs of inputs UL and FL. The sample presents a great variability in the production volume of the companies.The application of the model is conducted by giving values that are proportional to the price of both outputs to parameters τr, so the size represents the sales volume of the company. These values are included in Table 2.The Utility Function Approach that consists in solving UF-MLPomodel(18) s.t.: (12)–(14) is applied. The values assigned to the wikparameters represent the preferences of the company and determine the solution that results in an optimal utility function. By changing wikvalues, the direction to the frontier is also altered.It should be taken into account that the efficiency concepts defined in Section 3.3 differ from the one estimated by DEA. In our case, efficiency depends on the utility function determined by management. Therefore, global and input efficiency depends on the utility function, that is, on wikvalues. This paper firstly estimates the efficiency of olive oil mills in Andalusia with no preferential direction, as unit values are assigned to every wikparameter. The descriptive measurements of these values are shown in Table 3.Expression (20) is applied and the mean value for global efficiency θ0 is 0.431. However, there is one company with a global efficiency of 0.14, and the maximum value in the sample is held by another company, the most globally efficient, with 0.84. It is remarkable that there are no companies that are efficient in all the four inputs, which is why there are no globally efficient companies. By applying expression (25), the efficiencyθi0for all the four inputs UL, SL, FL and FC is estimated. The least efficient input is SL with a mean score of 0.237. The other three inputs have mean values between 0.5 and 0.6. With those values, there is only one efficient company for SL and FC and only two efficient companies for UL and FL. There is no company that is efficient in more than one input. To calculate the efficiencyθik0of every ICS for UL and FL, expression (29) is applied. Table 3 shows the descriptive measurements of the values obtained. We find very low minimum values for the efficiency of ICS in UL. They belong to the smallest company in the sample. To become efficient in ICS UL3, this company should reduce the use of this input up to 94%. The mean values in the ICSs of this input are lower than those in FC.Table 4shows the descriptive measurements of the Differential Ratios for inputs obtained by applying expression (31). The possible mean reductions have values of approximately 43% for UL, FL and FC inputs, whereas, the value for the SL input indicate that the industry would attain a mean reduction of 73.5% in the use of this resource, if its performance was efficient. This would enable reaching the established utility function regarding the use of Skilled Labour.The solution of the model UF-MLPomodel(18) s.t.: (12)–(14) with values wikequal to the unit leads to multiple solutions regarding the results obtained in the solution for the Xik. Nevertheless, what really matters to management is to follow a specific direction towards the frontier. To this end, wikare assigned different values so that the highest value corresponds to the ICS where the minimum consumption is to be achieved. The model has been solved with two different scenarios in the sector. In Option A, management prefers that UL in ICS UL1 is minimised, followed by UL2, UL4 and UL3 in order of preference. On the other hand, in Option B, management wants the consumption of this input to be minimal in ICS UL3, followed by UL2, UL4 and UL1. As to FL, each option has a different combination of preferences for both ICSs. Regarding the utility function, inputs behave independently from one another. Therefore, the values assigned to the wikof a particular input will not affect the solution of the other inputs.Table 5shows the values assigned to wikfor both options according to the above-commented preferences. These values are assigned to every DMU for the sake of simplicity but each DMU could have its own values in accordance with its preferences.Results from the solution to the model UF-MLPomodel(18) s.t.: (12)–(14) for Options A and B are explained below. Tables 6–8show the data of the solutions for both options. A representative DMU has been taken from the sample. The values for every ICS consumed in practice are shown together with the values taken in frontiers A and B for both options. In addition, the differential ratios for every ICS are calculated.Table 6 shows the values for UL and its four ICSs. The total consumption of UL in frontiers A and B is identical. Therefore, the wikvalues only affect the internal distribution of the 7883.5 units, which is the value that makes the utility function of this input optimal in this DMU. It is also interesting that the solution for UL1 is the minimum possible one (1728.9) in frontier A, whereas the solution for the same ICS in frontier B is the maximum possible solution (4815.6). These values result from the preferences established by the wik, 4 for frontier A in this ICS and 1 for frontier B. The same occurs in ICS UL3, but the wikvalues are swapped: 1 and 4, respectively. The differential ratios demonstrate that a company can reduce its total consumption of UL up to 12% and achieve efficiency in this input, accomplishing the goal established in the utility function. The distribution of consumption among the four ICSs depends on the scenario. If Option A is chosen, the consumption could decrease up to 64% in UL1, 15% in UL2, and 59% in UL4. In return, the consumption in UL3 has to increase up to 261%. On the other hand, if Option B is chosen, the consumption in UL2 should decrease up to 15% and 59% in UL4, and it would increase up to just 1% in UL1.Table 7 shows the results related to FL. We can also see the result from swapping wikvalues. This DMU could reduce the total consumption of FL up to 35%. If the manager prefers Option B, they would have to transfer the input consumption in the production process to other services. Lastly, Table 8 includes the results related to the two inputs that have not been divided into ICSs. Therefore, there are only data related to the total consumption of the input and a single frontier. Note that the company could reduce the use of SL up to 78% and FL up to 33%.The global efficiencies θ0 calculated for the whole sample in accordance with Options A and B have average values of 0.43 and 0.38, respectively. These results indicate that the sector is consuming resources in a manner that is more compatible with scenario A than B.To explain the levels of efficiency found in the olive oil industry, we have studied the profile of efficient companies with respect to their size. Table 9includes the Spearman correlations between the size of the companies and the values estimated for the global and input efficiencies.Given the results, we can deduce a clear relation between global efficiency and business size. In addition, there is another connection between size and the efficiency in the use of workforce and fixed capital. However, there is no relation with the efficiency in the use of floating capital.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes and presents a Multi-criteria Linear Programming model (MLP) with input orientation, which is aimed at computing efficiency scores of decision-making units (DMUs). The problem is applied to the production of olive oil in Andalusia, and the main requirements for the production process under study are illustrated. The consumption of inputs is split up into input consumption sections (ICS) to better model real-world situations. The MLP model is both an input-oriented model and an input-ICS-oriented model. The possibility to assess a different technical efficiency score for each ICS and each input is also shown. First, the production possibility set (PMLP) is defined and then estimated by the MLP mathematical model which is proposed and defined. Then, the MLP model is solved by the Utility Function Approach, which results from the weighted (preferences) linear combination of the criteria (inputs) for every input and ICS. In this context, we are using a directional approach to assess technical efficiency.The resulting efficiency scores are defined. Global efficiency, input efficiency and ICS efficiency scores are established. The MLP model not only performs the analysis at a global level, just as with other models previously presented in the existing literature, it also differs from previous models because it produces a more in-depth analysis with input and ICS levels. Global and input efficiency scores provide the satisfaction levels in the consumption of inputs of a particular DMU. These measurements are evaluated in regard to the own utility function of the DMU, with its own set of weights to model the DMU’s preferences. These satisfaction levels are evaluated with respect to the frontier with the best performance. Whereas global efficiency considers the total input consumption, input efficiency is calculated with focusing on just one input from a separated approach. ICS efficiency scores measure the proportion over 1 of the minimum feasible consumption for the stage under analysis as well as the current consumption in a particular ICS of a DMU, and they do not depend on the set of weights. The ICS and input differential ratios are set to aid the decision-making teams of every DMU.The suggested model is applied to efficiency levels of the olive oil industry in Andalusia (Spain). The global efficiency scores obtained are approximately 40%. This indicates that the industry can significantly reduce the consumption of resources to obtain complete satisfaction with its utility function. It should be taken into account that our model is much more demanding when measuring efficiency than DEA models. In addition, the concept of efficiency varies from one model to another, and they should not be compared. We have not actually found any fully efficient companies in the sample, whereas DEA always presents efficient companies that define the envelope (frontier). That is why the technical efficiency scores in the same industry found in previous works (Dios-Palomares & Martınez-Paz, 2010, 2011; Dios-Palomares et al., 2013, chap. 12) are approximately 80%. It can also be concluded that the use of unskilled labour is the best managed input in the olive oil sector. However, a large amount of effort needs to be expended in the allocation of skilled labour and in the management of floating capital.The different solutions for the diverse directions towards the frontier that have been established as the management’s preferences allow for ascertaining that the model is suitable for the problem posed by the management: the allocation of unskilled labour and floating capital in the different ICSs. Two scenarios with opposite preferences have been tested. Both reach solutions that meet the utility function.From the examination of the efficient companies’ profiles, it is concluded that the largest companies are the most efficient at the global level and in the use of workforce and fixed capital. Nevertheless, this conclusion must be considered with caution, as the model assumes constant returns to scale.In conclusion, we can assert that the MLP model is a directional Multi-criteria Linear Programming model that is solved in a utility function framework and, therefore, with just one optimisation criterion. It can be easily solved by the existing Linear Programming methods, software and tools. In addition, the constraints involved in the MLP model are, mainly, the lower bounds of the decision variables, with the optimisation problem being a minimisation one. These last features make the MLP model easier to solve, even if the number of constraints increases.In addition, as it is well known, DEA models require a minimum number of units to obtain good estimations. However, in our MLP model, the properties of the estimations are maintained even when the number of units is very small.Lastly, based on the results obtained, it would be interesting to conduct the efficiency analysis in the olive oil sector from this approach but from an output-oriented viewpoint. Olive oil is a crucial contribution to the GDP of Andalusia. In addition, the newly created interprofessional association, which gathers all the supply in the sector, has led to a remarkable increase in the exports opening up new markets in the USA or Japan. For this reason, the general goal is to increase the production in the sector, keeping the same level of the resources. On the other hand, the industry is very micronised and the size of companies varies as seen in the descriptive analysis of the sample. Therefore, an efficiency analysis including variable returns to scale would be highly advisable to prevent large companies from being favoured in the efficiency evaluation.Finally, a new output-oriented MLP model with variable returns to scale is proposed as a future research line as to widen the field of application of this methodology in the real world.