@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rethinking Soft OR interventions: Models as boundary objects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A case is made to conceptualise models as potential boundary objects.The framework is illustrated via two empirical case vignettes.The framework provides a means to appreciate the dynamics of model-supported knowledge creation.The value of the framework for evaluating and conducting Soft OR interventions is also discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Soft OR,Models,Intervention,Boundary objects,Knowledge creation,Group decision and negotiation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper I draw on research on the role of objects in problem solving collaboration to make a case for the conceptualisation of models as potential boundary objects. Such conceptualisation highlights the possibility that the models used in Soft OR interventions perform three roles with specific effects: transfer to develop a shared language, translation to develop shared meanings, and transformation to develop common interests. If these roles are carried out effectively, models enable those involved to traverse the syntactic, semantic and pragmatic boundaries encountered when tackling a problem situation of mutual concern, and help create new knowledge that has consequences for action. I illustrate these roles and associated effects via two empirical case vignettes drawn from an ongoing action research programme studying the impact of Soft OR interventions. Building on the insights generated by the case vignettes, I develop an analytical framework that articulates the dynamics of knowledge creation within Soft OR interventions. The framework can shed new light on a core aspect of Soft OR practice, especially with regards to the impact of models on the possibilities for action they can afford to those involved. I conclude with a discussion of the prescriptive value of the framework for research into the evaluation of Soft OR interventions, and its implications for the conduct of Soft OR practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of models has been an integral part of the emergence and establishment of operational research (OR) as a field. Pidd (2003, p. 12) defines a model as: “an external and explicit representation of part of reality as seen by the people who wish to use that model to understand, to change, to manage and to control that part of reality”. There are many ways in which models are used in practice depending on the degree of human interaction involved in creating them and the intended frequency of use (Pidd, 2010). For example, models can be created to tackle a particular issue and discarded afterwards, as when developed and used by a group to make a one-off decision. Other models are built as part of decision support systems, as in the case of many spreadsheet-based models that have become embedded in organisational routines. Models give OR its distinctive identity, and help to distinguish it from other intervention approaches also concerned with tackling organisational problems such as organisational development (Burnes & Cooke, 2012; Eden, 1978). And whilst it is recognised that the impact of OR work cannot be solely attributed to the use of models alone, it is evident that models perform a central and critical role in any OR intervention.In this paper I examine the role of models in interventions designed to support the type of collaborative problem solving typically associated with Soft OR (Mingers, 2011). There is an extensive literature that offers accounts of the perceived or realised impact of different types of Soft OR interventions (e.g. Franco, Cushman, & Rosenhead, 2004; Franco & Lord, 2011; Mingers & Rosenhead, 2004; Rouwette, Vennix, & van Mullekom, 2002), as well as surveys of Soft OR adoption (e.g. Munro & Mingers, 2002; O’Brien, 2011). Despite this evidence, however, a focus on what goes on inside the ‘black box’ of Soft OR interventions has received little consideration in the literature to date (White, 2009). In particular, with notable exceptions (e.g. Ackermann & Eden, 2011b; Franco & Rouwette, 2011; Shaw, Ackermann, & Eden, 2003), we know little about the complexities associated with core aspects of Soft OR interventions such as model-supported interactions. I argue that this focus is critical because it could help us answer a number of relevant questions related to the impact of models. For example, how do models enable or constrain interactions between those involved in a collaborative problem solving effort? How do models help to create new knowledge about the problem situation being addressed? What types of interactions take place when model outputs are invoked by group members and with what impact? And so forth. These questions are no doubt complex ones, but their answers can provide insight into the factors affecting model-supported group processes and outputs and, ultimately, intervention outcomes.To conduct my examination, and in line with similar recent efforts by scholars working in the group model building tradition (e.g. Black & Andersen, 2012; Zagonel, 2002), I draw on the body of organisation and social science literature that studies how different types of boundary objects help to overcome barriers in problem solving collaborations (e.g. Bechky, 2003a, 2003b; Carlile, 2002, 2004; Henderson, 1991; Star, 1989; Star & Griesemer, 1989). This literature is relevant to Soft OR because it provides a useful means to better understand the type of model-supported problem solving collaborations that are central to Soft OR practice (Franco, 2008), and also highlight the conditions under which models can become boundary objects during group interaction.In what follows I explore the relationships between problem solving collaboration, knowledge creation, and boundary objects, and extend it to the context of Soft OR interventions. This is turn enables the conceptualisation of models as potential boundary objects, with specific roles and associated effects according to the type of boundary faced. These roles and effects are then illustrated via empirical case vignettes drawn from an ongoing action research programme that studies the impact of Soft OR interventions in a variety of organisational settings. Next, building on the insights generated by the case vignettes, I develop an analytical framework that articulates the dynamics of knowledge creation within Soft OR interventions. The framework can shed new light on a core aspect of Soft OR work, especially with regards to the impacts of models on the possibilities for action they can afford to those involved. I conclude with a discussion of the prescriptive value of the framework for research into the evaluation of Soft OR interventions, and its implications for the conduct of Soft OR practice.Much recent organisation and social science literature has accounted for the role of objects in cross-disciplinary collaboration using the notion of boundary objects (Bechky, 2003b; Carlile, 2002, 2004; Carlile & Rebentisch, 2003; Levina, 2005; Levina & Vaast, 2005; Nicolini, Mengis, & Swan, 2012; Star, 1989, 2010; Star & Griesemer, 1989). This body of literature highlights the capacity of objects to support cross-disciplinary collaborations, including problem-solving collaborations such as those typical of Soft OR interventions (Franco, 2008). In the discussion that follows I will concentrate mainly on the work by Paul Carlile (2002, 2004), whose account is perhaps one of the fullest and most widely read in this literature.Carlile (2002, 2004) argues that problem-solving collaboration is typically associated with the need to create new knowledge within or across organisations. This need arises because novelty in the form of, typically, environmental changes requiring new organisational responses (e.g. a new product, service or process), is present. In such cases, a diverse group of experts, each one possessing domain specific knowledge and practice (e.g., about design, manufacturing, sales, safety, etc.), is typically formed to engage in a collaborative problem-solving effort. The specialisation of group members’ knowledge and practice creates boundaries associated with differences in the perspectives and type of knowledge group members have, and dependencies that hold important consequences for the particular tasks their respective functions perform. These boundaries are mostly evident in group members’ interactions, making problem-solving collaboration, and thus new knowledge creation, a complex and challenging task.There are three knowledge boundaries, namely, syntactic, semantic and pragmatic (Carlile, 2002, 2004), which present increasing levels of complexity and difficulty for creating new knowledge. In a syntactic boundary, difficulties are created by divergence in the symbols, labels and jargon used by group members due to their specialised knowledge, roles and organisational affiliations. The challenge for group members here is how to represent and communicate their knowledge to one another. Provided a common syntax or shared language is established and used by group members, then communication across the boundary is reasonably straightforward. However, when the differences in the amount and specialisation of group members’ knowledge, and the dependencies on one another’s knowledge to complete the problem-solving task, appear unclear or ambiguous a semantic boundary is then faced. These interpretive differences limit effective communication and knowledge sharing among group members, and thus shared meanings need to be developed in order to transfer knowledge across the boundary.The process of developing shared meanings is likely to reveal consequences for group members’ interests and incentives which, if adverse, will create potential for conflict. In this case we are faced with a pragmatic boundary. Where group members have different interests and incentives, knowledge developed in one area may have negative consequences for another and so be resisted. Under these circumstances, the shared interpretations developed for dealing with differences and dependencies at the semantic boundary will be insufficient to generate the level of collaboration required for problem solving. This is thus the most socially and politically complex type of boundary, as group members are required to negotiate meanings and be willing to transform knowledge and interests from their own specialised domains. The critical challenge here is changing knowledge that is ‘at stake’, and to create new knowledge as a result (Bechky, 2003a, 2003b; Carlile, 2002, 2004).There is an extensive literature that examines how different types of boundary objects help traverse syntactic, semantic and pragmatic boundaries within problem solving collaborations (e.g. Bechky, 2003a, 2003b; Carlile, 2002, 2004; Carlile & Rebentisch, 2003; Henderson, 1991; Nicolini et al., 2012; Star, 1989; Star & Griesemer, 1989). A boundary object is a shareable and tangible artefact around which group members can interact about a problem situation of concern, and may include objects such as repositories and standardised forms (Star & Griesemer, 1989); sketches and drawings (Henderson, 1991); prototypes (Bechky, 2003b; Carlile, 2002; Pawlowski & Robey, 2004); strategy tools (Jarzabkowski, Spee, & Smets, 2013; Kaplan, 2011), and more abstract objects such as narratives (Boland & Tenkasi, 1995). When working within and between organisations, individuals and groups orient towards boundary objects in terms of their affordances (Gibson, 1986; Hutchby, 2001), namely, the different possibilities they offer for action. For example, a prototype can make specialised knowledge tangible and offer opportunities for discussing design issues between representatives of different professional groups, departments, divisions or organisations. This ‘tangibility’ can be said to be the prototype’s affordance.According to Carlile (2002, 2004), to be useful within the context of a problem-solving collaboration, objects must afford group members with opportunities to: (1) represent and transfer their knowledge by providing them with a common syntax for communication; (2) translate their knowledge by enabling the specification and learning of knowledge differences and dependencies; and (3) draw on, change or negotiate its context so that they can apply and transform what they know. In other words, a useful object is one that helps group members to deal effectively with the syntactic, semantic boundaries discussed above. When this happens an object is said to have become a boundary object (Barley, Leonardi, & Bailey, 2012; Bechky, 2003b; Boland & Tenkasi, 1995; Carlile, 2002, 2004; Levina & Vaast, 2005; Pawlowski & Robey, 2004; Star & Griesemer, 1989). Consequently, not all objects are boundary objects per se. Provided they become one to those involved, changes in knowledge and practices across group member’s functional or organisational constituencies are thus likely to follow (Bechky, 2003b; Carlile, 2002).In the next section, and in line with similar recent attempts by scholars working in the group model building community (e.g. Black & Andersen, 2012; Zagonel, 2002), I extend the notion of boundary objects to the case of models developed in Soft OR interventions. This conceptualisation can help us better understand the affordances that models can provide to those working across interaction boundaries and, at the same time, highlight useful criteria against which the effectiveness of Soft OR interventions may be assessed.The link between Soft OR and knowledge creation has been discussed by some scholars such as Eden (1992) and, more recently, Keys (2007a, 2007b). Indeed, whilst Soft OR interventions can have many purposes (see, for example, the discussion in Connell, 2001), knowledge creation is arguably a significant product of Soft OR interventions designed to tackle problem situations demanding novelty in their treatment. The need for novelty arises because existing approaches to address the situation may have proved insufficient in the past, or there is a belief by those concerned that their use may perhaps exacerbate the situation. To make progress, then, a group of individuals with domain-specific understandings of, and interests in, the situation is typically gathered to participate in a model-supported problem-solving collaboration, with a view to developing new knowledge about, and novel responses to, that situation. New knowledge arises when the meanings attributed to the problem situation change, as modelling helps to transform the context and relationships between the different elements of that situation (Ackermann & Eden, 2010; Eden, 1992).Model-supported problem-solving collaborations that are typical of Soft OR interventions (see, for example, Franco, 2008) also require that syntactic, semantic and pragmatic boundaries be traversed, and models have in this process similar supporting roles to those discussed earlier for the case of (boundary) objects. To traverse a syntactic boundary, models perform a transfer or communication role that helps group members to develop a shared language that enables them to specify and share their perspectives and knowledge differences and dependencies related to the problem situation. The variety of classification structures and coding procedures embedded within models are intended to create this shared language. For example, Strategic Choice models (Friend & Hickling, 2005) structure group members’ discussions in terms of ‘decision areas’, ‘uncertainty areas’, and ‘comparison areas’. Similarly, SODA models (Ackermann & Eden, 2010) require group members’ inputs to the discussion to be codified using bipolar nodes organised as hierarchies of argumentation. When different types of models need to be used to communicate at the syntactic boundary, specific procedures are developed to help group members move between different models (see, for example, Howick, Ackermann, & Andersen, 2006). Having a shared language through the use of models, however, does not necessarily mean that group members will understand models in exactly the same ways. At the syntactic boundary, models only enable group members to have different types of conversations (Franco, 2006) without enforcing commonly shared meanings (Boland & Tenkasi, 1995).A model acting only as a communication tool will not be sufficient to traverse a semantic boundary. To traverse this boundary models also must function as translation devices. In this role models help group members to create sufficient shared meanings to accommodate and learn about interpretative and knowledge differences and dependencies. The models created within Soft OR interventions represent these differences and dependencies in terms of relationships between concepts, activities or stakeholders, relations of similarity or influence, and relationships between options. It is the visual and accessible nature of these representations, together with the interactive analyses they can facilitate, that are claimed to be of particular value in increasing group members’ understandings of their differences and dependencies, and thus help them learn (Franco & Montibeller, 2010).Finally, models also have a role to play with regard to pragmatic boundaries, which are commonly experienced in most Soft OR interventions. Pragmatic boundaries arise when particular shared meanings emerging during interaction make group members’ knowledge and interests more salient and at stake, which generates conflict that needs to be managed through negotiation. Typically, it is the group members’ anticipations of the consequences, perceived or real, of particular shared meanings that generates this conflict (Ackermann & Eden, 2011b). The pragmatic boundary can be traversed when the model performs a transformative role that enables group members to manage an open negotiation that develops common interests, and creates new knowledge with change implications about the problem situation being addressed. Models can help to manage the negotiation by allowing group members’ to consider their needs, choose what to include or exclude from the discussion, and reflect any changes in knowledge, interests or relations that may emerge incrementally during interaction. This transformative role has also been referred to as ‘transitional’, ‘facilitative’ or ‘negotiative’ by other scholars (e.g. Eden, 1992; Eden & Ackermann, 2001, 2004; Franco & Montibeller, 2010).Table 1below summarises the preceding discussion. In the first column each type of boundary is categorised according to the complexity of the boundary faced by those involved in a Soft OR intervention. The second and third columns highlight the different roles models perform at each boundary (transfer, translation, transformation) and their associated effects (shared language, shared meanings, common interests), respectively. It is important to stress that as we successfully traverse each boundary, the roles and effects of models in more complex boundaries encompass those associated with less complex boundaries. For example, when faced with a semantic boundary, models must be able to operate as both communication and translation tools. Similarly, when a pragmatic boundary is faced, those involved must be able to use models as communication, translation, and transformation tools. Not surprisingly, models developed in most Soft OR interventions are required to perform all three roles.Building on the theory of boundary objects discussed above, I posit that the extent to which syntactic, semantic and pragmatic boundaries are traversed in Soft OR interventions will depend upon whether the models created can become boundary objects ‘in-use’ (Levina & Vaast, 2005) to those involved. This would require that models perform the three roles specified in Table 1 successfully, and thus help in creating a shared language, shared meanings and common interests during group members’ model-supported interactions. However, it is possible that models do not achieve these effects in some cases. For example, as Ackermann and Eden (2011a) note, this can happen when models, and the analyses they enable, are used either symbolically to deflect attention away from discussing the real issues, or as a vehicle for imposing particular perspectives, in which case new knowledge and change is unlikely to be achieved. In these cases, models are not (or will not become) boundary objects in-use. Therefore, their actual potential to become boundary objects deserves closer empirical examination, which I undertake in the next and the later sections.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
