@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Productivity and efficiency estimation: A semiparametric stochastic cost frontier approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A flexible stochastic cost frontier model.Inefficiency and productivity decomposed.Technical progress and efficiency improvement found in Norwegian salmon farming.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Economics,Cost function,Semiparametric smooth coefficient model,Stochastic frontier model,Decomposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a flexible stochastic cost frontier panel data model where the technology parameters are unknown smooth functions of firm- and time-effects, which non-neutrally shift the cost frontier. The model decomposes inefficiency into firm and time-specific components and productivity change into inefficiency change, technical change and scale change. We then apply the proposed methodology to the Norwegian salmon production data and analyze technical efficiency as well as productivity changes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The estimation of technical inefficiency was pioneered by Aigner, Lovell, and Schmidt (1977) and Meeusen and van den Broeck (1977) in a stochastic frontier (SF) production function framework. Since then the SF model has been extended in many directions accommodating both cross-sectional and panel data. The models use both primal and dual approaches such as the production, input or output distance functions (Coelli & Perelman, 1999). Although most of the models use parametric functional forms, there are SF models that deal with nonparametric formulations of the frontier function (Fan, Li, & Weersink, 1996; Kumbhakar, Park, Simar, & Tsionas, 2007, among others). Sun and Kumbhakar (2013) used a semiparametric model to introduce flexibility to the parametric production frontier model. More recently, attention has been paid to the non-traditional inputs, i.e., firm characteristics, policy variables as well as factors that describe the environment in which production takes place, in addition to the traditional inputs such as capital and labor. These non-traditional inputs or environmental factors are the exogenous factors that may neutrally or non-neutrally shift the frontier of the technology.The role of the environmental factors have been recognized in the literature using both parametric and semiparametric models. For example, Bhaumik, Kumbhakar, and Sun (2014) considered a model in which the environmental variables shift the frontier neutrally by expressing the intercept as a function of the non-traditional inputs. On the other hand, Zhang, Sun, Delgado, and Kumbhakar (2012) considered a model in which the environmental variables shift the production function non-neutrally by expressing both the intercept and slope coefficients as functions of R&D. More specifically, Zhang et al. (2012) estimated these coefficients as unknown smooth functions of R&D. The unknown functions allow the environmental variables to affect the technology in a flexible manner without imposing any specific form in their effect on the production frontier.In this article we focus on the semiparametric cost frontier model to estimate and decompose productivity and efficiency. The advantage of the cost function approach is that it explicitly recognizes endogeneity of the input variables. To separate firm effects from time-varying technical inefficiency, we consider a panel data cost frontier model where the coefficients of the cost function are allowed to vary over time in a flexible manner. To do so, the slope coefficients of the cost function are specified as nonparametric functions of the time trend. Inefficiency is assumed to be neutral and is captured by the intercept which is allowed to vary over time and across firms in a flexible manner. Thus, firm- and time-effects on inefficiency are completely flexible. Estimation of the model is done in three steps. The semiparametric cost function is estimated in the first step. Inefficiency is estimated in the second step in which we separate the firm-effects from both persistent and time-varying technical inefficiency (Kumbhakar, Lien, & Hardaker, 2014). In doing so, we make distributional assumptions on the inefficiency components as well as on the random firm-effects. Finally, we decompose and estimate the inefficiency and productivity change components based on the estimated cost frontier from the first two steps. In particular, inefficiency is decomposed into time-invariant and time-varying components, and productivity change is decomposed into various components including the scale change, technical change, and technical inefficiency change. Although firm-effects and persistent inefficiency do not affect productivity directly (i.e., they vanish upon differentiation with respect to time), omission of these effects is likely to bias the other parameters and hence productivity and its components. As an empirical example, we use a farm-level Norwegian salmon production data set. This is an unbalanced panel data set that covers 442 farms over 14 years. Fish farming is a highly relevant industry to study as a future increase in the global production of healthy proteins has to rely on innovations and productivity growth in aquaculture. Many aquaculture sectors are young or infant industries where one can expect substantial farm heterogeneity in terms of technology, efficiency and productivity. It is important to understand quantitatively the sources of productivity differentials across firms and their development over time, as this can be used in design of policies aimed at increasing productivity, e.g., public extension services and technology transfer programs. The model framework proposed in this paper enables us to perform these kinds of analyses, as it allows a rich and flexible decomposition of sources of firms’ productivity and its growth over time.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains in detail how to estimate the semiparametric stochastic cost frontier model and to decompose the inefficiency and productivity within this modeling framework. Section 3 describes the data set used for the evaluation of the model. Section 4 reports and interprets the estimation results, and Section 5 concludes.The cost function that we consider in this article is:(1)lnCit=θ(i,t)+ϕ(t)′lnBit+vitwhere the total cost, Cit, is the cost of variable inputs for firm i in year t, Bitis a vector of covariates (output and input prices), the intercept, θ(i, t), is an unknown function of firm- and time-effects which captures both persistent and time-varying inefficiency (to be specified later), the slope coefficient vector, ϕ(t), is an unknown function of time trend, and vitis the noise term. We call (1) a semiparametric stochastic cost function because the structure of the cost function is parametric (Cobb-Douglas or translog depending on the construction of the Bitvariables), but the coefficients are nonparametric functions of time trend. In principle, they can be functions of a vector of environmental variables (call them z). However, the cost frontier function is something that is common to all firms in a given year. That is, if two firms have the same values of all the covariates (input prices and output), their optimal (minimum) cost will be the same. If the cost function coefficients are functions of the z variables, the cost frontier will depend on z; and furthermore, if these z variables vary across firms, the cost frontier will be firm-specific. This is counterintuitive, especially if one thinks of the cost frontier as the benchmark technology, the value of which changes with z but not the technology itself. We avoid this problem by letting the technology parameters change with only time but not across firms. By doing this, we allow the cost frontier to change over time nonparametrically so that it is the same for all firms in any given year. More specifically, we define the cost frontier as:(2)lnCit=α(t)+ϕ(t)′lnBit+mit+vit,where α(t) = miniθ(i, t) and mit= θ(i, t) − α(t). Note that the above frontier function coefficients are invariant across firms; and therefore, we have a separate frontier for each t, unless all the functional coefficients do not vary over time (which is a testable hypothesis).We start with a Cobb-Douglas type stochastic cost frontier model with panel data:(3)lnCit=θ(i,t)+∑q=1Qβq(t)lnYqit+∑k=1Kδk(t)lnWkit+∑p=1Pγp(t)lnQpit+vit,where Citis the total cost, Yqitis the qth output, Wkitis the kth input price, and Qpitis the pth quasi-fixed input (e.g., capital), for the ith firm at time t. The i and t inside the functional parameters capture firm- and time-effects in a fully flexible manner. The random shocks vitare assumed to be distributed with mean zero and varianceσv2. Furthermore, it is assumed to be independent of firm- and time-effects as well as ln Yq, ∀q, ln Wk, ∀k, and ln Qp, ∀p. The functional coefficients θ(i, t), βq(t), ∀q, δk(t), ∀k, and γp(t), ∀p, are the intercept and slope coefficients. It is worth emphasizing the economic meaning of the functional coefficients. The time-varying βq(t) are cost elasticities with respect to outputs. Similarly, cost elasticities with respect to input prices are δk(t) which also vary over time. Both βq(t) and δk(t) should be non-negative for all q, k and t. Finally, the cost elasticities with respect to quasi-fixed factors, γp(t), can be either positive or negative and the sign can also change over time. We will discuss this issue in the empirical section of the paper. These unknown functions can be estimated using the kernel-based nonparametric method, which will be explained in more details in the following section.Since the cost function is homogeneous of degree one in input prices and this property has to hold at every data point, we impose this property before estimation of the cost function. Such a restriction can be imposed by using any one of the input prices as a numeraire and express all other input prices relative to the numeraire. Using W1, the price of the first input as the numeraire, we re-write the cost function as:(4)lnC˜it=θ(i,t)+∑q=1Qβq(t)lnYqit+∑k=2Kδk(t)lnW˜kit+∑p=1Pγp(t)lnQpit+vit,whereC˜it=Cit/W1it,andW˜kit=Wkit/W1it,∀k = 2, …, K.The cost function in (4) is similar to the semiparametric smooth coefficient (SPSC) model (Fan & Zhang, 1999; Li, Huang, Li, & Fu, 2002). However, the traditional SPSC model assumes that all the coefficients, the intercept and slopes, are functions of the same covariates. In our case, the intercept is a function of firm- and time-effects while the slopes are functions of time only.For estimation we perform a Robinson (1988) type transformation and re-write (4) as:(5)lnC˜it*=∑q=1Qβq(t)lnYqit*+∑k=2Kδk(t)lnW˜kit*+∑p=1Pγp(t)lnQpit*+vit,wherelnC˜it*=lnC˜it−E(lnC˜it|i,t),lnYqit*=lnYqit−E(lnYqit|i,t),lnW˜kit*=lnW˜kit−E(lnW˜kit|i,t),andlnQpit*=lnQpit−E(lnQpit|i,t). The conditional expectations,E(lnC˜it|i,t),E(ln Yqit|i, t),E(lnW˜kit|i,t),and E(ln Qpit|i, t) can be estimated using the Nadaraya-Watson kernel estimator.11The np package (Hayfield & Racine, 2008) in R can be easily used to estimate these conditional expectations with the least-squares cross-validation bandwidth selection method. As a technical note, we set i to be an unordered categorical variable, and t to be a continuous variable. While adding more continuous variables may affect the rate of convergence of the Nadaraya-Watson estimator, we have only one continuous variable in the unknown functions with almost three thousand observations.After computinglnC˜it*,lnYqit*,lnW˜kit*,andlnQpit*,one is ready to estimate (5), which is a SPSC model without the intercept. Define ρ(t) = [β1( · ), …, βQ( · ), δ2( · ), …, δK( · ), γ1( · ), …, γP( · )] andXit=[lnY1it*,…,lnYQit*,lnW˜2it*,…,lnW˜Kit*,lnQ1it*,…,lnQPit*],and re-write (5) as:lnC˜it*=Xit′ρ(t)+vit. Using the population moment condition, E(Xitvit|t) = 0, gives:(6)ρ(t)=[E(XitXit′|t)]−1E(XitlnC˜it*|t).Thus we can use the Nadaraya-Watson estimator for the conditional expectations, and estimate ρ( · ) as:22The bandwidth selection method for estimating ρ(t) is again the least-squares cross-validation. But here the np package should be used with caution as there is no intercept in (5). Appendix A explains how we select the bandwidth for estimating ρ(t) in detail.(7)ρ^(t)=[∑j=1N∑τ=1TXjτXjτ′Kjτ(t)]−1∑j=1N∑τ=1TXjτlnC˜jτ*Kjτ(t)where Kjτ( · ) is the Gaussian kernel function. Sinceρ^is an unknown function of t,ρ^(t)is time-specific, viz., there is a parameter vectorρ^given each time period. One would expect thatβ^q(t),∀q = 1, …, Q, the output elasticity, and therefore the marginal cost, to be non-negative for each observation, andδ^k(t),∀k = 2, …, K, the cost share of the kth input, to be between zero and one for each observation.33No negative marginal cost is observed for any observation in our application. However, it is quite possible that in other applications one may find the estimated marginal costs to be negative, or the estimated cost shares to lie outside the (0,1) interval at least for some observations. In such cases, one can apply the constraint weighted bootstrapping (CWB) method (Du, Parmeter, & Racine, 2013; Hall & Huang, 2001; Parmeter, Sun, Henderson, & Kumbhakar, 2014; Sun, 2014) to guarantee that the estimated coefficients have the right signs. Appendix B provides more details on this.To estimate the intercept, θ( · ), in (3), we use (4) to constructRit=lnC˜it−∑q=1Qβ^q(t)lnYqit−∑k=1Kδ^k(t)lnW˜kit−∑p=1Pγ^p(t)lnQpit. Then we run a nonparametric regression Rit= θ(i, t) + εit, and estimate θ(i, t) using the nonparametric kernel method. This is the same as estimating E(Rit|i, t), assuming E(εit|i, t) = 0.After the intercept, θ(i, t), is estimated, we are ready to estimate and decompose inefficiency. Recall that we define the cost frontier in (4). Using this definition, we define inefficiency as:(8)mit=θ(i,t)−α(t),where α(t) = miniθ(i, t), ∀t. This definition is similar to that in Cornwell, Schmidt, and Sickles (1990). The only difference is that Cornwell et al. (1990) defined inefficiency in a parametric production frontier framework whereas we are using it in a semiparametric cost function model.The problem of treating mitas inefficiency is that it might include factors that are specific to firm’s location and the environment in which it operates. Assuming that these environmental factors are time-invariant, it is desirable to separate them from inefficiency. In view of this, we decompose mitinto a firm-effect and two inefficiency components, viz.,(9)mit=μi+ηi+uit,where μiare random (zero mean) firm-effects, ηi≥ 0 are persistent (time-invariant) cost inefficiencies, and uit≥ 0 are time-varying cost inefficiencies. To estimate the ηiand uit, we use the following three-step procedure.Step 1: Estimate firm-effectsDefine ɛit= mit+ vitand then use (9) to re-write it as the following one-way error component panel data model, viz.,(10)ɛit=α0+ψi+χit,where α0 = E(ηi) + E(uit), ψi= μi+ [ηi− E(ηi)], and χit= vit+ [uit− E(uit)].In practice, ɛitis replaced by its estimatem^it+v^it,wherem^it=θ^(i,t)−α^(t),andv^itcan be calculated from (4). We estimate (10) as a one-way fixed or random effects model and get predicted values of ψiand χit, denoted byψ^iandχ^it,respectively.Step 2: Estimate persistent inefficiencyUsing the definition ψi= μi+ ηi− E(ηi), we estimate the following stochastic cost frontier model:(11)ψi=a0+μi+ηi,where we replace ψiwithψ^i,and use a0 = −E(ηi) as the constant term, μiis the noise and ηi≥ 0 is the persistent inefficiency term. The Jondrow, Lovell, Materov, and Schmidt (1982) method can then be used to estimate the persistent inefficiency, ηi, for each firm. The associated persistent technical efficiency (TE) score is calculated from TE0i= E[exp ( − ηi|r0i)] where r0i= μi+ ηiare the residuals in (11).Step 3: Estimate time-varying inefficiencyHere we use the definition χit= vit+ uit− E(uit) and estimate the following stochastic cost frontier model:(12)χit=b0+vit+uit,where b0 = −E(uit) is the constant term, vitis the noise and uit≥ 0 is the inefficiency. In practice, we replace χitwithχ^it. The Jondrow et al. (1982) technique is used again to estimate uit. The associated technical efficiency is estimated from TEpit= E[exp ( − uit|eit)] where eit= vit+ uitare the residuals from the SF regression in (12).The overall TE is then computed as TEit= TE0i× TEpit. Note that TEitmust be strictly less than TE0iand TEpit, unless each of the component is equal to 1.After estimating the inefficiency, we separate it from the cost frontier function. Using (8), we re-write (4) as(13)lnC˜it=mit+α(t)+∑q=1Qβq(t)lnYqit+∑k=2Kδk(t)lnW˜kit+∑p=1Pγp(t)lnQpit+vit,where mit+ α(t) = θ(i, t). Taking the time difference on both sides of (13), we can decompose the rate of change in total cost,ΔlnC˜it,into the following components, i.e.,(14)ΔlnC˜it=inefficiencychange+technicalchange+scalechange+inputpricechange+changeinquasi-fixedinputs+aresidualcomponent,whereinefficiencychange=Δmit=Δuit,technicalchange=Δα(t)+∑q=1QΔβq(t)lnYqit+∑k=2KΔδk(t)lnW˜kit+∑p=1PΔγp(t)lnQpit,scalechange=∑q=1Qβq(t)ΔlnYqit,inputpricechange=∑k=2Kδk(t)ΔlnW˜kit,changeinquasi-fixedinputs=∑p=1Pγp(t)ΔlnQpit,andaresidual/unexplainedcomponent=Δvit.Note that the rate of change in cost (ΔlnC˜it) in (14) is decomposed into six components. Each component shows its impact on the rate of change in cost. For example, if the technical change component is − 0.05 it means that given everything else technical change reduces cost by 5 percent per year. Similarly, if the scale component is 0.22, it means 22 percent of the cost increase is due to changes in scale (output) change. Similar straightforward interpretation can be given to other components. It is worth pointing out thatΔlnC˜itis not the same as total factor productivity growth (TFPG) which is defined asTFPG=∑qRqY˙q−∑jSjX˙jwhere Rqis the revenue share of output Yqand Sjis the cost share of input Xj. However, TFPG and its components can be easily derived from the components ofΔlnC˜it(see, e.g., Kumbhakar, 2000; Kumbhakar & Lozano-Vivas, 2005). The advantage of usingΔlnC˜itis that its components are more intuitive because these show the percentage change in cost associated with percentage changes in outputs, input prices and quasi-fixed inputs, in addition to technical change and changes in inefficiency. Note that these components are derived using the product rule of differentiation to the cost function in (13). In that sense it is quite straightforward and standard. What is non-standard is that these components are based on a model in which parameters are fully flexible (nonparametric) functions of time. Consequently, changes in all the regression coefficients play a role in each of these components. Thus, for example, the technical change component which measures shifts of the cost frontier over time is not a constant although we have a simple log-linear model. Other components, viz., scale change, input price change, and change in quasi-fixed inputs, are expressed as the weighted sum of rates of changes in output, input price, and quasi-fixed inputs, respectively. The weights are the associated coefficients (i.e., elasticities) of these variables, which are nonparametric functions of time. Thus compared to a parametric model with constant coefficients, all the components can change over time even if some of the regressors do not change for some firms in some years.Kumbhakar and Sun (2012) derived TFPG formula using a distance function in which the components are technical change and returns to scale. Orea (2002) decomposed a Malmquist productivity index based on a distance function where the TFPG is decomposed into the efficiency change and technical change. Our approach here is based on a cost function, and we decompose change in cost into not only (in)efficiency change and technical change, but also changes in scale, input prices, and quasi-fixed inputs using a SPSC model. This is similar in spirit to Kumbhakar and Lien (2009) who used a parametric distance function approach and decomposed profitability change into various components. Again the main difference in our approach is in the use of a SPSC model.Apart from being more flexible compared to its parametric cousins, another advantage of our SPSC approach is that the decomposition is directly based on the regression function in (13), and therefore the sum of all the components, including the residual component, exactly matches with the rate of change in cost calculated from data. However, this is not always the case, that is, a gap is often found between the observed changes in TFP and sum of their estimated components (see Kumbhakar & Lozano-Vivas, 2005).As an empirical example, we use a farm-level Norwegian salmon data set obtained from the Norwegian Directorate of Fisheries. Salmon is farmed in open cages in seawater, usually in sheltered coastal areas. Since the salmon is directly exposed to an inflow of seawater from the marine environment, it is susceptible to fish diseases, toxic algaes, and other harmful substances. Coastal regions and sites of fisheries have different biophysical conditions. This applies particularly to sea temperature and water exchange, two important determinants of salmon growth and mortality. The average sea temperature is significantly lower in the northern counties than in the southern counties of Norway. The growth rate of salmon increases with sea temperature. Water exchange varies from farm site to farm site, depending on site characteristics such as exposure to open sea, local sea currents, water depth and seabed topography. Biophysical farm site heterogeneity should give rise to differences in the biological productivity of the farms. Because of these it is important to model farm heterogeneity and these effects are to be separated from inefficiency in estimating and decomposing productivity.This is an unbalanced panel data set covering 442 farms over 14 years. Labor and feed are treated as variable inputs, while capital and fish stock at the beginning of the year are treated as quasi-fixed inputs. Output is kilograms (kg) of fish harvested plus the change in stock of live fish in the pens during the year. Costs and prices are measured in Norwegian Kroner (NOK). The nominal figures are converted to the 1995 prices using the consumer price index. Wage is hourly wage rate (NOK per hour), and the price of feed is measured in NOK per kilogram feed. The price of feed is observed directly in 1994–1998. However, for the years 1985–1993, the feed price has been constructed as the ratio of feed costs to the output and adjusted for a feed-to-fish conversion ratio. The quasi-fixed inputs are capital equipment (buildings, cages and machines measured in real NOK), and stock of live fish at the beginning of the year (measured in kilogram). Table 1contains the summary statistics of the variables used. A close look at the table shows wide variations for all the variables. Most of it is due to differences in size of the fisheries. That is, large variations in total cost, output, capital and fish stock can be attributed to a wide range of scale of operations. Some of the variations are due to mergers and acquisitions (M&A). For overwhelming majority of salmon farms wages are competitively determined. Some variations in wages reflect different job opportunities in different regions. However, we observe a handful of low (high) wages which are likely to be caused by owners rewarding themselves with below (above) market wage rates during adverse (favorable) economic conditions.44These outliers are so few that dropping them did not change any of the results. Because of this we decided to keep them.Given that we have two variable inputs, one output and two quasi-fixed inputs, the empirical model can be explicitly written as:(15)lnC˜it=θ(i,t)+β(t)lnYit+δ2(t)lnW˜2it+γ1(t)lnQ1it+γ2(t)lnQ2it+vit,whereC˜it=Cit/W1it,andW˜2it=W2it/W1it.Table 2 reports the mean and quartile values (Q1–Q3) of the estimated smooth coefficients and returns to scale (RTS). It can be seen that the mean output elasticity (β^(t)) is 1.2454 which means that, on average, a 1 percent increase in output, ceteris paribus, increases cost by 1.25 percent. The mean RTS, calculated as the mean of1/β^(t),is 0.8157 which indicates absence of scale economies, on average.It is worth mentioning thatδ^2(t),interpreted as the cost share of feed input, is between zero and one. This is expected since the cost share cannot go beyond this interval. The mean feed price elasticity (δ^2(t)) is 0.7365. Thus, the mean cost share of labor is 1 − 0.7365 = 0.2635.Estimates of cost elasticities of quasi-fixed inputs (capital and fish stock) areγ^1(t)andγ^2(t). These can be either positive or negative because the cost of quasi-fixed inputs are not included in total variable cost. A positive value ofγ^1(t)means variable cost increases with an increase in capital stock. This is a reasonable result as an increase in the input of capital equipment at a given farm location and for a given output level could lead to need for more variable labor input to operate and maintain the capital equipment. In particular, an increase in larger cages and thus more extensive production could necessitate an increase in both labor and feed input. On the other hand, estimates ofγ^2(t)is negative for more than 50 percent of the observations, thereby meaning that cost is decreased when fish stock is increased for about 50 percent of the farms. An increase in the input of live salmon in the beginning of the year could reduce the variable feed input quantities needed to achieve a given level of output. However, at high levels of live fish input, higher fish stock densities in the cages may lead to lower salmon growth rates and higher mortality rates, which would then increase the feed and labor input levels needed to achieve a given output level.Fig. 1 illustrates the temporal behavior of the cost elasticities, represented by the slope coefficients. It can be seen that the output elasticity (upper left panel) follows a U-shaped relationship, with the minimum occurring in 1990. One explanation for this time pattern may be that average farm output expanded over time, and that expansion of output increased costs progressively due to biophysical constraints at farm sites in the form of oxygen availability and increased disease pressure. In contrast, the feed price elasticity (upper right panel) follows an inverse U-shaped pattern, and the maximum occurs in the year 1990. The lower feed price elasticity after 1994 may be due to farmers in the relatively infant salmon industry having learned to use feed more productively as a response to higher prices than in the previous years. The capital elasticity (lower left panel), although quite fluctuating, remains positive during the period of study. Finally, the fish stock elasticity (lower right panel) follows an inverse U-shaped pattern, and has positive estimates for the years 1989–1994. Since fish stock is treated like a quasi-fixed input, implying that its cost is not included in the total cost of variable inputs, the dependent variable, its cost elasticity is likely to be negative or zero so long as an increase in the stock does not increase variable cost. The positive values are found to be close to zero for some thereby meaning that an increase in stock size increases variable cost slightly. Since the sign can go either way, we did not impose constraints to make the sign negative or positive. The decline in the fish stock elasticity to increasingly negative values after 1994 indicates that by increasing fish stock farmers benefited in terms of variable cost reductions, possibly due to more productive use of feed and labor with higher fish densities.In addition to the estimated coefficients, Fig. 2 reports the histograms of the decomposed technical efficiency (TE) scores, using the decomposition approach proposed in Section 2.2, along with Battese and Coelli’s (1988) point estimator. Recall that TE0, TEp, and TE are the time-invariant, time-varying, and overall TE scores, respectively. All the distributions are skewed to the left. TE0 scores are strictly greater than 0.8 for 86.45 percent of the farms, indicating that most farms are quite efficient in a given year. This percentage figure is 71.57 for TEp(the time-varying component of inefficiency). For 21.98 percent of the farms the overall TE scores are greater than 0.8. The mean of TE0 and TEpare 0.8777 and 0.8264, with standard deviations 0.0646 and 0.0756, respectively. The mean of overall TE is 0.7265 with a standard deviation of 0.0921.Following Kumbhakar and Sun (2012), Fig. 3shows the trends of the overall TE scores. To compute the indices, we first computed the TE change defined as:(16)TE˙it=TEit−TEit−10.5(TEit+TEit−1).Note thatTE˙it=TE˙pitasTE˙0i=0by definition. Then, we computed the weighted average ofTE˙itwhere the weights are the ratios of output for farm i in year t to the total output in year t. Instead of reporting these weighted averages ofTE˙tover time, we used them to define an index, TEt, as:(17)TEt=TEt−1(1+TE˙t),∀t=1986,…,1998,andTE1985=100.According to Fig. 3, technical efficiency increased over time. This is expected as producers of farmed salmon learned from their past mistakes and perhaps also learned from their peers (Tveterås & Battese, 2006).Finally, Table 3 reports the decomposition results. For simplicity we reported the mean and median values of all the components together with the rate of change in total cost. It can be seen from Table 3 that the mean inefficiency change is − 0.0282, indicating a decrease in inefficiency over time. A negative value of technical change indicates technical progress (cost diminution over time). Thus, we find a technical progress of about 6.79 percent per year, on average. This means total cost decreased over time, ceteris paribus, at the annual rate of 6.79 percent. Some farms at the top quartile experienced technical regress (cost increase, ceteris paribus). This could be due to biological degradation of their farm localities due to cumulative production over time. Note that the decomposition result in (14) shows contribution of each component to the rate of change in cost. For the scale change component, it is β(t)Δln Yit. If we rewrite it as (β(t) − 1)Δln Yit+ Δln Yit, then it clearly shows that the contribution of the RTS component, (β(t) − 1)Δln Yit, is positive since β(t) > 1. This is because RTS = 1/β(t). Thus, for a 1 percent increase in output, cost is increased by more than 1 percent. This might not be bad for the salmon farmers, especially if they maximize profit and output market is competitive. In such a case, the output price, P, is equal to the marginal cost, MC, that is, P = MC, which implies PY/C = ∂ln C/∂ln Y = β(t) > 1. This, in turn, means profit = (PY − C) > 0. Thus, so long as P is high and increases over time, farmers might be expanding their operations even when RTS < 1 because, by doing so, their profit is not decreased (although cost is increased more than proportionately). In fact, during the sample period, salmon prices were quite high, which might have prompted salmon farms to expand their operations well beyond their efficient scale. The input price change component is negative at the mean, indicating that input price changes contributed negatively to the rate of change in cost. A similar effect is found for the quasi-fixed inputs. Note that because of rounding errors in calculating the mean/median of each component, the sum of the means/medians of these six components is not exactly equal to the mean/median of the rate of change in total cost.Fig. 4shows the trends of the indices of the various components of the rate of change in cost. The entries in these indices are generated using the formula in (17) which is the same formula used in Kumbhakar and Sun (2012), viz.,At=At−1(1+A˙t),whereA˙tis the calculated average rate of change in A, and A is one of the components in (14). Results from these plots are consistent with Table 3. The inefficiency change index generally decreased over time, indicating that efficiency generally improved during the period of study, and the technical change index generally decreased over time, indicating that the total variable cost mostly decreased over time, ceteris paribus. For input price change, the decreasing trend outweighs the increasing trend during the sample period. The quasi-fixed input change index is characterized by mild increases during the years 1987–1995 (except for a slight decrease in 1992) and sharp decreases for the first year and the last 3 years of the sample period.More importantly, we see from Fig. 4 that the rate of technical change varies considerably over time. After the initial period of 1986–1988, which was characterized by significant diseases losses in the infant salmon aquaculture industry, the industry experienced rapid technical progress (cost diminution) until 1994. During these years several radical innovations were introduced into the industry, for examples in the areas of feed, feeding equipment, vaccines, cage structures, and genetically improved salmon through breeding programs. Moreover, it was probably also a period characterized by substantial learning from both own production experiences and other farmers’ production (Asche, Roll, & Tveterås, 2012; Tveterås & Battese, 2006). After 1994, technical progress has been low. From 1994 the salmon industry experienced new challenges with fairly high salmon mortality rates, and the industry was not able to innovate sufficiently fast to reduce disease losses and reduce production costs further.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
