@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Flexible waste management under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We determine the optimal recycling policy within a flexible waste management program.We determine the optimal time for investing in a flexible waste management program.Flexibility is purchased to reduce the impact of uncertainty on investment.Investment in a flexible program occurs earlier and at a higher expected NPV.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Real options,Flexibility,Municipal waste,Recycling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we use stochastic dynamic programming to model the choice of a municipality which has to design an optimal waste management program under uncertainty about the price of recyclables in the secondary market. The municipality can, by undertaking an irreversible investment, adopt a flexible program which integrates the existing landfill strategy with recycling, keeping the option to switch back to landfilling, if profitable. We determine the optimal share of waste to be recycled and the optimal timing for the investment in such a flexible program. We find that adopting a flexible program rather than a non-flexible one, the municipality: (i) invests in recycling capacity under circumstances where it would not do so otherwise; (ii) invests earlier; and (iii) benefits from a higher expected net present value.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The design of effective solid waste management strategies is a crucial issue for policy makers not only at the (inter)national level, where guidelines, targets, and strategies are set (US EPA, 2002; European Commission, 2010), but also at the local level, where waste is actually produced, collected, and treated.In the last decades, the amount of municipal solid waste produced by industrialized societies has been increasing (Eurostat, 2011; EPA, 2011). This trend, together with growing attention on environmental pollution, human health, and resource recovery, has stimulated a wide debate on the strategies to be implemented to reduce the amount of waste produced and treat the waste collected in an effective and sustainable way (OECD, 2007; EC, 2008).1Municipal solid waste can be disposed by essentially adopting four methods: landfilling, incineration, recycling, and composting. See Goddard (1995) for a discussion of these disposal methods.1In particular, starting from the late 1970s, the US first, and later the EU, introduced a stricter regulation for the construction and operation of landfills2In the U.S., after the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 providing federal guidelines for the operation of landfills, their number (of landfills) has significantly reduced (Kinnaman and Fullerton, 2000). In the EU, after the Directive 1999/31/EC, which fixed targets for the reduction of biodegradable municipal waste going to landfills, the quantity of waste landfilled has reduced from 68% in 1995 to 33% in 2009 (Eurostat, 2011).2in order to promote recycling and incineration as alternative disposal methods (EEA, 2009; Kinnaman, 2006). Incinerators are expensive, however, and their effect on human health is controversial. As a consequence, citizens seem more willing to spend time sorting their waste for recycling than accepting the operation of an incinerator in their neighborhood (Giusti, 2009).3Even though landfilling has strongly reduced, it is still adopted as a residual method together with recycling. As for the EU countries, in 2009 shares of waste landfilled of 14% and 17% were reported by Norway and Luxembourg, respectively. France, Italy, Finland, and the UK reported shares in the range of 32–50%. Among the EU-12 member states, the highest shares in 2008 were reported by Greece (81%), Portugal (62%), Ireland (62%), and Spain (52%), (Eurostat, 2011).3Thus, although their profitability is still debated, an increasing number of municipalities have introduced recycling programs (in order) to meet citizens’ preferences (see, e.g., Kinnaman, 2006).In this paper, we consider a municipality designing a new waste management program that integrates the preexistent landfilling with recycling as an alternative waste disposal method.4Note that considering incineration as an alternative disposal method would make no difference in our analysis.4We assume that a price is paid to the municipality for recycled materials and that such a price follows a geometric Brownian motion. We also assume that recycling has higher operative costs than landfilling. The municipality can choose between a non-flexible and a flexible waste management program.By investing in a non-flexible program (hereafter NFP), the municipality may partially or totally substitute landfilling with recycling. This decision is irreversible and implies that, irrespective of a change in the relative convenience of recycling with respect to landfilling, the purchased recycling capacity must always be fully used.In contrast, by investing in a flexible program (hereafter FP), the municipality purchases recycling capacity but keeps the option to fully use the preexisting landfilling capacity whenever changes in the relative convenience make it profitable. By combining the two disposal methods, the FP guarantees a certain degree of operational flexibility, which may be beneficial under uncertainty about the price for recycled materials. This flexibility, however, comes at a cost. More specifically, we assume that the FP setup requires a sunk investment cost which depends on the chosen recycling capacity, i.e., the chosen degree of flexibility.The problem faced by the municipality is twofold, and we solve it in two steps. First, the municipality must determine the recycling capacity, taking into account its uncertain profitability and the option of landfilling whenever recycling becomes unprofitable. Second, the municipality must set the investment time threshold, triggering the adoption of the optimally designed FP.Having designed the optimal FP, we compare the investment in such a program with the investment in an NFP where, as stated above, the option to switch back to landfilling is not available. We find that adopting an FP rather than an NFP gives the municipality two main advantages. First, we show that the municipality may be willing to invest in recycling capacity under circumstances where investment in an NFP would not be undertaken. Second, we show that an investment in an FP may be undertaken earlier than one in an NFP and also provide a higher expected net present value (hereafter NPV).The intuition behind these results is that the municipality that adopts the FP, by holding the option to switch back to landfilling, may, if needed, adjust the waste disposal operations and so optimally hedge against uncertainty about the profit from recycling. This hedging policy may prove particularly valuable when net revenues from recycling remain low and/or are volatile. In contrast, when net revenues are high and stable, the exercise of the option to switch back to landfilling becomes unlikely and the value of the hedging policy vanishes. Hence, the municipality may, by investing in an FP that guarantees operational flexibility, start recycling when the relative net revenues are too low to justify the investment in an NFP instead. Moreover, this may also occur with a higher payoff in terms of NPV.Several papers have studied the design of waste management programs in the presence of alternative disposal strategies. In a deterministic frame, some pioneer investigations have been conducted by Huhtala (1997) and Highfill and McAsey (1997, 2001b). Huhtala uses an optimal control model to determine the optimal recycling rate for municipal solid waste. He shows that landfilling is more costly than other disposal alternatives, once the monetary costs of recycling, the social costs of landfilling, and consumers’ environmental preferences have been accounted for. Under endogenous waste stream, Highfill and McAsey (1997) study a municipality which must choose between using an (existing and exhaustible) landfill or recycling at higher cost. The authors show that a municipality that recycles will always simultaneously use its landfill. This will last for some time when since landfill use is declining while recycling is increasing. Highfill and McAsey (2001b) extend previous works by including in their analysis a growing income stream. Income is optimally split between consumption and expenditures for waste disposal. Waste disposal must be optimally allocated between recycling, which is considered (as) a backstop technology, and landfilling. The authors show that landfill capacity and initial income have a considerable impact on the optimal recycling program and recommend considering these factors when designing a waste management program. Recently, Lavee et al. (2009) have analyzed the choice of a municipality that can switch forward and backward between landfilling and recycling but cannot combine them. The choice is determined by taking into account a sunk switching cost and uncertainty about prices for recycled materials. Their main finding is that recycling, due to its uncertain profitability, may not be adopted even when it is less expensive than landfilling. Hence, their analysis advises policy intervention in favor of price stabilization as a tool for enhancing recycling. Finally, it is worth noticing that an alternative approach for tackling waste management decision problems under uncertainty and multiplicity of objectives is represented by fuzzy mathematical programming5The main difference between fuzzy and stochastic programming is given by the assumption that uncertain information in waste management processes may not be fully represented by using traditional probability theory.5(see Zadeh, 1965). As shown by,6See also Lee et al. (1991) and Chang et al. (1996b).6for instance, Koo et al. (1991) and Chang and Wang (1996a, 1997), the practical implementation of this approach to real-world cases may provide valuable support to policy makers when comparing waste disposal alternatives characterized by different economic and environmental impacts.Our paper contributes to the literature adopting a stochastic programming approach in two respects. First, under uncertainty about profit from recycling, we study the optimal design of a program where the simultaneous combination of two disposal strategies, i.e., landfilling and recycling, is feasible. Second, we consider how the presence of landfilling as a preexisting and residual method affects (i) the degree of operational flexibility in the waste management program and (ii) the timing of its adoption.7In the real option literature, the value of operational flexibility has been deeply investigated. See, e.g., Kulatilaka (1988, 1993),Triantis and Hodder (1990), He and Pindyck (1992),Fontes (2008), Li and Wang (2010), and Benaroch et al. (2012). In this literature, our paper belongs to a recent family of papers studying investment in flexible systems where the degree of flexibility is optimally chosen. See, e.g., Di Corato and Moretto (2011) on investment in a biogas digester under flexible diet composition and Moretto and Rossini (2012) on partial outsourcing and flexible vertical arrangements.7The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the basic setup of our model. In Section 3, we determine the optimal recycling capacity. In Section 4, we study investment value and timing. In Section 5, we use some numerical examples to illustrate our findings. Section 6 concludes. All proofs are available in Appendix A.Consider a municipality currently using landfilling as a waste disposal method and contemplating the opportunity of integrating it with recycling. Following Highfill and McAsey (2001b), we restrict our analysis to the recycling programs offered by the municipality and do not consider any recycling activity undertaken by individuals on their own initiative. By integrating these two disposal methods, the collected waste may be partially or totally recycled, with the municipality still holding the option of landfilling.8In our paper, we implicitly assume that the landfill space capacity is not binding over the considered time horizon. The reason for this is that we want to abstract from capacity considerations and focus on the benefit of implementing, through a combination of waste disposal technologies, operational hedging policies against uncertain recycling profit. Note that at no loss our frame is sufficiently general to consider an alternative technology such as incineration.8Both disposal methods are costly. Denote by cLand cRthe operating costs of landfilling9It is worth noticing that the cost of landfilling, cL, may also include the cost associated to externalities generated by the landfill when still in use (see Huhtala, 1997; Kinnaman, 2006). Note also that potential external effects (e.g. damages due to methane gas explosions, toxic leakages, etc.) may also be associated to the landfill once abandoned. In our decision problem, however, we consider negligible the impact of the abandonment decision in that: (a) we assume that landfill capacity is not binding over a sufficiently long time period. This would in fact imply that abandonment would likely occur far in the future and consequently, due to the effect of discounting, shut-down costs and the benefit from postponing abandonment (by introducing recycling) would have limited impact on the investment decision and (b) in modern lined landfills, due to stricter regulations, the probability of accidents and, consequently, expected damages have sensibly lowered (see Eshet et al., 2006).9and recycling waste, respectively. We assume that cR−cL>0.10This assumption is in line with Kinnaman (2006, pp. 220), reporting that “On a per-ton basis, recycling is roughly twice as costly as landfill disposal.”.10Compared to landfilling, recycling involves additional costs for collection, selection of different types of waste fractions (i.e., plastic, paper, glass), and for their transport to the different recycling plants. Collection costs depend on the requirements of the program, for instance how the recyclables have to be sorted by households (i.e., single-stream or multi-stream), the frequency of the collection of the different sorted waste fractions, and the level of participation in the program. The selection and processing costs per ton increase with the number of commingled commodities (EPA, 2002).Recycled materials are valuable on a secondary market, and the municipality is paid a price ptfor each unit of recycled waste, where units are expressed in tons.11The implicit assumption is that the municipality is a price-taker. The arrangements for selling the recycled materials in the secondary markets are different and affected by the national legislative framework. In the US, municipalities can sign contracts with private entities providing these services (EPA, 2002). In the EU, there is heterogeneity due to the different approaches adopted by the national Producer Responsibility System (PRO). In Italy, e.g., CONAI, the national PRO, pays municipalities a “compensation fee” for taking back packaging waste from separated waste collections.11Let us assume that such a price evolves according to the following geometric Brownian motion:(1)dptpt=μdt+σdzt,withp0=pwhereμis the expected growth rate, σ is the volatility parameter, and dztis the increment of the standard Wiener process satisfyingE[dzt]=0,Edzt2=dt.In the following, we simplify the analysis by considering the optimal disposal of one unit of waste which is potentially recyclable. Such a unit can be thought as including only one specific recyclable material, i.e., glass, paper, plastic, metals, or a mixture of recyclable materials. In the first case, ptis the price paid for a specific material. Otherwise, ptcan be a price vector or, for simplicity, an average price.Denote by WLthe waste management program where the collected waste is totally landfilled and by WRthe program where a portion α∈[0,1] of waste is recycled while the rest, 1−α, is landfilled. When both disposal methods are feasible, the collected waste could be managed in order to minimize the cost of waste disposal, ct, that is:(2)ct=min{cL,cL(1-α)+α(cR-pt)}=cL+min{0,α[cR-(cL+pt)]}=cL-max{0,α[(cL+pt)-cR]}where (cL+pt) represents the total benefit per unit of recycled waste, i.e., the price paid to the municipality plus the avoided landfilling cost.The relative convenience of using landfilling or recycling depends on market prices. In this respect, we can have the following two scenarios:(3)ct=cLforpt⩽cR-cL(1-α)cL+α(cR-pt)forpt>cR-cLThis means that, whenever the current price of recycled material does not cover the increase in the disposal cost, landfilling is the less costly disposal method. In contrast, whenever the current price, pt, covers the additional disposal cost, the municipality recycles a share α∈[0,1] of the collected waste. In the following, we (will) refer to the first and second scenarios as ”Landfilling” and “Recycling”, respectively.The analysis can be simplified by noting that the marginal advantage of a waste management program adding the program WRto the existing WLstrictly depends on the benefits the municipality may obtain under each scenario, that is12Note that, abstracting from the characterization given so far, the stochastic variable ptmay also be seen as the cost of the unit of landfill space implicitly saved by recycling. This would be consistent with the assumption of treating landfill space as an exhaustible resource (see e.g. Ready and Ready, 1995; Huhtala, 1997) which price evolves following the diffusion in (1). In this respect, note that a resource price following a geometric Brownian motion is a quite common assumption in the economics of exhaustible resources (see e.g. Mason, 2001, p. 68).12(4)bt=0forpt⩽dα(pt-d)forpt>dwhere d=cR−cL>0 is the additional operating cost to be paid when recycling is preferred to landfilling.Now, denote by W an FP, that is, under W, we allow the municipality to switch between WLand WR, if this is profitable. Note that, without loss of generality, we assume that, once initiated, the waste management program runs forever.13This is a costless assumption. Recall that the focus of our paper is the comparison between a flexible and non-flexible program. Hence, even assuming a more realistic finite time horizon, our final results would still hold. Finally, note also that, for the sake of simplicity, we abstract from other operative options such as the options to mothball and/or abandon the program once it has been initiated (see, e.g., Dixit and Pindyck, 1994, chaps. 6–7).13Let V(pt;α), VL(pt;α), and VR(pt;α) represent the value of W, WL, and WR, respectively. For α∈[0,1], V(pt;α) is the solution of the following dynamic programming problem (Dixit, 1989, pp. 624–628):(5-6)ΓVL(pt;α)=0forpt<dΓVR(pt;α)=-α(pt-d)forpt>dwhereΓ=12σ2pt2∂2∂pt2+μpt∂∂pt-ris the differential operator with r as interest rate.As shown in Appendix A, the solution to (5–6) is(7)V(pt;α)=VL(pt;α)=αORptθ1forpt<dVR(pt;α)=α[OLptθ2+ptr-μ-dr]forpt>dwhere θ1>1 and θ2<0 are the roots of the characteristic equationϕ(θ)=12σ2θ(θ-1)+μθ-r=0and(7.1-7.2)OR=d1-θ1rr-μθ2(r-μ)(θ1-θ2)>0,OL=d1-θ2rr-μθ1(r-μ)(θ1-θ2)>0In Eq. (7), we observe that forpt⩽d (Landfilling scenario), the value of the FP,αORptθ1, is simply represented by the option to recycle a portion αof collected waste as soon as WRbecomes profitable. Note that the value of this option is increasing in ptand decreasing in d, i.e., cR−cL. This makes sense, considering that such an option is more valuable if recycled waste is more profitable and less desirable if landfilling becomes relatively more convenient. By contrast, when pt>d (Recycling scenario), the termαOLptθ2represents the value of the option to switch back to landfilling, which is consistently decreasing in ptand increasing in d. The termαptr-μ-drrepresents instead the net benefit obtained by recycling a portion α of collected waste.Finally, denote byW^an NFP where the municipality, once it has/ initiated the program, adopts the disposal regime WRforever. Note that in this case the municipality does not hold the option to switch between WLand WR, i.e., OR=OL=0. Hence, the value of the program is simply given by(8)V^(pt;α)=αptr-μ-dr,which, as above, represents the expected net benefit accruing from the recycling of a portion α∈[0,1] of the total collected (recyclable) waste.In this section, we determine the recycling capacity, α, that a municipality must purchase to ensure an optimal waste management program. As discussed above, when an FP, W, has been adopted, the municipality holds the options to switch to recycling and back to landfilling. These options are particularly valuable under uncertain profit from recycling since they provide the flexibility needed to conveniently rearrange the waste disposal operations. As can be seen from Eq. (7.1–7.2), the value of these options depends linearly on the degree of operational flexibility which, in our setup, corresponds to the recycling capacity, α. However, higher operational flexibility does not come free of cost so that, given the higher investment cost, the municipality may have to give up operational flexibility and invest in a less costly NFP,W^.Let us denote by I(α) the sunk investment cost required to add WRto the existing WL. Assume that it is a function of the recycling capacity α and that it takes the following convex functional form:(9)I(α)=i1α+i2αγγ,withγ>1,i1⩾0andi2>0where i1 and i2 are dimensional investment parameters.The investment cost in (9) is obtained by summing two components. The first component, i1α, captures costs which are linear in the recycling capacity, α, as, for instance, the cost of informing households about the new collection program, the cost of buying and providing households with specific bins for the waste fraction(s) to be collected separately, the cost of transporting waste, etc. The second component,i2αγγ, accounts for nonlinear costs14In general, we agree on the idea that it should be “less expensive per unit to recycle bottles and newspapers than it is to recycle bottles, newspapers, and refrigerators” (Highfill and McAsey, 2001a, p. 681).14such as the cost of keeping idle landfilling capacity when recycling or the additional cost of transports to different recycling facilities or to the landfill (see Nagurney and Toyasaki, 2005). Thus, by the second cost component, we mainly want to account for the costs directly related to the implementation of a more complex FP allowing for both disposal alternatives.In order to focus on the role that technological flexibility may have in the adoption of recycling, we assume, in the following, that the first linear cost component, i1α, must be paid whenever recycling is adopted while the second component,i2αγγ, is conditional on the municipality having decided to keep the option to switch between landfilling and recycling whenever profitable, i.e., if the municipality invests in an FP. Without loss of generality we may set i1=0 and i2=i and then proceed (in order) to determine the optimal recycling capacity α∗. Note that this must be done under both “Landfilling” and “Recycling” scenarios, i.e., for pt⩽d and for pt>d, respectively.As discussed above, program WLis preferred to WRwhen the price for recycled materials, pt, does not cover the increase in disposal costs determined by the introduction of recycling, d. This implies that by investing in an FP when pt⩽d the municipality is only purchasing the option to adopt recycling later as soon as pt>d. The optimal recycling capacity, α, must then maximize the expected net present value, NPVL(pt,α), of such an option, that is, VL(pt;α), minus the investment cost, I(α). Formally(10)α̲∗=argmaxNPVL(pt,α)s.t.0<α⩽1forpt⩽dwhere NPVL(pt,α)=VL(pt;α)−I(α).Solving the maximization problem yields the following proposition:Proposition 1The optimal recycling capacity to be adopted in an FP when investing at pt⩽d is(10.1)α̲∗(pt)=ORptθ1i1γ-1for0<pt<p̲1forp̲⩽pt⩽dwherep̲=iOR1θ1.See Section A.2 in Appendix A.□Note that the optimal recycling capacity,α∗(pt), is increasing in price pt. This makes sense, considering that a higher ptimplies a higher probability of switching to program WRwhere the municipality starts recycling. Note also thatα∗(pt) is decreasing in the investment cost magnitude, i, and increasing in the parameter illustrating the convexity of the costs, γ, respectively.15Note thatdI(α)dγ=iαγγ2(γlnα-1)⩽0in the interval α∈[0,1].15This implies that, as expected, a higher recycling capacity is installed as investment costs drop. However, there is a ceiling for recycling capacity. Hence, there exists a price level,p, such that forp⩽ptit is always worth choosing the highest feasible recycling capacity, i.e.,α∗(pt)=1. This means the municipality switches from a waste management program where it landfills the entire amount of collected (recyclable) waste to a program where such waste is completelyrecycled. It is worth noting that the higher the marginal value,ORptθ1, of the option to switch to WR, the higher is the desired recycling capacity.By substituting the optimal recycling capacity,α∗(pt), into the net present value function, we obtain:(10.2)NPVL(pt,α∗(pt))=ORptθ1iγγ-11-1γiforpt<p̲ORptθ1-iγforp̲⩽pt<dWhen pt>d, recycling is worthwhile and the municipality adopts program WRas soon the investment in the flexible program W has been undertaken. The optimal recycling capacity, α, is given by the solution of the following problem:(11)α¯∗=argmaxNPVR(pt,α)s.t.0<α⩽1forpt>dwhere NPVR(pt,α)=VR(pt;α)−I(α).Proposition 2The optimal recycling capacity to be adopted in an FP when investing at d<pt<∞ is(a)for Ψ>0(11.1)α¯∗(pt)=OLptθ2+ptr-μ-dri1γ-1ford<pt<p¯1forp¯⩽ptfor Ψ⩽0(11.2)α¯∗(pt)=1forpt>dwhereΨ=i-ORdθ1andp¯(>d)solvesQ(p¯)=(OLp¯θ2+p¯r-μ-dr)-i=0.See Section A.3 in Appendix A.□We observe thatα¯∗(pt)is increasing in ptin the intervald<pt<p¯. In this respect, we need to distinguish the presence of two components. First, as ptincreases, due to larger expected net benefits,ptr-μ-dr, the municipality would prefer to invest in high recycling capacity. Second,α¯∗(pt)is increasing in the value of the option to switch back to landfilling, i.e.,OLptθ2. This is not surprising, considering that the option to restore WLis an extremely valuable hedging policy against fluctuations in the net revenues from recycled waste. However, we also note that such a positive effect is decreasing in pt. This is due to the relationship between the value of the option to switch back to landfilling and the distance between ptand d or, differently put, the probability that once the investment has been undertaken, ptreaches the region pt<d where the program WLis less costly than WR. Accordingly, the contribution of this second component is decreasing in ptsince the higher the price of recycled materials, the less likely is the exercise of the option to switch back to WL.Studying the impact of investment costs, it is immediate to see that, as in (11.1), the recycling capacity,α¯∗(pt), is decreasing in i and increasing in γ, respectively. In other words, the lower the investment cost, the higher the recycling capacity installed.It is worth discussing the role played by the sign of the termΨ=i-ORdθ1, which represents the net marginal cost of investing in full capacity. Note that this is, in fact, given by the difference between the marginal investment cost, I′(1)=i, and the marginal value of the option to switch to WR,ORptθ1, evaluated at the boundary pt=d. Thus, if at dthe marginal benefit,ORdθ1, is higher than the marginal cost, i, of investing in the last unit of feasible capacity, the municipality invests in the maximum recycling capacity. In contrast, ifi>ORdθ1the municipality may opt for partial recycling capacity. This will occur if prices for recycled material are lower than the levelp¯which, according to (12.1), triggers the choice of a 100% recycling capacity(α¯∗(pt)=1). Otherwise, again, prices may be sufficiently high to justifyα¯∗(pt)=1.Finally, by plugging the optimal recycling capacity,α¯∗(pt), into NPVRwe have:(i)for Ψ>0,(11.3)NPVR(pt,α∗(pt))=OLptθ2+ptr-μ-driγγ-11-1γiford<pt<p¯OLptθ2+ptr-μ-dr+iγforp¯⩽ptfor Ψ⩽0,(11.4)NPVR(pt,α∗(pt))=OLptθ2+ptr-μ-dr+iγford⩽ptLet us now set the optimal recycling capacity, α, for an NFPW^. Recall that in this case I(α)=0. As above, such a capacity is given by(12)αˆ∗=argmaxV^(pt;α)s.t.0<α⩽1forpt⩽dNote thatV^(pt;α)>0forpt>r-μrd. Thus, by the linearity ofV^(pt;α)in α, it is straightforward to show that this is the case.16Note that having assumed i1=0 does not affect our results. In fact, even allowing for a more general concave investment function in this case, I(α)=i1αωwith i1>0 and ω⩽ 1, the municipality would still have invested in the highest feasible recycling capacity(αˆ∗(pt)=1).16Proposition 3The optimal recycling capacity to be adopted when investing in an NFP is(12.1)αˆ∗(pt)=1forpt>r-μrdAs expected, the municipality chooses the maximum recycling capacity if the expected net benefits from recycling,ptr-μ-dr, are positive and no capacity at all otherwise. The expected present value ofW^is then given by(12.2)V^(pt;αˆ∗(pt))=ptr-μ-dr,forr-μrd<ptIn this section, we study the timing of the investment in an optimal waste management program. To this end, we derive the value of the option to invest and then determine the conditions characterizing an optimal investment time strategy.First, let us define by W∗ andW^∗the flexible and the non-flexible program where the recycling capacity has been set at its optimal level, α∗(pt). Second, we consider the option to invest in the continuation region0<pt<p̃wherep̃is the price threshold triggering investment. The value of such an option is given by(13)F(pt)=maxτE{e-rτNPVk(pτ)},withk={W∗,W^∗}whereτ=inf{t⩾0|pt=p̃}is the optimal investment stopping time and(13.1)NPVW∗(pt)=NPVL(pt,α̲∗(pt))forpt<dNPVR(pt,α¯∗(pt))ford⩽pt(13.2)NPVW^∗(pt)=V^(pt;αˆ∗(pt)),forr-μrd<ptThe problem can be rearranged as follows17For the calculation of expected present values, see Dixit and Pindyck (1994, pp. 315–316).17:(14)F(pt)=maxp̃ptp̃θ1NPVk(p̃)From the first-order condition of the maximization problem18See Appendix A.4.18we obtain(14.1)p̃=θ1[NPVk(p̃)/(∂NPVk(p̃)/∂p̃)]Finally, the definition of a maximum requires that the following second-order condition should hold atp̃:(14.2)[p̃/(θ1-1)](∂2NPVk(p̃)/∂p̃2)<∂NPVk(p̃)/∂p̃Let us now study the investment policy under both scenarios, “Recycling” in Section 4.1 and “Landfilling” in Section 4.2.We consider the option to invest in the subset d⩽ptwhere WR≻WL. In this case, the recycling capacity would be used as soon as the municipality has invested in W∗. The desired degree of flexibility,α¯∗, will be chosen taking into account price volatility and the magnitude of investment costs, i. In addition, the municipality will choose it, aware that it would still be possible to switch back to WL. As discussed above, this consideration should favor investment in a higher recycling capacity.By using Proposition 1 we can distinguish between two cases in terms of adopted recycling capacity. This will depend on the comparison between the magnitude of the investment cost, i, and the value of the option to switch to recycling,ORdθ1. We start by considering case (b) where Ψ⩽0 and the municipality opts for the highest feasible level of flexibility, i.e.,α¯∗=1. Substituting (11.4) into (14.1), we obtain the following result:Proposition 4When Ψ⩽0 the optimal investment threshold, p∗(⩾d), for the adoption of an FP withα¯∗=1is given by the solution of the following equation(15)p∗+θ1-θ2θ1-1OLp∗θ2(r-μ)-θ1θ1-1(r-μ)iγ=pˆ∗wherepˆ∗=θ1θ1-1(r-μ)dr.See Section A.5 in Appendix A.□According to Proposition 4, it is worth investing at p∗⩽pt. In Eq. (15),pˆ∗represents the investment threshold for the investment in an NFP, i.e.,pˆ∗=argmaxpp̃θ1NPVW^(p̃). It is immediate to see that the investment threshold p∗ depends not only on the present value of the disposal cost differential,dr, investment cost,iγ, and on the standard option value considerations19The investment timing should account for the option value arising from new information about the variables affecting the profitability of the investment decision. This consideration implies a higher investment threshold with respect to the one set under the standard NPV approach. See Dixit and Pindyck (1994, chap. 5).19but also on the presence of landfilling as a waste management option. This effect is captured by the second term on the RHS of (15). As shown in Section A.5,∂p∗∂OL<0. In other words, the more valuable the option to switch back to WL, the earlier, in expected terms, the flexible program W∗, is adopted. Rearranging (15) as follows:(15.1)p∗-pˆ∗=12σ2θ1+riγ-θ1-θ2θ1-1OLp∗θ2(r-μ)in Eq. (15.1), the first term of the RHS accounts for the higher investment cost,iγ, to be paid in order to have a flexible program allowing for both recycling and landfilling. As expected, given that such a program is more costly than a non-flexible one, the municipality should wait longer before investing. Waiting before making an investment takes even longer under uncertainty. Note, in fact, that the first term,12σ2θ1, must be added to the user cost per unit of capital, r, to account for uncertainty. However, this effect is balanced by the second term in the RHS of (15.1), which represents the option to landfill whenever recycling is less profitable than landfilling. This clearly reduces the uncertainty characterizing the investment. Note that the second effect may also prevail, leading to a faster adoption of the flexible program. This will occur if the following condition is met:(15.2)OLp∗θ2>1+θ2θ1-θ2iγthat is, whenever the value of the option to landfill evaluated at p∗ covers a portion of the investment costiγ(note that1+θ2θ1-θ2<1).We now proceed by studying case (a) in Proposition 2 where Ψ>0. In contrast with the previous case, the municipality may invest in a flexible program W∗with a lower degree of flexibility, i.e.,α¯∗<1, due to the higher investment cost. This should allow a faster adoption of the flexible program by trading off the degree of flexibility with the initial investment cost. Note that not investing in a 100% recycling program(α¯∗=1)makes sense if ptis likely to take low values or fall below d, but this may be regretted when prices for recycled material are high and well above d since the municipality will not be able to exploit the entire potential of the recycling strategy.In Appendix A, we show that:Proposition 5When Ψ>0 and provided thatp¯r-μ<Λandγ>θ1θ1-1,the optimal investment threshold, p∗∗(⩾d), for the adoption of an FP withα¯∗<1is given by the solution of the following equation(16)p∗∗+[θ1(γ-1)-γθ2]OLp∗∗θ2-pˆ∗r-μθ1(γ-1)-γ(r-μ)=pˆ∗whereΛ=θ2θ2-1dr-θ1(γ-1)-γθ2θ2-1iγ.See Section A.6 in Appendix A.□According to Proposition 5, the municipality should invest in the region wherep∗∗⩽pt⩽p¯. Note that investments in programs withα¯∗<1are undertaken when, atp¯, the expected present value of earnings,p¯r-μ, is not sufficiently high to cover level Λ which, as we show in Appendix A, triggers investment in programs with full recycling capacity. By rearranging (16), we obtain(16.1)p∗∗-pˆ∗=pˆ∗r-μ-[θ1(γ-1)-γθ2]OLp∗∗θ2θ1(γ-1)-γ(r-μ)Again, we stress the role played by the option to switch back to WL. In fact, in this case too20See Section A.6 in Appendix A.20∂p∗∗∂OL<0. This implies that also whenα¯∗<1, the higher the value of the option to restore WL, the faster, in expected terms, the flexible program W∗ is introduced.By comparing the investment in a lower recycling capacity with the investment in a program providing 100% recycling capacity but no option to restore WL, we notice that the former may be undertaken earlier if the following condition holds:(16.2)OLp∗∗θ2>pˆ∗r-μθ1(γ-1)-γθ2that is, when at p∗∗the value of the option to restore WLis higher than a percentage1θ1(γ-1)-γθ2<1of the expected discounted value of revenues accruing from the alternative waste disposal program, namely,pˆ∗r-μ.We complete our analysis by showing that:Proposition 6When Ψ>0 and provided thatp¯r-μ⩾Λ, the optimal investment thresholdp∗∗(⩾p¯)for the adoption of an FP withα¯∗=1is(17)p∗∗=p∗See Section A.5 in Appendix A.□The above discussion also applies here. However, note that, since Ψ>0, the investment in a management program with full recycling capacity occurs only if atp¯the expected present value of earnings,p¯r-μ, is higher than level Λ. In fact, if this condition is met, investment occurs at a price level high enough to cover the investment cost.Finally, by focusing only on the case21Note that one may easily show that a similar result holds also for the case whereα¯∗(p∗∗)<1.21whereα¯∗(p∗(∗))=1we can also show that a higher expected net present value corresponds to an earlier investment,p∗(∗)<pˆ∗. In fact, by comparing at p∗ investment in W∗ with investment inW^∗, it is immediate to show that:Proposition 7IfOLp∗θ2>Ωthen(18)NPVW∗(p∗)>(p∗/pˆ∗)θ1NPVW^∗(pˆ∗)whereΩ=dr[1-(p∗/pˆ∗)θ1]-p∗-pˆ∗(p∗/pˆ∗)θ1r-μ+iγ.In words, this means that a W∗ program guarantees earlier investment and a higher expected net present value when, at the investment time, the value of the option to landfill,OLp∗θ2, covers the sum of investment cost,iγ, plus the difference between the discounted expected value of the flow of increased disposal costs,dr[1-(p∗/pˆ∗)θ1], and the discounted expected value of the flow of revenues,p∗-pˆ∗(p∗/pˆ∗)θ1r-μ, from recycling. Note that both flows start at p∗ and are consistently discounted, taking into account the random time period needed for reaching price levelpˆ∗.In this section, we examine the investment strategy for the range of values pt<d where WL≻WR. In this range, even if landfilling is still profitable, the municipality mayconsider the possibility of adopting a flexible waste management program W∗ so that it can switch to WRas soon as pt⩾d. As we show in Appendix A.7, this never occurs. In fact, we prove that:Proposition 8If pt<d, the municipality never invests in a flexible waste management program withα∗⩽1.See Section A.7 in Appendix A.□By plugging (10.2) into (14.2) it is straightforward to show that the second-order condition is violated. This implies that an investment time trigger maximizing (14) does not exist in the range of prices considered. As can be easily seen in (10.2), the option to switch to WR, even if valuable, is not worth the investment cost when pt<d. Its expected net present value is increasing in ptas the probability of a switch increases so that the municipality prefers to postpone the investment. Finally, note also that differently from the option to switch to WL, the option to switch to WRdoes not pay any “dividend” when held.As explained above, due to the presence of uncertainty, the municipality may keep open the option to invest for long time periods. In this respect, it is important, in terms of informing policy makers, to determine, at least in expected terms, the length of such a period. In the following, we will therefore first determine the probability of adoption within a particular time period in the future and then the expected time of adoption.For this purpose we first remember that investment occurs at stopping timeτ=inf{t⩾0|pt=p̃}. Note that as prices for recycled materials follow the stochastic process (1), τalso becomes a stochastic variable. Hence, denoting by T the time period in which a first passage through barrierp̃may occur, the cumulative probability of investment is given by the following function (see Harrison, 1985, p.14):(19)G(p,T;p̃)=N-ln(p̃/p)+μ-12σ2TσT+e2ln(p̃/p)μ-12σ2σ2N-ln(p̃/p)-μ-12σ2TσTwhere N[·] is the cumulative standard normal distribution.Following Dixit (1993), the probability of an eventual investment (i.e., T→∞) is(20)G(p,∞;p̃)=1forμ⩾(1/2)σ2e2ln(p̃/p)μ-12σ2/σ2forμ<(1/2)σ2while the expected investment time is given by(21)E(τ;p,p̃)=ln(p̃/p)/μ-12σ2forμ>(1/2)σ2∞forμ⩽(1/2)σ2Note that forμ⩽12σ2the expected time is ∞. This is due to the drift which drives the price away from barrierp̃. Since, by (20), the probability of hitting the barrier is lower than one, the expected time tends to ∞ for T→∞.Finally, in order to assess the relative profitability of a flexible program with respect to a non-flexible one, we derive from (18) the following measure:(22)π(x,pˆ∗)=NPVW∗(x)xpˆ∗θ1NPVW^∗(pˆ∗)forx<pˆ∗pˆ∗xθ1NPVW∗(x)NPVW^∗(pˆ∗)forx⩾pˆ∗,withx={p∗,p∗∗}.By (22) we are basically comparing the expected present values of both possible programs evaluated at the same time period. In particular, the comparison occurs at the earliest investment time for the two projects.22Clearly, nothing would change if we chose the latest investment time.22For instance, if the flexible program is adopted earlier, i.e.,x<pˆ∗, the expected present value of the non-flexible program,NPVW^∗(pˆ∗), is discounted back to x by using the stochastic discount factor,xpˆ∗θ1. In contrast, if the adoption of the non-flexible program occurs earlier, i.e.,x⩾pˆ∗, thenNPVW∗(x)is discounted back topˆ∗. Thus,π(x,pˆ∗)indicates, in percentage terms, the value of a flexible program when compared to the value of a non-flexible program. Finally, note that by using the measureπ(x,pˆ∗)for the comparison, we are taking into account the difference in the probability of adoption and in the expected investment time through the stochastic discount factorxpˆ∗θ1.In this section, we use some numerical examples to illustrate the effect of operational flexibility on the investment timing and on the value of a waste disposal program. We start our calculations by setting d=1. This is equivalent to normalizing our frame with respect to the additional cost of disposal incurred when recycling.23Note that we could have normalized the setting from the beginning by assuming that qt=pt/dtwith dt>0 evolves according to dqt=μ qtdt+σqtdzt. However, we preferred to keep dtsince it guarantees a clearer presentation and discussion of our results.23By using (1), it is straightforward to show that the ratio qt=pt/d evolves according to the following Brownian motion:(23)dqtqt=μdt+σdzt,withq0=q=pdNote that recycling is consistently profitable for any q>1 and not profitable otherwise.In our exercise, we let the other parameters vary as follows:1.Price trend and volatility – We let drift, μ, and volatility, σ, take values {0,0.025} and {0.1,0.2,0.3}, respectively. Note that a positive drift may capture both an expected increase in the price for recycled material and/or an expected decrease in the gap between recycling and landfilling operating costs. A driftless motion simply implies that, even if fluctuating over time, ratio qton average takes the initial value q. See Table 2. In each table, we allow for increasing levels of volatility in order to check the impact of uncertainty on the choice of the program and on the investment policy. In particular, we expect that under higher uncertainty (i) the municipality prefers a higher degree of flexibility, and (ii) investment in a costly flexible program should be delayed. As a result, the municipality must trade off flexibility with investment delay. In light of this trade-off, it is of interest, however, to check how a flexible program performs compared to a non-flexible one.Investment cost – We consider the impact of investment cost by letting its magnitude, i, and convexity, γ, take values {2.5,5,10} and {2,4}, respectively. As discussed above, higher i and lower γ will likely make a flexible program less desirable since the marginal investment cost of flexibility increases. See Tables 1 and 4.Interest rate – We set the interest rate, r, equal to 5% in our calculations. We then check for the effect of a variation by raising it to 10%. It is immediate to see that when investing in a flexible program, this variation implies, ceteris paribus, a higher user cost of capital. Hence, in order to invest, the flexible program must yield higher returns. With a higher interest rate, investment is likely to occur when q is high enough to cover the higher opportunity cost of capital. See Table 3.In our calculations, we set 1 as initial level for q. This means that the additional cost of recycling is covered by revenues from the sale of recycled materials. Note that (1) as discussed above, this does not necessarily trigger investment in any of programs under analysis, and (2) this assumption does not influence the comparison between a flexible and a non-flexible program. In this respect, recall that when comparing the two programs on the basis of probability of investment and expected investment timing, what matters is the temporal distance between the optimal investment thresholds set for each program. We compare the probabilities of eventual investment and investment within 10years (T=10) with or without flexibility.In Table 1, we set μ=0.025, r=0.05, and γ=2 and we let vary the investment cost magnitude, i, and the volatility, σ. We observe that within a flexible program, the municipality would always prefer to purchase the maximum feasible recycling capacity, i.e.,α¯∗=1. Furthermore, in the majority of cases the investment in such a program would occur earlier than the investment in a non-flexible program. In particular, we note that this is always the case for the highest level of volatility. This makes sense, considering that under highly uncertain recycling profitability, the municipality may fully exploit the potential of the hedging policy adopted by investing in a flexible program. This consideration is also supported by the performance of the flexible program in terms of expected investment time and value. In fact, we observe that the presence of flexibility may induce important reductions in the length of time needed for eventual investment. Note thatπ(x,pˆ∗)is always increasing in the level of uncertainty. Interestingly, the flexible program may perform even better in some cases, for instance if i=5 and σ=0.3. In this case, the value attached to the flexible program is equivalent to 105% of the value of a non-flexible one. Not surprisingly,π(x,pˆ∗)is decreasing in i, i.e., the higher the investment cost of the flexible program, the lower the net benefit in comparison to the non-flexible one. In general, however, even whenπ(x,pˆ∗)is lower than 1, we note that the score is quite high. This is particularly noteworthy when considering that a non-flexible program is actually costless in terms of investment (i=0). Finally, note that the investment thresholds for both programs are increasing in σ. This is due to the presence of uncertainty and irreversibility which, as is standard in the real option literature, requires a more prudent investment policy. Investment should, in fact, occur at higher price levels. This, in turn, requires waiting longer before investing. This period of inaction may become infinitely long in the presence of a weak expected growth in the net benefit of recycling (q). In Table 1, this is actually the case for σ=0.3. This figure must be analyzed in combination with the probability of investment which, up to Table 1, markedly increases when investing in flexibility.In Table 2, we focus on the impact that a change in the expected trend, μ, may have. We note that in the majority of cases, (1) the municipality prefers to invest in the maximum recycling capacity and (2) investment occurs earlier in the presence of flexibility. The expected time of adoption is decreasing in μ. In particular,E(τ;p,p̃)=∞for μ=0. As explained above, this is due to the fact that there is a positive probability of never hitting the investment threshold, i.e.,G(p,∞;p̃)<1. When considering a flexible program, there are, however, marked gains in terms of probability of adoption as uncertainty rises. The value attached to the disposal program is increasing in μ. Higher NPV are attached to higher growth in recycling profitability. Note also that for high levels of uncertainty the flexible program performs better when the drift is null (higherπ(x,pˆ∗). This makes sense, considering that if the recycling profitability is expected to grow, the hedging policy available within a flexible program is less valuable. This is due to the lower likelihood of q falling below 1. In contrast, the activation of the hedging policy is more likely when μ=0. Finally, the positive relationship betweenπ(x,pˆ∗)and σ holds also for μ=0.In Table 3, in order to isolate the effect of the interest rate, r, we set μ=0. We note that by raising r to 10%, we have two opposite effects on the investment thresholds set for both feasible programs. In fact, while the investment in a flexible program is postponed, the investment in a non-flexible program is anticipated. To explain this difference, again, recall that the investment in a non-flexible program occurs at no cost (i=0). In addition, the current value of future payoffs decreases since they are discounted at a higher rate. This easily explains the rush in investing in a non-flexible program. In contrast, when investing in a flexible program, the effect of discounting on future payoffs is balanced by the effect of a higher user cost for the capital needed to purchase flexibility. In Table 3, the second effect is prevailing in every scenario. This clearly has a huge impact on the performance of the flexible program when compared to a non-flexible one. Note thatπ(x,pˆ∗)is decreasing in r and the flexible program performs poorly for σ=0.1. As above, the performance improves, as uncertainty rises and reaches 90% for σ=0.3. This confirms again the relevance of flexibility in terms of program value. Similarly, note also that, despite its higher cost, a full recycling capacity is chosen.Finally, we study the effect of investment cost convexity, γ. Recall that in the interval α∈(0,1] the investment cost is decreasing in γ. In the three scenarios represented in Table 4, the municipality would always install full recycling capacity within the flexible program. Thus, the effect of γ is highly similar to the effect of a higher i. As γ decreases, the investment in a flexible program is postponed, and its relative profitability,π(x,pˆ∗), drops. Note that in Table 4 we set r=0.1 so that, not surprisingly, the investment in a non-flexible program occurs earlier in the majority of cases. It is, however, worth pointing out the strength of a flexible program which improves its performance in terms ofπ(x,pˆ∗)as uncertainty increases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
