@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-period game of a closed-loop supply chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Manufacturer and consumer prefer that manufacturer collects used products.This leads to a higher environmental quality.Retailer and external service provider prefer to close themselves the loop.Results in our dynamic setting differ from their static counterparts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Closed-loop supply chain,Two-period game,Incentive,Supply-chain configuration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We consider a two-period closed-loop supply chain (CLSC) game where a remanufacturer appropriates of the returns’ residual value and decides whether to exclusively manage the end-of-use product collection or to outsource it to either a retailer or a third-service provider (3P). We determine that the manufacturer outsources the product collection only when an outsourcee performs environmentally and operationally better. On the outsourcees side there is always an economic convenience in managing the product returns process exclusively, independently of returns rewards and operational performance. When outsourcing is convenient, a manufacturer always chooses a retailer if the outsourcees show equal performance. Overall, the manufacturer is more sensitive to environmental performance than to operational perfomance. Finally, there exists only a small region inside which outsouring the collection process contributes to the triple bottom line.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Suppose that a manufacturer can derive some economic benefits from the used products it previously sold to consumers, and that the latter are willing to recycle them. This raises the following relevant question: should the manufacturer outsource the collection activity or do it itself? The aim of this paper is to characterize the conditions under which the manufacturer is better off outsourcing and to assess its impact on potential stakeholders, on consumer’s surplus and on the environment.A closed-loop supply chain (CLSC) combines forward and reverse activities into a unique system, to improve economic and environmental performance (Krikke, Le Blanc, & van de Velde, 2004). Forward activities include new product development, product design and engineering, procurement and production, marketing, sales, distribution, and after-sale service, while reverse activities refer to all those needed to close the loop, such as product acquisition, reverse logistics, points of use and disposal, testing, sorting, refurbishing, recovery, recycling, re-marketing, and re-selling (Fleischmann, Krikke, Dekker, & Flapper, 2000; Guide & Van Wassenhove, 2009). A necessary condition for firms to close the loop is that producing with used components is less costly than manufacturing with new materials (Guide & Van Wassenhove, 2001; Savaskan, Bhattacharya, & Van Wassenhove, 2004). Several empirical studies (see, e.g., Fleischmann, van Nunen, & Grave, 2003; Tabolt, Lefebvre, & Lefebvre, 2007) have already highlighted the relevance of CLSC for business and government. The reviews in Fleischmann, Bloemhof-Ruwaard, Dekker, van der Laan, and Van Wassenhove (1997), Dekker, Fleischmann, and Van Wassenhove (2004) and Atasu, Guide, and Van Wassenhove (2008a) provide a comprehensive report on what has been achieved so far, and on the issues that still need attention.In a common form of a CLSC, a manufacturer collects used products and appropriates the benefits. In this case, the manufacturer must create a proper incentive for customers to return products. Lexmark started the ”Prebate” program in 1998, where customers could get 30$ rebate off a 230$ toner cartridge if they return the cartridges back (Majumder & Groenevelt, 2001). Similarly, Hammond and Beullens (2007) show that a buy-back mechanism can ideally supply a 100% return rate. When gains from the collection process are high, manufacturers prefer collecting by themself (De Giovanni & Zaccour, 2013). For instance, Guide (2000) reports that 82% of firms collect directly from customers. Xerox carries out alone the product collection process and performs 65% return rate Guide (2000). In such a context, the other players (e.g., the retailers) do not participate in managing the backward flow, because either they do not have the right logistics system in place, or because the residual value of returned products is too low. However, this does not mean that other forms of CLSC could not develop. Indeed, several reasons may induce manufacturers to involve other parties (Klassen, 2009). Because they are closer to consumers, retailers may be able to achieve a higher return rate than manufacturers. Similarly, third-party service providers (3P) may exploit their specialized skills to better perform all CLSC operations. There is ample evidence from the literature that choosing the right CLSC configuration is crucial to its success. Savaskan et al. (2004) obtain that a CLSC performs better when the retailer manages the product acquisition. Bhattacharya, Guide, and Van Wassenhove (2006) model a three-player game where a manufacturer always does the collection. Depending on the type of contract used, there are several coordination mechanisms that may align the players’ goals. De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013) show that when the manufacturer and the retailer share the cost in investing in green activities aimed at increasing the return rate, both players could be better off in a large region of the parameter space. De Giovanni (2011a) demonstrated that players cooperate in a CLSC only when the collector receives a sufficiently high incentive.When outsourcing the product collection, the manufacturer clearly needs to design adequate incentives to induce the other players to collaborate or achieve better results (Corbett & Savaskan, 2003; Ferguson & Toktay, 2006; Majumder & Groenevelt, 2001). For instance, ReCellular uses a variety of incentives and sources to collect used phones from cellular airtime providers, third-party collectors, etc. (Guide, Jayaraman, & Linton, 2003). Kodak offers customers and retailers some economic incentives to return their cameras because components can be used to produce new products (Savaskan et al., 2004). Interface Inc. is the world’s largest provider of commercial carpet tile that leases carpets instead of selling them; the ownership of off-lease products gives Interface Inc. an incentive to recover the residual value of these products (Agrawal & Tokay, 2009). Pitney-Bowes remanufactures off-lease products by offering a trade-in program (Ferguson & Toktay (2006)). Similarly, Xerox obtains part of its returns from trade-ins, which has resulted in cost savings of several hundred million dollars per year (Ray, Boyaci, & Aras, 2005). Consequently, the manufacturer’s decision to manage the return process either exclusively or jointly with other players depends on several factors (Hammond & Beullens, 2007), such as building up an appropriate incentive. The theoretical literature general reports models that characterize exogenous incentive mechanism because it allows players to know in advance both the costs and benefits of closing the loop. manufacturers have interests to align the incentives for closing the loop because other suppliers do not take part of the collection process (Guide & Van Wassenhove, 2009). Bakal I.S. and Akcali, 2006 demonstrated than when the per unit acquisition price is exogenous rather than endogenous, the manufacturer experiences better operational performance as the order quantity equals the production capacity. Nevertheless, the authors showed that an endogenous incentive mechanism is a suitable scenario as well. Savaskan et al. (2004) and Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006) cited the case of Kodak that reimburses a fixed fee to retailers per each unit returned. They used the same incentive scheme to show that manufacturers always prefer outsourcing to retailers. De Giovanni (2011b) introduces an exogenous incentive mechanism that takes the form of reverse-revenue-sharing contract; he shows that the incentive along with the transaction costs influence the chain coordination. Corbett and DeCroix (2001) examine exogenous shared-savings contracts to overcome incentive conflicts between a supplier and a buyer to reduce the use of indirect materials. Ferguson and Toktay (2006) model an endogenous incentive that assumes the form of a target rebate; the mechanism increases the retailer’s wishes to invest more in green activity programs and perform the reverse flow management. Majumder and Groenevelt (2001) propose an endogenous incentive to increase the fraction of remanufacturable products available and decrease the costs for remanufacturing. Guide et al. (2003) model the case of an endogenous acquisition price: the decision maker has to decide a combination of acquisition prices according to the quality of different returns in order to maximize its profits. Returns are stimulated through price incentives. Similarly, Ray et al. (2005) use an endogenous price mechanism in the form of trade-in rebate to drive customers’ willingness to repurchase. De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013) model a cost-revenue sharing contract in which the incentive has an exogenous component (linked to revenue sharing) and an endogenous component (linked to sharing costs). Robotis, Boyaci, and Verter (2012) make the simplifying assumption that no incentive is provided neither to collectors or to customers because all past sold products will be surely received back.In this paper, we characterize and compare the equilibrium results of three scenarios, namely, where the manufacturer exclusively manages product returns, outsources the activity to its retailer, and where it outsources it to an external service provider. We develop these three scenarios because in the world of business manufacturers always struggle with decisions on whether the product collection process should be outsourced. For instance, Valpak and Batteries Plus have recently internalized the reverse logistics management. In Sainsbury, Valpak (2011) has decided to work with retailers rather than with 3PL on the battery collection process until 2010. Then, during 2010, the company has started to personally manage the house hold battery collection process to improve the return rate. Similarly, BatteryPlus Ltd., who outsourced the battery collection through a 3PL until 2011, has decided to directly manage the collection process because outsourcing was not economically and operationally efficient. The company invested in reverse logistics network and information systems to internalize all return activities in 2012 (HighJump Software, 2012). As the return process is inherently dynamic, our model is also. For each scenario, we build a two-period game, in which some of the units sold in the first period are returned to the manufacturer in the second period. Further, we assume an active approach to recycling by considering that the entity in charge invests in certain activities to influence the return rate. Our model is a dynamic extension to the static game by Savaskan et al. (2004) (SVB), who recommended an analysis of strategies and outcomes in a dynamic CLSC. As we will see, our results substantially differ from whose obtained by SVB in a static setting.Our results indicate that independent of the selected CLSC structure, closing the loop is always beneficial for all players comparatively to the case when the management of reverse activities is not part of the business. The collection of products increases the internal efficiency of the manufacturer creating the basis for a lower double marginalization effect which implies lower wholesale prices, higher demand and, consequently, higher profits. In the comparison between chain configurations, all parties with a stake in the choice of the CLSC structure, i.e., the manufacturer, the consumer and the environment, prefer in a large region of the parameter space that the manufacturer be the one to close the loop and collect the used products. Nevertheless, the cost differences among players is just less important in the selection of the CLSC structure. The manufacturer is more sensitive to environmental performance (environmental effectiveness) than to operational performance (collection efficiency). Thus, it will always make use of outsourcing when the outsourcee is able to better perform the environment, while on the cost side outsourcing is a valid option only when the manufacturer’s collection process is drastically inefficient. On their side, both the retailer and the external service provider would be better off, profit-wise, to perform this task themselves, but they will be asked to do so by the manufacturer only when it is itself less efficient either in terms of collection cost and/or influencing the return rate. The same conditions apply for sales in the first period, that is, outsourcing is prefarable in few cases, with a preference when outsourcee’s environmental performance is higher.We obtain different results in the evaluation of outsourcing to perform the environment, that is, the return rate. Our findings show that conditions for choosing outsourcing are much more stringent for both environmental and operational performance. The leader will opt for outsourcing conditioned to substantially better outsourcee’s performance. Under this perspective, environmnetal and operational performance provide couter-intuitive findings. In fact, the leader will choose the outsourcee performing the best environmental effectiveness and the worse operational efficiency. While the first result is intuitive, the second finds an explanation in the competition between outsourcees to obtain an outsourcing contract as well as in the higher profits to gain through reverse logistics.Finally, outsourcing is marginally beneficial to perform the triple bottom line (TBL), independent of the CLSC structure. When the triple bottom line is in the agenda, the leader should base its decisions by mainly evaluating the players’ environmental effectiveness. While effective outsourcees’ investments in environmental practice enlarge the region in which the TBL benefits from outsourcing, higher outsourcees’ collection efficiency does not imply a similar improvement. The TBL turns out to be a high-level target that can rarely be reached through outsourcing.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the game model and the retained scenarios for collecting used products. In Section 3 we characterize the equilibria in these scenarios. In Section 4 we compare strategies and outcomes and discuss their managerial implications. Section 5 briefly concludes.Consider a two-player CLSC where a manufacturer sells its product to consumers through an exclusive independent retailer. Past-sold products have a residual value for the manufacturer, and their collection can be carried out through several CLSC configurations. In this paper, we follow Savaskan et al. (2004) (SBW) and retain three scenarios, in which either the manufacturer (player M), the retailer (player R) or an external third-party (player E) collects the end-of-use products. For each configuration, we develop a two-period model, where a proportion of the units sold in the first period are returned to the manufacturer. Products sold today will be returned only in the future, therefore dynamic modeling appears the most appropriate setting. The literature presents several dynamic approches. De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013) characterize a differential equation that capture the return rate motion. De Giovanni (2011b) model a static return rate complemented by an exogenous delay factor to capture the product residence time. Ferguson and Toktay (2006), Ferrer and Swaminathan (2006), and Atasu et al. (2008) consider the delayed effects of closing the loop through a two-period setting. We follow the last stream of research, where a two-period setting is meant to capture the long-term effect of remanufacturing. We characterize and compare the equilibrium strategies and outcomes for the three scenarios defined below. In each scenario, the game is played noncooperatively à la Stackelberg, with the manufacturer acting as the CLSC leader, and the retailer as the follower. This information structure, which is very common in the supply-chain and marketing literature (see, e.g., the books by Ingene & Parry (2004) and Jørgensen & Zaccour (2004)), in operations management (e.g., De Giovanni, 2011b; He, Prasad, & Sethi, 2009), as well as in environmental management (e.g., Savaskan et al., 2004), is based on the actual sequence of events, that is, the manufacturer announces its wholesale price and other incentives, and next, the retailer sets the retail price and the values of other marketing variables. Let t be the period index. Denote by qtthe demand for the manufacturer’s product and by ptthe retail price at period t. Assume that the demand is linear in price and given byqt=α-βpt,where α and β are strictly positive parameters representing the market potential and the consumer’s sensitivity to price, respectively. Our demand specification deserves some comments. First, the choice of a linear demand can be justified on the basis that it can be derived from the consumer’s utility maximization. Second, we purposely used the simplest setting, where demand solely depends on price and is stationary. The thinking behind this choice is that we see our three scenarios as three experiments, which are designed to isolate the impact of the CLSC configuration itself on the players’ outcomes and on the environment. The more features the model has, the more difficult it becomes to attribute the observed differences to that configuration. In principle, there is no conceptual difficulty in adding, e.g., quality and advertising in the demand specification, or letting α and β to be time dependent and hence accounting for market expansion or shrinking, and for changes in consumer’s tastes. Denote by rjthe proportion of units sold in the first period that are returned to the manufacturer when the collection is done by player j=M, R, E. The literature has modeled the return rate as an exogenously given parameter (e.g., Atasu, Sarvary, & Van Wassenhove, 2008b; Ferrer & Swaminathan, 2006; Fleischmann et al., 2003; Geyer, Van Wassenhove, & Atasu, 2007); as a random variable (e.g., Aras, Boyaci, & Verter, 2004; Ketzenberg, 2009; van der Laan & Salomon, 1997; van der Laan, Salomon, Dekker, & van Wassenhove, 1999); or, as a function of the technological level, defined as remanufacturing level (e.g., Debo, Tokay, & Van Wassenhove, 2005). We depart from these references and follow Savaskan et al. (2004) and Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006) who consider that the players adopt an active return policy by investing in some promotional activities to raise the return rate. Indeed, we suppose that the collector can positively influence the return rate by investing in some green activity programs (GAP) such as advertising and communications campaigns about the recycling policies, logistics services, monetary and symbolic incentives, employees-training programs, etc. GAP investments seek to increase awareness about the collection policy that the company undertakes and to establish capabilities and skylls over the reverse logistics network. Let Ajdenote the level of a composite index of these GAP by the agent j in charge of collecting the used products, and assume that rjis proportional to Aj, i.e.,(1)rj=hjAj,j=M,R,E,where hjis a positive scaling parameter measuring the consumer’s response to these actions (environmental effectiveness). The empirical validity of such activities is documented in Talbot et al. (2007). We suppose that the cost of Ajis given by an increasing convex function C(Aj), satisfying C(0)=0. For simplicity, we chose the following quadratic functional form:(2)C(Aj)=ηAj22,where η is a positive parameter. To save on notation, in the sequel, we set η=1.1This assumption is not as restrictive as it may seem, because we can always rescale the parameter hj.1Let c be the manufacturer’s unit-production cost. A product sold in period 1 can be returned in period 2. The unit-collection cost, which explains the operational (collection) efficiency, is gjto player j∈{M, R, E}, and it has a residual value Δ to the manufacturer. Clearly, we have 0⩽Δ⩽c. In addition, Δ⩾gj, which means that the marginal benefit that the manufacturer gets through the collection process is larger than the marginal collection cost. The latter comprises all unit variable costs that a collector faces from when an end-of-use product is picked up till it is delivered to the manufacturer’s plant and it is linked to several tasks such as: handdling, collection, inspection, separation, redistribution, disposal, etc. Indeed, under normal circumstances, a used product cannot have a higher value to the manufacturer than its original cost. In addition, the return residual value deteriorates over time. We therefore assume that only if goods sold in t are returned in t+1, the manufacturer finds closing the loop economically convenient as condition Δ⩽c holds. This assumption is in line with Debo et al. (2005), who highlight that when the residence time (number of periods a product stays with consumers) is too long, the return residual value is very low and the benefits of closing the loop vanish. Denote by djthe price paid by the manufacturer per unit of used product when collected by agent j∈{R, E}. We suppose that the manufacturer pays players R and E on a cost-plus-pricing approach when selling the returned product to the manufacturer, that is,dj=(1+μ)gj,where μ is the markup. The parameter μ can be thought of as the incentive provided by the manufacturer to the other players to do the collection of the used product. A cost-plus-pricing incentive allows a collector to have an immediate perception of the advantages that the collection process provides, independently of the other players’ strategies. The collector receives a fix per return incentive that depends on the return rate. As in Savaskan et al. (2004), the collector has a full control on the return rate through the GAP efforts. Thus this type of mechanism seeks to reach better environmental performance through a return rate increment and turns out to be environmentally sustainable. We assume that the incentive does not depend on the product quality as in Guide (2003b), but rather it takes the form of buy-back price (Savaskan & Van Wassenhove, 2006; Savaskan et al., 2004). The net per-return benefit to the manufacturer is then Δ−(1+μ)gj, i.e., each returned unit contributes to the manufacturer’s revenue in some unspecified way. In particular Δ−(1+μ)gj⩾0 represents a necessary condition for a reverse logistics process to be economically convenient. For example, the used product can then be sold on a secondary market after some reconditioning (think of a durable product), or some parts can be extracted and used in the fabrication of either the product under investigation, or another one of the manufacturer’s products (Klassen, 2009). An alternative could have been to measure the benefits of collecting used products in terms of the reduction in the cost of remanufacturing of the same product (see, e.g., De Giovanni & Zaccour, 2013; Savaskan & Van Wassenhove, 2006; Savaskan et al., 2004). For our purposes, it does not really matter how these benefits are assessed.We now describe the three scenarios for the collection of used products. We denote by Πjthe total profit of player j∈{M, R, E}, and by πjtthe profit of player j in period t=1, 2. Let δ∈(0, 1) be the common discount factor of second-period profit.Scenario M: In this scenario, the manufacturer does the collection of used products, invests in green activities and retains all the economic benefits of recycling. The retailer buys the product from the manufacturer at the wholesale price wtand sells it to the consumer at the retail price pt, t=1, 2. The third-party firm is not active in this benchmark scenario. Although the manufacturer sells products through a unique retailer, he has numerous motivations to collect himself end-of-use products rather than prefering outsourcing. For instance, low return residual values discourage a manufacturer to provide suitable incentives to an external collector; similarly, high collection costs may lead a collector to renounce to closing the loop. In all these cases outsourcing can make the manufacturer economically worse-off, thus an exclusive collection is preferable. The optimization problems of the manufacturer and the retailer are as follows:ΠMM=maxw1,w2,AM(πM1+δπM2)=(w1-c)q1-AM22+δ[(w2-c)q2+(Δ-gM)hMAMq1],ΠRM=maxp1,p2(πR1+δπR2)=(p1-w1)q1+δ(p2-w2)q2.The manufacturer’s total profit can be decomposed into forward and backward profits, with the first resulting from selling its brand to the retailer and the second from remanufacturing through collection of used products. More specifically, we haveΠMM=(w1-c)q1+δ(w2-c)q2︸Forwardprofit+δ(Δ-gM)hMAMq1-AM2/2︸Backwardprofit.The equilibrium results in this scenario will be superscripted by M.Scenario R: In this scenario, the retailer collects the used products at a per-unit cost of gR, invests ARin green activities and receives from the manufacturer a per-unit monetary compensation dR>gR. While the manufacturer sells products through one retailer only, involving the retailer also in the collection process leads to an integrated CLSC. Players generally responsible for forward flows are now also involved in jointly managing the backward flows. The per-unit incentive that the retailer receives represents the key to efficiently close the loop. As in the previous scenario, the third-party agent is not involved in this game. The optimization problems of the manufacturer and the retailer are as follows:ΠMR=maxw1,w2(πM1+δπM2)=(w1-c)q1+δ[(w2-c)q2+(Δ-(1+μ)gR)hRARq1],ΠRR=maxp1,p2,AR(πR1+δπR2)=(p1-w1)q1-AR22+δ[(p2-w2)q2+μgRhRARq1].The decomposition of the total profits, in terms of forward and backward parts, is as follows:ΠMR=(w1-c)q1+δ(w2-c)q2︸Forwardprofit+δ(Δ-(1+μ)gR)hRARq1︸Backwardprofit,ΠRR=(w1-c)q1+δ(w2-c)q2︸Forwardprofit+δμgRhRARq1-AR2/2︸Backwardprofit.ScenarioE: This scenario involves an external third party (3P) to take charge of reverse operations. Player E invests AEin green activities, and collects the used products at a per-unit collection cost gE. The manufacturer pays this external service provider dE>gEper unit of delivered used product. Recalling that the manufacturer has a residual per-unit value, Δ, the optimization problems of the three players are as follows:ΠME=maxw1,w2(πM1+δπM2)=(w1-c)q1+δ[(w2-c)q2+(Δ-(1+μ)gE)hEAEq1],ΠRE=maxp1,p2(πR1+δπR2)=(p1-w1)q1+δ(p2-w2)q2,ΠEE=maxAEδπE2=δ[μgEhEAEq1-AE2/2].The total profits in this scenario can be decomposed as follows:ΠME=(w1-c)q1+δ(w2-c)q2︸Forwardprofit+δ(Δ-(1+μ)gE)hEAEq1︸Backwardprofit,ΠRE=(p1-w1)q1+δ(p2-w2)q2︸Forwardprofit,ΠEE=δμgEhEAEq1-AE2/2︸Backwardprofit.In this section, we characterize the equilibrium strategies and outcomes in the three scenarios.When the manufacturer collects, it contributes to the forward flows while it exclusively manages the reverse logistics flows and entirely retains the economic benefits of closing the loop. The retailer acts only on marketing strategies by setting the price, while no other player has a role in the CLSC. The results for this scenario are collected in the following proposition.Proposition 1Assuming an interior solution, the unique Stackelberg equilibrium strategies and demand when the manufacturer collects the used products are given byw1M=2(α+βc)-αβ(δ(Δ-gM)hM)24β-β2(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2,p1M=3α+βc-αβ(δ(Δ-gM)hM)24β-β2(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2,q1M=α-βc4-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2,AMM=(α-βc)δ(Δ-gM)hM4-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2,w2M=α+βc2β,p2M=3α+βc4β,q2M=α-βc4.The corresponding equilibrium outcomes are as follows:ΠMM=α-βc28β4+δ4-βδ(Δ-gM)hM24-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2,ΠRM=α-βc216β16+δ4-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)224-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)22.See Appendix A.□Note thatw2Mandp2Mare positive. The demand in period 1 is given byq1M=α-βc4-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2.Forq1Mto be positive, we need4β>(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2.To have an interior solution, assuming that the above condition holds, it suffices that the numerator ofw1Mbe positive, i.e.,2(α+βc)αβ>(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2.Therefore,(3)(δ(Δ-dM)hM)2<1βmin4,2(α+βc)α.The condition in (3) will be imposed in the numerical illustrations in the next section. Note that if the players disregard future outcomes in their optimization problems, that is, if they set δ=0, then it is easy to see that no GAP efforts will take place, and hence, no collection of used products. The results in the first period would then be exactly the same as in the second period.In the following corollary, we characterize the equilibrium strategies in the absence of any product collection policy. This case provides an interesting benchmark to assess the merits of have a product-return policy.Corollary 1In the absence of backward activities, the unique Stackelberg equilibrium strategies and demand are given byw̃t=(α+βc)2β,p̃t=3α+βc4β,q̃t=α-βc4,t=1,2.The corresponding equilibrium outcomes are as follows:Π∼M=(1+δ)(α-βc)28β,Π∼R=(1+δ)(α-βc)216β.It suffices to set the GAP effort equal to zero to get the result.□A product collection program managed by the manufacturer is profit Pareto-improving and leads to higher demand in the first period.To show that the manufacturer and retailer achieve higher profits, it suffices to compute the differences in their profits and to note that they are positive for all parameter values. Indeed, we haveΠM-Π∼M=α-βc28ββ(δ(Δ-gM)hM)24-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2>0ΠR-Π∼R=α-βc216β16(1-δ)+βδ(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2[8-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2]4-β(δ(Δ-gM)hM)22,which is clearly positive under condition (3).The first-period demand is clearly higher when the manufacturer manages the backward flow.□The interesting item in the above proposition is that the retailer, without doing anything, is better off when the manufacturer invests in product collection. The reason is that the wholesale price in the first period is then lower and the retailer benefits from this. Indeed,w1M-w̃t=[-α+βc]β2(δ(Δ-gM)hM)22β[4β-β2(δ(Δ-gM)hM)2]<0.The manufacturer is interested in lowering the transfer price to push the retailer to lower its price, and consequently increase demand. In a supply chain with reverse activity, a sold unit has not only an impact on current revenue, but also affects next-period one. Further, as both players achieve higher profits under GAP, the total supply chain payoff is also higher. This implies that the return policy, here implemented and managed by the manufacturer, is in fact a (partial) coordinating mechanism.When the manufacturer outsources the product collection process to a retailer, it is not responsible for the collection process and the related environmental performance. The retailer exclusively manages the reverse logistics flows and receives a per unit reward to cover the reverse logistics cost and gain a surplus. The manufacturer’s economic benefits depend on the net amount received. The retailer acts only on operational strategies by setting the GAP efforts and on marketing strategies by setting the price, while no other player has a role in the CLSC. The results of this scenario are summarized in the following Proposition.Proposition 4Assuming an interior solution, the unique Stackelberg equilibrium strategies and demand when the retailer collects the used products are given byw1R=(α+βc)Φ-2αΛ2β(Φ-Λ),p1R=2α(Φ-Λ)-(α-cβ)2β(Φ-Λ),q1R=α-cβ2(Φ-Λ),ARR=hRgRδμ(α-cβ)2(Φ-Λ),w2R=α+βc2β,p2R=3α+βc4β,q2M=α-βc4,whereΦ=2-βδ2(μgR)2hR2,Λ=βδ2(Δ-(1+μ)gR)μgRhR2.The corresponding equilibrium outcomes are as follows:ΠMR=(α-βc)28β2+(Φ-Λ)δΦ-Λ,ΠRR=(α-βc)216β2Φ+(Φ-Λ)2δ(Φ-Λ)2.See Appendix A.□The conditions for an interior solution are not as straightforward to state as in the previous scenario. We shall refrain from attempting to synthesize these complicated conditions involving six parameters. Instead, we shall insure that the values chosen for these parameters indeed imply thatw1R;p1RandARRare positive. This implies that we shall insure thatΦ-Λ>0⇔Δ-gR<2βμδ2gRhR2while α−βc>0 always holds.Proposition 5Decentralizing the used-product collection activity to a retailer leads to higher profits for all players, comparatively to the absence of any environmental program.It is easy to verify that:ΠMR-Π∼M=(α-βc)28βhR2gRδ2μβ(Δ-gR)Φ-Λ>0,ΠRR-Π∼R=(α-βc)216βhR2gR2δ2μ2βΦ+Λ(2Φ-Λ)(Φ-Λ)2>0.□The retailer is always economically better-off when managing the product collection, and the manufacturer also gains more even if it only coordinates backward activities through the transfer of a fix (exogenous) incentive. This result is explained by the lower double marginalization effect implied by the coordination mechanism that boosts the sales. Indeed, when the retailer manages the product collection process the manufacturer fixes a lower wholesale price than in the scenario where no backward activities take place, i.e.,w1R-w̃t=-(α-βc)Λ2β(Φ-Λ)<0.When the manufacturer outsources the product collection process to an external collector, for instance a 3P, it is not responsible for the collection process and the related environmental performance. The 3P exclusively manages the reverse logistics flows and receives a per unit reward to cover the reverse logistics cost and gain a surplus. The retailer acts only on marketing strategies by setting the price, while the supply chain assumes the form of an extended CLSC. The Proposition below reports the results for this scenario.Proposition 6Assuming an interior solution, the unique Stackelberg equilibrium strategies and demand when the external provider collects the used products are given byw1E=α+βc-Ωαβ(2-Ω),p1E=α(3-2Ω)+βc2β(2-Ω),q1E=α-βc2(2-Ω),AME=(α-βc)μgEhEδ2(2-Ω),w2E=α+βc2β,p2E=3α+βc4β,q2E=α-βc4,whereΩ=βδ(Δ-(1+μ)gE)μgEhE2.The corresponding equilibrium outcomes are as follows:ΠME=(α-βc)22+δ(2-Ω)8β(2-Ω),ΠRE=(α-βc)216β4+δ(2-Ω)2(2-Ω)2,ΠEE=δ2(α-βc)2(μgE)2hE28(2-Ω)2.See Appendix A.□Again, we shall now attempt to establish the conditions that must be satisfied by combinations of parameter values to obtain an interior solution. However, we mention that we must have Ω<2 for demand to be positive. We assume this condition to hold.Comparing this scenario to the case where there is no product collection, that is, to the Stackelberg equilibrium with the manufacturer acting as leader and the retailer as follower, we obtain the following result.Proposition 7Decentralizing the used-product collection activity to a third party leads to higher profits for all players, comparatively to the absence of any environmental program.It is easy to verify thatΠME-Π∼M=(α-βc)2Ω8β(2-Ω)>0,ΠRE-Π∼R=(α-βc)216βΩ(4-Ω)(2-Ω)2>0,ΠEE>0.□Again, the main driver of this result is that the manufacturer sets a lower wholesale price to provide an incentive to the retailer to lower its price and boost first-period demand. Indeed, we havew1E-w̃1=-(α-βc)Ω2β(2-Ω)<0.Similarly to the scenario in which the retailer is the outsourcee, it is clearly possible to identify the lower wholesale price that the manufacturer charges when backward activities are outsourced to a 3P. Because all parameters influence the judgment of players’ profits and strategies, we will numerically check the convenience of outsourcing as well as positivity for strategies and profits.In the previous section, we analytically characterized the players’ strategies and outcomes in the three scenarios. We obtained, not surprisingly, given the model’s structure, that the equilibrium wholesale and retail prices in the second period are the same across all scenarios. This implies that any difference in players’ outcomes is due to what happens in the first period. As strategies and outcomes cannot be compared analytically, we shall proceed numerically. Contrary to some previous research (e.g., Savaskan et al., 2004), we take into consideration the difference among players in terms of collection costs and GAP effectiveness. These two dimensions supply relevant managerial insights and their investigation provides new contributions to the literature. Nevertheless, this approach prejudges a full analytical development that could be otherwise easily obtained (e.g., assuming collection costs and GAP effectiveness equal for all players). With 12 parameters taking values in large sets, the number of possible scenarios that could be investigated is huge (and consequently the number of figures to report). Instead of attempting to cover all imaginable cases with the expected outcome that the results could not be organized in any meaningful way, we shall once and for all set the values of some parameters. The model has the following parameters: (see Table 1).We normalize the demand parameters and assume thatα=β=1.The rationale for setting α=β=1 is that all other parameters will then be automatically bounded between zero and one. Indeed, fromqt=α-βpt=1-pt,we get pt=1−qt⩽1, and consequently all positive cost parameters are upper-bounded by one. The above parameters, along with the manufacturer’s production cost and the discount factor, play a quantitative role, and varying them is not expected to much alter the qualitative insights.2Other numerical results could be provided by the authors upon request.2Therefore, we are left with eight parameters, namely, μ, Δ, gjandhj, j∈{M, R, E}. Our numerical grid is as follows:μ∈{0.05,0.1,0.2},Δ∈{0.4,0.5,0.6},gj∈0,0.5,hj∈0,1,j∈{M,R,E}.That is, we consider three values for the incentive parameter μ, and as many for the return residual value Δ, to be interpreted as low, medium and high, respectively. The collection-cost and the GAP-effectiveness parameters take values in the shown interval. We concentrate our analysis on three main features, namely: (i) the players’ profits, to figure the conditions under which the manufacturer prefers outsourcing and how the outsourcee’s payoff changes; (ii) environmental performance, by investigating the differences in the players’ GAP efforts and identifying the best supply-chain configuration to maximize product recovery (return rate); and (iii) customer sales, by comparing the first-period demands of all supply-chain configurations, and determine the structure that maximizes sales. The results are shown in two three-dimensional spaces, namely, the g-space, that is, gM·gR·gE, and the h-space, i.e., hM·hR·hE. Each figure is drawn with specified values of μ and Δ, and unshown ones are fixed at their base-case values.As the leader, the manufacturer has the privilege of choosing between collecting the used products, or outsourcing this activity to another agent, that is, the retailer or the third-party collector. Our results have similarities to and differences with the literature. For instance, Guide (2000) reports that 82% of the manufacturers in the sample directly collect from the customer because outsourcing is marginally profitable or convenient. In contrast, Savaskan et al. (2004) obtain that the manufacturer should always outsource the collection process to the retailer, while outsourcing to a 3P is not an economically suitable CLSC configuration. Assuming that the cost of collection is independent of the identity of the agent, Savaskan et al. (2004) and Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006) find that the retailer should always manage the backward flows. Interestingly, we have found that when outsourcing is a suitable practice and both outsourcees have equivalent reverse logistics performance, an outsourcing contract should always be granted to the 3P.Our results show that accounting for different costs has an important impact on the outcomes. Fig. 1and Fig. 2respectively show the regions in the g-space and the h-space where the manufacturer is better off outsourcing. Note that it suffices to superpose the regions where the retailer and the third party (denoted 3P in the figures) collect to visualize the whole region where the manufacturer is better off outsourcing.3This is valid for all other simulations. Overlapping the areas where a manufacturer prefers outsourcing to a retailer (LHS) and to a 3PL (RHS), one gets the global region in which the manufacturer never manages the product collection exclusively.3Our results can be summarized as follows:Claim 1A manufacturer should always collect to maximize its profits, except in two cases:1.An outsourcee can collect at a lower marginal collection cost; orAn outsourcee can collect at a higher GAP effectiveness.Outsourcing is a convenient option only when the manufacturer faces higher collection costs and lower GAP effectiveness than an outsourcee. In all other cases, the manufacturer should always collect. Therefore, our findings contrast with Savaskan et al. (2004) and show that when the manufacturer’s reverse logistics performance are low and both outsourcees show equal performance, an outsourcing contract should be granted to a 3P.In addition, through Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, it is possible to appreciate the different roles that operational efficiency and environmental effectiveness play in the leader’s decisional process. The differences among players’ operational efficiency are less important than environmental effectiveness. In the evaluation of collection costs, the manufacturer will opt for outsourcing only when its collection process is highly inefficient, that is only in case where there is a huge gap between its operational efficiency and the outsourcees’ ones. Outsourcing becomes convenient only in this case. In contrast, outsourcees’ environmental effetiveness is much more relevant. A small difference between players’ environmental effectiveness will lead the manufacturer to outsource. Finally, the impact of GAP investments on the return rate is more important than the collection cost to estimate the benefits that outsourcing supplies.Appendix B displays additional figures for the other retained values of μ (incentive to collect) and Δ (return residual value). These figures provide additional insights into the economic benefits implied by the management of backward activities. In this sense, both values supply motivations to close the loop and/or manage reverse logistics in outsourcing. These amounts play a different role inside the g- and the h-space. μ is a mere per collected unit reward that relates with the collection cost directly to determine the amount that the manufacturer would transfer to an outsourcee. Δ indicates the convenience of the entire backward business that relatively to collection cost indicates the manufacturer’s economic rewards. Compared to collection costs, μ and Δ show opposite implications for a manufacturer to establish the convenience of outsourcing. In the g-space, we observe the following effects: (i) increasing the incentive leads to a larger outsourcing region; and (ii) increasing the return residual value leads to a smaller outsourcing region. In the evaluation of collection costs, the manufacturer decides whether to announce an outsourcing strategy according to the trade-off between the incentive and the return residual value. On the one hand, a high incentive fosters outsourcing because the outsourcee will be economically attracted and eventually invest in an efficient reverse-logistics system. This result contrasts with De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013) and De Giovanni (2011a), where it is shown that a manufacturer in a CLSC is economically worse off with outsourcing when the incentive is too high. In these cases, the incentive consists of a share of the profits being transferred from the manufacturer to a retailer in order to coordinate the chain. In our model, coordination is not on the menu; thus, the per-return incentive plays a different role: It is not a tool to jointly manage the backward flows, but rather a device to decide who can exclusively close the loop. On the other hand, a high return residual value makes a return management highly appealing so that the manufacturer’s willingness to outsource decreases; the leader prefers to manage the return process exclusively, taking on all related collection costs, and entirely appropriating of the return residual value. This result is in line with De Giovanni (2011a), who shows that high return residual values discourage coordination in a CLSC.In the h-space, we obtain the following results: (i) increasing the incentive leads to a larger outsourcing region for the retailer and to a smaller outsourcing region for the 3P; and (ii) increasing the return residual value leads to a smaller outsourcing region for the retailer and to a larger outsourcing region for the 3P. Inside the h-space, the total outsourcing region remains roughly the same when both the incentive and the return residual value change. However, the shares between outsources vary substantially. Thus, the general result that outsourcing the product collection is economically convenient only when the manufacturer’s GAP effectiveness is sufficiently low remains valid, independently of the outsourcees’ GAP effectiveness, the incentive, as well as the return residual value. Further, we observe that when outsourcing is an appropriate practice, increasing the incentive value enlarges the region where the manufacturer should outsource to a retailer, while increasing the return residual value leads the manufacturer to opt for the other outsourcee, namely, the 3P. This is in line with the empirical findings by Guide (2000), who reports that less than 20% of manufacturers collects through third party, brokers and seed stock to avoid speculative actions. These findings are interesting in light of the fact that the two outsourcees do not have the same basic purpose. For the retailer, closing the loop is simply a secondary source of revenues, which complements its primary activity (selling products at a certain price) through reverse-logistics activities. For the 3P, collecting end-of-use products is part of its core activities and (here) also represents its only source of revenues.Relatively to environmental effectiveness, μ and Δ play a different role than in the evaluation of cost. Instead of showing opposite contribution to decide about outsourcing, both amounts enlarge the region in which outsourcing is convenient. In fact, these values are both positively associated to the outsourcees’ environmental effectiveness. When the latter increase, the manufacturer formulates an appealing incentive while it also boosts its economic rewards. This depends on the fact that a higher GAP effectiveness always implies higher margins.The answer to this question is clear-cut, and stated in the following claim:Claim 2For all admissible parameter values, the retailer is better off collecting the used products.Our result is in line with previous findings. Indeed, Savaskan et al. (2004), Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006), De Giovanni (2011a), De Giovanni and Zaccour (2013), and Ferguson and Toktay (2006) reported that the retailer is always economically better off when it manages product returns. An efficient remanufacturing system increases the retailer’s willingness to order more (Bhattacharya et al., 2006) while it performs economically and operationally better than the case without remanufacturing.Product collection is an atypical task for a retailer who traditionally seeks payoff maximization through pricing, advertising and merchandising strategies. This relatively new practice seems to add value to the retailer’s primary activity. Although it is not of direct concern to our paper, the fact that retailers control the GAP efforts, in addition to the prices and local promotions, may induce a shift in power in the supply chain. This is in line with Ferguson and Toktay (2006) who show that when the incentive is high enough the retailer invests more in closing the loop and its profits can be even higher than the manufacturer’s gains. As the manufacturer is the player who chooses the CLSC structure, our result should be spelled out as follows: if the collection of used products by the retailer (follower) leads to a higher payoff for the manufacturer (leader), then the latter will outsource this operation to the retailer, who, in return, will be better off accepting this task independently if the backward reward are defined in the contract before that operations start (exogenous incentive).We finally note that the third party is always willing to collect the used products if asked to do so. This result is obvious, as this task can only add a positive amount to its otherwise zero profit. Indeed, recall that the outsourcee is paid on a cost-plus basis.Following Guide and Van Wassenhove (2009), we assume that environmental performance is measured by the return rate. As Subramanian, Gupta, and Talbot (2009) suggest, reverse logistics and CLSC research should be devoted not only to profit maximization but also to environmental performance. A high return rate means that a high number of end-of-use products have been collected and (eventually) reprocessed rather than being discarded into the environment. Therefore, a higher return rate leads to improved health and quality of life, reduced environmental waste, lower waste-disposal and landfill costs, lower air and water pollution, and less waste of resources. These relationships may be affected by other types of performance. For instance, Georgiadis, Vlachos, and Tagaras (2006) identified some variables that influence the return rate such as the residence time and the product life cycle. These variables can be also used as a proxy to evaluate the companies’ environmental performance. As we assumed a proportional relationship between GAP efforts and returns, we can safely suppose that GAP efforts are a good measure of environmental performance. These performances are drastically variable because remanufacturing implies uncertainty in quality, quantity, and timing (Aras et al. (2004)). Nevertheless, the core of a reverse logistics system with an environmental target in mind should be evaluated in terms of quantity returned rather than in terms of quality. In this sense, companies should take advantage from all types of resource and see the preservation of environment as an opportunity rather than as a burden (Guide et al., 2003).The following claim summarizes our findings in terms of the best environmentally sustainable CLSC configuration when players’ collection performance are different.Claim 3A manufacturer should always collect, to maximize the environmental performance, except in two cases:1.High marginal collection cost (low collection efficiency), orLow GAP effectiveness (low collection effectiveness).More specifically, Fig. 3and Fig. 4show that the regions where outsourcing can do better than the manufacturer collecting is very small, representing the cases where the manufacturer’s collection costs are excessively high or the GAP effectiveness is extremely low. The clear message here is that if environmental performance is part of the manufacturer’s agenda, then this task should be performed in-house, and only exceptionally be outsourced. Naturally, the exception will be when the outsourcer excels either in terms of cost of collection or rate of return. Intuitively, the product collection should be carried out by the player with the highest collection performance. Nevertheless, when all players perform same collection costs and GAP effectiveness, our results show that, contrary to Savaskan et al. (2004), the manufacturer invests in GAP efforts and collects more products than any other collector. In addition, when the product collection is outsourced and both collectors (the retailer and the 3P) show equal performance, the retailer contributes more to the CLSC’s environmental performance than a 3P.Varying the incentive and the return residual value leads to the following additional insight in both g-space and h-space (see Appendix B): (i) increasing the incentive enlarges the region in which outsourcing is environmentally preferable; and (ii) increasing the return residual value reduces the region in which outsourcing is environmentally preferable. These are intuitive results and are a direct by-product of the idea that higher performance (i.e., lower collection cost, or higher efficiency in the collection of used products), induces higher investments.The analysis of GAP efforts under outsourcing supplies some more counter-intuitive results inside the g- and h-space. Contrary to the profit analysis, outsourcing leads to higher environmental performance only when both the manufacturer’s environmental effectiveness and the operational efficiency are substantially worse than the outsourcees’ performance. The two types of performance play a different role in the manufacturer’s decision. Inside the h-space, the manufacturer gets some intuitive results, such as, it will choose the outsourcee with the highest environmental effectiveness: The higher the outsourcee’s GAP effectiveness, the higher the environmental performance that the CLSC gets when the manufacturer grants the outsourcing contract to this player. Inside the g-space, instead, the manufacturer should identify the chain structure selecting the outsourcee with the lowest operational efficiency. This can be explained considering the role of outsourcees’ competition and the economic benefits of closing the loop. First, because players’ operational efficiency is common knowledge, when an outsourcee (e.g., the retailer) performs a lower collection efficiency, the manufacturer can doubtly grant a contract because there is another outsourcee (e.g., the 3P) who performs operationally better. The only way to induce the manufacturer to concede a contract to the first outsourcee (the retailer) is to boost the GAP efforts and, consequently, the environmental performance. Second, when a player becomes the outsourcee and it knows that its marginal collection cost is high, the only way to boost profits through this atypical acitivity is an increase in the GAP investments and, consequently, of the return rate.When checking which CLSC consumers would vote for if asked, we need to keep in mind that the CLSC structure does not affect second-period equilibrium prices and demands. Therefore, the impact of the three possible configurations on the consumer is fully assessed by comparing only sales in the first period.Claim 4A manufacturer should always collect to maximize the first-period sales, except in two cases (seeFigs. 5 and 6):1.Its collection costs are too high;The retailer’s collection effectiveness is sufficiently high (i.e., the value of hRis medium or large).As for the supply side of the market (profits of firms) and environmental performance (return rate), reverse logistics also significantly impact the other side of the market, that is, consumer’s demand (see Figs. 5 and 6). Guide et al. (2003) emphasize the importance of managing the return policy with an active approach because reverse logistics has a strong impact on sales and marketing strategies. The latter can somewhat be seen as a proxy for the firm’s social performance. In this sense, the manufacturers’ choice of their CLSC structure also determines the social outcomes. The prebate contract introduced by Xerox increases the social performance because people pay a lower price when they contribute to the environment. The success of a reverse logistics strategy impacts on the customers’ willingness to return products, thus the effects of remanufacturing positively impact the sales (Bhattacharya et al., 2006). Looking at the g-space in Fig. 5, we observe that outsourcing leads to higher sales only when the manufacturer’s collection cost is substantially higher than the outsourcees’ ones. The cost structure entails an important influence on the remanufacturing benefits, so customers receive additional pressures on their purchasing decisions when the recovery system is efficient (Aras et al., 2004). In this case, outsourcing is an attractive policy (almost) independently of the outsourcers’ collection costs.1.When we consider the GAP effectiveness inside the h-space, outsourcing leads to higher sales only when the retailer’s collection effectiveness is medium or large, and independently of the manufacturer and the 3P’s performance. This result strongly highlights the economic benefits that a CLSC may obtain when mitigating the double-marginalization effect. Reverse logistics positively impacts pricing, which in turn increases sales. Majumder and Groenevelt (2001) stress the fact that remanufacturing and pricing strategies should be jointly set up to succeed in closing the loop. The findings cannot be extended to an outsourcing policy that involves the 3P. The region in which sales are boosted is smaller and relates to the case where the 3P’s GAP effectiveness substantially surpasses the other players’ performance.Finally, the comparison of Figs. 5 and 6 with Figs. 1 and 2 highlights a further result: if the manufacturer only looks at customers’ performance (sales) to decide whether to outsource, the outsourcing region gets restricted in the g-space while it gets enlarged in the h-space. Marginal collection cost differences among players do not influence substantially the sales while the GAP effectiveness differences turn out to be more important.Today, CLSC is emerging as the managerial philosophy through which organizations can achieve their economic objectives by reducing their environmental impact (van Hoek, 1999) and internalizing the concept of corporate social responsibility into their strategies (Balabanis, Phillips, & Lyall, 1998). Actually, an effective assessment of a sustainable strategy passes through an expanded performance optimization that simultaneously consists of economic, environmental, and social performance (De Giovanni, 2012). This triad is called the Triple Bottom Line (TBL), a concept only recently applied in the supply-chain-management literature. For instance, Hendricks and Singhal (2003) state that firms should depart from a narrow vision of profits maximization to also embrace environmental and social aspects. By promoting the TBL, a firm signals to shareholders, stakeholders and SC partners that the company’s focus is not only restricted to profits, but also includes environmental and social concerns (Markley & Davis, 2007). The natural question is therefore whether there is a CLSC structure that simultaneously maximizes profits and environmental and social benefits. The answer is in the following result:Claim 5A manufacturer should always collect, to maximize the TBL, except when:1.Its collection costs are too high; orIts GAP effectiveness is medium or small.More specifically, considering the results in the g-space, the two strongest messages are: (i) it never occurs that an external service provider can achieve the TBL objectives; and (ii) the region where a retailer can achieve these objectives is really small (see Fig. 7). When we insert the results observed in the h-space, the conclusion becomes that if the manufacturer’s GAP performance is sufficiently high, then there is no doubt that it must be the one to collect the used products (see Fig. 8). Outsourcing is therefore a valid option from a TBL perspective only when the manufacturer’s GAP performance is rather low. This could occur when, e.g., it takes a larger effort for the consumer to send the used product to the manufacturer, comparatively to reaching the retailer or the 3P. This condition entails a decision maker to suitably set the CLSC structure and the logistics network to contribute to the triple bottom line and firms corporate socially responsible attitudes. In contrast with Savaskan et al. (2004) and Savaskan and Van Wassenhove (2006), who demonstrate that when a retailer performs the product collection, then the economic, environmental and social performance is simultaneously increased with respect to other types of configurations, our findings suggest that a retailer should manage the product collection only when both the manufacturer and the 3P underperform in the collection process.The TBL is a high-level objective to be reached through outsourcing the product collection. The analysis of the cost inside the g-space highlihgts the needs for looking at other types of practice because the differences among players’ marginal collection cost show a small region inside which outsourcing is convenient. The analysis of the GAP effectiveness inside the h-space informs on the importance of performing the backward activities to reach the TBL. Nevertheless, the TBL is a challenging target and outsourcing supplies an attractive chance to perform it only when an outsourcee shows environmental effectiveness substantially higher than the chain leader.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
