@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A service network design model for multimodal municipal solid waste transport

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a generic dynamic tactical planning model for shipping household waste.Multimodal transport is shown to compete with truck transport over short distances.Computational experiments illustrate the performance of the model.Real life case shows its potential to support decision-making.Real life case shows feasibility for modal shift on distances shorter than 100km.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Solid Waste Management,Supply chain management,OR in societal problem analysis,Linear Programming,Networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A modal shift from road transport towards inland water or rail transport could reduce the total Green House Gas emissions and societal impact associated with Municipal Solid Waste management. However, this shift will take place only if demonstrated to be at least cost-neutral for the decision makers. In this paper we examine the feasibility of using multimodal truck and inland water transport, instead of truck transport, for shipping separated household waste in bulk from collection centres to waste treatment facilities. We present a dynamic tactical planning model that minimises the sum of transportation costs, external environmental and societal costs. The Municipal Solid Waste Service Network Design Problem allocates Municipal Solid Waste volumes to transport modes and determines transportation frequencies over a planning horizon. This generic model is applied to a real-life case in Flanders, the northern region of Belgium. Computational results show that multimodal truck and inland water transportation can compete with truck transport by avoiding or reducing transhipments and using barge convoys.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Green House Gas (GHG) emissions associated with the transport of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) in the European Union (EU) have been increasing over the last decades. Barring interventions, this evolution is expected to continue (EEA, 2011a). The European Environment Agency (EEA) recognises the growing importance of the transport component in the total net GHG emissions associated with MSW management: “The collection and transport of waste, closely linked to waste volumes, is estimated to account for less than 5 percent of the direct greenhouse gas emissions of the waste sector, primarily due to the short distances over which municipal waste is usually transported. However, this figure represents 40 percent of the net emissions in 2020” (EEA, 2008).MSW is defined as the waste collected by or on behalf of municipalities. In reality, it also includes waste that is identical or similar in nature but collected directly by the private sector (business or private non-profit institutions) (Eurostat, 2012). MSW can be recycled, incinerated with or without energy recuperation, or landfilled by Waste Treatment Facilities (WTF). The transport of MSW can be organised by a carrier or shipper. A carrier is a person or organisation that offers transportation services and a shipper is either the supplier or the owner of the cargo to be shipped (Agarwal & Ergun, 2008).The increase in GHG emissions associated with MSW transport follows the same unfavourable evolution as the fast growth in EU GHG emissions associated with transport modes in general over recent decades. To mitigate this trend several technology or behaviour-based solutions have been developed (Waisman, Guivarch, & Lecocq, 2013). On the technological side, carbon intensity can be lowered through the introduction of bio fuels and alternative energy carriers (electricity and hydrogen). Additionally, the energy intensity of transport and mobility can be lowered by developing more energy-efficient vehicles. On the behavioural side, transport GHG emissions can be reduced through policy choices that cause decision makers to choose transportation options that will lower GHG emissions. On the one hand, the modal structure of mobility can be shifted from carbon-intensive options (air, passenger cars and trucks) to less carbon intensive ones (public transport and non-motorised modes for passengers, rail, and shipping; and inland waterways for freight). On the other hand, the volume of transport can be decreased by a more efficient spatial distribution of transport movements (Waisman et al., 2013).These same strategies are formulated in a European Commission white paper to establish a competitive and resource-efficient transport system (EC, 2011). In addition to the development and deployment of new and sustainable fuels and propulsion systems, the European Commission advocates the increased use of more energy-efficient modes. Its goal is to shift 30 percent of road freight over 300km to other modes (such as rail or waterborne transport) by 2030, and to shift more than 50 percent by 2050. In principle, moving a portion of the MSW currently transported by truck to other transport modes could contribute to lowering the growth in GHG emissions and congestion (EC, 2011). In practice, however, such a modal shift will take place only if it is at least cost neutral compared to truck transport. The main issue that arises when considering such a move is that a modal shift is generally more expensive for long-haul distances shorter than 100km. The break-even distances for a modal shift from truck transport to Inland Water Transport (IWT) differ across studies. Van Duin and Van Ham (1998) report break-even distances of 100–250km for IWT and 200–400km for railway transport. Pekin (2010) states that IWT can be cheaper than road transport above 99km. The MIRA (2010) reports a break-even distance of 250km for continental container transport with IWT or truck. The break-even distance for intermodal rail is longer than for intermodal barge transport (Macharis, Vanhaverbeke, van Lier, Pekin, & Meers, 2012).In consideration of the options presented by Waisman et al. (2013) to reduce GHG emissions for transport in general, we aim to examine whether a modal shift from truck to IWT for long-haul transport can be beneficial, given that transport distances shorter than 100km are typical for MSW transport (see e.g. Sweden: Sonesson, 2000). We will not address the technological evolution towards more environment-friendly fuels and engines. For the impact of alternative, greener fuels in freight transport we refer to Erdogan and Miller-Hooks (2012) and Bektas and Eglese (2014).To support strategic decision making towards a modal shift in MSW transport it is crucial to evaluate the conditions that influence the feasibility of multimodal MSW transport. By demonstrating the feasibility of multimodal MSW truck/barge transport based on real life cases research could support strategic decision makers to consider this option. To this end, we formulate a tactical planning problem that minimises the transportation costs for a given waste handling and processing infrastructure composed of multiple collection centres and multiple WTFs. Solving this problem enables decision makers to choose services and associated transportation modes (truck and/or barge), allocate volumes to orders while taking available capacities into account, and plan shipping itineraries. This tactical planning problem will be modelled as a Service Network Design Problem (SNDP) applied to a practical case of MSW transport in Europe. This approach is in line with a majority of research conducted at the tactical planning level that addresses specific real-world problems using algorithms designed for those problems (SteadieSeifi, Dellaert, Nuijten, Van Woensel, & Raoufi, 2014).Generally speaking, multimodal transport has increased significantly due to the use of standardised containers that enable both faster loading/unloading at intermodal terminals and transportation of multiple commodities on the same mode (Ayar & Yaman, 2012). However, in the case of MSW, using dedicated containers for hygienic reasons leads to both empty backhaul and additional handling costs. For transport over distances shorter than 100km, transportation costs can be significantly higher compared to truck transport, according to logistic experts that were interviewed. Therefore, in this paper we will examine the transport of MSW in bulk only. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first feasibility study of multimodal barge-truck bulk transport on distances shorter than 100km.The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The literature on multimodal waste transport is discussed in the next section. The research objectives are formulated in Section 3. The methods for addressing the issue as a tactical planning problem, as well as the model, are presented in Section 4; and the application to a practical case study is presented in Section 5. Finally, results are discussed in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we examined the feasibility of a modal shift for MSW bulk transport on distances shorter than 100km formulating the problem as a tactical planning problem of assigning trucks and/or barges to the MSW transport over a scheduling horizon. Multimodal barge transport is generally believed to be more expensive than truck transport on such short distances. However, policy makers want to stimulate a modal shift to barge transport to reduce the environmental and societal impact of MSW transport. To support MSW modal shift decision-making a discrete multi-period dynamic SNDP model was developed for MSW bulk transport. The MSW SNDP model is tested on a real-life case of MSW transport in Belgium. Computational experiments illustrate the performance of the model and its potential to support decision making and evaluate scenarios. For the case and scenarios under consideration, multi-modal barge-road transport turns out to be a viable option when MSW is transported in bulk.As such, the study confirms that generic recommendations of Bontekoning and Priemus (2004) to lower the break-even distance are also valid for the MSW bulk transport. Simulations also showed that taking external costs into account is favourable for a shift to waterborne barge transport. Moreover, we demonstrated that dropping the MSW directly into a barge near the collection centres and linking up barges make a shift towards multimodal barge transport more attractive.The MSW SNDP presented in this paper considers only the transport between the collection centres of MSW and the WTF. It can be further extended to cover total logistics costs, encompassing warehouse costs at collection centres and operations at several waste treatment facilities (WFTs).We would like to thank the WTF experts of an anonymous company for their inputs and feedback. The model assumptions and conclusions in this paper are, however, the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinion of the stakeholders involved. The authors are grateful for the constructive comments of the editor and referees that helped to improve the presentation of the paper.