@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Generous, spiteful, or profit maximizing suppliers in the wholesale price contract: A behavioral study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Heterogeneous individual supplier behavior is consistent with fairness preferences.Subjects are more inclined to generous than spiteful behavior.Fairness can help or hurt the supply chain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Behavioral OR,Supply chain management,Newsvendor,Contracting,Supplier pricing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Prior experimental research shows that, in aggregate, decision makers acting as suppliers to a newsvendor do not set the wholesale price to maximize supplier profits. However, these deviations from optimal have rarely been examined at an individual level. In this study, presented with scenarios that differ in terms of how profit is shared between retailer and supplier, suppliers set wholesale price contracts which deviate from profit-maximization in ways that are either generous or spiteful. On an individual basis, these deviations were found to be consistent with how the profit-maximizing contract compares to the subject's idea of a fair contract. Suppliers moved nearer to self-reported ideal allocations when they indicated a high degree of concern for fairness, consistent with previously proposed fairness models, and were found to be more likely to act upon generous inclinations than spiteful ones.Pure profit maximization is often assumed to motivate operational decision making, but community and social pressures also guide individual decision makers (Gorman & Kehr, 1992; Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler, 1986). For example, in the “fair-trade” movement, relatively powerful retailers pay higher prices for comparable order quantities in order to more fairly allocate supply chain profits to their relatively vulnerable suppliers (Moore, 2004). Managerially, it is crucial to identify the underlying causes that would influence a decision-maker towards or away from maximum profits. A growing body of research has attempted to model individual social preferences in objective functions. (Bolton, 1991; Bolton & Ockenfels, 2000; Charness & Rabin, 2002; Cui, Raju, & Zhang, 2007; Demirag, Chen, & Li, 2010; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Katok, Olsen, & Pavlov, 2014; Rabin, 1993; Wu & Niederhoff, 2014). Our paper attempts to show to what extent and in what direction an individual's concept of fairness will guide deviations from profit-maximization.But why consider fairness? Alternative utility functions and experimental work have considered risk-averse newsvendors (e.g., Eeckhoudt, Gollier, & Schlesinger, 1995; Schwietzer & Cachon, 2000) and newsvendors with reference-dependent preferences regarding stock outs and leftovers (e.g., Ho, Lim, & Cui, 2008). The newsvendor's supplier, though, faces no demand risk; and reference-dependent utility with loss-aversion cannot explain generous supplier behavior where less profit and lower allocations are intentionally chosen over higher profits or higher allocations (Koszegi & Rabin, 2006). Wu and Niederhoff (2014) address the impact of individual fairness concerns in a traditional newsvendor setting. They show analytically that suppliers may over- or under-price relative to the profit-maximizing optimal wholesale price, w*, if the allocations achieved at w*do not match the decision maker's ex-ante preference for profit allocations. The degree and direction to which they respond to this discrepancy—if at all—depends on the weight that the decision maker assigns to fairness concerns. They find that the supplier's fairness preferences have a stronger overall effect on the supply chain's performance than the retailer's, supporting the idea that maintaining fairness in a distribution channel “should be the supplier's first concern” (McCarthy, 1985, p. 33).Based on the importance of the supplier, this behavioral paper further probes this fairness preference model – this time primarily from a supplier's decision perspective. In order to isolate the effects of individual fairness concerns on suppliers, our work differs from existing research in three primary ways: (i) we focus on the supplier facing a retailer with known order quantities, (ii) we pre-measure subjects and correlate individual preferences to individual results across the population, allowing maximum heterogeneity to be explored, and (iii) we automate the decisions of the human retailers in our study so there is no private information or risk of rejection. Human subjects play the role of retailers in order to motivate human-to-human fairness motivations. However, the actual decisions of the retailer subjects (order quantity) are automated to ensure consistency and remove uncertainty for the subjects acting as suppliers.Prior experimental work in supplier price-setting has focused largely on deterministic price-sensitive demand and has analyzed the behavior based on observed results (Katok & Pavlov, 2013; Katok et al., 2014). These studies show that subjects do deviate from profit-maximization. Using a maximum likelihood estimate, Katok et al. (2014) estimate a homogenous parameter of ideal allocations (identical for all suppliers and retailers) and then use observed decisions relative to this fairness point to calculate individual disutility parameters for the retailer. Our paper builds on these studies by considering two primary suspects for sub-optimal deviation: calculation error and fairness preferences. Further, our experimental design allows for full heterogeneity of both ideal allocation and disutility weights. Individual deviations in decision making are used to test analytical models of fairness-based utility maximization. By studying personal-level biases, this paper approaches the questions of bias from the perspective of individual utility functions and analyzes the decisions relative to these measures. This focus on individual behavior through pre-and post-experimental tests about individual preferences and intentions is unique to our paper.Additionally, prior studies (Katok & Pavlov, 2013; Katok et al., 2014) have either implied or explicitly included privately-held information about the partner's fairness motivations. As a result, a subject's decisions are as much a function of his own preferences as his beliefs about his partner's decisions. A subject with no concerns for fairness himself may deviate due to beliefs that his partner will react based on fairness or other concerns. To isolate the supplier's motivation, in this study the retailer response is known by the supplier to be automated. The supplier's task is to set a price given the retailer's response curve which includes the resulting order quantity, expected sales, and expected profits for both parties. The retailer response curve is provided directly to the decision maker, to reduce computational burden for the subjects and allow more control over treatment conditions.Methodologically, the closest paper to ours is that of Moritz, Hill, and Donohue (2013) who look at pre-measured problem solving skills in the newsvendor problem to study how individual heterogeneity in pre-measured analytical skills relates to observed order quantity of newsvendors. We apply a similar individual focus on the price-setting supplier under the analysis of fairness concerns. To our knowledge we are the first to incorporate individual measurements of ideal fairness allocations separately from degree of concern for fairness; and then test the contract decisions against the commonly used fairness utility function.We have chosen the newsvendor model under wholesale pricing for two main reasons: its pervasive application in practice and its structure which provides no intrinsic motivation to reduce supplier profits through either generosity, spite, or risk-aversion. Other work in supply chain coordination and pricing focuses on more sophisticated contracting models, such as the two-part or three-part tariff (Ho & Zhang, 2008; Lim & Ho, 2007), as well as revenue sharing and buy-back contracts (Katok & Wu, 2009; Niederhoff & Kouvelis, 2014). However, the ubiquitous nature of the wholesale price contract in practice makes it an important contract to understand, both in its predicted implementation and in the cause of deviations from optimal results. Further, its structure reduces the possible external motivations for deviation (through either generosity, spite, or risk-aversion) compared to the risk-sharing coordinating contracts, and thus is a natural starting point for studying individual motivations. Without demand risk, the supplier's decision is much like a dictator game; a well-studied construct in experimental economics and game theory (cf. Camerer, 2003, pp. 43–100). The supplier calculates the retailer's optimal order quantity given the distribution of demand and then makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the retailer in the form of a unit price (Lariviere & Porteus, 2001). The important distinction is that the supplier's profits are concave in wholesale price and are maximized at a price which yields positive profit to the retailer. The retailer's optimal order quantity and the expected profits of both the retailer and the system are monotonically decreasing in wholesale price. Due to the supplier's concave profit function, deviations from the supplier's profit-maximizing contract will always hurt the supplier's payoff, making generosity or spite a costly social preference to enact. The ability to both help and hurt in a dictator setting has been explored by Bardsley (2008), List (2007), and Krupka and Weber (2013). These show that the frequency of giving, neutral, or taking decisions are consistent with a utility function that incorporates social acceptability of an action. From this, one would expect to see almost no hurtful deviations from profit maximization (which hurt both parties) and very few generous deviations (which help the retailer at the supplier's loss).The major goal of this paper is to analyze supplier decisions in setting a price to a newsvendor at an individual level. Based upon prior studies, only a subset will choose to maximize profits. This paper explores the direction and magnitude of deviations from profit-maximizing behavior – both errors and intentional – and compares the observed behavior to the predictions of fairness-based utility maximization models to better understand the part that fairness plays in the decision making process. The wholesale contract is predicted to be inefficient due to double-marginalization (Lariviere & Porteus, 2001; Spengler, 1950); this paper studies if and when those inefficiencies occur within individual decision-maker profiles.Based on traditional fairness-minded utility functions and their role in the newsvendor problem (Bolton, 1991; Cui et al., 2007; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Katok et al. 2014; Wu & Niederhoff, 2014), the utility-maximizing result for fairness depends on two factors: the degree of concern a subject has for achieving fairness and the subject's ideal allocation. This ideal allocation is sometimes modeled using a scale factor, k,11Note that the supplier model in Cui et al. (2007) uses γ for the supplier's scale factor and k for the retailer's scale factor. To avoid confusion with Wu and Niederhoff's (2014) use of γ as the allocation percentage, we use k here to denote the supplier's scaler.which identifies the ideal scaling of profits such that πs= kπr, or equivalently, that the retailer earns allocation πR/(πs+ πR) = 1/(1 + k) (Cui et al., 2007; Katok et al., 2014). Alternatively, Wu and Niederhoff (2014) use a percentage allocation, γ = πR/(πs+ πR), to indicate the ideal fairness allocation to the other player, leaving (1−γ) to the supplier. Our paper elicits preferences as in Wu and Niederhoff (2014), using the percentage allocation to the supplier, denoted as Fair Allocation Ideal Reference (FAIR). All results are the same as the classic model using k = FAIR/(1−FAIR).The degree of concern the subject has for fairness is represented with disutility weights within the utility function. Traditionally, utility is modeled as a piecewise function with advantageous disutility (β) and disadvantageous disutility (α) associated with the magnitude of unfair allocations. It is important to note that the standard assumption gives 0 ≤ β ≤ α; i.e., a decision maker is more strongly influenced by disadvantageous inequality than by advantageous inequality (De Bruyn & Bolton, 2008; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999). Wu and Niederhoff (2014) use algebra to re-write the utility function as a piecewise function with spiteful (As) and generous (Ag) disutility weights, As≤ 0 ≤ Ag. These weights are a simple algebraic replacement of the traditional parameters but allow more intuitive understanding of the relationship between supplier and retailer profits. Specifically,(1)As=−αk1+α〈0;Ag=βk1−β〉0The active preference is determined by how a given contract's allocation compares to an ideal allocation. We first report our experimental results for FAIR, Ag, and Asand then translate them to traditional parameters in the results.In the fairness model of Wu and Niederhoff (2014), utility is modeled as in Eq. (2):(2)Us={πs+AsπRifπsπs+πR<(1−γ)πs+AgπRifπsπs+πR≥(1−γ)The first order conditions of Eq. (2) show that the supplier's utility is increasing in price if and only if the supplier's increased utility from fairness is sufficient to compensate the lost profit; i.e.,∂πs∂w+Ai∂πR∂w>0. We use this model and results to generate our hypotheses and analyze our results.In the newsvendor model the supplier's profits are increasing in w for w < w* and decreasing in w for w > w*. The retailer's profits are monotonically decreasing in w (i.e.,∂πR∂w<0). See, for example, Fig. 1. Therefore, as shown in Wu and Niederhoff's Proposition 5, if the supplier feels generous at w*, the supplier will decrease the price in the direction of the FAIR-achievingw¯, with the utility-maximizing price set as the greater of either thew¯which achieves fairness or the price wgat which the supplier's preference is met:Ag=−∂πs∂w/∂πR∂w>0(in Fig. 1, Ag= 0.4). Likewise, a supplier who is spiteful at w* will increase the price to the lesser of eitherw¯where fairness is achieved or ws, whereAs=−∂πs∂w/∂πR∂w(in Fig. 1, As= −0.3). We use this relationship to estimate the Asand Agvalues from the chosen contract, and then calculate the traditional α and β of the classic fairness utility function using the relationships in Eq. (1).Our hypotheses come directly from Proposition 5 of Wu and Niederhoff (2014).H1Directional: When w* achieves an allocation more (less) than the subject's ideal allocation, the subject will set wholesale prices at or below (above) w*consistent with the direction to achieve fairness.H2Magnitude: Chosen prices will fall within the range of w*andw¯.The study had five between-subject treatments. These five treatments differed in their underlying demand distribution for the retailer, and therefore the treatments yielded different order quantities to the supplier at any given price (see Figs. 2 and 3for two of the treatments). In this way, the price which optimized the supplier's profit (calculated as (price - $5)*(order quantity)) occurred at a low price in Treatments 1 and 2, a mid-range price for Treatment 3, and high prices for Treatments 4 and 5. These resulted in differing profit allocations by treatment, which were chosen such that spiteful, generous, and profit-maximizing behaviors would manifest in supplier decision making. See Appendix A for the parameters. Suppliers set a price between manufacturing cost ($5) and an upper limit ($10); retail sales price was set at $11 per unit. Suppliers could choose prices in 50-cent increments and, therefore, had 11 possible choices.In each treatment, there was one price (w*) which maximized the supplier's profits. In all treatments, the retailer's order quantity decreased as price increased. Expected sales were calculated as an increasing percentage of order quantity, with nearly 100 percent of inventory expected to sell as the order quantity fell to very small quantities. Treatments were designed to allow for a range of perceptions from extremely disadvantageous (treatment one (T1) earned the supplier 17 percent of system profits at w*), moderately disadvantageous (T2: 33 percent), moderately advantageous to neutral (T3: 51 percent) and advantageous (T4: 90 percent and T5: 96 percent). Key parameters are summarized in Table 1.In each treatment, subjects as suppliers were informed that another subject would be assigned the role of retailer and then would be paid based on the supplier's decisions. The subject assigned the role of retailer was a real human with no active decision task. The supplier's task was to set a wholesale price based upon a menu of the retailer's order response, expected sales, and the resulting profits for each party in a single anonymous decision period (Figs. 2 and 3). Subjects were pre-screened to select only those with experience as entrepreneurs, buyers, or product line managers as suppliers. This was done to best represent true biases of experienced supply chain professionals. Retailers were assigned from general participants with no particular background. This human counterpart increased the relevance of fairness concerns for the supplier without adding negative reciprocity (fear of rejection or retaliation) or other retailer-side uncertainty to the supplier's decision.Subjects were paid a proportion (0.1 percent) of their total earnings and had to correctly answer a question regarding the payoff structure before starting the decision screens. Marginal production costs ($5) and retail prices ($11) were fixed and identical in each treatment. Figs. 2 and 3 show two sample decision screens. The study was coded in Qualtrics.We asked each individual subject to identify his ideal allocation: the Fair Allocation Ideal Reference (FAIR). Subjects view a contract as disadvantageous and feel spiteful if it gives them less than their FAIR or as advantageous and feel generous if the resulting allocation is more than their FAIR. Approximately half of the subjects were asked before the price-setting decision stage and the remainder were asked after the price-setting stage to avoid priming self-reported fairness with the condition or priming actions in the decision stage with their self-reported fairness. These ordering effects are discussed in Section 4.1Comparing the reported FAIR term to the treatment's allocation at w*, we can begin to calculate the subject's disutility at w*using the difference of (Treatment–FAIR). For example, someone indicating a FAIR of 60 percent placed in each condition would have a fairness disutility based on the discrepancy −43, −27, −9, 30, and 36 for the 17, 33, 51, 90, and 96 percent treatments respectively. Specifically, we calculate ΔF as the number of price points above (−) or below (+) the profit-maximizing price a subject must move to achieve his or her FAIR. Given the heterogeneity of FAIR values across subjects, ΔF was a nearly continuous metric across participants. Fig. 4(b) shows the distribution of ΔF among our subjects as well as the frequency distribution of the reported FAIR by treatment (a). Table 2summarizes descriptive statistics.Likewise, degree of concern about fairness influences the magnitude of deviation. Two subjects may each believe that 50/50 is fair, but one is generally indifferent to achieving it while another feels very concerned about fairness. A contract that yields 90 percent to these two subjects is perceived as unfair by both with equal magnitude of discrepancy, but the degree of concern acts as a multiplier on this disutility to drive behavior. Mathematically, the latter would be more likely to deviate from the profit-maximizing wholesale price (Wu & Niederhoff, 2014). To measure this individual motivation, we asked subjects to rank their fairness and profit motivations on a 7-point Likert scale of strongly disagree to strongly agree. The six-item measure included evaluating the statements “I tried to be fair”, “I tried to maximize profits”, “Fairness is important in contracts”, “Fairness is important in general” and comparable reverse statements. The Cronbach's alpha reliability of the six-item measure (after reverse scoring the appropriate items) was 0.756. The average of these measures creates a “fairness concerns” metric, C, which ranges from one to seven. This weight will be used as an individual parameter within the regression to estimate the disutility weights of advantageous and disadvantageous allocations. There was no statistically significant difference in average fairness concerns between treatments. Female subjects reported slightly higher degrees of fairness concern (mean difference = 0.427, p < 0.05).Additional questions made certain that participants were generally profit-seeking in a non-social context: we told each subject that they had won a prize and could choose which of three prizes to add to their total earnings: $50, $5, or $0. These values were chosen such that they should not create a significant endowment effect relative to the maximum possible supplier profits in each treatment. Several other questions checked their understanding of the payoff structure, their decision and results, the optimal result, and the roles of supplier and retailer.Subjects were recruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). Subjects ranged from ages 18–65 with 47.1 percent coming from the 18–29 year old age group and an average age of 36.2 years. All MTurk subjects signed up for a general business decision making study and were pre-screened for work experience across a wide range of options. Those that indicated appropriate experience from a subset of choices continued to this study as suppliers while those without were sent to the role of retailer, or to other studies related to their indicated careers, or to a general consumer behavior study. Average supplier payoff was $0.95 for a 10-minute task; average retailer payoff was $0.55. Both payoffs are average or high by MTurk standards (Mason & Watts, 2009). Table 2summarizes demographic details for the subjects working as suppliers while Fig. 4 shows the distribution of individual preferences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
