@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Consumer environmental awareness and channel coordination with two substitutable products

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the impact of consumer environmental awareness (CEA) on order quantities and channel coordination.The closed-form expressions of optimal order quantities, wholesale prices and return credits are derived.A return policy can effectively coordinate a decentralized supply chain.Order quantity of the traditional product may not increase with CEA.Firms will benefit from product customization and consumer segmentation based on the distribution of CEA in a market.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supply chain management,Newsvendor,Consumer environmental awareness,Environmental product,Return contract,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper focuses on the impact of consumer environmental awareness (CEA) on order quantities and channel coordination within a one-manufacturer and one-retailer supply chain. The manufacturer produces two types of products: the environmental and the traditional products. These two products differ in their price and environmental quality. Based on the multi-product newsvendor model, this study compares three decision scenarios: the centralized model (M1), the decentralized model (M2), and the decentralized model with the coordination of a return contract (M3). The closed-form expressions of optimal order quantities, wholesale prices and return credits are derived for each scenario. Extending these models, we incorporate a production capacity constraint of the manufacturer. Finally, sensitivity analyses on model parameters are performed and numerical examples are provided.Our study suggests (1) the retailer’s profit monotonically increases while the manufacturer’s profit is convex with respect to CEA; (2) a return contract can help both parties to achieve the profit they could expect in the centralized model; (3) order quantity of the environmental product increases with CEA; (4) the production capacity constraint of the manufacturer does not impact order quantities of the two products if it is sufficiently large (when it is larger than two critical points); otherwise, production capacity constraint negatively changes the channel profit and order quantities; (5) our simulation study and sensitivity analyses indicate that the difference of environmental quality between the traditional and the environmental products determines whether order quantity of the traditional product increases or remains constant with respect to CEA. The firms will benefit from product customization and consumer segmentation based on the distribution of CEA in the market.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rise of environmental awareness changes consumer behavior. The BBMG Conscious Consumer Report shows that 51% of Americans are willing to pay more for products with high environmental quality and 67% agree it is important to buy products with environmental benefits (Bemporad & Baranowski, 2007). OECD (2002a) points out that 27% of consumers in OECD countries can be labeled “green consumers” due to their strong willingness-to-pay for environmental products and strong environmental activism. A study carried out by European Commission in 2008 shows that 75% of Europeans are ‘ready to buy environmentally friendly products even if they cost a little bit more compared to 31% in 2005 (European Commission, 2008).Considering the impact of consumer environmental awareness (CEA), researchers started to introduce environmental quality as a demand enhancement factor in the product demand function (Liu, Anderson, & Cruz, 2012). Often the traditional and the environmental products are considered to be substitutable (Brécard, 2013; Conrad, 2005; Liu et al., 2012; Reinhardt, 1998; Rodriguez-Ibeas, 2007). The environmental product provides greater environmental benefits (or imposes smaller environmental costs) than the traditional product but has a higher price. This is known as environmental product differentiation (Reinhardt, 1998). Hybrid vehicles may be considered as an example of the environmental product. Such vehicles contribute to reducing carbon dioxide by approximately 3.5milliontons as of April 2007, but they are more expensive than traditional vehicles with similar functionalities (Yakita, 2009).Given the important role of CEA (Bemporad & Baranowski, 2007; Mawson, 2007; OECD, 2002b), most studies in this area have been focused on product design and market competitiveness, and government environmental policies. Studies regarding its effects on supply chain management still remain sparse to our knowledge. We consider a one-manufacturer and one-retailer supply chain following the previous modeling approaches (e.g. Chen & Xiao, 2011; Lee & Rhee, 2007; Pasternack, 1985; Taylor, 2001). The manufacturer produces two types of products: the traditional and environmental (or green) products. We assume environmental quality of the products is given. One retailer sells the two substitutable products. Automobile dealership management may be considered as such an example. An automobile manufacturer (say, Ford) produces hybrid vehicles (i.e., an environmentally friendly product) and traditional gasoline vehicles (i.e., a traditional product that is less environmentally friendly). In each region (which may be defined based on the geographical distance), there is usually one and only one dealership for the manufacturer that sells both products.1Our results will remain the same even if there are two dealerships for the manufacture in a region but they sell different type of products (one for the environmental product, and one for the traditional product).1The automobile manufacturer and the dealership constitute one manufacturer and one retailer supply chain in a region.We assume that the demand function of a product is the common knowledge of both parties. The retailer needs to determine order quantity and the manufacturer needs to decide wholesale price (and return credit in the case of introducing a return contract) for each product to maximize their profits. We investigate the following questions:1.How CEA impacts both parties’ profits and the retailer’s order quantities for the traditional and the environmental products, respectively?Whether a return policy can effectively coordinate the manufacturer and the retailer?Will production capacity of the manufacturer change the results?Based on the multi-product newsvendor model, our study compares three decision scenarios: the centralized model (M1), the decentralized model (M2), and the decentralized model with the coordination of a return contract (M3). We derive the closed-form expressions of optimal order quantities, wholesale prices, and return credits. Extending these models, we further incorporate a production capacity constraint of the manufacturer. Finally, sensitivity analyses on model parameters are performed and numerical examples are provided.This study contributes to the literature by investigating how CEA impacts supply chain management. We show that a return contract can effectively coordinate the manufacturer and the retailer to achieve the profit that they can expect in the centralized model. Order quantity of the environmental product increases with CEA. The retailer’s profit monotonically increases while the manufacturer’s profit is convex with respect to CEA. The production capacity of the manufacturer does not impact order quantities of the two products if it is sufficiently large. Otherwise, order quantities and profits decrease with the production capacity. Further, based on our simulation and sensitivity analyses, if environmental quality of the traditional product is sufficiently smaller than that of the environmental product, order quantity of the traditional product will remain constant with CEA. Otherwise it will increases with CEA. Both parties will benefit from product customization and consumer segmentation based on the distribution of CEA in the market.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a review of relevant literature. Section 3 presents the basic assumptions and definitions. Section 4 first analyzes the centralized and the decentralized model. Then it discusses the channel coordination with a return contract. Section 5 extends the models with a production capacity constraint. Section 6 describes sensitivity analyses and numerical examples. Section 7 summarizes our main findings and concludes the paper by providing some directions for future research. All proofs are relegated to Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
