@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Emergency response in natural disaster management: Allocation and scheduling of rescue units

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model scheduling and assigning rescue units to incidents in disaster management.A decision support model in a mixed integer non-linear formulation is proposed.A catalog of construction and improvement heuristics as well as GRASP metaheuristics are computationally tested and evaluated.Several results are close to optimal solutions and improve current best practice.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Natural Disaster Management (NDM),Heuristics,Assignment,Scheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Natural disasters, such as earthquakes, tsunamis and hurricanes, cause tremendous harm each year. In order to reduce casualties and economic losses during the response phase, rescue units must be allocated and scheduled efficiently. As this problem is one of the key issues in emergency response and has been addressed only rarely in literature, this paper develops a corresponding decision support model that minimizes the sum of completion times of incidents weighted by their severity. The presented problem is a generalization of the parallel-machine scheduling problem with unrelated machines, non-batch sequence-dependent setup times and a weighted sum of completion times – thus, it is NP-hard. Using literature on scheduling and routing, we propose and computationally compare several heuristics, including a Monte Carlo-based heuristic, the joint application of 8 construction heuristics and 5 improvement heuristics, and GRASP metaheuristics. Our results show that problem instances (with up to 40 incidents and 40 rescue units) can be solved in less than a second, with results being at most 10.9% up to 33.9% higher than optimal values. Compared to current best practice solutions, the overall harm can be reduced by up to 81.8%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Natural disasters, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, floods, hurricanes and volcanic eruptions, have caused tremendous harm in the past and continue to threaten infrastructure and millions of people each year. Of particular importance for the reduction of casualties and economic losses is the response phase in natural disaster management, during which a large number of geographically-dispersed incidents, such as fires and collapsed buildings, require immediate processing by rescue units in the presence of severe resource scarcities and time pressure. Thus, one of the most critical emergency response tasks (Comfort, Ko, & Zagorecki, 2004) is the efficient allocation and scheduling of rescue units. However, this challenge has been addressed in the literature only very rarely.In this paper, we propose a decision support model for emergency operations centers that allocates available rescue units to emerging incidents and schedules the processing time of these incidents. The model is formulated as a binary quadratic optimization problem, where the objective minimizes the sum of completion times of incidents weighted by their severity. We refer to this problem as the Rescue Unit Assignment and Scheduling Problem (RUASP). Our decision problem is related to problems from both routing and scheduling. We show that our problem can be modeled as a (more complex) modification of both the Multiple Traveling Salesman Problem (mTSP) and the parallel-machine scheduling problem with unrelated machines, non-batch sequence-dependent setup times and a weighted sum of completion times as the objective function, classified asR/STSD/∑wjCjin the scheduling literature. Using this relationship, we prove that our problem is NP-hard.However, the NP-hardness of the underlying problem opposes one of the imposed requirements that decisions – even in complex emergency situations – must be derived timely. Therefore, we propose, implement and computationally compare several heuristics for the allocation and scheduling of rescue units. More specifically, we use a Monte Carlo-based heuristic as well as joint applications of 8 construction heuristics and 5 improvement heuristics. In addition, we embed these combinations of construction and improvement heuristics into GRASP metaheuristics. Thus, our work contributes not only to the field of disaster management, but also to the optimization literature in general.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 examines and presents relevant literature and reveals the research gap that our paper addresses. In Section 3, we suggest the RUASP problem and propose an appropriate optimization model. Because of the NP-hardness, Section 4 proposes several solution heuristics. Our computational experiments are presented in Section 5, which also discusses our results. We summarize our results in Section 6, and conclude with an outlook on future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
